103
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
  
ValueML: A Proposal for Representing Values Embedded within Web Resources  
Elio Toppano 
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche (DMIF)  
Università di Udine,  
Udine, Italy 
e-mail: elio.toppano@uniud.it 
 
 
 
Abstract— Growing on recent research work in the fields of 
Value Sensitive Design, Design for Well-Being and Disclosive 
Computer Ethics, this paper focuses on values embedded in 
multimodal web resources during the design and development 
processes. They are inscribed within the artifact as symbolic 
meanings or as a built-in use consequence. We propose a 
preliminary version of a markup language, called ValueML, 
that may be used for value representation and annotation. 
After a brief review of various perspectives on the concept of 
value and relevant taxonomies and vocabularies, we discuss the 
syntax and semantics of ValueML together with examples of 
manual annotation of video commercials. 
Keywords-value; 
annotation; 
semantic 
web; 
markup 
languages. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper addresses the issue of values embedded in 
web 
information 
resources, their 
representation 
and 
annotation. It is an elaboration and extension of previous 
work presented in the IARIA Sixth International Conference 
on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments [1]. 
We are interested in how ethical, political, aesthetic and 
cultural values (to name only a few types) are, intentionally 
or unintentionally, constructed and articulated during the 
design and development of a product; how they are actually 
inscribed within the artifact and materialized through various 
semiotic resources (e.g., written and spoken texts, still and 
moving images, music and sound effects); how the values 
can be used for resource annotation and exploited in content 
retrieval, filtering, repurposing and reuse.  
The need for value annotation of information resources is 
present in several application domains. In the fields of 
Marketing and Brand Communication, for instance, values 
constitute an important component of websites, commercial 
videos and advergames. They may refer to the advertised 
good or service (i.e., a value proposition) or, more generally, 
to a company's brand identity (i.e., the brand core values) 
and brand world (i.e., the brand world ethos).  
 Political parties, religious communities, non-profit 
organizations as well as social activists focus on values as 
one of the fundamental content and theme of their messages 
in designing websites and blogs. The project Values at Play 
(VAP), for example, is an initiative aimed at investigating 
how social and political values can be intentionally 
embodied in a digital game's architecture, interaction 
paradigm, and mechanics [2]. 
In the same vein, Value Sensitive Design [3], Value 
Centered Design [4], Design for Subjective Well-Being [5], 
Disclosive Computer Ethics [6] and Design for Sustainability 
[7] explore conceptualizations and methods for consciously 
addressing human values and related ethical concerns during 
the analysis and design processes of information systems.  
All 
these 
initiatives 
assume 
that 
artifacts 
(and 
technologies, in general) are not morally neutral and that it is 
possible to identify tendencies in them to promote or demote 
particular values, and norms [6]. Such tendencies are 
embedded in the artifact in the sense that they can be 
identified and studied largely or wholly independently of 
actual uses of the artifact, although they manifest themselves 
in a variety of uses of the system (not necessarily in all 
uses!).  
In addition, values are an important component of 
national, organizational and professional cultures. Therefore, 
independently of explicit design intentions, values are 
inevitably inscribed within information resources as a 
reflection of the culture of their clients, designers and 
developers (Culture in Design). Furthermore, communicative 
artifacts may be intentionally designed to adapt to the culture 
of target users (Design for Culture). This is at the base of the 
localization of web resources, a challenging issue addressed 
by several approaches in the field of cross-cultural design. 
The explicit representation and annotation of values present 
advantages in both cases: on the one hand, it forces the 
designers and developers to reflect on the intended or 
unintended values and the way they are embedded in their 
products; on the other hand, value annotation facilitates the 
identification and selection of those resources that are more 
appropriate for a target culture. 
In spite of the growing interest on values manifested by 
several research studies, there is not yet a markup language 
and a value ontology or taxonomy that can be used for 
annotation of textual documents and multimodal resources 
on the web. This is a little disappointing considering the 
efforts that have been made, in the past, to model other 
experiential concepts such as pleasure, emotions, opinions 
and sentiments [8] [9]. The present work is a preliminary 
proposal aimed at filling this gap.  
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we 
discuss the concept of value from different perspectives and 
we illustrate available taxonomies and vocabularies of 
values. Next, in Section III we state the scope and the aim of 
the study. The main requirements of a language for value 

104
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
annotation are, then, introduced in Section IV together with a 
possible solution, i.e., the ValueML. Section V is devoted to 
illustrate an example of annotation in the domain of video 
advertising. To this end, two paradigmatic cases have been 
selected among those used in the experimental activity made, 
so far. Section VI discusses some limitations and problems 
emerged during the assessment process of the current version 
of the language. Finally, in Section VII, some conclusions 
highlighting the benefits of value annotation are reported. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A. Defining value  
The concept of value has several meanings according to 
the specific perspective from which it is considered. Looking 
at existing literature [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15], the term 
"value" has been interpreted variously as: 
• 
an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or 
end-state of existence is personally or socially 
preferable to an opposite or converse mode of 
conduct or end state of existence (i.e., value as 
enduring belief system);  
• 
the monetary sacrifice people are willing to make for 
a product (i.e., value as exchange); 
• 
the utility of the physical properties of the product, 
which is realized only upon its use (i.e., value as 
perceived utility); 
• 
an indicator of how much one desires a product or 
fears of loosing it (i.e., value as attachment); 
• 
an index of social status, lifestyle, modernity (i.e., 
value as sign or meaning); 
• 
an indicator of how the interaction with a product is 
aesthetically, cognitively or affectively worth to be 
made (i.e., value as good experience). 
In his Value Theory [13], Schwartz, defines values as 
"desirable, trans-situational goals, varying in importance, 
that serve as guiding principles in people's lives". Most 
importantly, he identifies five main features of the 
conception of value that are implicit in the works of many 
theorists and researchers: 
• 
values are beliefs tied inextricably to emotions; 
• 
values are a motivational construct. They refer to 
desirable goals (e.g., idealized qualities or conditions 
in the world) people find good and strive to attain; 
• 
values transcend specific actions and situations; 
• 
values serve as standards or criteria to guide 
selection or evaluation of action, policies, people or 
events; 
• 
values are ordered by importance relative to one 
another. 
One aspect worth highlighting is the relationship existing 
between values and behavior. As claimed by Rokeach: "... 
values are determinants of virtually all kinds of behavior that 
could be called social behavior or social action, attitudes and 
ideologies, evaluation, moral judgment and justification of 
self to others, and attempts to influence others" [15]. 
Given the polysemy of the term value, one critical 
problem when using this concept for content analysis is to 
decide which interpretation is relevant for the purpose at 
hand. In addition, there is the need to disambiguate among 
different concepts that are in some way correlated such as 
values, needs, desires, preferences, and goals (see for 
example [10]). For some scholars values are abstract, 
desirable trans-situational goals; for others they are relatively 
stable individual preferences that reflect socialization; yet 
others consider values as cognitive representation of needs.  
Another issue regards the classification of values. In [16] 
Brey illustrates an articulation of axiology - a branch of 
philosophy concerned with a general analysis of value - that 
provides structure and overview to relevant values belonging 
to traditional theories including cultural values of Theories of 
Good applied to new media. Figure 1 schematizes this 
classification.  
 
 
Figure 1.  A classification of values according to Brey [16].  
As shown in the figure, axiology can be decomposed into 
four main fields each one devoted to a specific type of value: 
Ethics concerning with the right (i.e., the understanding of 
what kinds of actions are right and, therefore, obligatory and 
which ones are wrong and, therefore, impermissible); 
Aesthetics concerning with the beautiful; normative Politics 
concerning with the just (i.e., the understanding of how the 
state ought to operate in relation to its citizens and how it 
should distribute powers and goods); and Theories of Good 
concerning with the sort of things in life that are considered 
good and, thus, worth striving for such as well-being, 
happiness and personal flourishing (i.e., eudaimonia). In 
particular the individualistic study of well-being has yielded 
three major types of theories namely hedonist (well-being 
consists of the presence of pleasure and the absence of pain), 
desire-fulfillment (well-being lies in the fulfillment of one's 
desires) and objective theories (well-being is the result of 
objective conditions of persons such as liberty, friendship, 
autonomy, wisdom, etc.). Collectivist theories hold that the 
greatest good is not the good of individual human beings but 
the good of a community or society at large; Transcendent 
theories point to one or more transcendent state-of-affairs or 
qualities that are held to constitute the highest good such as 

105
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the glory of God, the natural order of things, eco-systemic 
integrity, knowledge or information. 
B. Value inventories and taxonomies 
What emerges from research literature is that a unified 
theory or model of values currently does not exist. Available 
proposals differ along several dimensions, including: 
• 
representational approach: the simplest and most 
wide-spread approach is the categorical approach 
that uses a word/label to represent a value. An 
alternative approach is the dimensional one that tries 
to capture the essential properties of values, by 
positioning them on a continuous space spanned by 
two or more dimensions. Holbrook, for example, 
proposes 
intrinsic-extrinsic, 
self 
oriented-other 
oriented, and active-reactive, as the main dimensions 
for classifying values [17]; 
• 
purpose: most of the proposals have been designed 
for survey research; only few have been applied to 
content analysis [14]; 
• 
scope of application: proposals span a wide range of 
scopes and application domains. Some proposals 
regard personal or individual values; some represent 
the values of groups of people, communities of 
practice or interests, institutions or companies, others 
focus 
on 
national 
values. 
Domains 
include 
psychology and social research; professional ethics 
(e.g., the values that guide the day-to-day activities 
of business managers), marketing and advertising; 
design, technology, and more; 
• 
number and type of distinct values: proposals widely 
vary in the number of specific values (or 
dimensions) that are considered relevant;  
• 
structural organization of values: most proposals are 
unstructured lists or inventories of items representing 
different types of values; others present hierarchical 
structures 
or 
taxonomies. 
Some 
proposals 
distinguish between instrumental and ends values; 
some organize values according to similarity/affinity 
or opposition/contrast relationships. Yet other 
proposals use part/whole relations (i.e., mereologies) 
to represent both elementary and aggregate (or 
composite) values; 
• 
conceptual definitions: few proposals provide a clear 
and accurate definition of value categories or 
dimensions. Therefore, there are ambiguities (i.e., 
multiple interpretations of values), and "semantic 
confusion" both within and across the various 
proposals;  
• 
terminological realizations: proposals use different 
vocabularies for denoting value categories. In some 
cases, the same term/label is used, within different 
vocabularies, 
for 
representing 
different 
value 
concepts (a case of homonyms). As an instance, the 
term "autonomy" is defined, within Value Sensitive 
Design [18], as: "people ability to decide, plan, and 
act in ways that they believe will help them to 
achieve their goals". The very same term in [19] is 
used to denote: "feeling that one's activity is self-
chosen and self-endorsed". In other cases, different 
terms are used to denote the same value concept (a 
case of synonymy). What is termed "autonomy" in 
one vocabulary [19] is denoted by "self-direction" in 
another proposal [13]. Moreover, some terms (e.g., 
autonomy, self actualization) are common to various 
proposals while others (e.g., informed consent, 
humor) are present only in some specific vocabulary; 
• 
homogeneity/heterogeneity: 
some 
inventories 
represent homogeneous values; others merge values 
having different nature such as hedonic values (e.g., 
pleasure) with ethical (e.g., morality, virtue), 
political (e.g., justice), and cultural values (e.g., life 
quality, happiness) or different generality or 
aggregation levels. Some examples are as following.  
Schwartz proposed a set of fifty-six human values that 
are organized into ten basic categories: self-direction, 
stimulation, 
hedonism, 
achievement, 
power, 
security, 
conformity, tradition, benevolence, and universalism [13]. 
These categories constitute a circular pattern where 
congruent values (e.g., achievement and power) are located 
on adjacent positions while conflicting values (e.g., 
achievement and benevolence) on opposite sides. At a more 
general level, basic categories are aggregated into four 
macro-categories, namely, openness to change, self-
transcendence, conservation and self-enhancement. 
Boztepe, focusing on user's values, proposed a 
classification including nineteen different values organized 
into four main categories namely, utility, social significance, 
emotional, and spiritual [11].  
Value Sensitive Design uses a flat list of values to be 
used in computer systems. Examples are: privacy, freedom 
from bias, informed consent, accountability, property rights, 
to name only a few [3]. 
Specific taxonomies have been proposed in marketing 
[20] and in game design [21]. Floch, for example, 
distinguishes four types of product values - practical, critical, 
utopian, and ludic values - that are at the base of the main 
marketing strategies. Flanagan et al. use a set of seventeen 
values 
(e.g., 
diversity, 
justice, 
inclusion, 
equality, 
environmentalism, creativity, trust, etc.) for the analysis and 
design of digital games. Recent research in Positive Design 
focuses on hedonic values (e.g., pleasure) and eudaimonia 
(e.g., personal flourishing) [5].  
It should be clear, from the above discussion, that it is 
difficult to select a proposal as a common reference standard 
or to create a shared standard by combining elements from 
existing vocabularies. Ideally, for content annotation in a 
given application domain, an adequate value ontology (i.e., 
conceptualization and vocabulary) should be manageable, 
that is, it should contain the minimum number of relevant 
value categories for the task at hand, and minimize 
conceptual ambiguity and redundancy by making each value 
concept unique and independent from the other concepts. For 
example, concepts such as "achievement" and "success" may 
be ambiguous when they are in the same inventory. 
However, by synthesizing them under the concept of 
"accomplishment" may avoid the ambiguity. A prerequisite 

106
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is that values do not remain underdeveloped: their nature and 
meaning must be clearly defined and distinguished. This is 
an important step for applications in the Semantic Web field. 
As a final remark it should be noted that a value inventory or 
taxonomy not only displays what values categories are 
available for analysis but also provides a descriptive tool for 
researchers to focus their discussion about values. 
III. 
SCOPE AND AIM OF THE STUDY 
A. The values inscribed within a web resource 
Figure 2 shows the general framework we have adopted 
for communication-based design [22]. It accounts for the real 
sender and receiver. They are connected by means of an 
instrumental medium - a device such as a PC, a tablet or a 
smart phone and a channel such the Internet - that enables 
the circulation of a web resource. By the term web resource 
we mean an information object (e.g., a message) that is 
realized by at least one accessible web representation and 
encoded in a media type.  
The sender is involved in the design and realization of 
the web resource. It is usually a team including, for example, 
the designers and developers as well as the client, sponsor 
and firm/company. The interaction between the sender and 
the resource takes place within a production context 
involving space-time location, the organizational and socio-
cultural environments with roles, norms, policies, standards 
and technologies.  
The receiver, an individual or a group, interacts with the 
resource within a context of use that may, or not, be 
synchronized with the production one as in the case of 
different cultural contexts. In this framework the web 
resource plays the role of a mediator between the intentions 
of the sender and the interpretation of the receiver. 
We shall focus on the production context of the above 
framework: we are interested in the values that are inscribed 
(or embodied) within the resource as a kind of meaning 
during its design and development. We call these values the 
"values in the product" to distinguish them from other kinds 
of values such as, for example, the economic value of the 
product (i.e., its exchange value), the value that a resource 
gains passing through a chain of activities (i.e., the value 
chain) or the value of the product as experienced by a user 
during its use (i.e., the perceived use value). These 
interpretations can be referred to as the "value of the 
product". 
The values in the product have different sources. Some 
values are strictly related to the stakeholders (the firm, the 
designers, or the users). These include, for example, the 
values that are associated to the personality of a brand, its 
identity, the brand world's ethos or the assumed values of the 
target user group to whom the message is directed. These 
values are usually explicitly expressed by a set of non- 
functional requirements. As an instance: to design a video 
commercial or a website to promote the core values of a 
company or to resonate with the cultural values of a specific 
community of practice or interest.  
Other values (called collateral values) are, intentionally 
or unintentionally, embedded within the web resource as the 
result of specific design or implementation decisions. It 
should be noted that a design solution is always under-
determined by specific functional requirements leaving to 
designers and developers numerous open-ended alternatives 
as they proceed through the process, including some that 
implicate values [23]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The communication-based design framework adopted in the 
study.  
The selection of an alternative solution with respect to 
another is guided by criteria that are often value-laden and 
reflect the personal or professional beliefs, preferences, 
cultural milieu of these persons.  
In the case of information resources, design decisions 
may refer to several aspects such as, for example, i) the 
adopted conceptual model or metamodel of the resource; ii) 
the articulation of content meaning; iii) the kind of semiotic 
media used for meaning presentation or expression, iv) 
stylistic choices (e.g., space-time layout of information, 
colors, typography); (v) the specific technologies employed 
during the implementation of a design solution, and vi) the 
definition of intended use in the destination context.  
Here are some examples. The adoption of the Semantic 
Markup for Web Services (OWL-S) instead of the Web 
Service Modeling Ontology (WSMO) reflects different 
values and has different ethical implications as discussed in 
[24].  
In a narrative commercial clip, ethical or aesthetic values 
can be inscribed in the story (content) or in the visual and 
auditory qualities (expression); in a digital game they can be 
embodied in game mechanics (e.g., in game elements, 
actions, rules, reward system), game dynamics (e.g., player's 
point of view, course of action) or experience (e.g., game 
atmosphere, 
narrative 
theme, 
expressed 
or 
induced 
emotions).  
According to [6], it can be useful to distinguish the 
following two main cases: 
• 
an information resource may be expressive of values 
(i.e., expressive conception of embedded values) in 
that it contains symbolic meanings that refer to 
values. These values may represent the values of 
designers, clients or users; 
• 
an information resource may have embedded values 
understood as special kind of built-in consequences. 
This conception (i.e., causalist conception of 

107
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
embedded values) relates values to causal capacities 
of the resource to affect the environment. In other 
words, the resource use causes a state of the world 
that realizes some kind of value. In Persuasive 
Technologies [25], Design for Sustainable Behavior 
[7], and in applications inspired to Nudge Theory 
[26], values are directly related to the intended 
behavior or state we want to be enabled, induced or 
fostered in users.  
Of course, the fact that a resource is expressive of values 
does not imply that it also functions to realize these values. 
Whether this happens or not remains an open question. 
B. The problem addressed: value analysis and annotation 
Generally speaking, value taxonomies and vocabularies 
can be exploited in four different use cases: 
• 
manual annotation of multimodal resources with 
inscribed values. By multimodality we mean the use 
of two or more representational modalities (or 
semiotic "languages") to express the content of an 
information resource. An example is to identify and 
represent the values communicated by the visual 
(i.e., written text, images) and auditory (i.e., spoken 
language, music, effects) tracks of a video 
commercial; 
• 
automatic value detection and classification. The 
goal, here, is to model the means-ends relationships 
existing between measurable features of multimodal 
artifacts and abstract constructs such as value 
concepts. An example is to infer the values that are 
at the base of behaviors or situations depicted by an 
image; or to infer the values that produce certain 
emotions expressed by the characters of a story;  
• 
value generation, that is, simulation of specific 
values by an appropriate selection and composition 
of multimedia content and expression. An example 
is to select the actions of the characters of a story 
that best communicate some specific values; 
• 
value assessment, that is, the use of value inventories 
for empirical tests aimed at measuring how people 
would rank or rate the relative importance of items 
in the given list of values. An example is to profile a 
group of individuals to adapt the design of a new 
resource to their values. 
An important aspect that is exploited in automatic 
detection and generation is that values have been 
acknowledged as a key predictor and explanatory factor in 
investigating human and social dynamics.  
Our study focuses on the first use case. The problem we 
intend to address is, thus, the following: to design a general-
purpose language for the manual annotation of values 
inscribed within a multimodal resource.  
The language should let the annotator to define the scope 
of a value annotation and to describe the value itself by 
referring to a specific and shared vocabulary. Notice that, the 
focus is on message production rather than use. This is not to 
deny that annotations made by the users are important. 
Simply, social tagging comes after the product has been 
developed and published and has different goals. It may be 
used, for example, to assess the effectiveness of intended 
value communication.  
We envisage several possible ways in which the 
annotation could be used including: 
• 
retrieval and selection/filtering of resources or part 
of them on the base of intended embodied values. It 
may be possible, for example, to annotate specific 
fragments of a multimodal resource with intended 
values and then retrieve the fragments using the 
values as keywords; 
• 
reuse of a resource for new goals or contexts (i.e., 
repurposing). The identification and value annotation 
of multimodal fragments enables a designer to reuse 
the content of the fragment for new goals/objectives 
or in new communication contexts; 
• 
exploitation of design knowledge embodied within 
an artifact for new products. Linking values to 
fragments is a way to explicitly represent how values 
are communicated in that artifact. This knowledge is 
design knowledge that may be used as inspirational 
for innovative products and design solutions; 
• 
construction of a shared data base of value 
annotation resources that can be used as a ground 
base or training set for automatic recognition of 
values or for scientific research. 
IV. 
THE VALUEML LANGUAGE 
A. Language requirements 
The following is an initial list of requirements for the 
development of a language for value annotation. They are 
based on an understanding of the needs arising from concrete 
scenarios of manual annotation of multimodal texts. We have 
structured requirements according to a specific model of 
annotation that distinguishes among: 1) annotated data (i.e., 
the subject or target of the annotation), 2) the annotating 
data (i.e., the object or body of the annotation), 3) the 
annotation relation (i.e., a predicate that defines the type of 
relationship existing between annotated and annotating data) 
and 4) the context in which the annotation is made [27]: 
• 
Annotated data. The desired language should allow 
the annotator to associate values to an entire resource 
or to specific parts of it at different aggregation 
levels. This requires a mechanism for addressing 
spatiotemporal segments of the resource (e.g., a part 
of an image, text section, video or audio segment). In 
addition, it should be possible to annotate different 
semiotic modalities (e.g., written texts, spoken 
words, still images, music, videos). Values can be 
communicated in sequence or in parallel (i.e., 
simultaneously); within a single modality or multiple 
modalities so the language is requested to provide 
means to address all these possibilities.  
• 
Annotating data. The desired language should allow 
the annotator to use a wide range of value types (i.e., 
categories) and taxonomies. We are interested in 
moral, ethical, political, aesthetic, and cultural 
values. As discussed in the previous sections any 
attempt to standardize the description of values using 

108
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a finite set of fixed descriptors is doomed to failure: 
even scientists cannot agree on the numbers of 
relevant values, or on the names that should be given 
to them. Given this lack of agreement on value 
descriptors and classification, the only practical way 
to tackle this problem is to allow annotators to "plug 
in" vocabularies that they consider appropriate for 
their applications. As a consequence, the language 
should be sufficiently flexible and modular so that 
the appropriate vocabulary of descriptors for the 
target use can be chosen. The aim is also to make 
scientific concepts of values practically applicable. 
Available alternatives that have been developed in 
literature are not sufficiently known, so people 
generally use a restricted set of not well defined 
values without asking themselves if they are the 
most appropriate choices for the application at hand. 
• 
Annotation relation. It should be possible to 
explicitly represent the functional role played by the 
object with respect to the target of annotation. 
Moreover, the language should allow the annotator 
to represent means-ends relationships linking values 
to their material realization in the given resource. A 
means-ends chain can be followed in two directions: 
top down from a value to specific resource features 
in order to understand how the value has been 
materialized in the resource; bottom up, from 
specific features to values in order to understand why 
the resource has been design the way it is. This 
information can be used to unfold design knowledge 
embodied in a given resource. In addition, if values 
are viewed as a kind of meaning then they may be 
dispersed across content (e.g., narratives, denotative 
and connotative meanings) as well as expression 
(e.g., visual and auditory qualities). As an example, 
brand 
values 
and 
brand 
ethos 
could 
be 
communicated by a storyline while aesthetic values 
by the product look and feel. 
• 
Context. 
The 
language 
should 
allow 
the 
representation of contextual information including: i) 
general metadata regarding the type of annotated 
resource, its location, the author of the annotation, 
the intention and the method of annotation, etc. ii) a 
measure of relevance (importance) of a given value 
with respect to the other values within the same 
resource; iii) a measure of confidence in the 
accuracy of the annotation. It should be noted that 
the expression of a value in an informational 
resource may be masked by another one, it may be 
inhibited, minimized or even exaggerated. Therefore, 
the human annotator needs to indicate the degree of 
importance and confidence that a certain attribution 
is correct. 
Additional requirements regard: i) a compatibility with 
the broad range of existing value theories; ii) the 
interoperability of the desired language, i.e., the possibility to 
embed it in other markup languages (e.g., EmotionML, 
SMIL); iii) extensibility, i.e., the possibility to extend the 
language in order to satisfy future use cases and thus avoid 
rapid obsolescence. The following section describes the main 
features of a draft language proposal intended to satisfy most 
of the above design requirements. 
B. Language syntax and semantic  
In developing the ValueML language we take inspiration 
to the recent W3C initiative of EmotionML for the 
annotation of emotions [8]. ValueML may be seen as a 
complementary tool for describing experiential and socio-
cultural aspects of web resources. The language uses an 
XML-based syntax. Table I illustrates the main elements of a 
document structure. The root element of a standalone 
ValueML document must be <valueml>. It may contain a 
single <info> element, providing metadata regarding the 
annotated information resource such as, for example, its 
media type, name, description, or web location. The <info> 
element may be followed by the declaration of a controlled 
vocabulary specifying the set of value labels (or categories) 
that can be used in the annotation. We draw on existing 
literature to propose the set of value categories. One or more 
value annotations may follow that are self-contained within 
the <value> element. One of the envisaged uses of 
ValueML is to be used in the context of other markup 
languages. In such cases, there will be no <valueml> root 
element, but <value> elements will be used directly in 
other markup. In order to address these cases the <value> 
element 
has 
been 
provided 
with 
the 
attribute 
"vocabulary-set" for specifying the URI of the external 
vocabulary to be used. Each value annotation includes two 
children elements namely the <category> and the 
<reference>. The <category> element has three 
attributes (see Table II). The attribute "name" is used to 
specify a value. Its content must be an item of a controlled 
vocabulary (internal or external to the document). 
The attribute "relevance" is used to express the 
relative importance of the value with respect to other values 
embodied within the resource. This information is described 
by a floating-point number in the close interval [0,1]. Finally, 
the attribute "confidence" is used by the annotator to 
express his or her confidence that the annotating value is 
correct. Again, this information is described by a floating-
point number in the close interval [0,1].  
Similarly, the <reference> element has three 
attributes (see Table III). The attribute "uri" is used to refer 
to the annotated resource or part of it. Its content must be a 
Media Fragment URI [28] consisting in four parts: 
<scheme name>:<hierarchical part> 
[?<query>] [#<fragment>] 
There are, therefore, two possibilities for representing the 
media fragment addressing URIs: the URI query part, or the 
URI fragment part. For dynamic resources such as sound 
objects or videos, segments are represented by time intervals. 
An interval is denoted by specifying begin and end times, 
e.g., t=t1,t2 where ti is expressed in seconds and 
milliseconds according to NPT (Normal Play Time). For 
static resources such as images, segments are represented by 
regions. A region is denoted by a rectangular selection, e.g., 

109
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
xywh, where x,y represent the top, left corner of the selection 
and w and h denote width and high, respectively. 
The attribute "role" specifies the type of relationship 
existing between the annotated and annotating information. 
Currently, we suggest two possible instances: a value is 
signified by a resource or a value is expressed by the 
resource. The rationale is that we adopt a semiotic stance 
according to which an information object can be viewed as a 
structured system of signs constituted by a content layer (the 
signified) and an expression layer (the signifier).  
Finally, the attribute "modality" can be used to 
describe how the value is communicated. It allows the 
annotator to specify the representational modality used for 
value communication (e.g., written text, sound objects, 
images or videos) and the specific features that are used for 
the task. As an instance, an image can be read in terms of 
plastic features (i.e., shapes, colors, textures, positions, 
orientations, sizes) or in terms of figurative elements (i.e., 
the objects, persons, actions, and scenes depicted in the 
image). Both kinds of readings may by used to convey 
values. Currently, we have identified a limited set of possible 
instances of the "modality" attribute including: by 
storylineContent, by imageExpression, by imageContent, by 
soundObjectContent, to name but a few. Tables II and III 
summarize the main features of the above discussion. Table 
IV illustrates the main elements used by ValueML to define 
a value vocabulary as a list of items representing value 
categories. The <info> element can be used to specify 
metadata associated to the vocabulary, e.g., the scope and 
purpose of the inventory. Currently, the type of vocabulary 
must be a categorical one. 
V. 
CASE STUDIES 
In order to assess the feasibility of value annotation with 
ValueML in concrete cases we focused on annotation of 
video commercials. Video commercials are a particular 
subclass of audio-visual resources that are characterized by 
specific properties in terms of: purpose, form, editorial 
context and use. Generally speaking, video commercials are 
designed to promote goods, services, ideas, brands or 
persons (e.g., politicians). This can be done by using several 
forms of appeal (i.e., logos, ethos and pathos) and different 
rhetorical strategies including analytical (e.g., logical 
argumentation) and narrative processing (e.g., storytelling) 
[29]. In particular, it has been shown that narrative 
advertising is particularly effective in persuasion (e.g., belief 
change) due to the transportation effect that has been studied 
and empirically demonstrated by [30].  
To give an example of value annotation, we have 
selected two paradigmatic cases. The first case - the Citroen 
BX ad campaign - is a narrative video promoting a specific 
model of car by describing an experience of use of the good. 
The second case - the Thai Insurance ad campaign - is a 
narrative video that does not advertise a specific product or 
service but is aimed at communicating the core values of the 
Thai Insurance brand using a story. The following sections 
describe each case in detail. In both cases annotation is 
preceded by an analysis of the clips that is driven by a 
semiotic metamodel of the video as discussed in [27] [31]. 
The metamodel distinguishes four interrelated levels of 
analysis (Figure 3): i) the textual level representing the 
concrete/physical manifestation of the video content in terms 
of audio-visual features; ii) the discourse level referring to 
thematic, figurative, rhetorical aspects; iii) a shallow 
narrative level describing the story told by the video in terms 
of abstract roles (called actants) and narrative schemes (e.g., 
the narrative canonical scheme), and, iv) a deep narrative 
level that uses a specific tool called semiotic square to 
articulate deep semantic meanings such as narrative values 
(axiology). Signification unfolds by crossing these levels 
from shallow features of the video to the most abstract and 
deep ones. This metamodel is particular interesting because 
it explicitly represents the values inscribed in the product and 
relates these values to the storyline content and expression 
(i.e., sensorial qualities). Value annotation concerns the deep 
Semio-Narrative level. 
A. The Citroen BX ad campaign 
The clip selected for analysis and annotation represents a 
well-known ad campaign by Citroen [32]. It was produced in 
1982 to advertise the BX model. The video lasts 47 s. It is 
constituted by a sequence of 18 shots. The narrative is based 
on a valorization process. By this term we intend a process 
by means of which an object/service (a car model in this 
case) is staged in a way that emphasizes (i.e., gives value to) 
some attributes of the object with respect to others according 
to specific consumer's values. Therefore, content annotation 
must be based on a classification of this kind of values. A 
possible choice is the model proposed by Floch [20].  
 
 
Figure 3.  A schematic view of the metamodel used for the analysis of 
narrative video commercials.  
In his model, consumer's values are classified into four 
classes namely, practical, critical, utopian and ludic values. 
They represent the vertices of a semiotic square (see the 
bottom of Figure 3). Briefly: practical values refer to utility, 
usefulness; critical values to convenience, performance, 
quality; utopian values to identity, reflection, social relations, 
and ludic values to surprise, madness, astonishment, irony 
and pleasure including aesthetic pleasure. 

110
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
MAIN ELEMENTS OF A VALUEML DOCUMENT STRUCTURE. 
Annotation 
<valueml>  
Definition 
 
The root element of a ValueML 
document. 
Children 
The element may contain a single 
<info> element providing metadata 
about the annotated resource. It may 
contain one or more <vocabulary> 
elements. It may contain one or more 
<value> elements. 
Attributes 
Required: 
• 
version: indicates the version of 
the specification to be used in the 
document. Documents using this 
specification must use 1.0 for the 
value. 
• 
namespace: declaration for 
ValueML. 
Occurence 
This is the root element; it cannot occur 
as a child of any other ValueML 
element. 
 
Annotation 
<value>  
Definition 
 
This element represents a single value 
annotation. 
Children 
The element must contain a single 
<category> element followed by a 
<reference> element. 
Attributes 
Optional: 
• 
vocabulary-set: a URI 
indicating an external repository of 
value vocabularies and the specific 
vocabulary to be used. Note: this 
attribute is requires if no 
vocabulary is declared within the 
ValueML document. 
Occurence 
As a child of <valueml> element. 
 
TABLE II.  
THE <CATEGORY> ELEMENT. 
Annotation 
<category>  
Definition 
 
Description of a value using a category 
name. 
Children 
None. 
Attributes 
Required: 
• 
name: indicates the name of a 
value category, which must be 
contained in the declared 
vocabulary. 
Optional: 
• 
relevance: specifies the 
importance of a value. It must be a 
floating-point number in the closed 
interval [0,1]. 
• 
confidence: the annotator's 
confidence that the annotation 
given for this category is correct. It 
must be a floating-point number in 
the closed interval [0,1]. 
 
Occurence 
As a child of the <value> element. 
 
 
TABLE III.  
THE <REFERENCE> ELEMENT. 
Annotation 
<reference>  
Definition 
 
This element is used to relate a value to 
the annotated resource or part of it. 
Children 
None. 
Attributes 
Required: 
• 
uri: a URI indicating the actual 
reference target. The URI may be 
extended by a media fragment or a 
media query. 
Optional: 
• 
role: specifies the type of relation 
between the value and the external 
item referred to. Its content must be 
one of "signified_by", 
"expressed_by". 
• 
modality: describes the modality 
through which a value is signified 
or expressed. Possible instances are 
"by_storylineContent", 
"by_imageExpression", 
"by_imageContent", 
"by_soundObjectContent", 
"by_soundObjectExpressio
n". Note: the above list is an open 
set to allow for a more fine-grained 
distinctions. 
Occurence 
As a child of <value> element. 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
THE <VOCABULARY> AND <ITEM> ELEMENTS. 
Annotation 
<vocabulary>  
Definition 
 
This element contains the definition of a 
value vocabulary. 
Children 
A <vocabulary> element must 
contain one or more <item> elements. 
It may contain a single <info> element 
providing metadata about the vocabulary 
itself. 
Attributes 
Required: 
• 
id: a unique vocabulary identifier. 
Optional: 
• 
type: must be "category".  
Occurence 
As a child of <valueml> element. 
 
Annotation 
<item>  
Definition 
 
This element represents the definition of 
one vocabulary item. 
Children 
None. 
Attributes 
Required: 
• 
name: a name for the item, used to 
refer to this item in the 
<category> element. 
Occurence 
As a child of <vocabulary> element. 
Note: a vocabulary must contain at least 
one <item> element. 
 
 

111
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In the considered video clip, values are communicated as 
follows: 
• 
the first segment of the video (time interval: [0 s, 33 
s]; 14 shots) represents practical values (see Figure 
4). A red car leaves Paris at midnight (Minuit, Paris 
...) under the rain. After 8 hours it gets to the sea (... 
8 heures, la mer). The car is presented as a safe, 
confortable, and quick mean to escape from the 
everyday city life. Onboard a young lady, takes off 
her hat, smiling. An off screen voice (by Julien 
Clerc) sings: "J'aime, J'aime, J'aime"; 
 
 
Figure 4.  Four key frames of the first segment of the video clip 
representing practical values. 
 
Figure 5.  Two key frames of the second segment of the video clip 
representing ludic values. 
 
Figure 6.  A key frame of the final segment of the video clip representing 
utopian values. 
• 
a following segment (time interval: [34 s, 40 s]; 3 
shots) is used to communicate ludic values (see 
Figure 5). The car suddenly dives in the sea without 
it could be possible to attribute this mad action to the 
driver that is never shown. The plunge, unexpected 
and irrational, represents the negation of practical 
values shown in the previous segment; 
• 
a final segment (time interval: [41 s, 47 s]; one shot) 
represents utopian values (see Figure 6). Here, the 
car (Citroen BX) is no more an instrument, it is a 
subject, it lives (Citroen BX. Elle vit.). 
Figure 7 shows the semiotic square used to represent the 
logical articulation of a basic opposition between practical 
and utopian valorizations. Arrows represent the trajectory of 
values expressed by the Citroen BX clip during presentation. 
Practical and ludic values are communicated through the 
visual track, while the utopian valorization is explicitly 
expressed by a voice over. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Semiotic square of consumer values  
Figure 8 shows an example of annotation of the 
considered video clip using the ValueML. 
Some observations are worth mentioning. First, the 
controlled vocabulary used for the annotation - the Floch's 
classification - has been defined within the document itself 
using the <vocabulary> element. The relevance of the 
annotating value has been assigned on the base of the time 
span of the video segment to which the value is associated. 
Therefore, values associated to longer video segments have a 
greater relevance with respect to values associated to shorter 
ones. This is a raw estimation of relevance that does not take 
into account other aspects such as, for example, the presence 
of multiple modalities communicating the same value within 
a segment.  
Confidence is high. The rationale is that the discovery of 
values and the association of values to specific video 
segments is based on the availability of the original script 
and critical essays about the considered video that provide 
the main source of annotation knowledge [20]. Therefore, we 
consider the annotation as a correct annotation. Annotated 
segments are represented by query segments. This choice 
produces a new resource and allows for transcoding 
activities. Therefore, if a URI query addresses a single frame 

112
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
out of a longer video it can be transcoded into a still image. 
This is not possible with URI fragments [28]. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Annotation of the BX video clip with ValueML. 
B. Thai Life Insurance ad campaign 
The video commercial [33] represents a snapshot of the 
daily life of a young man, his encounters and emotional 
experiences. It lasts 3 minutes and it is constituted by a 
sequence of 76 shots. Because there is not a specific object to 
be promoted, we refer here, for the annotation, to the 
classification of universal values proposed by Schwartz [13]. 
Figure 9 shows the declaration of the relative vocabulary 
using ValueML. This example is aimed at showing how the 
markup language can be used to define an external repository 
of value vocabularies.  
One problem we encountered during the analysis of the 
Thai clip regards how to assign values to the events of the 
story in a way that could be sufficiently "objective" and 
reproducible. The idea was to exploit the link existing 
between values and behaviors. To this end, we used the 
Portrait Values Questionnaire (hereafter, PVQ) developed by 
Schwartz for the measurement of users' values [34]. The 
PVQ uses a list of forty portraits, each one describing what 
is important for a hypothesized male or female individual 
and what he/she likes. For the sake of clarity the following 
are four examples of portraits (the numbers reflect their 
position in the original PVQ list): 
P-1: thinking up new ideas, and being creative is 
important to him. He likes to do things in his own original 
way; 
P-2: it is important to him to be rich. He wants to have a 
lot of money and expensive things. 
P-12: it is very important to him to help people around 
him. He wants to care for their well-being; 
P-19: he strongly believes that people should care for 
nature. Looking after the environment is important for him. 
  
 
Figure 9.  Definition of a repository of value vocabularies with ValueML. 
In value surveys, the PVQ is used by asking users to 
mark the portraits that better reflect themselves. An 
algorithm is then executed to map answers with value 
categories. As an instance, portrait P-1 above is associated to 
self direction; P-2 to power, P-12 to benevolence, and P-19 
to universalism. We re-purpose the tool for content analysis 
by using it to characterize the behavior of characters in a 
narrative. In other words, instead of using the PVQ for the 
analysis of users we employ it for the analysis of the main 
characters 
in 
narratives. 
The 
method 
we 
have 
envisaged/foreseen for this task can be summarized as 
follows: 
Step 1: decompose the video into its constituent shots, 
then aggregate shots into scenes on the base of the unity of 
intent or action/behavior of the characters represented in the 
shots;  
Step 2: use the PVQ list of portraits to characterize each 
scene obtained in the previous step. This step exploits the 
strong association existing between portraits and expected 
behaviors. The annotator is assumed to perform an abduction 
process to infer a portrait on the base of observed behaviors 
in the video; 
Step 3: map portraits and relative scenes with their 
associated values according to the PVQ algorithm;  
Step 4: evaluate the relevance of each value by 
computing the total time of occurrence of the value (i.e., the 
sum of the time duration of all the scenes/shots in which the 
related behaviors are presented) with respect to the duration 
of the whole clip. 
The application of the method has been supported by the 
use of the ELAN tool [35]. Results indicate that three main 
values are inscribed in the commercial video namely 
universalism (relevance: 19%), benevolence (relevance: 
38%) and tradition (relevance: 12%). Figure 10 shows key 

113
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
frames extracted from scenes showing behaviors associated 
to these values. 
Figure 11 illustrates a fragment of the video annotation 
using ValueML. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Key frames obtained from scenes that represent specific values: 
universalism (top frames), benevolence (middle frames) and tradition 
(bottom frames). 
Some observations are worth mentioning. First, the 
definition of an external repository of vocabularies (see 
Figure 9) allows the annotator to potentially use different 
vocabularies in the same document. Notice that a URI 
fragment is used to specify a vocabulary as the content of the 
"vocabulary-set" attribute in each <value> element. 
Second, each value is communicated by one or more 
portraits that are spread over several scenes. Benevolence, 
for example, is associated to five different portraits that are 
well represented in several scenes/shots of the video. These 
portraits are: 
P-3: he thinks it is important that every person in the 
world be treated equally. He believes everyone should have 
equal opportunities in life; 
P-19: he strongly believes that people should care for 
nature. Looking after the environment is important to him; 
P-23: he believes all the worlds' people should live in 
harmony. Promoting peace among all groups in the world is 
important to him; 
P-29: He wants everyone to be treated justly, even people 
he doesn't know. It is important to him to protect the weak in 
society; 
P-40: it is important to him to adapt to nature and to fit 
into it. He believes that people should not change nature.  
The main consequence is that a value category is 
associated to more than one reference element in the 
annotation.  
Third, the modality attribute can be further specialized by 
taking into account the specific component of a storyline 
content that is used, in the clip, to express the value (in this 
case the main character's behavior).  
Another observation concerns the audio track of the 
video. This is composed by a combination of music, effects 
and voice over. The voice over contributes to the 
communication of the values but in a very different way: it 
does not express the intended value by a description of the 
associated behavior but through the negation of the opposite 
behavior (or portrait). 
 
 
Figure 11.  Partial example of annotation of the Thai clip. 
As an instance, the voice over of the Thai clip says :"He 
does not want to be rich" referring to the character of the 
story. This expresses an opposite value with respect to power 
(a value associated to the portrait P3: he wants to be rich). 
Looking at the Schwartz circle of values the opposite of 
power is universalism that is coherent to what is 
communicated by the visual track. The problem of coherence 
of meaning expressed by different modalities is a critical 
issue during the design of a multimedia and a useful source 
of redundancy for annotators during analysis and annotation.  
Another dimension of coherence concerns the degree of 
localization of the video commercial. Are the values 
embodied in the clip adapted to the Thai Culture? If we refer 
to the characterization of national cultures made by 
Hofstede's theory [36] then the answer is definitely yes. 
Thailand is considered a nation that scores very low in 
individualism and masculinity. This means that the society 
fosters 
strong 
relationships 
where 
everyone 
takes 
responsibility for fellow members of their group and that 
dominant values are caring for others and the quality of life. 
These characteristics are coherent with the values of 
universalism and benevolence that we discover in the clip. 
Therefore, the video features a high degree of localization.  
A final observation regards the effects of the values 
inscribed within informational resources. In the following we 
shall report a comment to the Thai clip made by a subject 
after having viewed the video on YouTube:  
"This video touched me on an unthinkable level so much 
that I'm almost reevaluating my life right now on how I can 
do nicer things to people. I strongly believe they should 

114
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
show this to as many people around the world no matter 
what religious beliefs or race or language they speak" 
This is an example of consequential effect as described 
in Section III. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
We are actually experimenting the use of the ValueML 
language with a dataset of commercial videos collected from 
the web. The dataset includes videos advertising objects or 
services as well as videos that campaign for or against 
something, e.g., for preserving the environment or against 
bullying, and videos that communicate brand personality or 
identity. The aim is to validate the proposed markup 
language, to obtain insights about how to refine the language 
and to reach a better understanding of some critical aspects 
regarding the communication of values through video 
commercials.  
The experiments show that specific pairs of valorizations 
very often come together. As an instance, a practical value is 
often accompanied by a critical one: the advertised good is 
not only valorized by emphasizing its utility and function but 
it is usually compared to other goods by presenting its 
characteristic features and benefits. Analogously, utopian 
valorizations are often presented with ludic ones. Although 
the current version of the ValueML allows the association of 
more than one value to the same segment of a clip, it seems 
to us that the simultaneous presence of these pairs introduces 
a precise semantic meaning that cannot be captured by the 
simple sum of the meanings of its component parts. By 
looking at recent semiotic literature, we found that Semprini 
proposed a classification of consumer's values that could be 
useful to address the above problem [37] [38]. The proposal, 
called "semiotic mapping of consumer's values", follows a 
dimensional approach and uses two pairs of values 
(borrowed from the Floch's inventory) to represent a bi-
dimensional continuous space of possible valorizations. Four 
aggregated values emerge, that correspond to the four 
quadrants of the space. These are: information (practical and 
critical values); mission (critical and utopian values), project 
(utopian and ludic values), and euphoria (ludic and practical 
values). Semprini's model is interesting for its semantic 
interoperability with respect to the Floch's one. However, in 
order to exploit this feature the actual version of the 
ValueML language should be enriched by allowing the 
definition of dimensional models of values that are currently 
not yet supported. Another open issue regards the modality 
attribute. The experiments with narrative videos show that 
values can be expressed not only through the characters' 
behaviors as shown in the Thai clip but also by means of 
other narrative elements such as, for example, the kind of 
space and time represented in the story: the setting, the 
personality of the characters, the relations existing between 
the characters, the expressed passions, emotions, and events. 
Therefore, there is the need to further develop and articulate 
the set of possible modalities in order to take into account 
these possibilities. 
An interesting open issue regards the links existing 
between values and emotions. According to appraisal theory 
[39], emotions are generated by the evaluation (an appraisal 
process) of a given situation, object, action (a stimulus) with 
respect to a personal value, goal, aesthetic or ludic 
preference, and expectations (a concern). This fact opens up 
the possibility of hypothesizing the value, given the emotion 
and the stimulus. This is important if we want to embed the 
ValueML in other languages such as the EmotionML 
language [8]. Are annotated emotions coherent with 
annotated values? Is it possible to infer the values from 
represented emotions (and vice-versa)?  
As shown in Section V, the annotation of values can be 
exploited in cross-cultural design to select the resource that 
best match the culture of the destination audience. Moreover, 
the explicit representation of how a value has been inscribed 
in the information resource is valuable information for 
multimodal designers and a source of inspiration for the 
development of new resources [27]. Analogously, the 
annotation can be exploited to assess the consistency of the 
values communicated through a collection of advertisement 
products belonging to the same ad campaign or to study the 
diachronic evolution of valorizations of a brand in a given 
time interval. As an instance, it can be shown that Benetton 
started its ad campaigns in the 60s by exploiting practical 
and critical values then it moves towards ludic valorizations 
(in the 80s), and to utopian values in the 90s.  
Finally, the presentation of the ValueML made in Section 
IV left a number of technical problems unsolved.  
It is unclear, for example, if it is better to use continuous 
or discrete, unipolar or bipolar, scales for representing 
relevance and confidence. The current choice, a continuous 
unit-less scale such as [0,1], may be overly restricted. Human 
annotators often use a set of discrete labels such as a five-
point Likert scale ("very low", "medium low", ... ," medium 
high", "very high"). Temporal intervals are currently 
represented using start and end time points that are measured 
with respect to the beginning of a clip. This is consistent with 
similar conventions used in other XML languages such as 
SMIL. Time instants are specified using the normal play 
code. Alternatives are SMPTE time code or real world clock 
time. Another problem regards the association of the same 
value to multiple time intervals. Should it be made using 
different value elements and media fragment URIs (one for 
each segment) or by a single value element and media 
fragment URI (see Figure 11)?  
We have postponed a final decision about these topics 
after the acquisition of more knowledge. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we address an aspect that has not been 
tackled before, namely, analysing and annotating web 
resources with embedded values. To this end, we propose a 
markup language, called ValueML, and illustrate its use in 
two paradigmatic cases. Some specifications are still sub 
optimal, such as the specification of multiple vocabularies; 
other aspects are currently missing but will be likely required 
by annotators such as the use of dimensional models of 
values or the use of qualitative scales. Nevertheless, 
experiments with video commercials have confirmed the 
feasibility of the approach and the effectiveness of this 
preliminary version of the language. 

115
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
We highlight some aspects of the approach that we deem 
important. First, our interest is on model-based annotation 
made by professionals during resource production [27]. The 
term model-based is used, here, to stress the fact that analysis 
and annotation are driven by a metamodel of the genre of 
resource to be annotated (see Figure 3) and exploit 
theoretically founded value taxonomies. These tasks require 
specific competencies and a particular analytic sensibility 
since values are often embedded within implicit features of a 
resource (e.g., its atmosphere) that are not easily accessible 
by non expert people. The annotator may be the 
author/designer of the resource. In fact, she is in a privileged 
position to provide annotating knowledge. Other possibilities 
include multimedia critics, semioticians, commentators. If 
the interpretation is not the designer's one, then it should be, 
at least, an interpretation that the designer would consider as 
a possible one. The consequence is that for the same 
resource, several annotations could exist, each one 
representing a specific interpretation according to the 
interests, the perspective and the value taxonomy used by the 
annotator.  
Second, manual annotation is time-consuming but the 
experiments with video commercials we have worked out 
showed that it is a feasible approach due to the limited time 
extension of these genres of media artifacts. The effort is 
largely rewarded by the benefits we may obtain that are 
numerous. 
In 
the 
field 
of 
Brand 
Marketing 
and 
Communication, for example, the use of ValueML allows 
producers to explicitly represent the brand identity core 
values that are inscribed within an advertising message. As a 
consequence, ad resources can be selected, compared, and 
aggregated to made portfolios on the base of embedded 
values. Moreover, value annotation makes is easier to 
evaluate the degree of consistency of ad messages 
communicated by different resources belonging to the same 
ad campaign or through different brand signals (e.g., product 
design, 
packaging, 
testimonials, 
flagship 
stores 
and 
exhibitions). In the field of Cross-Cultural Design, value 
annotation makes it easier to select the resource that best 
match a given context of use, i.e., a resource that could 
resonate with the values of the target consumers or with the 
values of a destination culture. In addition, the ValueML 
language allows the annotator to unfold design knowledge 
embedded within a resource. It allows, for example, to use 
the "modality" attribute in order to explain how a value is 
inscribed within the ad message. This is inspirational for 
designers who may exploit these insights for addressing new 
design problems. We claim that this kind of knowledge can 
be exploited also for automatic recognition of values. This is 
in line with a growing interest in automatic understanding of 
images and video advertisements as reported, for example, in 
[40]. Having a dataset of professionally annotated video 
commercials can be used, in the future, as a ground truth for 
supervised learning techniques. To this end, we claim that 
model based annotation could provide better results with 
respect to current approaches based on the exploitation of 
Amazon Mechanical Turk annotators. 
Finally, the use of ValueML may help designers to better 
focalize their attention on the ethical aspects embodied in 
their products, and the final consumers to become more 
aware of the technological mediation effect produced by 
persuasive messages. 
Our current work is devoted to enrich our dataset of 
annotated resources with new cases. We think that this phase 
is needed for stabilizing the language in a form suitable for 
final formalization. A further step will be the design and 
implementation of an ontology to define the terms of the 
ValueML language, to relate the terms to one another, and to 
define mappings between value vocabularies when possible. 
We are also investigating opportunities for promoting the 
standardization of the ValueML as a recommended format 
for value representation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to thank the editor and reviewers 
for their comments and suggestions. Special thanks also to 
Massimo Romanin for his help in developing the first 
version of the ValueML language. 
REFERENCES  
[1] M. Romanin and E. Toppano "Value annotation of web 
resources: the ValueML language," Proc. WEB 2018: The 
Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring 
Web Based Environments, IARIA, Nice, France, pp. 32-37, 
2018. 
[2] J. Belman, H. Nissenbaum, M. Flanagan, and J. Diamond, 
"Grow-A-Game: a tool for values conscious design and 
analysis of digital games," Proc. of DiGRA Conference, Vol. 
6, pp. 14-17, 2011. 
[3] B. Friedman, P. H. Kahn, A. Borning, and A. Huldtgren, 
"Value sensitive design and information systems," in Early 
engagement and new technologies: opening up the laboratory, 
pp. 55-95, Springer, Netherlands, 2013. 
[4] G. Cockton, "A development framework for value-centered 
design," Proc. CHI EA '05, pp. 1292-1295, 2005. 
[5] P. M. A. Desmet and A. E. Pohlmeyer, "Positive Design: an 
introduction 
to 
Design 
for 
Subjective 
Well-Being," 
International Journal of Design, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 5-19, 2013. 
[6] P. Brey, "Values in technology and disclosive computer 
ethics," The Cambridge Handbook of Information and 
Computer Ethics, Ed. L. Floridi, Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 41-58, 2009. 
[7] F. Ceschin and I. Gaziulusoy, "Evolution of design for 
sustainability: from product design to design for system 
innovation and transition," Design Studies, 47, pp. 118-163, 
2016. 
[8] W3C. Emotion Markup Language (EmotionML), May 2014, 
URL: 
https://www.w3.org/TR/emotionml/ 
[retrieved: 
November, 2018]. 
[9] E. Cambria, "Affective computing and Sentiment analysis," 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, March/April 2016, pp. 102-107, 
2016. 
[10] S. Kujala and K. V.V.Mattila, "Value of Information Systems 
and Products: Understanding the Users' Perspective and 
Values," Journal of Information Technology Theory and 
Application, 9:4, pp. 23-39, 2009. 
[11] S. Boztepe, "User Value: competing theories and models," 
International Journal of Design, Vol. 1, No.2, pp. 55-63, 
2007. 
[12] C. A. Le Dantec, E. S. Poole, and S. P. Wyche, "Values as 
lived experiences: evolving Value Sensitive Design in support 
of value discovery," Proc. CHI 2009, ACM, pp. 1141-1150, 
2009. 

116
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[13] S. H. Schwartz, "An Overview of the Schwartz theory of 
Basic Values," Online Readings in Psychology and Culture, 
2(1), 
Article 
11, 
2012, 
https://doi.org/10.9707/2307-
0919.1116 
[14] A. Cheng and K. R. Fleischmann, "Developing a meta-
inventory of human values," ASIS&T, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 1-
10, 2010. 
[15] M. Rokeach. The nature of human values. New York: Free 
Press, 1973. 
[16] P. Brey, "Theorizing the cultural quality of new media," 
Technè, 11:1, Fall 2007, pp. 2-18. URL: 
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/SPT/v11n1/brey.html 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[17] M. Hollbrok. Consumer value: a framework for analysis and 
research, Routledge, New York, 1999. 
[18] B. Friedman and P. H. Kahn, "Human values, Ethics, and 
Design, " in Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, J. 
Jacko, A. Sears, and N.J. Mahwah, Editors, Lawrence 
Erlbaum, pp. 1177-1201, 2003.! 
[19] K. Sheldon, A. J. Elliot, Y. Kim, and T. Kasser, "What is 
satisfying about satisfying events? Testing 10 candidate 
psychological needs," Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 325-339, 2001. 
[20] J. M. Floch, Semiotics, Marketing and Communication: 
beneath the signs, the strategies. Palgrave MacMillan, 2001. 
[21] M. Flanagan, J. Belman, H. Nissenbaum, and J. Diamond, "A 
method for discovering values in digital games," Proc. 
DiGRA Conference, pp. 752-760, 2007. 
[22] N. Crilly, A. Maier, and P.J. Clarkson, "Representing artifacts 
as media: modelling the relationship between designer intent 
and consumer experience," Journal of Design, Vol. 2, No. 3, 
pp. 15–27, 2008. 
[23] M. Flanagan, D. C. Howe, and E. Nissenbaum, "Embodying 
values in technology. Theory and Practice," in: Information 
Technology and Moral Philosophy, (J. van de Hoven and J. 
Weckert Eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
322-353, 2008. 
[24] L. Anticoli and E. Toppano, "Technological mediation of 
ontologies: the need for tools to help designers in 
materializing ethics," International Journal of Philosophy 
Study, Vol. 1, Issue 3, pp. 23-31, 2013. 
[25] B. Fogg. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change 
What We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 
2003. 
[26] R. H. Thaler and C. S. Sunstein. NUDGE. Improving 
decisions about health, wealth, and happiness, Yale 
University Press, 2008. 
[27] E. Toppano and V. Roberto, "Semiotic annotation of narrative 
video commercials: bridging the gap between artifacts and 
ontologies," International Journal on Advances in Internet 
Technology, vol. 10, nr. 3&4, pp. 145-162, IARIA, 2017, 
http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/ [retrieved: 
November, 2018]. 
[28] W3C. Media Fragments URI 1.0, September 2012, URL: 
https://www.w3.org/TR/media-frags/ [retrieved: November, 
2018]. 
[29] C. 
Chang, 
"Narrative 
advertisements 
and 
narrative 
processing," in Advertising Theory (S. Rodgers and E. 
Thorson Eds.), Routledge, pp. 241-254, 2012. 
[30] M. C. Green and T. C. Brock, "The role of transportation in 
the persuasiveness of public narratives," Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 79, No. 5, pp. 701-
721, 2000. 
[31] C. Bianchi, "Semiotic approaches to advertising texts and 
strategies: narrative, passion, marketing," Semiotica 183, 1/4, 
pp. 243-271, 2011. 
[32] Citroen Bx Campaign, YouTube, URL: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jH2HLRpIq2Y 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[33] Thai Good Stories, YouTube, URL: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZGghmwUcbQ 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[34] S.H. Schwartz, G. Melech, A. Lehrnami, S. Burgess, M. 
harris, and V. Owens, " Extending the cross-cultural validity 
of the theory of basic human values with a different method 
of measurement," Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 32, 
519-542, 2001. 
[35] B. Hellwing, and D. Uytvanck, “EUDICO Linguistic 
Annotator (ELAN),” Version 2.0.2, software manual, 2004. 
[36] G. Hofstede, G.J. Hofstede, and M. Minkov, Cultures and 
Organizations. Software of the mind. Mc Graw Hill, 2010. 
[37] A. Semprini, Marche e mondi possibili. Un approccio 
semiotico al marketing della marca. Franco Angeli, 2007. 
[38] G. Rossolatos, "Applying structuralist semiotics to brand 
image research," The Public Journal of Semiotics, IV(1), pp. 
25-82, 2012. 
[39] E. Demir, P. M. A. Desmet, and P. Hekkert, "Appraisal 
patterns 
of 
emotions 
in 
human-product 
interaction," 
International Journal of Design, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 41-51, 
2009. 
[40] Z. Hussain, M. Zhang, X. Zhang, K. Ye, C. Thomas, Z. Agha, 
N. Ong, and A. Kovashka, "Automatic Understanding of 
Image and Video Advertisements, " Proc. IEEE 2017 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
(CVPR), pp. 1100-1110, 2017. 
 

