A Systematic Approach to Agent-Based Dynamic Analysis
of Social Media Communication
Jan Ole Berndt,
Fabian Lorig, Ingo J. Timm
Business Informatics 1
Trier University
54296 Trier, Germany
Email: [berndt,lorigf,itimm]@uni-trier.de
Christof Barth,
Hans-J¨urgen Bucher
Media Studies
Trier University
54296 Trier, Germany
Email: [barth,bucher]@uni-trier.de
Abstract—The omnipresence of information technology and the
increasing popularity of online social networks (OSN) has led to
a change in communication behavior. While companies beneﬁt
from this, i.e., through viral marketing campaigns, they are also
challenged by negative phenomena, like Twitterstorms. However,
existing empirical approaches and theories for analyzing the
dynamics of social media communication processes and for
predicting the success of a campaign have several shortcomings
with respect to this change of communication. Agent-based social
simulation (ABSS) provides approaches to overcome existing
restrictions, e.g., privacy settings, and to develop a framework
for the dynamic analysis of communication processes, e.g., for
evaluating or testing OSN marketing strategies. This requires
both a valid simulation model and a set of real world data serving
as input for the model. In this paper, a systematic procedure
for preparing and implementing such a model is developed. The
paper describes an integrated process for collecting and analyzing
the required data. In addition, it outlines the components of agent-
based models for simulating OSN communication processes and
demonstrates the necessary steps by examples.
Keywords–Social Network Analysis; Networks of Communi-
cation; Data Collection and Handling; Agent-Based Modeling;
Simulation Methodology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the most noticeable advances of this century is the
omnipresence of information and communications technology
which demands novel and innovative methods for analyzing
and understanding new communicative phenomena [1]. The
establishment of computer systems in various areas of our daily
life and the connection of private households to the Internet
has initiated and still promotes the digital revolution [2]. As a
result, social media platforms have gained popularity and have
become an inherent part of our private communication.
Nowadays, popular OSN, e.g., Facebook, Twitter, or
Google+, have more than 1 billion registered users each and the
tendency is still rising. Internet user spend approximately 28%
of their online-time in OSN [3]. Companies have observed
this trend, too, identiﬁed the potential of OSN as a platform
of aggregated customer contact, and have shifted the focus of
many business units to OSN, e.g., customer service or mar-
keting. This has the beneﬁts of facilitating the determination
of the customers’ demands, of decreasing the efforts of client
contact, and of allowing for an identiﬁcation of trends at an
early stage.
A. Dynamics of Communication Processes in OSN
The high degree of connectivity between the users makes
OSN beneﬁcial for companies, e.g., in terms of word-of-mouth
marketing. Moreover, it allows for fast direct communication
and situation assessment by both companies as well as ofﬁcial
authorities in cases of crisis [4]. OSN users are connected
with a large average number of people which results in an
increased speed of information distribution. Marketing strate-
gies of companies utilize this to quickly reach a high level of
awareness, e.g., in viral marketing campaigns [5]. The self-
replicating process of gaining awareness for a certain product
or brand is driven by messages which are spread by users and
which contain information on the entity that is advertised.
However, the effects and mechanisms which are bene-
ﬁcial for companies in terms of viral marketing and for
gaining a high level of awareness can also result in harmful
consequences. Due to the fast diffusion of information in
OSN, negative comments or criticism can be multiplied in
an uncontrollable way and cause a storm of protest. As these
storms often occur on Twitter, they are called Twitterstorms.
A recent example is the #CrippledAmerica Twitterstorm. In
late 2015, Donald Trump, an American businessman, politi-
cian, and the 45th President of the United States, mocked
a disabled reporter during a political rally while promoting
his book “Crippled America”. Stuttering stand-up comedian
Nina G took this as an opportunity propose using the hashtag
#CrippledAmerica for writing about experiences with disabil-
ity [6]. As a result, the hashtag’s focus shifted from promoting
Trump’s campaign and book to reports on peoples’ experiences
with disabilities and negative responses to his statement.
Currently, companies lack methods to inﬂuence or end
Twitterstorms and thus sometimes inadvertently promote the
distribution of negative statements. Nevertheless, the challenge
is not only to avoid negative impacts. Also utilizing positive
aspects of OSN communication is difﬁcult as traditional con-
cepts of communication can no longer be applied to analyze the
dynamics of OSN. The reasons are multilateral communication
behaviors as well as an increased number of interpersonal
relationships in OSN. Furthermore, the lack of distribution
barriers (“death of distance” [7]) and the increased size of
the potential addressees of messages need to be considered.
This does not only challenge companies. Also from a
scientiﬁc perspective, there is a lack of empirical methods
57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for investigating and explaining complex social mechanisms
and dynamics of communication processes [8]. Due to their
characteristics, compared to traditional ofﬂine communication,
innovative concepts and techniques are required for analyzing
communication processes in OSN [9].
Related research questions arise from the ﬁelds of media
studies and communication research. Here, contents and effects
of mass media as well as human communication are in focus.
Considering standard research methods from these areas, there
are two major challenges: Firstly, operators of OSN restrict
access to data and users applying privacy settings to protect
their personal data. This prevents researchers from accessing
relevant information. Thus, ﬁeld studies can only be conducted
when the communication is openly accessible. Secondly,
anonymity and the large number of actors in OSN inﬂuence
the behavior of the users. Hence, empirical experiments under
laboratory conditions are unfeasible. It can be assumed that
actors will not behave the way they would behave in real OSN
when knowing they are part of an artiﬁcial network which is
being observed in a scientiﬁc study. Consequently, alternative
approaches are needed for analyzing communication dynamics
in OSN, e.g., for evaluating Twitterstorm strategies in advance.
B. Agent-Based Social Simulation for Analyzing Communica-
tion Processes
Computer simulation is a commonly used technique for
analyzing complex and inaccessible systems in many disci-
plines. Here, artiﬁcial systems are created by modeling and
simulating actors and mechanisms which then can be studied
using existing research methods. In contrast to real world
systems, simulated systems can be fully accessed, modiﬁed,
and recreated by the researchers as required. In social sciences,
Agent-Based Social Simulation (ABSS) has been established
as a special type of simulation for studying emergent social
behavior [10]. By modeling the actors of the real world system
as autonomous entities, individual decision-behavior can be
simulated and global social phenomena emerge from local
interactions of the actors.
For the use in OSN analysis, such a simulation must model
social media users, their behaviors, and the emergent effects
of their communicative activities. It has to be grounded on a
real world data basis of actual online discourses as well as on
sociological and psychological theory. Consequently, the data
basis comprises data about the actors (the users of the OSN),
the environment of the actors (the OSN itself), as well as the
topics of conversations and their development (the contents and
styles of OSN communication). This information regarding the
types of actors, their actions and goals but also the structure
and the opportunities for actions provided by the OSN are
needed for creating a realistic simulation model.
That model can then be used to produce artiﬁcial communi-
cation scenarios which imitate or alter real discourses in a con-
trolled experiment setting. These simulations provide various
potential conversation ﬂows as their results. This will allow for
evaluating which media phenomena, e.g., Twitterstorms, are
likely to emerge from a given situation. Moreover, simulations
can serve as a method for evaluating communication strategies
to cope with these phenomena or to take advantage from them.
To achieve these results, a systematic process of data
handling, model development, and simulation experimenting
is required. Hence, this paper presents a ﬁrst step towards
the development of a framework for analyzing communication
dynamics in OSN and for testing communication strategies
using an ABSS approach. It extends existing work [1] with
systematic procedure models for gathering and analyzing data
as well as for modeling social media communication.
Section II outlines the foundations of communication in
OSN, conventional analysis methods, and related work. In
Section III, agent-based dynamic analysis is introduced as the
method being systematically explored in this paper. Section IV
focuses on the automated collection, preparation, and selection
of relevant communication data from OSN. The usage of that
data for developing the components of a simulation model
is subsequently discussed in Section V. In Section VI the
implementation and evaluation of the approach is described.
Here, particularly the syntactical context of the communica-
tion will be in focus with an outlook on requirements for
additional analyses of its semantics. Using the example of
Twitter, isolated tweets related to the same topic are selected,
individual actors and messages sent by them are derived,
and communication dynamics are reconstructed. To evaluate
this approach, communication dynamics of Twitterstorms and
political discourses are analyzed and discussed. Finally, Sec-
tion VII provides a concluding summary of the ﬁndings.
II.
FOUNDATIONS
For analyzing the dynamics of OSN communication pro-
cesses, the act of communication itself but also the structure
of OSNs need to be considered.
A. Communication
Human communication can be considered a sequence of
actions of individuals, where the behavior of a sender inﬂu-
ences the behavior of a receiver [11]. It can be understood as
a process, where the sender uses a set of characters to encode
a message, which then is transmitted using an information
medium. The receiver uses an own set of characters to decode
and interpret the message and returns a feedback using the
same mechanism but not necessarily the same medium [12].
However, a message does not necessarily need to be a verbal
utterance but can also be nonverbal.
Each message consists of different layers of information
(Figure 1). Without further knowledge, a message is only
perceived as a set of characters. Syntax adds rules deﬁning the
relationship between characters. Hence, the characters become
a message. The meaning of a message is determined by its
semantics. A transfer of information can only be achieved
if both the sender and receiver share the same semantics.
Pragmatics reveal the intention of the message’s sender.
The shifting of communication into technical media results
in a loss of information. The transmission of messages is
ensured, yet, the receiver does not know whether a message
was interpreted correctly. On Twitter, e.g., the platform de-
termines and restricts communication processes between users
and inﬂuences understanding. The result of a communication
can only be returned on the same technical way it has been
received, by replying to a tweet using another tweet. Thus, we
focus on the analysis and simulation of sequences of tweets
and leave nonverbal communication out of account at ﬁrst.
For that analysis, it is necessary to know the participating
social actors, the structure of the network, and how com-
munication is made possible. As pragmatics and semantics
need to be abstracted for the simulation model, tools for the
automated evaluation of messages are needed and are provided
58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

!"#$#%&'$(
)'((#*'
)'#+,+*
-+&'+&,.+
/012+&#3
/01'4#+&,%(
/05$#*4#&,%(
Figure 1. Pragmatics, semantics, and syntax of communication [13], [14].
by computer linguistics. Even though our example does not
focus on the computer linguistic analysis of tweets, it is an
essential part of the model building process as the large amount
of data requires an automated approach.
B. Communication Platforms: Online Social Networks
Since the early 1980s, platforms which are now referred to
as OSN exist. According to Boyd and Ellison [15], OSN are
webservices, enabling users to create a proﬁle, to maintain a list
of other users they are in contact with, and to navigate through
their own list as well as through the list of other users of the
service. In 1980, Usenet was the ﬁrst service to enable users
to discuss certain topics with others sharing the same interests.
17 years later, in 1997, SixDegrees.com provided the ﬁrst OSN
according to [15]. In 2004 and 2006, Facebook and Twitter
were started, respectively and made OSN popular. As of today,
they are still two of the three most popular OSN, according
to the number of active users. End of 2015, Twitter had 320
millions and Facebook had 1 billion active users [16][17].
In terms of graph theory, the structure of a social network
can be described by a set of users (nodes) and relationships
between the users (edges), connecting those nodes [18]. De-
pending on the direction of the relationship, graphs can be
unidirectional, deﬁning the direction of the relationship, or
bidirectional, connecting two nodes without providing infor-
mation regarding the direction of the relationship.
For assessing the importance of a node in a graph, e.g.,
the most inﬂuential users of an OSN, centrality measures can
be used [19]. The degree of centrality corresponds to the total
number of edges a node has and can be used as a measure
of a node’s interconnectedness in a graph. Nodes having a
high degree (compared to other nodes) are classiﬁed as hubs
in terms of information diffusion. When considering directed
graphs, the indegree (number of inbound edges) needs to be
distinguished from the outdegree (number of outbound edges).
In contrast to this node-speciﬁc measure, the density is
calculated for an entire network or graph. Doing so, it can be
used for comparing different graphs. The density of a graph is
deﬁned by the ratio of the number of existing edges and the
maximum number of edges in case every pair of nodes would
be connected by an edge (complete graph).
For simulating communication in OSN, the structure of
the network needs to be recreated. A representation of a
network using a graph deﬁnes the communication channels. In
particular, the described platform-speciﬁc characteristics give
indication of the conditions under which communication is
taking place, e.g., who can send messages to whom and how
their reach can be assessed.
C. Communication Actors, Activities, and Contents: Compu-
tational Linguistics
In addition to the structure, OSN consist of messages which
are send between the users. For analyzing communication
processes, the content of the messages is of relevance, too.
It provides the researcher information about the intention as
well as the context of communication. Thus, it is desirable to
automatically classify the topic of individual messages and
communication processes. Doing so, a ﬁrst impression of
the content of communication is given which facilitates the
researcher’s process of ﬁnding and selecting relevant commu-
nication processes. Furthermore, a basis for the abstraction of
the content for the modeling process is provided. Yet, as the
messages consist of natural language, analyzing the content
in an automated way is challenging. Computational linguistics
focuses on the modeling and processing of natural language
and provides suitable techniques.
1) Machine Learning: A basic technology used in com-
putational linguistics is machine learning which evolved from
artiﬁcial intelligence. In contrast to other algorithms following
hard-coded program instructions, machine learning algorithms
learn from experiences gained from data or from models built
from data [20]. There are three types of machine learning:
supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. While
supervised algorithms learn rules from example inputs and
outputs, unsupervised learning approaches ﬁnd patterns in data
on their own. Reinforcement learning takes place in dynamic
environments and will not be considered any further in this
paper. For classifying data, supervised learning algorithms are
commonly used, e.g., support vector machines (SVM) [21].
2) Content and Lexical Analysis: When using machine
learning algorithms for processing natural language, the text
ﬁrst needs to be divided into its linguistic entities. These
include words as well as phrases or even entire paragraphs
of a text. For separating words, whitespace characters can be
used in most segmented writing systems, e.g., those consisting
of Latin characters. The entities received when dividing a text
are called n-grams and are used for creating a model of the
language. In this work, n-grams are used for analyzing the
mood of messages, i.e., tweets.
For assigning attributes (tags) to words, part-of-speech
tagging (POST) is applied [22]. Given a text, POST identiﬁes
the grammatical categories of each word, e.g., noun, verb, or
adjective. This is challenging, as words may appear in different
parts of speech at the same time. Yet, analyzing the mostly
used nouns, verbs, and adjectives in a large data set, e.g., a set
of tweets, may provide a ﬁrst impression regarding the most
commonly discussed topics.
When analyzing frequencies of words in a text or when in-
dexing documents, a reduction of the words to their base form
is needed. Stemming aims at reducing words with a similar or
identical meaning, but which differ in its sufﬁx, to its word
stem. Here, each language requires own stemming algorithms.
A commonly used algorithm for the English language is the
porter stemming algorithm [23].
Summarizing it can be said that for evaluating communi-
cation processes in OSN, content and lexical analysis provide
information regarding the topic of a conversation and allow
for a ﬁrst assessment of the tweet.
59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Related Work
There are several existing approaches to modeling and
analyzing networks of communication and discourses in OSN.
In the following, we discuss these works and relate them to
our systematic procedure.
Information propagation aims at identifying a group of
users which can propagate an unspeciﬁed information, i.e., a
message, to as many users as possible [24]. These users are
frequently modeled as agents with particular behavioral rules
that ﬁre if a certain activation threshold is reached. Such a
threshold denotes the required strength of inﬂuence (e.g., a
number of received messages) on an agent until it becomes
active itself. This method is particularly relevant for planning
advertising strategies in OSN as viral marketing campaigns
make use of information propagation effects [25] [26].
However, information propagation frequently leaves the
content of communication out of account or only focuses on
a particular topic. Nevertheless, alternative approaches exist
where the topics of communication within OSN are explic-
itly modeled for providing a topic-aware estimation of the
propagation probability [24]. Thus, information propagation
provides valuable ex-post approaches for analyzing networks
of communication but lacks methods for integrating individual
and more complex opinion making processes.
Cogan et al. [27] used Twitter data to reconstruct complete
conversations around an initial tweet which is given. This
enables a more detailed evaluation of conversation topologies,
as social interaction models can be compared to OSN. Yet,
only isolated and minor conversations lasting up to six hours
were analyzed, not larger networks of communication as they
occur in Twitterstorms.
For analyzing political discourses among Twitter users,
Hsu et al. [28] examined their participation in discussions.
The identiﬁcation of key users was based on the users’ public
data, e.g., Twitter ID, location, number of tweets, and follower-
followee-networks, instead of considering the communicative
behavior of the users.
Maireder [29] described discourses on Twitter using three
perspectives: networking topics, networking media objects,
and networking actors. By connecting these perspectives, the
author aims at understanding the process of political opinion-
making through Twitter using empirical approaches by hand.
These approaches consider the collection and preparation
of data as isolated processes for social network analysis. An
integration of data handling in an entire research process for
generating theories, testing hypotheses or deriving conclusions
is not proposed. Additionally, an adoption of data handling and
its impact on model development as part of a simulation study
is not performed. Thus, the approach presented in this paper
complements existing approaches such that an agent-based
simulation of communication processes in OSN is facilitated.
III.
DYNAMIC ANALYSIS
For analyzing and modeling the dynamics of OSN com-
munication processes, a data basis is needed. As the number
of existing OSN is large and as OSN differ in structure and
mechanisms, the process of data collection differs, too. In this
paper, Twitter is used as an example platform due to the size
of the OSN and the unrestricted access to data. Compared to
other OSNs like Google+ and Facebook, Twitter’s data is not as
much affected by privacy settings and can be accessed using
the provided API. Still, the communication processes which
can be observed on Twitter are of relevance as they affect the
general public and have resulted in cross-media phenomena in
the past, e.g., the harlem shake [30].
A. Twitter as a Communication Platform
Twitter was founded in 2006 and, compared to other
OSN, its unique feature is the limitation of the message
(“tweet”) length to 140 characters. Initially, the restriction
to 140-character messages was a consequence of the limited
size of SMS messages and the service aimed at sharing
short status updates from personal life. Another difference
is how friendships are represented. While most OSN consist
of bidirectional relationships between users, meaning two
users constitute the friendship together, a distinction between
followers and followees is made on Twitter. Here, a user
actively and voluntarily decides which other users to follow
for receiving their status updates in an unidirectional way.
Following another Twitter participant makes the following
user become a followee. Nevertheless, the user being followed
does not need to follow its followers. Thus, a connection
between two users does not imply that they exchange in-
formation in both directions. In consequence, for analyzing
communication dynamics, the directions of the relationships
need to be considered.
Besides the user network, the hashtag (#) emphasis Twitter
provides is of special interest from a media studies and com-
munication research point of view. When publishing messages,
Twitter users can make use of two operators for classifying
a message. The #-symbol is used for categorizing messages
and for marking keywords of a tweet. This simpliﬁes the
researcher’s assignment of tweets to a certain topic.
Furthermore, Twitter provides mechanisms for replying to
other tweets and for addressing a tweet to a certain person.
Using the @-symbol followed by the name of a user or by
putting the preﬁx “RT” (retweet) at the beginning of a tweet,
the identiﬁcation of dialogs or conversations is supported. Due
to these features, Twitter has been widely used for conducting
studies of certain subjects or events, e.g., spread of news [31],
the activity of diseases [32] or political communication [33].
B. ABSS of Communication Processes in OSN
For developing a dynamic analysis framework which makes
use of simulation techniques, the simulation method needs
to be chosen according to the phenomena to be analyzed.
A special feature of phenomena occurring in OSN, e.g.,
Twitterstorms, is that they are emergent [34]. Due to the local
interactions of the users on a micro level, global effects occur
on a macro level as shown in Figure 2. Yet, they can not
(entirely) be explained by the local actions.
Macro Level 
Micro Level 
Discourse Situation 
New Discourse Situation 
Agents 
Actions 
Decision-Making 
Figure 2. Emergence of macro level discourse dynamics from micro level
agent interactions. Figure adapted from Hedstr¨om and Ylikoski [35].
60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Data Collection & 
Analysis 
Implementation & 
Simulation 
Conclusions & 
Explanations 
Evaluation & 
Optimization 
Theories from  
Agent Technology 
Real World 
I 
O 
t 
Multiagent System 
I 
O 
t 
Interdisciplinary Discourse Model for 
Online Social Networks 
OSN Platform 
Social Actors 
Discourses 
Theories from Media & 
Communication Science 
System Analysis &  
Model Application 
Agent-based Simulation &  
Model Refinement 
Figure 3. Integrated research method for creating and reﬁning an interdisciplinary model of OSN communication.
For analyzing, reproducing, and investigating such emer-
gent phenomena, agent-based computer simulation has been
established as a standard means. By modeling real world
actors, in this case the users of an OSN, as autonomous soft-
ware agents, individual behavior and anticipation of behavior
on the micro level can be simulated resulting in emergent
effects on a macro level [36]. The observation of the global
phenomena in combination with the knowledge of the actions
and interactions of the actors can then be used for deriving
as well as examining scientiﬁc explanations regarding the
mechanisms of the system. In terms of social sciences, using
agent-based actor models for doing social simulation studies
is referred to as ABSS [37].
For using ABSS to analyze communication dynamics in
OSN, three entities need to be modeled: the users of an OSN
(actors), the decisions and actions of the users (behavior), and
the connections between the actors (network). While actors
and their behavior can be considered as the micro level of
the model, the network is a macro phenomenon and can be
observed in the real world. Accordingly, an understanding of
the macro level needs to be established ﬁrst, as a basis for
further consideration of the actor-based micro level.
During the model development process, domain expertise
is needed for modeling real world mechanisms and processes
according to observations or results from discourse analysis.
This information from sociology and media studies, enriched
with theories from software agent technology, can then be
technically formalized and used for specifying a multiagent
system for simulating OSNs. As a result, different artiﬁcial
scenarios and processes can be observed based on how stochas-
tic events inﬂuence the mechanisms. Instead of using the real
world system as an object of research, domain-speciﬁc research
methods can then be applied to the artiﬁcial system.
Compared to the real world system, a more cost-efﬁcient
and restriction-free access to data is provided. Furthermore,
variations of the spatial or temporal dimension as well as
repetitions of experiments are possible and the real world
system is not exposed to any risk or needs not be existent at all.
Results of the simulation experiments will be used for reﬁning
the model. This enables domain experts to draw conclusions
and implications from the model regarding the real world
system using speciﬁc theories, e.g., to provide decision support
for analyzing viral marketing or for preventing Twitterstorms.
The described process results in two interconnected loops
of research where a central interdisciplinary model serves as
intermediator. This model is improved and reﬁned stepwise
by both disciplines, i.e., agent technology and media studies,
until a satisfying state is reached as depicted in Figure 3. The
model can then be used in the dynamic analysis framework for
simulating OSN and communication processes within them.
The following sections elaborate on the research process in
Figure 3 in detail. Firstly, Section IV covers the data collection
and processing aspects of its left hand side. This is necessary to
develop a simulation model of OSN which allows for drawing
conclusions about real world communication dynamics. In
addition, Section V further explains the right hand side of the
Figure. It describes an iterated modeling approach of OSN
communication structures, users, and contents as a basis for
conducting social media simulation experiments.
IV.
DATA COLLECTION AND PROCESSING
The process of performing a simulation study for analyzing
dynamics of communication in OSN can be divided into three
major steps (see Figure 4): the acquisition of relevant data,
the conduction of the simulation experiments, and the drawing
of conclusions from the results of the experiments regarding
the real world. In this paper, we focus on the ﬁrst step, the
acquisition of relevant data and the simultaneous development
of an agent-based simulation model.
To decide which data is relevant for a speciﬁc simulation
study, the experiments need to be designed in advance. This
includes the determination of the methodology of the simula-
tion study as well as the deﬁnition of research hypotheses to
be tested. After the experimental design has been deﬁned in
consultation with the domain experts, e.g., PR experts, relevant
data needs to be collected, prepared, and selected accordingly.
A. Data Collection
When gathering OSN data using APIs, most of the data is
provided in standardized data formats, e.g., JSON or XML.
Due to the structure of the data format, each message or
contribution (e.g., tweet or Facebook posting) is transferred
as a single piece of information. Additionally, each entity is
described by meta data, e.g., a unique ID, the name of the
author, a timestamp when it was published, and a reference to
which other message it replies.
61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Tonality 
Analysis
Tweet 
Database
Conversation 
Analysis
Content
Analysis
Filter
Tweets
User
Network of 
Communication
Visualization
ABSS
Theories
Simulation
Explanation
Mechanisms / 
Expert know-how
Design
Collection of 
Data (API)
Design of 
Experiment
Data Collection
Data Preparation & Selection
Detailed Conceptualization
Methodology
Hypothesis
Simulation 
Model
Basic Conceptualization
Data
Tested 
Hypothesis
Conclusions
Other OSN
Figure 4. Procedure model for collecting, editing, and aggregating OSN data for ABSS studies.
Twitter provides REST APIs for reading and writing data.
The access to the API is at no charge and the data can be
downloaded as JSON ﬁles. Each tweet is characterized by up
to 35 attributes, e.g., favorite count and geo coordinates. Up
to 500 million tweets are sent per day. Two APIs are intended
for the assessment of data. The streaming API provides access
to the global stream of data and the search API allows queries
against a subset of tweets from the past week. Both APIs
need to be requested with a set of predeﬁned keywords, i.e.,
hashtags, to restrict the results.
Here, the tradeoff is the extent of the data. The streaming
API provides complete data regarding a hashtag, yet, this
results in large datasets which need to be collected and stored
in real-time. Technical problems during this process may result
in a loss of data, as past data can not be accessed. In contrast
to this, the search API provides relevant data only which
decreases the size of the dataset. The data of the last week
can be accessed, which enables a non-real-time collection of
data, but the completeness as well as representativity of the
provided data are questionable.
Certainly in terms of topics and events that are not dis-
cussed using a hashtag which is known in advance, e.g., a
Twitterstorm, the advantages and disadvantages of the two
APIs are noticeable. The keywords of the real-time streaming
API need to be modiﬁed in order to capture the tweets of the
storm of protest. Yet, when the Twitterstorm is recognized, the
beginning has been in the past and thus can not be captured
using a real-time API. The search API, in contrast, can be used
to collect “popular” tweets of an event which has occurred
up to one week ago. Yet, Twitter determines the popularity
of a tweet without providing any information regarding the
weighting function being used. Thus, the completeness of the
dataset collected using the search API can not be assessed.
Consequently, according to the design of experiment, the
appropriate API needs to be chosen or a combination of both
APIs needs to be used for the collection of data.
B. Data Preparation & Selection
After a dataset has been collected using the API provided
by the OSN, it needs to be stored for further processing. In
this phase of the data handling, communication processes are
identiﬁed in the set of isolated tweets, and the content of
the communication is analyzed. Furthermore, the network of
communication is reconstructed representing related messages
and conversations. That network of communication provides
the basis for specifying, reﬁning, and validating the agent-
based simulation model.
1) Conversation Detection & Content Analysis: Topic-
related communication processes, i.e., discourses, are consid-
ered as coherent dialogs between users or groups of users
regarding a certain topic [38]. From a media studies and com-
munication research perspective, the identiﬁcation and analysis
of these discourses within a network of communication is of
high relevance. They are the foundation for reconstructing and
evaluating topics and opinion-making processes over time.
For discovering discourses in a network of communication,
both the conversations between users and the content of the
messages need to be analyzed. A conversation is deﬁned by
the direction as well as the order of messages which were sent.
First, the beginning of a discourse, i.e., the initial tweet, needs
to be identiﬁed. The identiﬁcation of this tweet in a dataset
can be achieved by selecting all tweets, one after another, and
checking the following two conditions: 1) Does another tweet
exist in the dataset, which is a reply to the selected tweet? and
2) Is the selected tweet no reply to other tweets itself?
In case both conditions are fulﬁlled, a tweet is considered
an initial tweet. Still, the dataset may contain only a part of
a conversation. This might occur, if the initial tweet has not
been part of the collection received from the API. In this case,
the initial tweet is the one which is a reply itself, yet, the tweet
it replies to is not part of the dataset. By iteratively applying
this procedure (see Figure 5), communication processes can
be identiﬁed as shown.
After identifying communication processes between users
in networks of communication, an automated analysis of the
conversation is desirable due to the large amount of data.
Doing so, researchers can get a ﬁrst impression regarding
the type and topic of the conversation. On the one hand,
the tonality of tweets can be determined using sentiment
analysis, providing information about the mood expressed in
62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

!"#$%&'()(*(#+'
*,""*'-).'$"/+01
2*#$*
!"#$%&'
$"/+("!3#)!,"$!
!#4"'*,""*
5"/+0'
6.7)89
0"!
).
!#4"'
%.)4"$!#*(.)
#)#+0:"'
%.)4"$!#*(.)
;)8
Figure 5. Conversation detection in Twitter dataset.
the tweets. Communication processes can be differentiated
according to differences of opinion, i.e., pro and contra. In
terms of discourses, an alternating tonality can be assumed,
as two parties talk about the truth of a certain statement. On
the other hand, an automated analysis of the discourse topic
can be performed. Content analysis provides techniques for
determining commonly used terms in tweets, giving a ﬁrst
impression regarding the potential topic of the conversation.
The tweets are analyzed in two ways. First, the hashtags
used in the tweets are identiﬁed and collected. An overview of
the most commonly used hashtags of a conversation provides
a ﬁrst impression regarding the topic of the conversation. As
a second step, a POST approach is used for analyzing nouns
and adjectives. For doing so, all tweets of the conversation
need to be divided into single words. Hashtags can be removed
from the set of words, as they have already been evaluated
individually and as hashtags often consist of made-up words
or abbreviations. Thus, the decision whether a hashtag is a
noun or adjective is difﬁcult. POST will then be applied to the
remaining words to identify nouns and adjectives which occur
multiple times. The outcome enables a ﬁrst assessment of the
conversations’ topics.
Furthermore, the tonality of a tweet is another indicator
for assessing its content. Tonality or sentiment analyses of
tweets can be conducted by means of rule-based classiﬁcators
[39]. Alternatively, applying supervised learning algorithms for
classifying tweets according to their tonality requires a three-
stage approach [21]. As a ﬁrst step, classiﬁcation algorithms
require a set of training data, which has been classiﬁed by
hand. Using this data, the learning algorithm is trained and
conﬁgured for the third step, the automated classiﬁcation of
the remaining tweets.
To increase the algorithm’s accuracy, the data should be
preprocessed. As the mood of the tweet is assessed by analyz-
ing natural language only, artiﬁcial constructs, such as links to
websites, @-mentions, and the “RT” preﬁx can be removed.
Doing so, disturbances of the algorithm can be reduced.
2) Network of Communication: At this point, the dataset
contains a large number of individual communication pro-
cesses. Yet, for analyzing the dynamics of communication,
these conversations must not remain separate. Instead, the
entire network obtained when merging all individual com-
munication processes is of interest. It contains dependencies
between different conversations and provides a chronological
order of each conversation. In the following, this topic-speciﬁc
network of users and messages sent between the users is
referred to as network of communication.
When reconstructing networks of communication in OSN,
the relationships between the users are of relevance. Generally,
Twitter provides two kinds of relationships between users:
communicative relationships expressed by the use of the RT
or @ operator and social relationships which are represented
by Twitter’s follower-followee-mechanism.
Analyses of the communicative structure of past Twitter-
storms have shown that a small amount of the involved OSN
users operate as central nodes and drive the diffusion of the
criticism (see Section VI). Thus, for reconstructing networks
of communication, communicative relationships seem to be
most relevant. Social relationships, in contrast, do not contain
any information regarding the participation and intensity of
communication. Yet, a user’s “communicative power” [38]
can be determined by the social interconnectedness of that
user. This is relevant when analyzing scenarios that potentially
can lead to Twitterstorms, i.e., prospective analysis. In terms
of networks of communication, communicative power can be
considered as the ability to gain a high level of awareness
for a message due to the large number of users the writer
is connected with. Accordingly, for reconstructing networks
of communication, these types of relationships need to be
extracted from the dataset.
Beginning with a large amount of separate tweets and
related attributes derived from the Twitter API, a preselection
regarding a deﬁned hashtag of interest needs to be performed.
At this point, additional ﬁlters can be applied for limiting the
extent of data, e.g., structure, content or mood ﬁlters. Doing so,
the dataset is reduced to the relevant tweets directly associated
with the topic to be analyzed. Here, the assumption is made
that the hashtags mentioned by the tweet imply the topics the
tweet is related to, as intended by Twitter. Tweets, that are
meant to be related to a topic, yet, do not mention the hashtag
in particular, can not be considered as part of the study, as
they are not recognized by the API.
As a next step, isolated users must be removed. They are
not part of the network of communication. Accordingly, iso-
lated tweets need to be removed as well. They are considered
not to be of interest to other users. A tweet is isolated when
neither addressing a certain user nor being a retweet or reply to
a previous tweet. By considering retweets, circles may occur,
as some users tend to retweet their own tweets. These tweets
are irrelevant for the network of communication.
Based on this cleaned dataset, a directed graph can be
generated. In this graph, the nodes represent the users of the
OSN and the edges represent the tweets of the users. For
simpliﬁcation purposes, just one type of edges will be used
for all three types of communication: retweets, replies, and
@-mentions. If the type of communication becomes relevant,
it is always possible to refer back to the contents of the
particular tweets which provide that information. At that point,
the calculation of centrality measures can be performed, e.g.,
degree or closeness centrality. When visualizing the graph, the
researcher gets a ﬁrst impression of the structure of the network
of communication. This structure provides the validation target
63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for the simulation as well as a basis for detailing the settings
for the previously deﬁned simulation experiments.
As the aim of this process is to create a realistic simu-
lation model, the conceptualization of the simulation model
is performed parallel to the data collection and preparation.
This facilitates the coordination and enables a harmonization
of these two interdependent processes. For one thing, the simu-
lation model is created according to the dataset which has been
collected and thus can take account of certain characteristics of
the dataset, e.g., involved actor types or speciﬁcs of the topic.
For another thing, the collection and preparation of data can
be adapted to the model ensuring the suitability of the dataset.
Starting with a basic conceptualization of the model during
the design of experiment and data collection phases, a more
detailed conceptualization during the preparation and selection
phase is done. This results in the creation of an applicable
simulation model which matches the acquired data as it has
been developed based on them.
V.
AGENT-BASED MODELING OF OSN COMMUNICATION
The data collected and prepared in the previous steps can
now serve as input for the simulation model. At this step,
ABSS experiments can be conducted using the results of the
previous process step. In addition, expert know-how is needed
to validate and verify the simulation model as well as to
interpret the results of the experiments. This includes proving
or disproving of the hypotheses deﬁned during the design of
experiment phase as well as deriving conclusions or theories
from the results.
As depicted in Figure 6, the conceptual model comprises
three major components: The platform structure, the agents
and their behaviors, as well as their available communicative
actions. These components are interconnected and from their
interplay emerge artiﬁcial communication processes in the
simulation. However, this interconnectedness makes it difﬁcult
to construct and validate a simulation model. Hence, we
propose an iterative modeling process. That process consists
of three consecutive phases, each of which focuses on one
component while only making those changes to the others that
are necessary for maintaining a runnable simulation model.
Each phase ends with a speciﬁc milestone. As explicated in
the following, such a milestone denotes the availability of a
validated simulation model with the required expressive power
to dynamically analyze a particular kind of research questions.
A. Phase 1: Platform Modeling
The ﬁrst modeling phase covers the development of an
initial agent-based OSN model. In particular, it focuses on rep-
resenting the OSN platform under consideration (e.g., Twitter)
which provides the agents with various activity options. These
options include abilities to address speciﬁc users, to reply to
messages or comments, as well as to forward and distribute
information to other users. Hence, the goal of this modeling
phase is to enable the simulation of information diffusion by
means of these different communication mechanisms (i.e., how
does communication take place?).
With respect to Twitterstorms, the corresponding milestone
encompasses the simulation of how protests can emerge from
speciﬁc users utilizing particular channels of communication.
This covers research questions like who are the most important
actors in communication processes? and how can information
spread throughout the OSN?
To address those questions, it is necessary to imitate
the aforementioned networks of communication in the agent-
based simulation. That is, the communicating users must be
identiﬁed along with their respective social and communicative
relationships. In the simulation model, each user is represented
by an agent that is connected to other agents through social
relationships (i.e., Twitter’s follower-followee mechanism).
Thus, each time an agent publishes or forwards a tweet, its
followers receive that message. Additionally, an agent can
address others directly by means of Twitter’s @-mentions or
it can listen to speciﬁc hashtags. The latter communicative
relationships dynamically emerge from the agent activities.
Representing those relationships and enabling the agents
to select among the available communicative options requires
descriptions in a formal language. Formal ontologies provide
such kinds of descriptions which are easily extensible and
facilitate automated reasoning of the agents about their activity
options [40]. In fact, ontologies for describing OSN structures
and communication options are already available [41] [42].
These can be applied and extended in this context.
While those ontological descriptions allow for extensive
reasoning about communication processes by the agents in
a simulation, these agents can remain simple for the ﬁrst
modeling phase. In order to utilize the available options, it
is sufﬁcient to model their behavior through simple condition-
action rules, in the same manner as existing threshold models
for information diffusion [24]. As long as the agents make
use of the RT and @ operators, these models are suitable for
simulating the establishment of communicative relationships.
In addition, the communicated content can be represented by
means of one or more hashtags per tweet. They model the
topics of each message as well as its visibility to further
agents (other than an agent’s followers). Hence, those hashtags
enable analyses of information spread processes throughout the
simulated OSN with respect to various topics.
To obtain realistic simulation results, the ﬁrst iteration
of the agent-based model must be calibrated and validated
against the previously analyzed network of communication
(see Section IV). To that end, activity selection rules of the
agents have to be appropriately prioritized and their activation
thresholds must be determined. In contrast to existing work,
these calibrations can differ between the agents to model indi-
vidual behavior as observed in real communication processes.
At this stage, the calibrated and validated model is then
able to reproduce the results of retrospective communication
analyses. However, it can also be used to prospectively identify
potentials for rapid information diffusion from which Twitter-
storms can emerge. That is, such a model allows for assessing
the risk and extent of future Twitterstorms by means of
systematically simulating various information spread scenarios
(this being practically a reverse application of the inﬂuence
maximization problem [25] [26]).
B. Phase 2: Agent Modeling
Subsequent to the platform modeling, the second phase
focuses on the agents’ decision-making. It replaces the initial
threshold model with a more elaborate agent architecture to
facilitate individual behavior. This phase models the agents’
motivation for selecting particular activities in speciﬁc situa-
tions. Its goal is to allow for simulating the underlying cause of
criticism diffusion (i.e., why does communication take place?).
Consequently, the respective milestone covers the sim-
64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Basic Conceptualization 
Detailed Conceptualization 
Simulation 
Model 
Design of 
Experiment 
Data 
Collection 
Data Preparation & Selection 
ABSS 
Explanation 
Phase 1 
Phase 2 
Phase 3 
Platform, 
Structure, 
Architecture 
Personality, 
Roles, Agent 
decision-making 
Content, Tonality, 
Ontology 
OSN Ontology 
Agent 
Architecture 
Discourse 
Ontology 
OSN Platform 
Agents 
Discourses 
Milestone 1 
information diffusion  
risk assessment 
Milestone 2 
agent motivation  
participation 
Milestone 3 
topic development 
option formation 
reaction and prevention 
Figure 6. Procedure for modeling OSN structures, agent behaviors, and communicative actions in ABSS studies.
ulation of the OSN users’ intentions which lead to them
contributing to a Twitterstorm. It addresses research questions
such as who participates in a communication process for which
reason?, which topic draws the attention of a particular user
community?, as well as what would happen if a speciﬁc user
did not participate in a Twitterstorm?
Answering those research questions in a simulation re-
quires a sophisticated model of the agents’ decision-making
[43]. As users either deliberately or affectively choose whether
and how to participate in a communication process, the model
must allow for representing various motivations and com-
municative roles. Candidates for such representations can be
derived from psychological theory and cognitive science [44].
For instance, the Big Five of personality traits (sometimes
also referred to as the OCEAN model) [45] [46] are a promis-
ing approach to analyze and understand human communication
in OSN [47]. In an ABSS study, agents can be characterized
by weighted combinations of these ﬁve personality traits
which then determine their decision-making. In fact, we have
successfully simulated social media phenomena by utilizing
such a model in previous work [9].
Alternatively, agent decision-making models can be based
on sociological theory. In contrast to personality-based ap-
proaches, sociologically inspired ones particularly emphasize
the situational context, its effect on the interactions of indi-
vidual actors, as well as the emergence of social phenomena
from them [35]. Such a focus of the interplay between micro
and macro social levels suits the modeling of agent behaviors
in OSN simulations since it allows for connecting individual
agent decisions with the emerging network of communications.
As an example, Dittrich and Kron [48] propose a sociolog-
ically derived agent architecture which parameterizes agents
according to combinations of up to four basic social actor
types. This kind of agent models even facilitates behavioral
adaptation that results in self-stabilizing communication pat-
terns [49] [36]. In dynamic OSN analyses, such methods can be
utilized to investigate the emergence of topics and sentiments;
e.g., in the early phases of a Twitterstorm.
While a reﬁned agent model extends the scope and explana-
tory power of an ABSS, the ﬁrst step to calibrate and validate
that extension in the second modeling phase is to reproduce
the behavior of the simple model from the ﬁrst phase. The
latter should already be capable of imitating the networks
of communication observed from the real world. Therefore,
calibrating the complex agent model accordingly makes it also
applicable to analyses of information diffusion processes.
However, these processes now result from motivational
dispositions instead of ﬁxed behavioral rules. Consequently,
the simulation becomes capable of the aforementioned research
questions of this modeling phase. In particular, it is suitable
for investigating hypothetic prospective scenarios like would
a Twitterstorm fail to emerge if a central actor did not
participate in it or would another agent act in the same
role instead? Hence, the resulting model allows for deriving
basic communication strategies, e.g., by predicting who might
potentially become inﬂuential in a communication process for
which reason.
C. Phase 3: Discourse Modeling
Finally, the third modeling phase focuses on the commu-
nication content and style in OSN. This extends the utilization
of the previously developed complex agent model to its full
extent. This is because an agent’s motivation not only refers to
whether or not communicate about a speciﬁc topic represented
by a hashtag. It also allows for further differentiation between
topics as well as for modeling the intentional or affective usage
of speciﬁc sentiments and styles of content representation.
This phase covers that ﬁne-grained modeling of topics,
styles, and sentiments for both individual messages and dis-
courses which connect them. Its goal is to facilitate the simula-
tion of topic development and opinion formation in social me-
dia (i.e., what is the subject and manner of communication?).
The milestone comprises the capability of simulating potential
reaction strategies and interventions; e.g., for alleviating a
Twitterstorm. Hence, it covers research questions such as is
self-mockery a sensible strategy for reacting to a Twitterstorm?
or is it possible to draw attention to another topic?
To achieve the aforementioned goal, it is necessary to
extend the existing rudimentary representation of communi-
cation contents. Firstly, for individual messages (i.e., tweets)
sentiment analysis methods can be applied to categorize the
65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

mood of communication as positive, neutral, or negative [39].
Secondly, methods for content and lexical analysis as described
in Section II can provide additional candidates for topics
besides the mere hashtags. Thirdly, these potential topics are
likely to be related to each other instead of being mutu-
ally exclusive. This is reﬂected in hierarchical designs of
code books for manually annotating messages in media and
communication studies [50]. The same holds for the role of
additional media like embedded pictures or videos which are
also distinguished in those code books. Consequently, this
provides a foundation for developing a content model of social
media communication in ABSS.
However, in a simulation model, the agents must be able
to reason about the described organization of topics, their
relationships, their co-occurrence, and the embedded media
used to represent them. Similarly to the OSN platform model,
also the content is best modeled using formal ontologies. They
are particularly suitable for reﬂecting the hierarchical design
of the aforementioned code books. Hence, they provide a well-
established means for abstracting from the contents and styles
of human communication in OSN for its simulation.
In fact, ontologies are a standard method for encoding
message contents in multiagent systems. In that context, agent
communication languages (ACL) accompany the communi-
cation content itself with references to the ontology in use
to represent that content [51]. Additionally, these languages
model meaningful sequences of messages in terms of con-
versation protocols [52]. While those protocols are typically
engineered to bring about an intended state of affairs, the
can also be generated dynamically at runtime in the form of
Markov chains [53]. This enables the agents to decide how
to interact with each other and to adapt their decision-making
about this interaction according to the current situation, their
observations, and expectations [36]. By means of the same
concept, it is possible to analyze and model the potential
developments of topics, styles, and overall discourses in social
media. Thus, we propose to use these techniques to represent
the dynamics of communication in ABSS.
The resulting reﬁned discourse model must, again, be
calibrated and validated against the network of communication.
This requires the tweets to be sufﬁciently annotated with topic,
style, and sentiment information as described in Section IV. As
that information should be encoded using the content ontology
speciﬁed in the third modeling phase, the annotation must
potentially be repeated or extended.
Given such a discourse model, the overall simulation still
possesses the analytic capabilities obtained in the previous
two phases. Moreover, its detailed representation of topics
and sentiment as well as their potential development makes
it suitable for testing elaborate prevention and intervention
strategies for Twitterstorms. This complements the outcomes
of phase two by modeling how inﬂuential users or groups
would probably react to particular communicative acts. Ad-
ditionally, this makes the simulation model transferable to
other applications like the planning of social (viral) marketing
campaigns as well as more sensitive communication areas like
crisis management [4].
VI.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
As a proof of concept and for evaluating the procedure
model proposed in Section IV, the process of collecting and
preparing data for ABSS studies is implemented. Furthermore,
the feasibility of the implementation is evaluated by analyzing
the datasets of two Twitterstorms.
A. Implementation of the Framework
For querying the Twitter API, a PHP script has been
developed and used. The results are formatted as JSON objects
and include all necessary information regarding the tweet itself
as well as the user which has been the author of the tweet.
The data is stored in a MySQL database which is used for the
central data management.
For the preparation of the data, existing software packages
can be used providing basic algorithms, e.g., machine learning
or part-of-speech tagging algorithms. A number of frameworks
exist, e.g., Apache Mahout or Scikit-Learn. However, due to
the programming language it is implemented with and the
large amount of preimplemented algorithms, the DatumBox
framework [54] has been chosen for this implementation.
DatumBox is a framework which provides natural language
processing and classifying services written in JAVA. It focuses
on social media monitoring as well as text analysis and quality
evaluation in online communities.
The learning algorithms of the DatumBox machine learning
framework have been used for this implementation, as the
framework can handle large datasets and is open-source. The
implementation of the support vector machine uses LIBSVM
[55], a widely used open-source implementation of SVM.
Furthermore, Apache Lucene [56] is used as text search engine,
which is open-source and used by large companies, e.g.,
Twitter, for real-time search.
After collecting raw communication data, this implementa-
tion allows for performing tonality conversation analyses. To
obtain the required training data, a number of tweets needs
to be classiﬁed by human beings, after they have been edited.
This training data as well as SVM, n-gram, and stemming
algorithms provide a classiﬁcation of the tweets regarding
their mood. In addition, the conversation detection has been
implemented as shown in Figure 5, followed by an analysis
of the conversations’ topics. The results of both analyses are
then saved in the central database.
As a next step, for reconstructing networks of communi-
cation, the tweets of the database are ﬁltered regarding the
hashtags of interest. That is, the analyst has to identify hashtags
associated with the topic to be analyzed. These are then used
to query the database for any matching tweets. Additionally,
the involved users are loaded from the database and a graph
is created. The users serve as nodes, while each tweet is
illustrated as a directed edge indicating the direction of the
communication. For a reply, the edge would point from the
user who replied to it to the author of the original tweet.
B. Analysis of the #pegida Twitterstorm
For evaluating the proposed approach, Twitter data has
been collected since the beginning of 2015. For doing so, the
hashtags of current topics of online news media have been
used as keywords. Overall, 18 Mio. tweets containing 8 Twit-
terstorms have been recorded. Both #pegida and #deﬂategate
are hashtags of considerable communication processes which
took place on Twitter during this period of time.
The evaluation of the conversation analysis method requires
a highly discursive topic, providing conversations with a high
depth. For this reason, the social media echo of the Pegida
protests has been chosen as dataset containing 3.2 Mio. tweets
66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[57]. Pegida is a right wing political movement that was
founded in Dresden, Germany in October 2014 and opposes
the perceived “Islamisation” of the Western world. Hence, due
to the formation of opposing interest groups supporting or
rejecting Pegida’s point of view, opinions are divided and the
formation of discourses is facilitated.
Analyzing the dataset, 19 685 conversations were identiﬁed
consisting of nearly 51 000 tweets. Conversations can be clas-
siﬁed by the number of replies as well as by the depth (steps)
of the conversation. Figure 7 shows the distribution of the
conversations by number of replies and depth. Conversations
of a depth higher than 10, meaning that two users wrote 5
messages each replying to the previous message of the other
user, are not existing whereas 136 conversations have more
than 10 replies.
!"#"#
!$%&
!'(
&&
!#
'
&
)
!
!&"#$
)"!'
($*
&&%
)$'
!#*
()
'&
#%
)%
!#*
!
!$
!$$
!+$$$
!$+$$$
!$$+$$$
!
)
#
&
'
*
%
"
(
!$
!"#$
!"#$%&'()'*(+,%&-./0(+-
1".+/0/2
,-./0
1234-5+67+8-.9:-;
Figure 7. Distribution of conversations by number of replies and depth of
conversation frm the #pediga analysis.
The structure of conversation trees can be divided into two
major groups: paths and stars [27]. A star is deﬁned by a
low depth of the tree combined with a high number of tweets,
consequently, a high amount of replies to one or a few tweets.
In contrast, paths have a high depth while the total number of
tweets is low.
Further analysis of the data showed that two types of stars
exist in the dataset that differ in the number of involved users.
The most extensive conversations of the dataset, consisting of
107 and 100 tweets, are the result of only 3 resp. 2 users.
On closer examination, these conversations were classiﬁed as
spam. Thus, we assume that for conversations on Twitter the
ratio between the number of tweets and the number of involved
users can serve as an indicator for spam. This assumption was
strengthened by a manual analysis of the dataset. For most
spam conversations, the ratio between users and tweets was
at least 1 to 10. Accordingly, this type of star can be referred
to as spam star and is only relevant for further analysis and
modeling if it affects the behavior of users participating in the
actual discussion.
A second type of stars exists where the ratio is inverted.
In this case, the number of tweets and the number of users is
almost equal implying that the majority of users commented on
the conversation only once. In over 90% of the conversations
which were detected in the dataset, 90% of the tweets have
been written by different users. Consequently, most of the
tweets have not been replied to. Even though these stars
represent relevant conversations, they may not be considered
as discourses, as the “back-and-forth” character of discourses
is missing. Nonetheless, they indicate a motivation for uttering
opinions that can be used to derive simple agent behaviors and
the relations of subtopics with the main focus of the protest.
In fact, this type of communication can potentially start more
elaborate discourses and should therefore be included in an
agent-based simulation model as a starting point for possible
communication ﬂows.
The paths, in contrast, are what we consider to be dis-
cursive behavior. Two or more users respond to each other’s
tweets and constitute a conversation. By merging both stars
and paths, the network of communication can be reconstructed
for further analysis. Furthermore, for the modeling of agent
behavior, it appears that the communication rather than the
exchange of opinions is in focus. This is triggered by an
initial tweet and results in a Fire-and-forget behavior of the
users. Such a setting indicates that agents in a simulation
should act according to their internally modeled motivation if
triggered by an observed tweet without closely following the
progress of the evolving conversation. It further suggests that
it is important to carefully model the (objective and subjective)
visibility of communication for individual agents since users
evidently often do not take notice of reactions to their tweets.
C. Analysis of the #deﬂategate Twitterstorm
The reconstruction of the networks of communication is
evaluated using the dataset of the #deﬂategate Twitterstorm.
Due to the limited timespan of a Twitterstorm, the collection
of a complete dataset is simpliﬁed. Furthermore, analyzing
a Twitterstorm’s network of communication is of interest, as
central users or tweets can be identiﬁed.
The #deﬂategate storm started three days after the 49th NFL
Super Bowl and was triggered by a tweet of the journalist Chris
Mortensen, claiming 11 of the 12 footballs were under-inﬂated
[58]. As each team plays with separate footballs and as the
hosting team supplies the balls, this appeared to have happened
on purpose, to inﬂuence the behavior of the ball when thrown,
kicked or caught. 17 621 tweets from 9 870 users have been
collected during the #deﬂategate storm. Out of this, 41 tweets
reply to themselves and 4 577 users are isolated and thus
were removed. Consequently, the network of communication
consists of 5 293 users and 6 067 tweets as shown in Figure 8
(left).
Figure 8. Network of communication (left) and ego-centered network (right)
of #deﬂategate Twitterstorm.
Two central nodes can be identiﬁed in the network of com-
munication. This observation is conﬁrmed when comparing the
degree centrality of the nodes. While the average degree is 1,
a user named TomBradysEgo (Twitter User-ID: 317170443) is
having the maximum degree of 509. TomBradysEgo is a parody
67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

account on Tom Brady, the quarterback of the New England
Patriots, having 235 000 followers and posting an average of
113 tweets per month. During the Twitterstorm, 39 tweets
were published by the account. Due to the high outdegree,
97.4% of the total degree of the node, in combination with
the low number of published tweets, it can be assumed that
the user’s tweets have often been retweeted. Thus, a central
role of TomBradysEgo can be implied and the account can be
classiﬁed as a hub.
Similarly, the user named brownjenjen (Twitter User-ID:
2453787236) has a degree of 485 and is an American blog-
ger. Having only 23 000 followers, brownjenjen published 43
tweets during the Twitterstorm. Due to the outdegree of 100%,
a large number of retweets can be assumed, too. As the account
does not reply to other tweets and participates in different
topics, it can be classiﬁed as a hub, as well.
The important role the two accounts play for the Twitter-
storm clariﬁes, when removing the two nodes and the related
communication from the network of communication. Doing
so, the density of the graph is reduced by 12.46% which can
be compared to a reduction of the communication by the same
extent. Figure 8b shows the union of the ego-centered networks
of the two central nodes of the Twitterstorm. An ego-centered
network places one node in the center and only includes those
other nodes directly or indirectly connected to the central one.
Consequently, such a network describes the communicative
reach of a user. Here, 69.69% of the communication of the
storm is linked to the two central nodes, showing their overall
impact. Thus, a more detailed consideration of these two users
seems promising in terms of social network analysis.
When modeling such a kind of network of communication,
the agents representing these two users have a great inﬂuence
on all other agents. However, the aforementioned observation
of a large amount of communication being related to those
users gives rise to the question whether the Twitterstorm
would also have happened if they had not participated in
it. That question can only be answered by simulating that
communication in order to evaluate whether other inﬂuential
users could have replaced them. The method we have proposed
in this paper facilitates such a simulation.
To conclude, for both topics, #pegida and #deﬂategate, the
feasibility of the approach proposed in this paper has been
shown. In terms of content and discourse analysis as well
as reconstruction of networks of communication, preliminary
results assisting the selection of relevant data for subsequent
studies were generated. Thus, when simulating emergent OSN
phenomena, the different reach of agents needs to be con-
sidered. Some agents need to serve as hubs for pushing the
diffusion of messages.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the systematic development of a dynamic
analysis framework for OSN communication processes has
been proposed. A major challenge is the collection as well
as the preparation and selection of relevant data, which is
addressed by the presented approach. Currently, the analysis
of a set of collected data for interesting phenomena for further
consideration is done by hand. Our concept aims at providing
assistance functionalities, by automating the handling of data
for the preparation of simulation studies.
For gaining a ﬁrst overview of the dataset of isolated mes-
sages, conversations between users are detected, the content
and tonality of the messages are assessed, and the network of
communication is reconstructed. This forms the basis for de-
veloping, calibrating, and validating an agent-based simulation
model. This paper has proposed a three-phase iterated process
extending from a simple initial version to a sophisticated
detailed simulation model of OSN communication. Using the
examples of #deﬂategate and #pegida, the process of data
collection as well as data preparation and selection has been
implemented and evaluated. The network of communication
has been visualized and central nodes of the communication
graph have been identiﬁed automatically as a foundation for
the agent-based modeling process.
This work is a ﬁrst step towards an agent-based modeling
method for analyzing the communication dynamics of OSN.
While it provides guidelines and techniques for systematic
data collection, analysis, and simulation modeling, the next
steps are to implement the resulting model and conduct sim-
ulation experiments with it. This includes the identiﬁcation
of interesting communication scenarios and the design of
simulation experiments. Using our method, ﬁrst results with
an agent decision-making method based on social actor types
have already been obtained [59]. However, these must still
be extended and complemented with the OSN and discurse
ontology components of our proposed simulation model.
The goal of that extension is not only the replication
of communication as retrospectively observed, but also the
prospective evaluation of alternatives and their impact on the
communication dynamics. Such a simulation can then provide
evidence about the expected robustness of phenomena such as
Twitterstorms against intervention and point out possibilities
to inﬂuence the communication dynamics. Thus, it can serve
as a decision-making aid for developing strategies in social
media communication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge our master students Nils
Dammenhayn, Stephanie C. Rodermund, Christopher Schulz
and Nicolas Schulz for contributing to this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Timm, J. Berndt, F. Lorig, C. Barth, and H.-J. Bucher, “Dynamic
analysis of communication processes using twitter data,” in Second
International Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2016).
IARIA, 2016, pp. 14–22.
[2]
W. R. Neuman, Y. Park, and E. Panek, “Tracking the Flow of In-
formation into the Home: An Empirical Assessment of the Digital
Revolution in the United States, 1960-2005,” International Journal of
Communication, vol. 6, 2012, pp. 1022–1041.
[3]
J.
Mander,
“Daily
time
spent
on
social
networks
rises
to
1.72 hours,” https://www.globalwebindex.net/blog/daily-time-spent-on-
social-networks-rises-to-1-72-hours, [retrieved: 09/16].
[4]
V. Hoste, C. Van Hee, and K. Poels, “Towards a framework for the
automatic detection of crisis emotions on social media : a corpus
analysis of the tweets posted after the crash of germanwings ﬂight
9525,” in Second International Conference on Human and Social
Analytics (HUSO 2016).
IARIA, 2016, pp. 29–32.
[5]
J. Kirby, Connected marketing: the viral, buzz and word of mouth
revolution.
Amsterdam: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2010.
[6]
Nina
G,
“Disability
Community
Tweet-in,”
https://ninagcomedian.wordpress.com/2015/12/01/
donald-trump-tweet-in-for-crippledamerica/, [retrieved: 09/16].
[7]
E. Tranos and P. Nijkamp, “The death of distance revisited: Cyber-place,
cyber-place, physical and relational proximities,” Journal of Regional
Science, vol. 53, no. 5, Dec. 2013, pp. 855–873.
68
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8]
R. Mayntz, “Mechanisms in the analysis of social macro-phenomena,”
Philosophy of the social sciences, vol. 34, no. 2, 2004, pp. 237–259.
[9]
F. Lorig and I. J. Timm, “How to model the human factor for agent-
based simulation in social media analysis?” in 014 ADS Symposium
(part of SpringSim multiconference).
SCS, 2014, p. 12.
[10]
D. Helbing, Social self-organization: Agent-based simulations and ex-
periments to study emergent social behavior.
Springer, 2012.
[11]
C. R. Berger, “Interpersonal communication,” The International Ency-
clopedia of Communication, 2008.
[12]
C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” ACM
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 5,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 3–55.
[13]
A. Church, “Carnap’s introduction to semantics,” The Philosophical
Review, vol. 52, no. 3, 1943, pp. 298–304.
[14]
C. W. Morris, “Foundations of the theory of signs,” Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 3, no. 4, 1938, pp. 158–304.
[15]
D. M. Boyd and N. B. Ellison, “Social network sites: Deﬁnition, his-
tory, and scholarship,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
vol. 13, no. 1, 2007, pp. 210–230.
[16]
Facebook
Inc.,
http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info,
[retrieved:
09/16].
[17]
Twitter Inc., https://about.twitter.com/company, [retrieved: 09/16].
[18]
F. Vega-Redondo, Complex Social Networks.
Cambridge University
Press Cambridge, MA, 2007.
[19]
L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation,”
Social networks, vol. 1, no. 3, 1978, pp. 215–239.
[20]
D. E. Goldberg and J. H. Holland, “Genetic algorithms and machine
learning,” Machine learning, vol. 3, no. 2, 1988, pp. 95–99.
[21]
S. Abney, Semisupervised learning for computational linguistics. CRC
Press, 2007.
[22]
A. Voutilainen, “Part-of-speech tagging,” The Oxford handbook of
computational linguistics, 2003, pp. 219–232.
[23]
M. F. Porter, “An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping,” Program, vol. 14, no. 3,
1980, pp. 130–137.
[24]
C. Zhang, J. Sun, and K. Wang, “Information propagation in microblog
networks,” in 2013 IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in
social networks analysis and mining.
ACM, 2013, pp. 190–196.
[25]
W. Chen, Y. Wang, and S. Yang, “Efﬁcient inﬂuence maximization in
social networks,” in 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining.
ACM, 2009, pp. 199–208.
[26]
D. Kempe, J. M. Kleinberg, and ´E. Tardos, “Maximizing the spread
of inﬂuence through a social network.” Theory of Computing, vol. 11,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 105–147.
[27]
P. Cogan, M. Andrews, M. Bradonjic, W. S. Kennedy, A. Sala, and
G. Tucci, “Reconstruction and analysis of Twitter conversation graphs,”
in First ACM International Workshop on Hot Topics on Interdisciplinary
Social Networks Research.
ACM Press, 2012, pp. 25–31.
[28]
C.-l. Hsu, S. J. Park, and H. W. Park, “Political Discourse Among KEy
Twitter Users: The Case Of Sejong City In South Korea,” Journal of
Contemporary Eastern Asia, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013, pp. 65–79.
[29]
A. Maireder, “Political Discourses on Twitter: Networking Topics,
Objects and People,” in Twitter and Society.
Peter Lang, 2013.
[30]
J. Bollen, H. Mao, and A. Pepe, “Modeling public mood and emotion:
Twitter sentiment and socio-economic phenomena.” in 5th International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2011, pp. 450–453.
[31]
K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, “Information contagion: An empirical study
of the spread of news on digg and twitter social networks.” ICWSM,
vol. 10, 2010, pp. 90–97.
[32]
A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, and P. M. Polgreen, “The use of twitter to
track levels of disease activity and public concern in the us during the
inﬂuenza a h1n1 pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 5, 2011, p. e19467.
[33]
A. Maireder and S. Schl¨ogl, “24 hours of an# outcry: The networked
publics of a socio-political debate,” European Journal of Communica-
tion, 2014, pp. 1–16.
[34]
J. Goldstein, “Emergence as a construct: History and issues,” Emer-
gence, vol. 1, no. 1, 1999, pp. 49–72.
[35]
P. Hedstr¨om and P. Ylikoski, “Causal mechanisms in the social sci-
ences,” Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 36, 2010, pp. 49–67.
[36]
J. O. Berndt and O. Herzog, “Anticipatory behavior of software agents
in self-organizing negotiations,” in Anticipation Across Disciplines.
Springer, 2016, pp. 231–253.
[37]
P. Davidsson, “Agent based social simulation: A computer science
view,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 5, no. 1,
2002.
[38]
J. Habermas, Between facts and norms: contributions to a discourse
theory of law and democracy, ser. Studies in contemporary German
social thought.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1996.
[39]
C. J. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for
sentiment analysis of social media text,” in Eighth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2014, pp. 216–255.
[40]
P. Mika, “Ontologies are us: A uniﬁed model of social networks and
semantics,” in International semantic web conference.
Springer, 2005,
pp. 522–536.
[41]
J. Golbeck and M. Rothstein, “Linking social networks on the web
with foaf: A semantic web case study.” in AAAI, vol. 8, 2008, pp.
1138–1143.
[42]
U. Boj¯ars, J. G. Breslin, V. Peristeras, G. Tummarello, and S. Decker,
“Interlinking the social web with semantics,” IEEE Intelligent Systems,
vol. 23, no. 3, 2008.
[43]
U. Schimank, From “Clean” Mechanisms to “Dirty” Models: Method-
ological Perspectives of an Up-Scaling of Actor Constellations. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 15–35.
[44]
T. Balke and N. Gilbert, “How do agents make decisions? a survey,”
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 17, no. 4,
2014, p. 13.
[45]
L. R. Goldberg, “An alternative ”description of personality”: the big-ﬁve
factor structure.” Journal of personality and social psychology, vol. 59,
no. 6, 1990, p. 1216.
[46]
——, “The structure of phenotypic personality traits.” American psy-
chologist, vol. 48, no. 1, 1993, p. 26.
[47]
S. Vandenhoven and O. De Clercq, “What does the bird say? exploring
the link between personality and language use in dutch tweets,” in Sec-
ond International Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO
2016).
IARIA, 2016, pp. 38–42.
[48]
P. Dittrich and T. Kron, “Complex reﬂexive agents as models of social
actors,” in SICE Workshop on Artiﬁcial Society/Organization/Economy,
ser. Meeting of Systems Engineering, vol. 25. Tokyo: Gkajutsu Sougou
Center, 2002, pp. 79–88.
[49]
P. Dittrich, T. Kron, and W. Banzhaf, “On the Scalability of Social Or-
der: Modeling the Problem of Double and Multi Contingency Following
Luhmann ,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 6,
no. 1, 2003.
[50]
K. A. Neuendorf, The content analysis guidebook.
Sage publications,
2016.
[51]
Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents, “FIPA ACL Message Struc-
ture Speciﬁcation,” Standard, 2002, document No. SC00061G.
[52]
——, “FIPA Interaction Protocol Library Speciﬁcation,” Standard,
2003, document No. DC00025F.
[53]
I. J. Timm and P.-O. Woelk, “Ontology-based capability management
for distributed problem solving in the manufacturing domain,” in
German Conference on Multiagent System Technologies.
Springer,
2003, pp. 168–179.
[54]
DatumBox Framework, http://www.datumbox.com, [retrieved: 09/16].
[55]
LIBSVM, http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm, [retrieved: 09/16].
[56]
Apache Lucene, http://lucene.apache.org/core, [retrieved: 09/16].
[57]
E. Crecsi, “How Germans documented Pegida’s far-right protests
on
social
media,”
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/06/
how-germans-documented-pegidas-far-right-protests-on-social-media,
[retrieved: 09/16].
[58]
A. Jaafari, “The goodell, the bad, and the ugly: The minimal level
of integrity in the NFL’s disciplinarian of players,” Social Science
Research Network (SSRN), 2016.
[59]
J. Berndt, S. Rodermund, F. Lorig, and I. Timm, “Modeling user
behavior in social media with complex agents,” in Third International
Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2017).
IARIA,
to appear 2017.
69
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

