73
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Surveying the Incorporation of IoT, SCADA, and Mobile Devices
into Cybersecurity Risk Management Frameworks
Aaron Pendleton
Graduate Cyberspace Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433
Email: Aaron.Pendleton@afit.edu
Richard Dill
Dept. of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Air Force Institute of Technology
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433
Email: Richard.Dill@afit.edu
James Okolica
Dept. of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Air Force Institute of Technology
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433
Email: James.Okolica@afit.edu
Dillon Pettit
Graduate Cyberspace Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433
Email: Dillon.Pettit@afit.edu
Marvin Newlin
Graduate Cyberspace Operations
Air Force Institute of Technology
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433
Email: Marvin.Newlin@afit.edu
Abstract—This paper reviews the state of the art in cyber risk
management with a focus on the adaptations in methodology
to account for Mobile Devices, Industrial Control Systems, and
Internet of Things systems into present risk analysis framework
models. Internet of Things devices present unique risks to a
network due to their highly connective and physically interactive
nature. This physical inﬂuence can be leveraged to access
peripherals beyond the immediate scope of the network, or to
gain unauthorized access to systems which would not otherwise
be accessible. A 2017 Government Accountability Ofﬁce report
on the current state of Internet of Things device security noted
a lack of dedicated policy and guidance within the United
States government cybersecurity risk assessment construct and
similar private sector equivalents. The purpose of this paper
is to expand that work and assess additional risk models.
Surveyed in this paper are 30 original frameworks designed to
be implemented in enterprise networks. In this research, the
comparison of frameworks is analyzed to assess each system’s
ability to provide risk analysis for Internet of Things devices. The
research categories are level of implementation, quantitative or
qualitative scoring matrix, and support for future development.
This survey demonstrates that there are few risk management
frameworks currently available which attempt to incorporate
both cyber-physical systems and enterprise architecture in a large
scale network.
Keywords—IoT; Mobile; Cybersecurity; Risk; ICS.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is a continuation of the work “Surveying the
Incorporation of IoT Devices into Cybersecurity Risk Man-
agement Frameworks” presented in the 2019 SECURWARE
proceedings [1]. The paper assesses the extent that risk
management frameworks have adapted to Industrial Control
Systems (ICS) and Internet of Things (IoT) devices which
have inﬁltrated most networks that would traditionally be
classiﬁed as enterprise networks. The transient or multi-
connected nature of IoT devices poses a challenge to security
methods based on creating a secure baseline. The unprece-
dented rise in popularity of mobile and interconnected IoT
devices has made it challenging for companies to assess and
mitigate the additional risk presented by incorporating them
into networks implementing risk management frameworks.
Frameworks from speciﬁc industries such as online services,
critical infrastructure, research and design, and enterprise risk
management have been evaluated an effort to fully assess the
state of the art across the security and risk industry.
IoT devices present unique risks to a network due to their
highly connective and often cyber-physical nature. Enterprise
networks that are not equipped with methods of assessing
vulnerabilities across less traditional interfaces or protocols
such as Bluetooth or remote location devices with unsecured
external connections are exposed to unaccounted risks. This
physical inﬂuence can be leveraged to gain unauthorized
access to systems which would not otherwise be accessible [2].
Similarly, they have been shown to exhibit several widespread
security challenges that require special consideration. Many
IoT devices are difﬁcult to patch, do not have consistent
software updates, or lack strong encryption. This creates
vulnerabilities in networks that require authentication, access
control, or data privacy [3]. It is also difﬁcult to identify
IoT devices that already exist on a network due to many
autonomous and passive applications [3].
The United States (U.S.) Government Accountability Ofﬁce
(GAO), an independent and nonpartisan U.S. Congressional
watchdog organization, provides objective and reliable infor-
mation to the government regarding work and spending prac-

74
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tices. GAO focuses on identifying problems and proposes solu-
tions [2]. In July 2017, GAO released a report titled Internet of
Things: Enhanced Assessments and Guidance Are Needed to
Address Security Risks in DOD in order to highlight shortcom-
ings in most current operational risk assessment frameworks to
include those implemented by the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD). The report includes security concerns with Mobile
Devices, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA),
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), and Remote Terminal
Units (RTU) in the U.S. DOD [2].
GAO noted a lack of dedicated policy and guidance within
the U.S. government cybersecurity risk assessment construct
and similar private sector equivalents. In the report, GAO
deﬁnes IoT devices as any personal wearable ﬁtness device,
portable electronic device, smartphone, or infrastructure device
related to industrial control systems [2].
Present DOD Instructional Guidance does not address IoT
devices sufﬁciently [2]. Furthermore, no single DOD entity is
responsible for the security of IoT systems, and the primary
guidance on IoT security is a strategic directive to establish an
operations security program. This paper furthers the research
done by GAO in order to expand the scope of analysis beyond
the U.S. DOD and into the greater ﬁeld of published cyber risk
solutions.
A risk analysis methodology must account for more than
just traditional enterprise network components in order to
mitigate the risks presented by an unregulated or loosely
deﬁned set of devices on an otherwise secure network [2]. The
purpose of this survey is to analyze the pace of development
and compare the strengths and weaknesses of each analyzed
framework with regard to IoT and ICS devices. The extent
of advancements in risk management is assessed in order to
highlight current knowledge and research gaps. 30 original
risk assessment and management models are compared based
on their method of risk scoring, level of implementation, and
future development plans. These metrics are used to gauge
the effectiveness of a framework when accounting for devices
which may not be consistently part of the secure baseline, or
may not be easily patched and secured. The ability of a risk
analysis model to incorporate these common, but otherwise
difﬁcult to attribute systems is compared in order to establish
the state of the art in currently employed systems. These
methodologies are compared to recently proposed frameworks
to assess the current gap in risk management. Frameworks
published from as early as 2002 were identiﬁed and assessed
for their ability to adapt to IoT devices. This paper analyzes the
extent that network risk analysis and management frameworks
have adapted to this evolving threat terrain. Section II outlines
the risk framework models and their attributes, Section III
presents the methods used to analyze and evaluate the frame-
works in order to make accurate comparisons, and Section
IV provides an assessment of the current state of the art in
order to then make recommendations for future research. We
conclude this work in Section V with recommendations for
future work.
II. RELATED WORK
This section reviews elements of 30 risk frameworks and
provides background information used in the analysis and
assessment. Speciﬁc methodology is discussed in order to
establish the basic elements of each model and to ascertain
the level of effectiveness observed.
A. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
The United States uses a centralized risk framework system
based on application. NIST is tasked with creating and main-
taining effective cyber risk modeling and management frame-
works implemented on millions of government and civilian
devices [4].
1) Risk Management Framework (RMF): The primary risk
assessment and management framework used by the U.S.
government, military and DOD to conduct mission assurance
is the cybersecurity Risk Management Framework (RMF)
developed by NIST. The NIST RMF process shown in Figure
1 is a six step qualitative analysis method for assessing
risk. RMF uses a strict adherence to process management to
establish a secure baseline through identifying controls that
are to be updated as changes are detected [5]. The strength of
the RMF process is that it allows for a network to grow and
evolve without a complete re-evaluation of its security posture.
Best practices are evaluated and selected as security controls
and solutions when new devices are added to the existing
baseline. The weakness in this method is it sacriﬁces micro-
level visibility of device interactions in favor of broad security
measures. NIST RMF implementation policy requires end
users to disable the impertinent network components of IoT
devices, but not physical removal. This leaves the opportunity
for subversion of the RMF process in personal and government
devices by dis-associating some capabilities from the network
and the secure baseline without fully mitigating the threat.
IoT and mobile devices present heightened risk levels that are
left unaccounted for in the overall assessment [2]. Qualitative
frameworks such as RMF rely on scanning tools and strict
Information Assurance (IA) policy to prevent unauthorized
activity. These security measures can be subverted by IoT
devices because they often have limited up-time, minimal
support, a notable lack of associated scanning tools, and a
smaller footprint for vulnerability testing [2].
2) Cybersecurity Framework (CSF): The CSF is designed
to provide a higher level of protection speciﬁc to the unusual or
irregular systems common in Critical Infrastructure (CI). CSF
is considered one of the premiere risk management models
for CI, and provides a ﬁve step, tiered, qualitative approach
to modeling risk to networks both small and large. The CSF
framework is a guide for security measures to be implemented
and allows classiﬁcation of the current security posture in
order to highlight pressing weaknesses. Many academic insti-
tutions, government and DOD entities, and private companies
have implemented CSF. CSF continues to struggle with the
same weaknesses identiﬁed in RMF despite offering signiﬁcant
improvements over previous generations of risk framework [7].

75
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 1. Risk Management Framework Process and Governance [6]
B. Control Objectives for Information and related Technology
(COBIT) 5
COBIT 5 is the latest COBIT version analyzed. It was
developed by the Information Systems Audit and Control As-
sociation (ISACA) and is a qualitative framework designed to
provide top-down security of a business sized network. It relies
on control objectives to build out the security requirements,
and the level of security is assessed by maturity models.
COBIT follows a purpose built model which is intended to
allow for only necessary systems to be on the network in
order to minimize risk [8][9]. COBIT 5 incorporated elements
of the NIST CSF structure, but did not greatly mitigate the
weaknesses of CSF when IoT devices are introduced to the
network environment without adequate vulnerability scanning
and assessment methods [7]. Initial information and methodol-
ogy publications introducing COBIT 2019 have been released,
but the framework implementation is not mature enough to
analyze at this time [10]. Figure 2 introduces the process of
implementing COBIT 2019. COBIT follows a process-based
approach similar to other qualitative methods such as NIST
RMF. A comparison of Figure 1 and Figure 2 shows the
extent of the similarities between qualitative process-based risk
management methodologies. The primary focus of the process
is to identify the problem by outlining each device and deﬁning
its potential interactions with the previously established secure
baseline. Security risks are then mitigated and monitored.
This general approach is observed in each leading enterprise
solution assessed in this survey.
Fig. 2. COBIT 2019 Process Overview [11]
C. ISO Risk Management Frameworks
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
is an independent and international organization dedicated to
developing international standards. The standards created by
ISO are not inherently designed for cybersecurity applications,
but they are tools for assessing risk across multiple domains.
1) ISO31K Series: The ISO 31000 standard is a general risk
standard mandated in some information technology applica-
tions built off of the Australian/New Zealand risk management
standard AS/NZS 4360. It identiﬁes speciﬁc language to be
used when classifying risk, but is not a strong methodology
for addressing it. It is not based on quantiﬁable probabilities or
decision points, but a qualitative assessment conducted at key
points in the risk management cycle. It is important to note
that the standard is speciﬁcally not intended for purposes of
certiﬁcation. ISO 31000 alone cannot be considered sufﬁcient
for a risk assessment framework within an enterprise network,
but frameworks have been designed to provide compliance
with this standard [12] [13].
2) ISO27K Series: The ISO/IEC 27000 series is a large
framework of best practices published by the ISO and the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). It provides
a security control based qualitative framework with signiﬁcant
modularity for varying levels of implementation similar to the
NIST RMF and COBIT. The strength of this model is its
inherent ability to scale to the needs of the network, but allows
for weaknesses where the framework is not fully implemented.
Implementation is conducted through a six step qualitative
process that assesses the current state of the network. Gov-
ernance of the network is through the assignment of controls
using a methodology similar to the NIST RMF. ISO 27K
is a contemporary of the NIST RMF, COBIT 5, and other

76
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
qualitative networks which are the operational state of the art.
It is currently in extensive use across the European Union [14]
[15] [5].
D. Information Security Maturity Model (ISMM) (2011)
The ISMM model was created by analyzing eight existing
models: NIST, Information Security Management Maturity
Model (ISM3), Generic Security Maturity Model (GSMM),
Gartner’s Information Security Awarness Maturity Model
(GISMM), SUNY’s Information Security Initiatives (ISI), IBM
Security Framework, Citigroup’s Information Security Evalu-
ation Maturity Model (ISEM), and Information Security Man-
agement System (ISMS) Maturity Capability Model. ISMM
assesses the security requirements of an organization and
then assigns a maturity level that will provide the correct
balance of security and accessibility. They propose a method
of quantifying risk at a very abstracted level, but the model
itself is primarily a qualitative system to initiate compulsory
levels of security [16].
E. Information Security Maturity Model (ISMM) (2017)
This ISMM model was also created following a comparison
of several current implementations of risk modeling frame-
works to include NIST RMF, COBIT, and ISO 27001. ISMM
attempts to directly map each capability provided by current
models to determine the most mature framework. The ﬁndings
discovered weaknesses in all frameworks, and a single com-
posite framework was introduced as a solution which provides
all capabilities of currentimplementations in one system. The
framework is still at a theoretical stage of implementation, but
has the potential to create a more complete qualitative solution
[5].
F. Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability
Evaluation (OCTAVE)
1) OCTAVE
(original):
OCTAVE
is
a
self
directed
risk management solution for large enterprises. It makes
assumptions regarding the network staff’s knowledge of
critical systems and components to create a secure baseline.
The weakness of this system is it is outdated (2003) and relies
on having an expert team with signiﬁcant resources. There
have not been signiﬁcant updates to OCTAVE following the
release of OCTAVE-Allegro, and it could now be considered
a legacy framework [17].
2) OCTAVE-S: OCTAVE-S is designed as a smaller scale
implementation of OCTAVE, but suffers from several similar
pitfalls. A manually created baseline that is updated as
changes are observed cannot be easily adapted. OCTAVE-S
provides additional structure for a less experienced team,
but at the expense of signiﬁcant system constraints as the
implementation matures [17].
3) OCTAVE-Allegro: Allegro attempts to make risk man-
agement system more approachable than the original models.
The complexity level of OCTAVE Allegro is lowered and the
system is shifted to a more information-centric container based
approach. Allegro is one of the ﬁrst qualitative systems to
incorporate an abstracted level of quantitative analysis using
the containers as network elements. Due to the still largely
qualitative nature of Allegro, it can have issues with implemen-
tation consistency. This can be especially challenging when
accounting for IoT devices [18].
G. Holistic Cyber Security Implementation Framework (HCS-
IF) (2014)
Atoum [19] introduces HCS-IF in an attempt to create
a more complete approach to risk management that avoids
the fragmented stovepipe nature that developed over several
iterations of abstracted quantiﬁcation in many risk manage-
ment frameworks of the current state of the art. Frameworks
that have used metrics of qualitative adherence to create a
security score give some users the perceived conﬁdence of a
quantitative system without the overhead of a fully mapped
risk framework. HCS-IF identiﬁes core issues with bringing
quantitative risk modeling back to cyber risk frameworks, but
rather than create a fully quantitative methodology it attempts
to advance the state of the art in qualitative models. The
potential value added by their research must assessed in future
studies before making any signiﬁcant assertions of overall
effectiveness [19].
1) HCS-IF Implementation Case Study (2017): The Na-
tional Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NI-
ACSS) of Jordan analyzed the HCS-IF in 2017 to determine if
it could be applied at a national level. An implementation of
HCS-IF is anticipated within the next three years following an
evaluation by the Jordanian National Information Technology
Center (NITC). Primary areas of improvement identiﬁed prior
to adoption included change management and human resource
issues [20].
H. IoT/M2M
Cisco introduces the IoT/M2M framework in order to
address the rising challenge of securing networks saturated
with relatively insecure IoT devices. The downside to this
model is the cost and difﬁculty in building a network from
essentially the ground up as opposed to introducing new
security measures to an existing network. IoT/M2M employs a
qualitative zero trust approach to security that attempts to limit
the access of IoT devices in order to prevent them from being
leveraged to inﬂuence otherwise secure devices. Live network
evaluation has not been published. The proprietary nature of
this framework signiﬁcantly hinders any further testing in
a research environment [21]. IoT/M2M builds a compelling
argument for the success of the theoretical model and it may
serve as the basis for future IoT security research.

77
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
I. Mobius
Mobius is a legacy framework included as an example of
quantitative systems. It creates a quantiﬁable model which
allows for risk calculations to be made using custom designed
proﬁles for each device. The weakness of this methodology
the poor scaling and implementation relative to more modern
tools. As enterprise networks have grown in both size and
diversity it is not ﬁnancially advantageous to manual create a
threat model for each device. This requires extensive expertise
to properly employ, and additional development to account for
IoT devices [22].
J. Online Services Security Framework (OSSF)
The OSSF framework is designed to manage risk in an
enterprise network offering online services and remote access.
It provides a structure or guide to create a secure baseline for
both the provider and the consumer, but inherently must be
conﬁgured by the end user. It accounts for highly mobile IoT
devices, but it is currently limited in its application until it can
be expanded to more diverse networks [23].
K. The CORAS Method
The CORAS approach is an 8 step model-based solution
which allows a great deal of ﬂexibility in implementation.
It is built on the ISO 31000 standard for risk management
as a self contained risk management solution for information
technology systems. A risk evaluation matrix is populated
using the CORAS tool that provides both high and low level
analysis, but at the cost of signiﬁcant labor as the baseline is
constantly redeﬁned when new assets are introduced. It uses a
threat diagram to estimate risk based on past experience [24]
[12].
L. Threat Agent Risk Assessment (TARA) (2009)
TARA was created by Intel and uses a calculation matrix to
predict which agents pose the highest risk to the network. The
output is then cross-referenced with known vulnerabilities and
controls to mitigate risk. A meaningful published application
of the TARA system has not been identiﬁed during this survey.
TARA offers high levels of security, but the tradeoff is high
operating costs. TARA attempts to bridge the gap between
quantitative and qualitative systems, but the framework is not
simpliﬁed enough to gain prominence [25].
M. Threat Assessment & Remediation Analysis (TARA) (2011)
The MITRE Corporation created the TARA system to secure
speciﬁc networks known to be of interest to potential threat
actors during the system design and acquisition phase. TARA
uses a scoring model to identify probability of attack and
potential attack vectors. It is difﬁcult to scale, but can provide
very sophisticated assessments if the cybersecurity budget is
sufﬁciently large. This method attempts to create stovepipes
that can be tracked and modeled quantitatively. TARA is
designed to be used primarily as an assessment tool to establish
a risk baseline before a more sustainable qualitative tool is
employed for the operational phase of the network life-cycle
[26].
N. CCTA Risk Analysis and Management Method (CRAMM)
CRAMM is a framework designed by the United King-
dom (UK) Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency
(CCTA). It is a relatively outdated method of providing quali-
tative analysis across multiple asset groups and requires them
to be built out on a per-network basis. This makes the modular
construction useful, but at the cost of signiﬁcant overhead to
implement. It has been implemented in many countries, but
has not been updated since CRAMM 5 in 2003 [27].
O. Cyber Assessment Framework (CAF) 2.0
Created by the UK National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC),
the CAF is a model based risk assessment system similar to
NIST RMF which provides extensibility across many devices
and network types including SCADA [28]. The intent is to
provide support from NCSC to adoption of the European
Union (EU) Network and Information System (NIS) directive.
The framework is new, without published academic assess-
ment, but it has been adopted at an international level with a
particular focus on SCADA and business IT systems. CAF
is implemented through the 14 principles of cybersecurity
and resiliency identiﬁed by the NCSC. CAF provides an
approachable methodology, but does not yet have the validated
technical controls of more mature qualitative frameworks [29].
1) CAF 3.0 Release: The release of CAF 3.0 makes no
changes to the structure or technical content of the CAF,
but replaces speciﬁc NIS Directive terminology with simpler
language better suited to users outside the direct purview of
NIS [30].
P. Cyber Risk Scoring and Mitigation (CRISM)
CRISM was developed in 2018 as an effort to reintroduce
quantiﬁable metrics into cyber risk assessment in order to
mitigate the information advantage of the network owner
in cyber insurance applications. The model uses Bayesian
graphs to build an end-to-end automated capability which can
provide security scores and prioritized mitigation plans. The
primary goal is to identify the exploitable attack surface of the
network, and then to assess the risks of lateral propagation.
With this information, a risk mitigation plan can be created
and implemented. CRISM relies on network scanning tools
to analyze the attack surface, which can struggle to detect
IoT devices. The likelihood of device exploitation is based
on CVSS to access the Common Vulnerability Exposures
(CVE) library. The weakness in this method is that a CVE
entry must exist for the vulnerability [31]. CRISM leverages
a high level of automation to make implementation much
simpler for small teams, but live network testing has not been
published. Additional testing and development is necessary
before CRISM is deployed to an enterprise network [32].

78
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Q. Network Security Risk Model (NSRM)
NSRM relies on establishing a secure baseline and com-
paring risk levels after the introduction of each new device.
This method is relatively outdated and labor intensive, but
can provide good results if it is effectively implemented. It is
targeted at Process Control Networks (PCN) which have less
variance and is not suitable for a large enterprise network [33].
R. Cyber-Physical Systems Security (CPSS)
DiMase [34] identiﬁed the need for a Cyber-Physical Sys-
tem (CPS) centric risk framework to account for the rise
in CPS devices across enterprise networks. It relies on a
heuristics based approach rather than a secure baseline to
provide an initial level of security, and over time creates
an operational baseline. The model does not yet employ a
holistic approach, but it is anticipated in future research and
development. Additional standardization is also necessary in
order to allow the framework to function across multiple
domains. The concept has not yet been tested on a live
netowrk. Despite the need for extensive future development,
the framework attempts to solve many current issues with
cyber-physical system security [34].
S. Harmonized Threat & Risk Assessment (HTRA)
Published by the Canadian Government, HTRA provides
a risk management framework which expounds rapid ad-
justments to account for quickly evolving threat terrain, but
still implements a traditional secure baseline structure. HTRA
suffers from the same pitfalls of most large frameworks in that
the size of the network often determines how effectively the
model is implemented. HTRA follows the NIST model closely
in an attempt to preserve scalability and consistency, but does
not implement the rigorous controls used by RMF [35].
T. System-Fault Risk (SFR)
The qualitative framework created by Ye employs systems
engineering, fault modeling, and risk assessment to classify
cyber attacks. It accounts for several layers of interconnection
by creating multiple attack origin classiﬁcation models. The
framework is modular and capable of extension into nearly
any device that operates on a network, but at extreme cost.
SFR takes the form of a checklist taxonomy which requires
manual assessment and identiﬁcation of devices in order to
populate the risk matrices. It is not intended to be used as
a full enterprise solution in its current form, but provides
attack classiﬁcation and characterization tools. Future research
intends to provide further development toward a functional
system [36].
U. Hierarchical Model Based Risk Assessment
Baiardi introduces a quantiﬁable framework based on se-
curity dependency hypergraphs which have the capability
to identify attack paths which an analyst may miss in a
qualitative assessment, but the model does not account for the
inner state or operations of components. Risk is modeled and
predicted within the graph. This allows for risk assessment
and mitigation for each individual node or device. Tools for
basic implementation were developed but not widely tested in
a live network [37].
V. Patel & Ziveri Model
The model is a quantitative system which depends on prede-
termined types of attacks and devices to populate a risk matrix.
This is accomplished by identifying the level of vulnerability
each device has to each type of attack across several levels
of effect. The model accounts for equipment loss, control
loss, time loss, potential damage, and cost of prevention. A
case study is performed in a small laboratory with several
ICS devices. Additional research would be required in order
to account for anything outside of the current scope of the
model. It is presently designed for implementation in SCADA
networks, and does not account well for IoT or any attack that
is not within the matrix [38].
W. IBM Security Framework
The IBM security blueprint stovepipes security into domains
which are broken down further into distinct objectives and
services. The IBM model is speciﬁc to proprietary implemen-
tations of IBM hardware and products, but includes applica-
tions with devices from other vendors. Network sub-domains
are deﬁned by the framework in order to give the network
managers sufﬁcient segmentation for their environment. IBM
relies heavily on operating according to industry best practices
[39]. An update in 2014 showed successful results in several
live networks [40].
1) Additional Publications (2016): IBM has published a
series of books [41] to address practical application of the IBM
security framework. They recognize the theoretical nature of
the original publication [40] and introduce controls to assist
in implementation of the framework. Each security domain is
broken down into individual elements and appropriate security
solutions are advocated. IoT devices are only accounted for
through host and endpoint security measures and Access
Control Lists (ACLs). The security model is simplistic, but
operates at a level equivalent to current generation frameorks
[41].
X. Information Security Risk Analysis Method (ISRAM)
ISRAM is an attempt to bridge the gap between the over-
whelming challenge of implementing a quantitative model on
a complex network and the inconsistencies of a qualitative
model. While sound in theory, the product still suffers from the
extensibility issues faces by quantitative models. It operates by
using one of the fundamental risk calculations, a function of
probability and consequence. ISRAM relies heavily on surveys
to populate risk tables. The case study was limited to a 20
device Local Area Network (LAN). The primary weakness of
ISRAM is that it is blind to risk that is not identiﬁed through
the surveys [42].

79
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Y. Cyber-Physical Security (CPS) Model
Amin [43] employs elements of game theory to estimate se-
curity risks using technology based security defenses grounded
in information security tools and fault tolerant controls in an
attempt to create a more quantitative framework to address the
risks presented by cyber-phsyical systems on a network. The
methodology struggles to account for all components simulta-
neously in a large composite model, and lacks extensibility.
Amin argues that the inter-dependencies of cyber-physical
systems is not well documented, and the risks they pose to
an established network are not assessed accurately due to the
lack of research in cyber-physical system vulnerabilities [43].
Z. Cybernomics
Cybernomics is an attempt to incorporate cyber risk man-
agement and economic modeling to build a more quantiﬁable
framework which can be scaled to a larger enterprise network
using a formally proposed unit of cyber risk. It provides a
more network centric portfolio, and in turn may be capable of
providing sound IoT accountability. This framework is reliant
on large scale adoption as a means to populate common threat
indexes and create informed risk models. Live network testing
is anticipated in a future publication [44].
III. METHODOLOGY
Four primary elements common to each framework are
evaluated. This establishes a basic standard used to make
comparisons, and highlights several key differences between
otherwise similar methods. These attributes are mapped and
graded to determine the level of efﬁcacy provided. It is
challenging to conduct a full pairwise comparison between any
two models due to their inability to target IoT devices specif-
ically. Nearly all models surveyed neglected to take special
measures towards securing IoT devices versus other enterprise
components. Models which account for IoT/mobile/ICS often
highlight that they are a security challenge, but do not have
speciﬁc countermeasures in place to mitigate the threats they
introduce. This led to a largely qualitative analysis of the
merits of each model, with models that have a particularly
outstanding system being highlighted in Section IV.
A. Quantitative vs. Qualitative
Each framework surveyed was classiﬁed as either primarily
qualitative, or quantitative. The constraints of the quantitative
model are similar to the strengths of a qualitative model, and
vice versa. Quantitative models can provide unparalleled threat
modeling at the expense of scalability. Popular methods of
quantitative modeling require manual analysis of each device
to identify network interfaces and operating systems. For the
purpose of this assessment a framework must demonstrate
device speciﬁc risk or attack probability considerations to be
classiﬁed as quantitative. Frameworks employing speciﬁc ar-
chitecture requirements, implementation controls, and vulner-
ability assessments were categorized as primarily qualitative.
Any system that used a method of device abstraction for a
quantitative analysis is classiﬁed as qualitative.
B. Level of Implementation
Models are assigned an enterprise network implementation
score of high, low, or N/A in order to account for the broad
range of real-world testing frameworks have received. It is
considered irresponsible to recommend an untested framework
for use in production networks prior to signiﬁcant live testing.
A framework with hundreds of implementations and years of
feedback will similarly have more data points to evaluate than
a network which is conceptual or in its ﬁrst live network test.
Many surveyed frameworks have not yet been employed in a
signiﬁcant capacity on a live network, but they are included in
this survey. Untested frameworks are examined in order assess
approaches that have been tried in previous research, or are
on the cutting edge of risk management development.
C. Age and Support Level
Risk assessment frameworks which no longer have a robust
implementation or supporting entity may no longer be viable.
It is important to consider that legacy models may no longer
provide adequate security, but they are important to consider
when examining the current state of IoT adaptation. Several
analyzed methodologies have been iterated over the course
of years and decades. The version of a methodology selected
for this paper is reﬂected by the date and any version release
information discussed in Section II. When applicable, the in-
dividual publications are cited and referenced with the speciﬁc
iteration selected for analysis.
D. Overall Rating
The current industry standard for a risk assessment frame-
work is the a qualitative model. This method of assessment
relies on robust security policy and patching processes along-
side vulnerability scanning and security controls. Examples of
these frameworks include the NIST RMF, NCSC CAF 3.0,
and ISACA COBIT. These methods are suitable for securing
a traditional enterprise network, but have weaknesses to IoT
devices that are introduced without being fully incorporated to
the baseline. Any framework that meets, but does not have the
potential to exceed the current state of the art implementation
is rated “Yellow”. Yellow rated models are a relatively good
assessments of cyber risk, but they do not manage IoT devices
well. Any framework which is unable to achieve the same level
of network protection as the current generation of frameworks
is rated “Red”. Models which have made a meaningful step
towards properly accounting for IoT devices within enterprise
networks will be rated “Green”. Several methodologies rated
green have not been fully deployed in a live test, but have
demonstrated that they manage IoT devices with a higher level
of effectiveness.

80
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. ANALYSIS OF RISK ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORKS
A live test and assessment of each risk model is beyond
the scope of this survey. Each selected methodology is broken
down according to the criteria outlined in Section III. The
assessment of each framework allows for comparison across
methodology, age, implementation level, and effectiveness
rating. This breakdown is introduced in Table I.
TABLE I. RISK FRAMEWORK COMPARISON
Framework Analysis
Reviewed Framework
Rating
Implementation
Year
†CAF [28]
Yellow
High
2018
†COBIT 5 [14][9]
Yellow
High
2012
†CORAS [45]
Red
Low
2003
*CPS Model [43]
Red
N/A
2013
†CPSS [34]
Red
N/A
2015
*CRAMM [27]
Red
Low
2003
*CRISM [32]
Green
N/A
2018
*Cybernomics [44]
Green
N/A
2017
†HCS-IF [19]
Green
N/A
2014
†*Hierarchical Model[37]
Red
N/A
2009
†HTRA [35]
Yellow
High
2007
†IBM Framework [39]
Yellow
Low
2010
†IoT/M2M [21]
Green
N/A
2016
†ISO27K [14][15]
Yellow
High
2005
†ISO31K [13]
Yellow
High
2009
*ISRAM [42]
Red
N/A
2005
†ISSM [5]
Green
N/A
2017
†ISSM [16]
Yellow
Low
2011
*Mobius [22]
Red
N/A
2002
†NIST CSF [7]
Yellow
High
2014
†NIST RMF [46]
Yellow
High
2015
*NSRM [33]
Red
N/A
2009
†OCTAVE [17]
Red
Low
2003
†OCTAVE-S [17]
Red
Low
2003
†OCTAVE-Allegro [18]
Red
Low
2007
†OSSF [23]
Green
N/A
2017
*Patel & Ziveri Model [38]
Red
N/A
2010
†SFR [36]
Red
N/A
2005
†*TARA (Intel) [25]
Yellow
Low
2009
†*TARA (MITRE) [26]
Yellow
Low
2011
†Indicates Qualitative *Indicates Quantitative
A. Common Framework Pitfalls
Initial assessment standards required a signiﬁcant imple-
mentation instance in order to merit a “green rating”, but
no surveyed models with production implementation were
designed to account for IoT devices. This requirement was
removed as a result each model that rated “green” for IoT
advancement has not been implemented in a live network.
Similarly, all models rated “high” for implementation scored
“yellow” in IoT advancement. This overwhelmingly indicates
that the state of the art has not yet accounted for IoT
properly, and no single framework can be recommended as
an immediate solution to the IoT problem. The current model
of a qualitative risk assessment may no longer be viable as
IoT devices continue to become more critically integrated into
networks. Each qualitative model surveyed attempts to use
only existing resources to secure the IoT threat vector. In order
to continue using existing risk models, it is necessary to either
invest in new risk assessment architecture to account for the
largely unknown vulnerabilities presented by current off the
shelf IoT systems, or incorporate only IoT systems which have
been subjected to a much higher degree of security analysis.
The current model of minimal support and small device market
share footprint is unsustainable if security is to be prioritized.
B. IoT Advancements
It is imperative that security development be proactive due
to the increasingly vital role that IoT devices have in enterprise
networks. Among the most promising proposed models is the
zero trust approach in the IoT/M2M framework. Rather than
attempt to impose enterprise security methods on IoT devices,
it attempts to section them off as much as possible into other
network segments. This is not a full solution, but it may prove
more effective than current implementations. The frameworks
that have the ability to accurately model risks to ICS and
IoT systems have primarily implemented a quantitative risk
assessment approach, but no solution has been able to provide
cost-effective coverage to a larger network. Most quantitative
models draw from the CVE database, which is reliant on
vulnerability publications. Due to the obscurity of IoT systems,
many face less rigorous assessment and have fewer published
CVE ﬁndings. The primary weakness to this solution is some
devices will eventually have to have a trusted relationship, and
this will lead to inevitable unmitigated vulnerabilities. This
method is at best a technique to shrink the attack surface of a
network, and does not fully mitigate the risk of IoT devices.
C. Proposed Solutions
Two courses of action for securing IoT devices based on
the analysis of the 30 frameworks surveyed are proposed
based on short term and long term research goals. The trend
of predominately quantitative risk assessment frameworks in
early models was primarily rendered obsolete due to imple-
mentation costs rather than level of effectiveness. A short
term approach focused on bolstering the IoT speciﬁc security
controls of qualitative methods is recommended based on
current developments in IoT and ICS security best practices.
The long term approach recommended by this paper is based
on reintroducing elements of quantitative risk assessment and
mitigation models through the use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) solutions designed to perform risk modeling and attack
probability extrapolation.
1) Short Term: Use network segmentation and a zero trust
model: IoT devices cannot be considered trusted or secure
by a risk analysis model until a more robust vulnerability
assessment process can be developed. IoT and ICS devices
both utilize interfaces which are not assessed by most current
enterprise network vulnerability assessment tools. Physical
access on remote devices must also be considered by a
risk methodology. Designing network architecture to create
the smallest foothold possible for compromised IoT devices
may be an effective short term solution, but would need
to be accompanied by policy and control updates. Poten-
tial examples of this would include creating requirements

81
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to implement an IoT device Virtual Local Area Network
(VLAN), De-Militarized Zone (DMZ), or using bastions as
IoT interface servers. Similarly, isolating IoT devices from
domain credentials and trust settings is vital to ensuring that
a vulnerable IoT device does minimized damage if exploited.
Due to the inherent hidden vulnerabilities in many IoT devices,
the threat of lateral attack propagation is extremely high. These
strategies focus on limiting an attackers inﬂuence in the event
that they do gain access to a device. This strategy has been
well documented and proposed in several IoT risk management
models, but have not been implemented at the scale of a large
enterprise in any research studies. Models such as the Cisco
IoT/M2M [21] provide an overview of this concept. The focus
of the network security controls is placed on regulating and
limiting the level of interaction a device can have with other
elements of the network.
2) Long Term: Increase viability of quantiﬁable risk as-
sessment frameworks with Machine Learning: Quantitative
frameworks have demonstrated the highest level of accuracy
when employed to assesses cyber risk, but are not capable of
modeling large networks in their present state. The next iter-
ation of quantitative framework research, currently underway,
relies on existing CVE score data to calculate risk, and requires
signiﬁcant oversight to operate. This model still suffers from
the scalability issues observed in past threat-quantiﬁcation
based methodologies. This problem must be solved in order
for quantiﬁable frameworks to become viable.
Potential methods for achieving this could include the
use of machine learning (ML) in order to implement risk
classiﬁcation and develop individual device proﬁles. This
direction requires signiﬁcant future research with live testing
and development, but could yield lower operating costs when
applied at an enterprise level. Building the threat proﬁle and
identifying logical/physical location of a device are currently
the areas that reliant on the effectiveness of a human input to
the system. Creating a method capable of employing passive
device detection automatically adjusted to compensate for
the additional network systems offers signiﬁcantly higher
reliability at the cost of adding nodes to each subnet. This
increases reliance on initial conﬁguration, rather than reliance
on network data inputted through survey. Additional scanning
tools would be necessary to provide oversight of external
network interfaces created by IoT devices similar to proposed
solution 1).
ML Tasks typically fall into two categories: regression
and classiﬁcation. Regression involves predicting a real-valued
output while classiﬁcation involves predicting a categorical
value [47]. A regression task that could be applied for cyber
risk frameworks is to predict values of risk using inputs
like those that go into the CVE score along with other risk
features. Using these features as input, an ML algorithm could
be applied to predict risk values much in the same way
as the CVE score. This system would also allow for very
accurate projections of security level in proposed architecture
developments, as well as software migrations and patching. A
classiﬁcation approach could be applied in coupling with items
such as an Intrusion/Anomaly Detection System. The IDS can
monitor trafﬁc and create trafﬁc proﬁles and then they can
be fed in as inputs. Using these features, a classiﬁcation of
risk level could be made using a classiﬁcation algorithm such
as Support Vector Machines, Logistic Regression or Random
Forest.
Using ML for risk classiﬁcation and device proﬁles would
require a multi-level approach. For developing device proﬁles,
a classiﬁcation task could be applied to classify the trafﬁc
for each device. With these classiﬁcations, then, using a
separate ML algorithm, risk level could be classiﬁed using
the device proﬁles and passive network trafﬁc such as Snort
logs [48]. Coupling this with an input such as CVE scores
for known vulnerabilities visible in the trafﬁc could allow for
classiﬁcation of successive levels of risk. Regardless of the
ML algorithm used, an approach such as this would require
a signiﬁcant amount of time and data to be useful. The data
would also have to be labelled so as to be useful for training
and testing an ML algorithm. Thus, this would not be a quick
solution, but could be quite powerful if implemented.
V. CONCLUSION
The assessment of 30 cyber risk assessment frameworks
shows signiﬁcant shortcomings in all state of the art risk
methodologies. No developmental model was identiﬁed that
could be considered deployment ready with capabilities clearly
exceeding those of the current generation of qualitative system.
Developmental models with the ability to incorporate both
cyber-physical systems and enterprise architecture in a large
scale network were reviewed, but none have been tested in
a live environment. At this time, there is still a signiﬁcant
need for research on methods to incorporate IoT devices
into enterprise networks while maintaining necessary levels of
accessibility balanced with security. The scale and diversity of
IoT has been insurmountable for qualitative models, but future
research developing Proposed Solution 1). may yield signiﬁ-
cant advancements that do not require substantial changes in
architecture. At this time there is not a methodology shown
to be able to quantify the additional risk presented by IoT
devices. A signiﬁcant change in funding or advancement in im-
plementation methods will be necessary in order to drastically
alter the current risk assessment terrain away from qualitative
models. Minimal published research on the application of
machine learning to cyber risk assessment was identiﬁed,
but this avenue of research outlined in Proposed Solution
2). offers a potential way forward to make the quantitative
model viable again. The development of quantiﬁable risk
methodologies is well regarded, but most current research
avenues are still reliant on known vulnerabilities. Additional
research in IoT vulnerability assessment is needed in order
to accurately populate the risk matrices employed by most
proposed quantiﬁed frameworks.

82
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are those of
the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or
position of the Air Force, the Department of Defense, or the
U.S. Government.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Pendleton, D. Pettit, and R. Dill, “Surveying the incorporation
of IoT devices into cybersecurity risk management frameworks,” SE-
CURWARE 2019, The Thirteenth International Conference on Emerging
Security Information, Systems and Technologies, pp. 128—-133, 2019.
[2] Government Accountability Ofﬁce, “Internet of things: Enhanced as-
sessments and guidance are needed to address security risks in dod,”
Publication No. GAO-17-668, 2017.
[3] M. Conti, A. Dehghantanha, K. Franke, and S. Watson, “Internet of
things security and forensics: Challenges and opportunities,” 2018.
[4] K. L. Dempsey, G. A. Witte, and D. Rike, “Summary of nist sp 800-53,
revision 4: Security and privacy controls for federal information systems
and organizations,” Tech. Rep., 2014.
[5] S. Almuhammadi and M. Alsaleh, “Information Security Maturity Model
for NIST Cyber Security Framework,” Computer Science & Information
Technology, vol. 51, 2017.
[6] National
Institute
of
Standards
and
Technology.
(2016)
Risk
management
framework
steps.
Last
Accessed
2019-12-
2. [Online]. Available: https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/Risk-
Management/images-media/NIST-RMF.png
[7] N. Keller, “NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) Reference Tool,”
2014.
[8] M. Ahlmeyer and A. M. Chircu, “Securing the internet of things: A
review.” Issues in information Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, 2016.
[9] K. Wal, J. Lainhart, and P. Tessin, “A cobit 5 overview,” 2012.
[10] J. Lainhart, “Introducing COBIT 2019: The Motivation for the Update?”
2018.
[11] ISACA, “Cobit 2019 framework: Introduction and methodology,” 2018.
[12] M. S. Lund, B. Solhaug, and K. Stølen, Model-driven risk analysis: the
CORAS approach.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
[13] M. Leitch, “ISO 31000: 2009—The new international standard on risk
management,” Risk Analysis: An International Journal, vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 887–892, 2010.
[14] W. Al-Ahmad and B. Mohammad, “Can a single security framework
address information security risks adequately,” International Journal of
Digital Information and Wireless Communications, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
222–230, 2012.
[15] T. Humphreys, “State-of-the-art information security management sys-
tems with iso/iec 27001: 2005,” ISO Management Systems, vol. 6, no. 1,
2006.
[16] G. Karokola, S. Kowalski, and L. Yngstr¨om, “Towards an information
security maturity model for secure e-government services: A stakehold-
ers view.” in HAISA, 2011, pp. 58–73.
[17] C. Alberts, A. Dorofee, J. Stevens, and C. Woody, “Introduction to
the OCTAVE Approach,” Carnegie-Melon Univ Pittsburgh PA Software
Engineering Inst, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[18] R. Caralli, J. F. Stevens, L. R. Young, and W. R. Wilson, “Introducing
OCTAVE allegro: Improving the information security risk assessment
process,” 2007.
[19] I. Atoum, A. Otoom, and A. A. Ali, “Holistic cyber security implemen-
tation frameworks: A case study of jordan,” International Journal of
Information, Business and Management, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 108, 2017.
[20] ——, “Holistic cyber security implementation frameworks: A case
study of jordan,” International Journal of Information, Business and
Management, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 108, 2017.
[21] “Cisco: Securing the internet of things: A proposed framework.” 2016.
[22] D. D. Deavours, G. Clark, T. Courtney, D. Daly, S. Derisavi, J. M.
Doyle, W. H. Sanders, and P. G. Webster, “The mobius framework and its
implementation,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 28,
no. 10, pp. 956–969, 2002.
[23] J. Meszaros and A. Buchalcevova, “Introducing ossf: A framework for
online service cybersecurity risk management,” computers & security,
vol. 65, pp. 300–313, 2017.
[24] M. S. Lund, B. Solhaug, and K. Stølen, “A guided tour of the CORAS
method,” in Model-Driven Risk Analysis.
Springer, 2011, pp. 23–43.
[25] M. Rosenquist, “Prioritizing information security risks with threat agent
risk assessment,” Intel Corporation White Paper, 2009.
[26] J. Wynn, J. Whitmore, G. Upton, L. Spriggs, D. McKinnon, R. McInnes,
R. Graubart, and L. Clausen, “Threat assessment & remediation analysis
(tara): Methodology description version 1.0,” MITRE CORP BEDFORD
MA, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[27] Z. Yazar, “A qualitative risk analysis and management tool–cramm,”
SANS InfoSec Reading Room White Paper, vol. 11, pp. 12–32, 2002.
[28] United Kingdom National Cyber Security Centre, “Cyber assessment
framework,” 2020.
[29] T. Kevin, “Introducing the cyber assessment framework v2.0,” 2018.
[30] ——, “Introducing the cyber assessment framework v3.0,” 2019.
[31] Government Accountability Ofﬁce, “Internet of things: Status and im-
plications of an increasingly connected world,” Publication No. GAO-
17-75, 2017.
[32] S. Shetty, M. McShane, L. Zhang, J. P. Kesan, C. A. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat,
and L. L. Njilla, “Reducing informational disadvantages to improve
cyber risk management,” The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-
Issues and Practice, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 224–238, 2018.
[33] M. H. Henry and Y. Y. Haimes, “A comprehensive network security risk
model for process control networks,” Risk Analysis: An International
Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 223–248, 2009.
[34] D. DiMase, Z. A. Collier, K. Heffner, and I. Linkov, “Systems engineer-
ing framework for cyber physical security and resilience,” Environment
Systems and Decisions, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 291–300, 2015.
[35] Government of Canada, “Harmonized Threat and Risk Assessment
(HTRA) Methodology,” 2007.
[36] N. Ye, C. Newman, and T. Farley, “A system-fault-risk framework for
cyber attack classiﬁcation,” Information Knowledge Systems Manage-
ment, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 135–151, 2005.
[37] F. Baiardi, C. Telmon, and D. Sgandurra, “Hierarchical, model-based
risk management of critical infrastructures,” Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, vol. 94, no. 9, pp. 1403–1415, 2009.
[38] S. Patel and J. Zaveri, “A risk-assessment model for cyber attacks on
information systems,” Journal of computers, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 352–359,
2010.
[39] A. Buecker, M. Borrett, C. Lorenz, and C. Powers, “Introducing the IBM
security framework and IBM security blueprint to realize business-driven
security,” IBM Redpaper, vol. 4528, no. 1, pp. 1–96, 2010.
[40] A. Buecker, S. Arunkumar, B. Blackshaw, M. Borrett, P. Brittenham,
J. Flegr, J. Jacobs, V. Jeremic, M. Johnston, C. Mark et al., Using
the IBM Security Framework and IBM Security Blueprint to Realize
Business-Driven Security.
IBM Redbooks, 2014.
[41] A. Buecker, B. Chakrabarty, L. Dymoke-Bradshaw, C. Goldkorn,
B. Hugenbruch, M. R. Nali, V. Ramalingam, B. Thalouth, J. Thielmann
et al., Reduce Risk and Improve Security on IBM Mainframes: Volume
1 Architecture and Platform Security.
IBM Redbooks, 2016.
[42] B. Karabacak and I. Sogukpinar, “Isram: information security risk
analysis method,” Computers & Security, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 147–159,
2005.
[43] S. Amin, G. A. Schwartz, and A. Hussain, “In quest of benchmarking
security risks to cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 19–24, 2013.
[44] K. Ruan, “Introducing cybernomics: A unifying economic framework
for measuring cyber risk,” Computers & Security, vol. 65, pp. 77–89,
2017.
[45] K. Stolen, F. den Braber, T. Dimitrakos, R. Fredriksen, B. A. Gran, S.-H.
Houmb, M. S. Lund, Y. Stamatiou, and J. Aagedal, “Model-based risk
assessment-the coras approach,” in iTrust Workshop, 2002.
[46] R. S. Ross and L. A. Johnson, “Guide for applying the risk manage-
ment framework to federal information systems: A security life cycle
approach,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[47] G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, “Classiﬁcation,” in
An Introduction to Statistical Learning.
New York: Springer Science
& Business Media, 2013, ch. 4, pp. 127–173.
[48] M. Roesch, “Snort-Lightweight Intrusion Detection for Networks,” in
Proceedings of LISA ’99, 1999, pp. 229–238.

