Internet of Things and Cloud Computing Enabling Circular Economy 
A tool rental service
Johanna Kallio, Maria Antikainen, Outi Kettunen 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: johanna.kallio@vtt.fi, maria.antikainen@vtt.fi, 
outi.kettunen@vtt.fi 
Panu Korpipää 
Finwe Ltd. 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: panu.korpipaa@finwe.fi
 
Abstract - Internet of Things, cloud computing and big data 
analytics are technological innovations that have the power to 
transform traditional businesses. These technologies can enable 
and accelerate a circular economy with closed material loops on 
a broader scale. We aim at providing information on how to 
disrupt prevailing linear business models by employing digital 
data, cloud computing and Internet of Things technologies. We 
give the reader an overview on circular economy and most 
prominent digital technologies affecting the incumbents of 
industry. We present the current deployment of a tool rental 
service and develop a scenario anticipating the possible future 
of the tool rental service. The envisioned tool rental scenario 
provides understanding on the effects of digital technologies and 
helps companies in identifying more sustainable and circular 
business models. 
Keywords - circular economy; Internet of Things; cloud 
computing; tool rental service. 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper explores how Internet of Things (IoT) and 
cloud computing can advance circular economy business 
model [1]. The concept of a circular economy (CE) describes 
an economy with closed material loops. CE focuses on reusing 
materials, and creating added value in products through 
services and technology-enabled smart solutions. This implies 
that the concept of CE is a continuous development cycle that 
aims to keep products, components and materials at their 
highest utility and value at all times, distinguishing between 
technical and biological cycles [2]. If EU manufacturing 
sector would adopt a CE business model, net material costs 
savings could be worth up to 570 billion euros per year and 
growth opportunities 320 billion euros by 2025 [3]. The 
circular concept fosters also wealth and employment 
generation against the backdrop of resource constraints [4], 
[5]. This transformation from linear “take-make-dispose” 
economy to circular one requires disruptive innovation in 
business models and technologies. 
IoT is a general term relating to the various technologies 
for connecting, monitoring and controlling devices such as 
sensors, home appliances, vehicles and industrial devices over 
a data network. We define IoT as a computing concept where 
internet-enabled physical objects (e.g., sensors, actuators, 
tags, smart machines) can network and communicate with 
each other to achieve greater value and services by 
exchanging data and producing new information [6]. IoT 
relies on the three pillars related to the ability of smart objects: 
i) to be identifiable, ii) to communicate and iii) to interact. 
When objects can sense the environment and communicate, 
they become tools for understanding complexity and 
responding to it [6]. IoT is considered as being one of the key 
enablers for enhancing CE at large [3]. 
Advancement in digital technologies is making the current 
linear take-make-dispose economy more and more efficient, 
but it still fails to address resource and natural capital issues. 
However, this new connectivity between digital technologies 
and economy also offers the possibility to re-think the 
underlying system and support the development of CE. By 
combining the principles of CE with IoT and cloud 
technologies, greater opportunity may arise to scale new 
business models more effectively [7]. 
In this article, we present the current implementation of a 
CE tool rental service and outline a scenario suggesting the 
possible future of the tool rental service. The envisioned tool 
rental scenario offers understanding on the potential of digital 
technologies and helps stakeholders to identify increasingly 
sustainable and circular business models. The remainder of 
this article is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
main principles of CE and the benefits that digitalization can 
provide. This is followed by representative overview of 
potential IoT and cloud computing technologies to be 
capitalized on the CE business. In Section IV, we describe the 
current deployment of the tool rental service, as well as 
develop the scenario for the future developments. Finally, 
Section V concludes the paper and provides some directions 
for future work. 
 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY AND DIGITALIZATION 
A circular economy is commonly defined as an industrial 
system that is restorative or regenerative by intention and 
design [8], [9]. In CE, new business models are developed to 
reduce the need for virgin raw materials and to generate 
sustainable growth. The basic approach of CE is to eliminate 
waste by designing out of waste. Products are designed and 
optimized for a cycle of disassembly, reuse and 
refurbishment, or recycling, with the understanding that 
economic growth is based on reuse of material reclaimed 
from end-of-life products rather than extraction of resources. 
Circular design makes products easier to disassemble in 
92
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

preparation for their next round trip. Reuse means the use of 
a product again for the same purpose in its original form or 
with little enhancement or change. Refurbishment means a 
process of returning a product to good working condition by 
replacing or repairing major components that are faulty or 
close to failure, and making ‘cosmetic’ changes to update the 
appearance of a product, such as cleaning, changing fabric, 
painting or refinishing. Any subsequent warranty is generally 
less than issued for a new or a remanufactured product, but 
the warranty is likely to cover the whole product (unlike 
repair). Accordingly, the performance may be less than as-
new [2]. 
In CE, the concept of user replaces that of consumer. 
Unlike today, when a consumer buys, owns and disposes of a 
product, in CE, durable products are leased, rented or shared 
whenever possible [2]. If goods are sold, new models and 
incentives motivate consumers (users) to return or reuse the 
products or their components and materials at the end of their 
primary use. New performance-based business models are 
instrumental in translating products designed for reuse into 
attractive value proposals.  
Digitalization’s role as an important enabler of CE is 
widely accepted. One major benefit is that digitalization 
enables building visibility and intelligence into products and 
assets. Intelligence can be knowledge of the location, 
condition or availability of assets or materials [7]. Knowledge 
of the product location enables increased product accessibility 
and increases the product looping. Especially reverse logistics 
planning becomes easier. Knowledge of the product condition 
enables 
predictive 
and 
condition-based 
maintenance, 
advanced diagnostics and prognostics of the components and 
products. Predictive maintenance increases product reliability 
and availability and enables further remanufacturing with the 
historical knowledge of the product in order to ensure future 
lifetime and guarantee the quality of remanufactured products. 
Knowledge of the availability of the product allows, for 
instance shared use cases through digital platforms and market 
places, and improved recycling.  
Digitalization also boosts the transformation towards 
service based business models [2], [3]. Thus, the shift towards 
product service systems (PSS) is suggested as being one of the 
key solutions in accelerating the transformation towards CE, 
and digitalization is a major enabler in this process [4]. RFID 
technology enables information collection on the usage 
history of products, which plays a central role in PSS-related 
business models, for example. This enables tracking the 
quality of returned products and facilitating the return flows 
into product life cycle management [10]. Also different digital 
technologies, such as utilization of artificial intelligence (AI) 
and data science bring novel ways to improve product life 
time, availability and looping. Moreover, digitalization can 
offer transparent access to data on products’ resource 
consumption enabling optimization of product life cycles [11]  
CE systems with interrelated cycles consist of large 
amounts of data. Digitalization provides new means to access 
this data. Decisions need to be made regarding the products’ 
lifecycle stages, how waste materials should be reused, what 
type of logistical arrangements are needed and who are the 
actors involved in the value network. Understanding the value 
proposition in the value networks is essential [12]. 
Digitalization provides opportunities for the virtualization of 
distribution channels. Value can be delivered to the customers 
through digital channels, e.g., online shops and digital 
products. This can lead to reduce environmental impact and 
novel circular business models [12]. 
In CE, the coordination of material and information flows 
is crucial. Information about quantity and quality of products 
and their raw material contents need to be collected and 
retained. Digital technologies enable keeping the data together 
with materials in the cycle and make it possible to use waste 
as a resource [13]. 
Integration of digital intelligence provides opportunities to 
distribute knowledge, structure, ownership and different 
levels of customization. This allows more connected and 
durable relationships with the customers and end users. In 
addition, digital solutions enable circular business models 
through automated monitoring, control and optimization of 
resources and material flows [13]. CE also requires system 
knowledge and understanding for optimizing business models 
during the product and service life cycle. Overall, this is one 
of the advantages of digitalization: the capability to optimize 
big data and utilize artificial intelligence for solving circular 
challenges. 
Yet, in order to gain all the above-mentioned benefits, 
there are still many challenges to be solved and gaps hindering 
digital 
technology-aided 
circular 
business 
models 
implementation. Overall, IoT technologies, cloud computing 
and digitalization in general have potential to disrupt current 
prevailing linear business models [14]. For instance, the 
incumbents of the media and music industries have 
experienced the enormous forces of start-ups’ new business 
models based on digital data and technologies. 
 
SENSORS AND COMMUNICATION 
The concept of combining computers, sensors and 
networks to monitor and control devices has existed for 
decades [15]. Advancements in digital technologies are not 
only 
limited 
to 
embedded 
technologies, 
wireless 
communication protocols and small devices, but also huge 
amounts of data are being generated by these devices and can 
be utilized to improve businesses. In this section, we give a 
representative overview of available IoT technologies 
affecting CE. 
A. Sensors  
Recent improvements in wireless technologies and 
electronics have enabled the development of low-cost, low 
power and multifunctional sensors that are small in size and 
can communicate in short distances. Typically, these sensors 
consist of sensing, data processing and communication 
components. The deployment of sensors is mainly driven by 
three factors; decreasing price, improving computational 
power and smaller size, which enables their integration into 
smartphones and other small devices [16]. 
Sensors are often categorized based on their power 
sources, i.e., active or passive. Active sensors emit energy in 
environment, while passive sensors passively receive energy 
that is produced externally to the device.  Passive sensors 
93
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

require less energy, but active sensors can be used in harsh 
environmental conditions. Table I lists typical sensor types 
based on their functions [17]. 
The main challenges related to the use of sensors are 
power consumption, data security and interoperability.  Many 
IoT applications need to run for several years over batteries, 
but charging and replacement may pose some issues 
especially in remote areas. However, recent advances in the 
fields of nano-scale accumulators and energy harvesting 
techniques have become promising choices [6]. IoT sensors 
are vulnerable for malicious attacks for several reasons; first, 
sensors are most of the time unattended that makes them easy 
to 
attack. 
Second, 
wireless 
communications 
make 
eavesdropping very easy and third, low energy and computing 
resources do not allow complex security implementations 
[18]. 
B. Networking 
Data collected with sensors need to be communicated to 
other locations for integration and analytics. Internet Protocol 
(IP) is an open protocol that provides unique addresses to 
various internet-connected devices. IP networking represents 
a scalable and platform-independent technology having 
interoperability as the most essential objective.  There are two 
IP versions, IP version 4 (IPv4) and IP version 6 (IPv6), which 
is the next generation protocol designed to provide several 
advantages over IPv4 [19]. 
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENT SENSOR TYPES. 
Sensor types 
Description 
Temperature 
Temperature sensor measures the amount of heat 
or cold. Temperature sensing is essential in quality 
control of an environment or internal factors. 
Humidity 
Humidity sensor detects the presence of water in 
the air or a mass. Humidity sensing in important 
for instance in industrial processes and human 
comfort. 
Position 
Position sensor measures the absolute or relative 
position of an object. 
Occupancy 
Occupancy sensor detects the presence of an object 
(e.g., people) even when they are stationary. 
Motion 
Motion sensor detects moving objects, for instance 
people or animals. 
Velocity 
Velocity sensor measures how fast the object 
moves or rotates. 
Acceleration 
Acceleration sensor measures changes in the 
velocity of objects that means how fast the object’s 
speed changes. 
Pressure 
Pressure sensor measures the physical force 
applied by liquids or gases. 
Flow 
Flow sensor measures the rate of liquid or gas 
movement. Flow sensing is used especially in 
medical technology, industrial and building 
automation. 
Sound 
Sound sensor measures the level of noise in the 
environment. 
Light 
Light sensor measures the change or presence of 
light in the environment. 
Chemical 
Chemical sensor measures the concentration of 
chemicals, such as carbon dioxide. 
 
TABLE II.  
COMMON NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES BY CONNECTION 
TYPES. 
Connection 
type 
Network type 
PAN 
LAN 
WAN 
Wired 
USB 
Ethernet 
 
Wireless 
Bluetooth, 
RFID, 
NFC, 
Wi-Fi, ZigBee 
Wi-Fi, WiMAX 
WiMAX, 
LoRaWAN, 
Cellular 
technologies  
 
Network technologies can be classified as wired or 
wireless. The main advantage of a wireless network is that 
users and devices can move around freely within the area of 
the network and get an internet connection, while wired 
connections are still useful for relatively more reliable, 
secured and high-volume network routes. The choice of 
technology depends mostly on the physical range to be 
covered [20]. When devices communicate with other nearby 
devices, they can use wireless personal area network (PAN) 
technologies. A local area network (LAN) connects 
networked devices over a limited area, such as an office 
building, school or home. When data have to be transferred 
over a large geographical distance, wide area network (WAN) 
technologies are used.  The Internet is an example of the 
world’s largest WAN.   
The most common short-range wireless network 
technologies are Bluetooth [21], Near Field Communication 
(NFC) [22], Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) [23], Wi-
Fi [24] and ZigBee [25]. Respectively, the most commonly 
employed wider range wireless network technologies are 
cellular technology, such as 3G or 4G, Low Power Wide Area 
Network (LoRaWAN) [26] and WiMAX [27].  Table II gives 
an overview of the mentioned networking technologies by 
their connection types [28]. 
The main challenges related to adoption of network 
technologies 
are 
associated 
with 
security, 
network 
interconnections and power consumption. Security will be a 
major concern wherever networks are deployed. Data 
transmission can be relied on several networks, such as 
Ethernet, cellular or other wireless networks, and different 
network technologies are often connected with gateways [29]. 
In addition to security, these interconnections pose challenges 
by adding complexity. In order to tackle the problem 
networked devices have with power consumption, energy-
efficient networking is explored in research communities [30]. 
C. Data communication 
Data communication focuses on how the data is streaming 
from the sensors towards the databases and application back-
ends. The data communication includes a set of protocols that 
have been built for high volumes and large networks of 
devices. Constrained processing capabilities and limited 
battery resources restrict communication in sensor systems. 
Typical sensor application and data communication protocols 
considering processing capability and energy consumption are 
the following three [31]: 
94
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT), which 
is a lightweight publish/subscribe based message 
protocol especially well-suited for running on limited 
computational power and lean network connectivity. 
 
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), which is 
designed specifically for machine-to-machine (M2M) 
applications, such as building and energy automation. 
 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which is 
attractive option because of availability and 
compatibility of the legacy HTTP-stack on various 
platforms.  
In many IoT solutions and sensor data platforms, the 
observational data from sensors is typically stored in simple 
and convenient data formats, which are easily accessible and 
already supported in many programming languages and 
common software development frameworks [32]. The most 
important examples of such data formats commonly applied 
in sensor systems are JSON, XML and CSV. 
 
CLOUD COMPUTING 
The previous Section III presented the sensor, networking 
and data communication technologies that are relevant for IoT 
applications. Figure 1 depicts a simplified high-level data 
handling process for IoT applications receiving data from 
multiple data sources and in different data formats. The 
process of extracting and transforming the data into a suitable 
format and storing it in databases is often called data 
aggregation. The data aggregation prepares the data for 
analysis. This section focuses on cloud computing, which 
complements the previous IoT technologies in terms of data 
processing, storage and analysis. 
A. Cloud platforms 
We define an IoT platform as a middleware and 
infrastructure that enables interaction between the end-users 
and physical objects [32]. The IoT platform can be either local 
or provisioned from a cloud as illustrated in Figure 2. With 
cloud technology, platform’s computation and storage 
resources can be made available on a need basis, without 
requiring major investment in new hardware or programming. 
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) is a category of cloud 
computing services for developing, managing and delivering 
applications. Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), on the other hand, 
provides an access to a cloud-based software or applications 
through which data can be stored and analyzed [33]. 
The most cloud platforms are implemented with the 
Representational State Transfer Application Programming 
Interface (REST API) [32]. Employing REST API also gives 
the advantage of easy integration with other web services, 
cloud environments and data processing toolchains. Thus, 
REST-based CoAP and HTTP are widely utilized data 
communication solutions to interconnect devices to the IoT 
platform. 
Many vendors, such as Microsoft, HP, IBM and Oracle, 
provide commercial cloud-based IoT platforms for connecting 
sensors and actuators to the Internet. In addition, several open-
source IoT platforms are available and often propose their 
own communication or middleware solutions. Mineraud et al. 
[32] provides an extensive evaluation of a number of available 
proprietary as well as open-source IoT platforms.  
The main challenges of cloud platforms are associated 
with security, integration of multifold technologies, data 
ownership and data processing [32]. Efficient security 
mechanisms are essential for IoT platforms because 
interactions between different objects, as well as with humans, 
must be secured [18]. Furthermore, information produced 
from data is a threat for privacy and anonymity of users must 
be retained [34]. The interaction of IoT platforms and sensing 
devices is hindered by various technologies and missing de-
facto 
communication 
standards. 
Currently, 
the 
interoperability issues are tackled by gateways, which support 
new types of devices (see Figure 2).  The ownership of created 
 
Figure 1.  High-level overview of data processing. 
 
Figure 2.  Cloud-based platform [27]. 
 
95
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

data is also a complex issue and regulation varies depending 
on whether the data is personal or machine-generated.  
B. Data processing and storage 
The key step for a successful analysis and use of any data 
is an organized and systematic approach to collecting, 
arranging, and presenting the incoming data [35]. Data 
processing methods can be divided in batch and stream 
processing. Batch processing starts with data acquisition and 
storing and continues with processing of the stored data [33]. 
For instance, Hadoop [36] is an open source batch processing 
framework targeted for distributed data storage and 
processing of unstructured data. Hadoop employs the 
MapReduce programming model for the processing of large-
scale data clusters [37]. Hadoop Distributed File System is 
optimized to store large amounts of data. Another example of 
batch processing framework is Apache Spark [38], which is 
also capable of stream processing. 
Especially large volumes of data and new IoT applications 
require real-time processing, where data items are processed 
as soon as they become available. This is called stream 
processing and it facilitates real-time action on the data, as 
well as filtering and aggregating it for efficient storage [33]. 
Open-source frameworks, such as the Apache tools Samza 
[39] and Storm [40] have been created for real-time or near 
real-time processing of streaming data. Flink [41], on the other 
hand, is an open-source hybrid framework for stream 
processing, which can also manage batch processing.  
 Compared to relational databases, requirements on 
performance and scalability typically presume non-relational 
databases. NoSQL (Not only SQL) databases are designed for 
storing unstructured data. Popular databases for storing 
streaming data are Apache Cassandra [42] and HBase [43]. 
True to form, all data processing frameworks and storing tools 
have different benefits and limitations, and the selection of 
tools depends on application.   
C. Data analytics  
Data analytics refers to examining of raw data with the 
purpose of refining this data as useful information that can be 
used as knowledge. Data analytics can be divided into three 
different categories: a) descriptive analytics describing what 
the data looks like, b) predictive analytics predicting what is 
going to happen, and c) prescriptive analytics describing what 
should happen to reach the goal [44]. 
Machine learning refers to system’s ability to learn 
without being explicitly programmed. Machine learning 
explores the development of algorithms that can learn from 
and make predictions on data. Machine learning methods are 
often categorized as supervised or unsupervised. Supervised 
learning can apply what has been learned in the past to new 
data. Unsupervised learning can draw inferences from 
datasets [45].  
Machine learning process is depicted in Figure 3. The 
process starts with data preparation. In this phase, the 
available raw data is visualized to get an overview of the data. 
The data may require some pre-processing actions, such as 
scaling, normalization and actions on missing data. The data 
is split in two parts, from which the first part is used for 
training and second part for testing. In the second phase, the 
most relevant features (i.e., variables) are selected. These 
features are used in construction of an accurate predictive 
model from various machine learning algorithm candidates.  
Next, the chosen machine leaning algorithms are trained 
by using the training dataset. In the evaluation phase, the 
quality of the trained model is assessed with the test dataset. 
The target of the evaluation is to test the performance of the 
data model with testing dataset that has not been used for 
training the model. Approximately 20 - 30 % of the original 
data is used for the evaluation purposes. Another commonly 
used method is to leave a part of the whole dataset as test 
dataset, while the rest is used as training dataset, and repeat 
the process over the whole dataset. The method is called 
cross-validation.  Before selecting the best solution, there 
might be several iteration cycles from feature extraction to 
model evaluation. Finally, the best model can be used for the 
target application in CE. The function performed by the 
model can relate to detecting a certain pattern in real time 
from sensor data or conducting a prediction based on the 
trend or pattern of the past data. 
 Different data analysis techniques are used based on the 
type of the addressed problem. Classification is a supervised 
machine learning technique, which produces a set of models 
or functions that distinguish dataset into different classes. The 
purpose is to predict the class for objects whose class is not 
known. There are plenty of methods that can be used for 
classifying the data, such as decision trees, frame- or rule-
based expert systems, neural networks, Bayesian network 
and support vector machines. Clustering is typically an 
unsupervised learning technique, which divides dataset into 
meaningful groups having similar patterns. Clustering is a 
common technique for statistical data analysis and used for 
example by e-commerce, industry and health care sectors 
[46], [47]. 
 
Figure 3.  Machine Learning process in circular economy.  
 
96
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TOOL RENTAL SERVICE 
In this section, we describe how the previously presented 
digital technologies, namely sensors, cloud platforms and 
data analytics can be applied to a tool rental service to 
promote CE. We present a rapid experiment of the tool rental 
service and develop a scenario envisioning the possible future 
of the tool rental service. Our aim is to provide understanding 
on the possibilities and benefits of digital technologies for 
sustainable and circular business models. In general, digital 
technologies and better utilization of digital data can build 
visibility and intelligence into products and services. 
A. Approach and data collection 
Our AARRE project (Capitalising on Invisible Value - 
User-driven Business Models in the Emerging Circular 
Economy) explored user-driven circular business models and 
collaborated with multiple Finnish companies, Finnish 
organizations and Finnish decision makers in the CE field. 
The idea of a tool rental service is to offer an alternative for 
purchasing of tools, such as electric tools and cleaning 
equipment, which are used infrequently in urban economy. 
This kind of sharing economy can be an ecological option in 
certain conditions and on the other hand, facilitates the storage 
problem of goods in urban housing [48]. The goal of our 
empirical study is to provide input for the discussion on how 
to disrupt current prevailing linear business models by 
employing digital data and IoT technologies. 
The planning and rapid experimenting of the tool rental 
scenario is based on several discussions with eight (8) 
AARRE project researchers, one start-up entrepreneur, and 
various companies. We also use interviews of nine (9) users 
and potential users of Liiteri, and Owela innovation tool 
results as a background material.  
In addition, prior to the experimentation, a consumer panel 
was held in the project in order to identify current and future 
needs, ideas, enablers and barriers related to CE business 
models. There were 42 panelists divided into 5 groups. The 
discussion in each group was led by 1 - 2 scientists and based 
on a uniform list of questions. Several issues related to renting, 
leasing, borrowing and sharing were identified where IoT can 
be an enabler. Based on the discussions, the identified barriers 
related to renting, leasing, borrowing and sharing, are current 
lack of information on selection, availability, location and 
condition of the items. There is also a need for some additional 
information, such as instructions for use, as well as a need to 
monitor the usage in some cases. Tracking and tracing 
information in the logistics process would make renting easier 
and more cost-efficient. Technology could also support in 
providing a rating system concerning both the users and 
service providers. 
B. Current deployment of the tool rental service 
Our AARRE project participated in the design and 
implementation of a rapid experimental tool rental service 
called Liiteri [49] in collaboration with Finnish IT-startup 
CoReorient [50] and hardware store K-Rauta. The other co-
operation partners were Helsinki Region Environmental 
Services Authority HSY, Technology Industries of Finland, 
SER-kierrätys, City of Espoo, Purjebägit Oy, Kierrätysverkko 
Oy, 
Metrosuutarit.fi, 
Pyörähuoltoovelle.fi 
and 
Kauppahalli24.fi. 
Liiteri is an online platform where users can rent electric 
tools and house cleaning equipment. By registering to the 
Liiteri service, the user can choose the desired product and 
renting date via the online platform. The rental payment is 
made via the online service at the same time with product 
selection. When the payment has been processed, the user gets 
an access code to the 24/7 Liiteri self-service point, which is 
an intelligent container in the city centre of Helsinki. The user 
can pick up the rented gear any time from the Liiteri self-
service point located at a central place of public transport 
connections. 
Alternatively, 
the 
user 
can 
choose 
a 
crowdsourced PiggyBaggy home delivery service [51]. An 
initial experiment to examine the utility of the Liiteri tool 
rental service was conducted and reported in another study 
[46]. 
C. Scenario for the tool rental service 
In this section, we describe a future business scenario for 
the previously described Liiteri tool rental service. The 
scenario complements the available Liiteri tool rental service 
and aims to provide information for companies about the 
future possibilities of digital data collection, processing and 
analytics. Figure 4 depicts the envisioned tool rental service 
scenario. The data is collected by various means, such as 
sensors, mobile application, web services and data logs. 
Depending on the data and its application, different data 
processing and storing options can be used. Respectively, the 
choices of data analytics methods and visualizations are 
always dependent on the target application. 
 
1) Personalized real-time services  
Asset tracking refers to the method, which can be used to 
provide information on the location of physical equipment by 
using scanning a barcode or using location aware 
technologies, such as GPS, RFID or Bluetooth Low Energy 
(BLE). The asset tracking can be real-time or based on 
connected checkpoints. A node that is aware of its location 
and can send signals to smartphones or other mobile devices 
is called a beacon. BLE-based beacons are a worthy choice for 
improving shopping experience as they have high accuracy 
and support by the majority of mobile devices [52]. User’s 
smartphone can interact with beacons placed in the Liiteri 
self-service point via a Liiteri mobile application (later 
referred to as the Liiteri app). BLE-based beacons can be used 
for mobile door opening when entering the 24/7 Liiteri self-
service point [53].  
Furthermore, the beacons can be utilized in store 
navigation. The beacons can enable users to be recognized in 
real-time when entering the 24/7 Liiteri self-service point and 
help them find easily the selected tool or other rented gear with 
nearby push notifications feature. A payment for the selected 
product can be discharged using a beacon-based mobile 
payment or a more conventional online payment service 
provided by the Liiteri app.  
 
 
 
97
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2) Other personalized services  
At home, the users can be provided with a guided usage 
service by scanning the tool (equipped with barcode or RFID 
tag) with their phone, and even a guided replacement service 
in case of a broken part can be possible. The data from web 
services, such as social media, can be integrated with Liiteri 
data logs to provide other personalized services via REST 
APIs. For instance, the rental profile including demographic 
data and browsing history from the Liiteri app can be further 
analysed for personalized recommendations. The Liiteri app 
can also allow the users to access product information and 
reviews to help them make their decision. In these services, 
the data is analysed in batches and possible data processing 
frameworks can be Apache Hadoop or Spark. For data 
storage, Hadoop file storage or HBase are possible candidates. 
The tool availability and location information can be 
utilized to provide a connection with next user. This promotes 
collaboration among users and facilitates crowdsourced 
delivery of tools from user to user. During the delivery 
process, communication can be handled via the Liiteri app. 
The deliverer can earn points, which she or he can spend for 
the tool rental or redeem for cash. Home delivery service of 
the tools, in turn, can utilize the real-time navigation 
information and the customer’s location information for route 
planning and optimization of delivery routes to reduce driving 
time, fuel consumption and exhaust gases. 
 
3)   Condition-based  maintenance 
Sensors 
can 
measure 
for 
example 
acceleration, 
temperature, vibration and humidity of tools or parts of the 
tools. The sensor data can be exploited in business intelligence 
in many ways, such as in condition-based maintenance 
(CBM). The condition-based maintenance is a maintenance 
procedure based on the information collected through 
condition monitoring and can be used for diagnostics and 
prognostics [54].  Prognostics based maintenance is often 
called as predictive maintenance. The goal of condition-based 
maintenance is to increase the lifetime of tools, improve the 
maintenance efficiency and safety. The condition-based 
maintenance of the tools can employ streaming data from 
multiple sensors, both from component or system level. This 
scenario is composed of various tools in different locations 
and cloud computing for (near) real-time monitoring of these 
tools. 
The tools can be equipped with affordable sensors 
connected to the Liiteri cloud-based platform using cellular 
networks. The data streams require real-time processing for 
assessing current failures (diagnostics). On the other hand, 
batch processing is needed for predicting possible future 
failures (prognostics). A possible solution for data processing 
can be Apache Spark or Flink, which are hybrid platforms and 
capable of stream and batch processing of data. NoSQL 
database, for instance HBase or Cassandra can be used for 
data storage. Different machine learning or data mining 
techniques, such as classification or regression analysis can be 
used for diagnostics and prognostics purposes. Automatic 
failure diagnostics can turn refurbishment into a potential and 
accessible option. A trivial consequence from refurbishment 
and increasing the lifetime of tools is decreasing the use of 
natural resources and waste. 
 
 
Figure 4.  IoT-enabled tool rental service business scenario. 
 
98
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III.  
SERVICES BASED ON THEIR INTELLIGENCE TYPES. 
Intelligence  
type 
Service 
Description 
Knowledge 
on location 
Mobile 
door 
opening 
Beacon-based service for mobile 
door opening when entering the 
24/7 Liiteri self-service point. 
Mobile payment 
Beacon-based 
mobile 
payment 
service for the selected product. 
Store navigation 
Beacon-based real-time navigation 
service. 
Guided usage  
Basecon-based 
guided 
usage 
service for the rented tool. 
Optimization of 
delivery route 
Optimization of delivery routes 
based on real-time navigation 
information and the next user’s 
location information. 
Knowledge 
on condition 
Diagnostics 
Real-time service for assessing 
current failures. 
Predictive 
maintenance 
Maintenance service based on 
predicting future failures. 
Decision 
support 
for 
future loops 
Prognostics service for predicting 
RUL to support on decision 
between the reuse, remanufacture 
or recycling. 
Improved 
product design 
Design service based on tool usage 
and user feedback data. 
Knowledge 
on availability 
Crowdsourced 
delivery of tools 
Service based on tool availability 
and location information to provide 
a connection with next user. 
 
4) Improved reuse, remanufacture and recycling 
A prognostics model employing machine learning can be 
developed for predicting a Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) 
and considering sustainability aspects in decision-making, 
i.e., deciding when maintenance is economically viable, 
environmentally bearable and equitable compared to reuse, 
remanufacture or recycle [55]. In this scenario, batch 
processing is used, and for instance Apache Hadoop or Spark 
are possible data processing options. For data storage, HBase 
would be a good choice.  
The main idea of predicting remaining useful lifetime is to 
build a machine learning model for normal and failure events 
based on one or more features, which are in this case failure 
predicting variables, such as rising temperature or unusual 
vibration. The analysis results help to decide between the 
reuse, remanufacture or recycling activities in order to 
maintain both economic and environmental value of the tools 
or their parts as high as possible. In addition, the tool usage 
data collected with sensors and the user feedback can be 
analysed to improve future product design and performance. 
IoT and cloud computing creates visibility and intelligence 
into assets. As described in Section II, this intelligence can be 
knowledge of the location, condition or availability of the 
tools. Table III lists the envisioned services according to their 
intelligence categories as introduced in [7]. 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
IoT technologies and digitalization in general enable novel 
business models based on CE, offering a significant potential 
to disrupt current prevailing linear business models [56]. As a 
case study to evaluate the hypothesis, we presented an 
instance of a CE tool rental service and outlined a scenario 
suggesting the possible future of the concept.  
A. Discussion 
Tool sharing itself is not a totally novel idea and for 
instance city of Toronto has a tool library [57]. The Toronto 
tool library is a centralized warehouse where people can store 
and share their tools to the local neighborhood with an annual 
membership payment. The novelty of our tool rental service 
lies on more advanced use of technology. The envisioned tool 
rental service scenario uses sensors, networking, cloud 
computing, and data analytics for selling services instead of 
goods, for designing products for regeneration and for 
creating added value through services. Generally, offering 
services instead of selling goods reduces the environmental 
footprint of product manufacturing and the private ownership 
of goods. The target of this study was to awake discussion 
among companies on how to create CE business by employing 
digital data, IoT and cloud computing. 
Organizing and managing the growing amount of data 
from increasing number of sources is crucial for a successful 
novel CE service. A notable data analytics challenge is related 
to heterogeneous data sources and extracting data from 
different data storage locations in large scale. The chosen 
methods need to overcome variety, heterogeneity and noise of 
the data.  Data storage is required to be highly robust and 
resilient to failures. Using the available data to a maximum 
benefit requires a comprehensive understanding of the 
meaning, behavior, and relations of the data. Data mining is  
typically a human-operated process, where the data is 
explored by supervised or unsupervised methods, aiming to 
gain understanding and to find patterns or models that can lead 
to a business advantage. Acquired models can then be 
deployed to automatically process the dedicated part of the 
data stream or storage. 
Our current database implementation is centralized but 
multidisciplinary colloboration towards more circular  
businesses could beneftit from the use of decentralized 
databases. Blockchain technology is a decentralized database 
that allows for the chronological recording and secure storage 
of transaction data. Blockchains can be used to register tool 
rentals and transfers between tool renters making system more 
transparent and increasing trust. Even though blockchains 
provide pseudonymity meaning that transactions are 
transparent but not explicitly connected to individuals, 
sensitive information should not be shared [58].  
When applying IoT and cloud computing in real-world 
implementations information security must always be 
considered. Information security and privacy procedures, in 
terms of data integrity, access control, and system availability, 
need to be in place to protect the information and service 
provisioning of relevant actors [18]. Moreover, the scenario 
raises questions about who owns the created data, on which 
terms the data can be shared with others, and what kind of 
legislation should be in place to prevent the sharing of 
sensitive data. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is 
an EU wide regulation for data privacy that aims to protect all 
EU citizens’ personal data and regulate the international 
business related to the personal data [59]. Before the 
99
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

commercial implementation of the envisioned services, 
considerations regarding data protection and privacy must be 
done according to the GDPR. All personal data must be 
protected, stored and processed appropriately. 
In order to create future services that are increasingly 
capable of adapting to the user and the surrounding external 
conditions, development in technologies enabling learning 
from data have become pivotal. The users are individuals, 
whose needs and preferences vary. The service provider 
operates on a large population, but gains an advantage from 
being able to adapt to the user and threat each one 
individually. There are several use cases in CE, where 
machine learning could be applied in general. Related to the 
service addressed in this study, the most potential usages 
include detecting the user preferences in current context in 
order to guide suitable actions for the user, and modeling 
different types of users having varying types of purchase 
behavior. As an additional benefit, adapting to the user 
enables targeting marketing or commercials for the user based 
on their past behavior. Predicting product demand highly 
accurately becomes feasible, which facilitates further cost 
savings. Moreover, AI and machine learning methods present 
a considerable prospect in materials and products process flow 
optimization, which becomes especially crucial when the 
system is scaled up. 
B. Limitations and future work 
As in every research, there are some noteworthy 
limitations with this study. The scenario planning has been 
qualitative and it includes researchers’ and interviewees’ 
subjective interpretation. The previous study [48] examined 
the utility of the Liiteri tool rental service and the results 
indicated that renting could be an attractive choice to 
consumers, if crucial consumer expectations are identified and 
met. This attitude change is partly attributable to technological 
improvements, such as widespread digital cloud platforms, 
which make sharing of goods easier. On the other hand, 
especially young people prefer services to ownership of 
goods. 
In order to proceed towards commercial utilization of the 
presented concept, further work on the IoT-enabled tool rental 
service scenario includes addressing multiple technical, 
usability, and profitability aspects, in addition to the 
environmental viewpoint. The main technological challenges 
include the overall cost-efficient logistics on large scale, data 
security, interoperability of IoT sub-systems, and interface 
with the consumers. The usability of the service must meet or 
exceed the level of current modern competing e-commerce 
platforms. Overall, the business challenges are the same as for 
e-commerce and retail services in general. To be 
commercially viable, the service must maximize the user 
satisfaction and minimize the costs through intelligent use of 
digital technologies.  
Future work needs to evaluate which parts of the system 
are efficient as automated, and which parts need to be 
managed by human operators for an optimal profitability, 
usability and security. The challenges and opportunities are 
similar as, for example, in Amazon’s automated grocery store 
recently deployed within their office building. The store relies 
on cameras and sensors to detect what shoppers take from the 
shelves, and what they put back. Cash registers become 
largely obsolete, as customers are billed after leaving the store 
using credit cards, based on the virtual shopping cart collected 
while physically shopping. 
Full examination is needed on the types of products that 
provide most benefit from the CE service concept in terms of 
environmental benefit. Moreover, next steps of future research 
endeavours could focus on implementation of a next 
generation IoT-enabled CE service for a larger group of 
people, with the systematic collection of consumer 
experiences for further service improvement.  
Despite the various remaining challenges, there is a 
growing amount of consumers that see the environmental 
friendliness as an added value factor. This could facilitate the 
accumulation of consumers in the early phases of 
development, towards ultimately better collaboration between 
the human use of technology and the environment.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been conducted as a part of the AARRE 
(Capitalising on Invisible Value – User-Driven Business 
Models in the Emerging Circular Economy) project. The 
authors would like to express their gratitude to the Green 
Growth Programme of Funding Agency Business Finland 
(formerly known as Tekes), the Technical Research Centre of 
Finland (VTT), the case companies and other parties involved 
in the AARRE project. In addition, the authors want to 
acknowledge the valuable contribution of the people who took 
part of this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Kallio, M. Antikainen and O. Kettunen, ”A tool rental 
service scenario - IoT technologies enabling a circular 
economy business model,” Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, 
Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOM), 2017 The 
Eleventh International Conference on, IARIA, Nov. 2017, pp. 
60-65. 
[2] Ellen Mac Arthur foundation, “Towards the Circular Economy 
vol 1: Economic and business rationale for an accelerated 
transition,” 2012. 
[3] J. Manyika, M. Chui, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, P. Bisson and A. 
Marrs, “Disruptive technologies: Advances will transform life, 
business, and the global economy,” McKinsey Global Institute, 
2016. 
[4] P. Ghisellini, C. Cialani and S. Ulgiati, "A review on circular 
economy: the expected transition to a balanced interplay of 
environmental and economic systems," Journal of Cleaner 
Production 
114, 
pp. 
11-32, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007.   
[5] A. Wijkman and S. Kristian, “The circular economy and 
benefits for society: Jobs and Climate Clear Winners in an 
Economy Based on Renewable Energy and resource 
Efficiency,” The Club of Rome Report, November 2015. 
[6] D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. De Pellegrini and I. Chlamtac, 
“Internet of things: Vision, applications and research 
challenges," Ad Hoc Networks 10(7), pp. 1497-1516, 2012, 
doi:10.1016/j.adhoc.2012.02.016. 
[7] A. Morlet et al. “Intelligent assets: Unlocking the circular 
economy,” Ellen Mac Arthur foundation, 2016. 
100
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] J. Butterworth et al. “Towards the Circular Economy vol 3: 
accelerating the scale-up across global supply chains,” Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2014. 
[9] D. A. R. George, B. C. Lin and Y. Chen, "A circular economy 
model of economic growth," Environmental Modelling & 
Software 
73, 
pp. 
60-63, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.06.014.  
[10] A. Pagoropoulos, D. C. A. Pigosso and T. C. McAloone, ”The 
Emergent Role of Digital Technologies in the Circular 
Economy: A Review,” Procedia CIRP, 2017, pp. 19–24, doi: 
10.1016/j.procir.2017.02.047. 
[11] H. Kagermann, “Change Through Digitization—Value 
Creation in the Age of Industry 4.0,” Manag. Perm. Chang., 
Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp. 23–45, 
2015, doi:10.1007/978-3-658-05014-6_2. 
[12] V. Salminen, H. Ruohomaa and J. Kantola, ”Digitalization and 
big data supporting responsible business co-evolution,” Adv. 
Intell. Syst. Comput., vol. 498, Springer, Cham, pp. 1055–67, 
2017. 
[13] H. Wilts and H. Berg, “The digital circular economy: can the 
digital transformation pave the way for resource-efficient 
materials cycles?,” International Journal of Environmental 
Science & Natural Resources, 7(5), pp. 1-4, 2017, 
doi:10.19080/IJESNR.2017.07.555725. 
[14] M. E. Porter and J. E. Heppelmann, “How smart, connected 
products are transforming competition,” Harvard Business 
Review, 92(11), pp. 64-88, 2014. 
[15] M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” IEEE 
pervasive computing, 1(1), pp. 19-25, 2002. 
[16] J. Greenough. “The Internet of everything 2016,” BI 
Intelligence, 2016. 
[17] J. Fraden, Handbook of modern sensors: physics, designs, and 
applications, Springer Science & Business Media, 2015. 
[18] R. Roman, J. Zhou, and J. Lopez, “On the features and 
challenges of security and privacy in distributed internet of 
things”, Computer Networks, 57(10), pp. 2266-2279, 2013, 
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2012.12.018. 
[19] The 
IPv6 
Forum 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ipv6forum.com/ 2018.05.29. 
[20] N. Kaur and S. Monga, “Comparisons of wired and wireless 
networks: A review,” International Journal of Advanced 
Engineering Technology, V(II), pp. 34-35, 2014. 
[21] Bluetooth, “A look at the basics of Bluetooth technology” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.bluetooth.com/Pages/Basics.aspx 2018.05.31. 
[22] NearFieldCommunication.org 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://nearfieldcommunication.org/  2018.05.29. 
[23] R. Want, “An introduction to RFID technology,” IEEE 
Pervasive Computing, 5(1), pp.  25-33, 2006, doi: 
10.1109/MPRV.2006.2. 
[24] Wi-Fi Alliance [Online]. Available from: http://www.wi-
fi.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[25] ZigBee [Online]. Available from: htpp://www.zigbee.org/ 
2018.05.31. 
[26] LoRa Alliance [Online]. Available from: https://www.lora-
alliance.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[27] WiMAX 
Forum 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://wimaxforum.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[28] D. E. Comer, Computer networks and internets, Pearson, 2015. 
[29] J. Latvakoski, A. Iivari, P. Vitic, B. Jubeh, M. B. Alaya, T. 
Monteil and M. Kellil, ”A Survey on M2M Service Networks. 
Computers,” 
3(4), 
pp. 
130-173, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.3390/computers3040130. 
[30] D. Feng, C. Jiang, G. Lim, L. J.Cimini, G. Feng and G. Y. Li, 
“A survey of energy-efficient wireless communications,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 15(1), pp. 167-178, 
2012, doi: 10.1109/SURV.2012.020212.00049. 
[31] V. Karagiannis, P. Chatzimisios, F. Vazquez-Gallego and J. 
Alonso-Zarate, “A survey on application layer protocols for the 
internet of things,” Transaction on IoT and Cloud Computing, 
3(1), pp. 11-17, 2015. 
[32] J. Mineraud, O. Mazhelis, X. Su and S. Tarkoma, “A gap 
analysis 
of 
Internet-of-Things 
platforms,” 
Computer 
Communications, 
89, 
pp. 
 
5-16, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.comcom.2016.03.015. 
[33] M. Díaz, C. Martín and B. Rubio, "State-of-the-art, challenges, 
and open issues in the integration of Internet of things and 
cloud computing,” Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications, 
67, 
pp. 
99-117, 
May 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jnca.2016.01.010. 
[34]  S. Satyadevan,  B. S. Kalarickal and M. K. Jinesh, “Security, 
trust and implementation limitations of prominent IoT 
platforms,” proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on 
Frontiers of Intelligent Computing: Theory and Applications 
(FICTA), Springer, Cham, 2015, pp. 85-95, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-12012-6_10. 
[35] D. Pyle, Data preparation for data mining (Vol. 1), Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1999. 
[36] Apache 
Hadoop 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://hadoop.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[37] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “MapReduce: simplified data 
processing on large clusters”, Communications of the ACM, 
51(1), pp. 107-113, 2008, doi: 10.1145/1327452.1327492. 
[38] Apache 
Spark 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://spark.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[39] Apache 
Samza 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://samza.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[40] Apache 
Storm 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://storm.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[41] Apache 
Flink 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://flink.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[42] Apache 
Cassandra 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://cassandra.apache.org/ 2018.05.29. 
[43] Apache 
HBase 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://hbase.apache.org/  2018.05.29. 
[44] T. H. Davenport, “Competing on Analytics,” Harward 
Business review, 84(1), p. 98, 2016. 
[45] R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell and T. M. Mitchell, eds. 
Machine learning: An artificial intelligence approach, Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2013. 
[46] S. Theodoridis and K. Koutroumbas, Pattern recognition, 
Fourth Edition. Elsevier, 2009. 
[47] J. Pearl, Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: 
networks of plausible interference, Elsevier, 2014. 
[48] M. Antikainen, M. Lammi and H. Paloheimo, “Creating value 
for consumers in CE - Tools as a service,” The XXVIII ISPIM 
Innovation Conference (ISPIM), June 2017, p. 1-12. 
[49] Liiteri [Online]. Available from: http://www.liiteri.net/ 
2018.05.29.. 
[50] CoReorient 
website 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.coreorient.com/ 2018.05.29. 
[51] Piggy 
Paggy 
Beta 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.piggybaggy.com/ 2018.05.29. 
[52] P. Kriz, F. Maly and T. Kozel, “Improving indoor localization 
using bluetooth low energy beacons,” Mobile Information 
Systems, pp. 1-11, April 2016, doi: 10.1155/2016/2083094. 
[53] J. Potts  and S. Sukittanon, “Exploiting Bluetooth on Android 
mobile devices for home security application,” Southeastcon 
2012, 
 
IEEE, 
2012. 
pp. 
1-4, 
doi: 
10.1109/SECon.2012.6197001. 
101
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[54] A. K. Jardine, D. Lin and D. Banjevic, “A review on machinery 
diagnostics and prognostics implementing condition-based 
maintenance,” Mechanical systems and signal processing, 
20(7), 
pp. 
1483-1510, 
2006, 
doi:  
10.1016/j.ymssp.2005.09.012. 
[55] B. Iung and E. Levrat, “Advanced maintenance services for 
promoting sustainability,” Procedia CIRP, 22, pp. 15-22, 2014,  
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2014.07.018. 
[56] M. Antikainen, M. Lammi and T. Hakanen, ”Consumer service 
innovation in a circular economy – the customer value 
perspective,” 
The 
4th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Serviceology (ICServ2016), September 2016. 
[57] Toronto 
Tool 
Library 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://torontotoollibrary.com/ 2018.05.29. 
[58] P. Boucher, S. Nascimenco and M. Kritikos, “How Blockchain 
Technology Could Change Our Lives: In-depth Analysis,” 
European Parliament, 2017. 
[59] The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) Portal 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.eugdpr.org/ 
2018.05.29. 
 
 
102
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

