79
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Beneﬁts of Virtual Network Topology Control
based on Attractor Selection in WDM Networks
Yuki Minami∗, Yuki Koizumi∗, Shin’ichi Arakawa∗, Takashi Miyamura†, Kohei Shiomoto† and Masayuki Murata∗
∗Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Osaka University
Osaka 565-0871, Japan
{y-minami, ykoizumi, arakawa, murata}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
†NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories
NTT Corporation
Tokyo 180-8585, Japan
{miyamura.takashi, shiomoto.kohei}@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract—Virtual Network Topology (VNT) is one efﬁcient
way to transfer IP packets over wavelength-routed optical net-
works. In recent years various new services have emerged, and
IP trafﬁc has been highly ﬂuctuated. Therefore, adaptability
against changes of trafﬁc is one of the most important char-
acteristics to accommodate the IP trafﬁc efﬁciently. To achieve
the adaptability, we have proposed a VNT control method
using an attractor selection model. In this paper, we investigate
the adaptability of our VNT control method via computer
simulations. Simulation results on various physical topologies
indicate that our VNT control method can successfully adapt
to changes of trafﬁc around twice higher variance comparing
with conventional VNT control methods. We also demonstrate
that our VNT control method achieves one-tenth of control
duration.
Keywords-WDM; Virtual Topology Control; Virtual Topol-
ogy Reconﬁguration; Attractor Selection; Internet Protocol;
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid growth in the number of users and in the
number of multimedia services is dramatically increasing
trafﬁc volume on the Internet. Wavelength division multi-
plexing (WDM) offers high-capacity data transmission by
multiplexing optical signals into a ﬁber. With the optical
cross-connects (OXCs) that switches the optical signals in
all-optical domain offers the wavelength-routing. That is,
sets of optical transport channels, called lightpaths, are
established between nodes. Since the Internet protocol (IP)
is emerging as a dominant technology, the ability to carry the
IP trafﬁc efﬁciently is an important issue to enjoy the WDM-
based optical networks. One approach to accommodate IP
trafﬁc on WDM networks is to conﬁgure a virtual network
topology (VNT), which consists of lightpaths and IP routers,
through the wavelength-routing.
Many approaches to accommodate trafﬁc demand by con-
ﬁguring VNTs have been investigated. One of approaches
is that VNTs are statically constructed to efﬁciently ac-
commodate one or multiple trafﬁc demand matrices [2–5].
These approaches inherently assume that the trafﬁc demand
matrices are available before the VNT is constructed or
assume that changes in the trafﬁc demand matrices are pre-
dictable. However, the approaches cannot efﬁciently handle
unexpected changes in trafﬁc demand matrices since VNTs
are conﬁgured for a certain set of trafﬁc demand matrices.
For example, the emergence of new services, such as peer-
to-peer networks, voice over IP, and video on demand causes
large ﬂuctuations on trafﬁc demand in networks [6], which
makes the existing VNT control mechanisms insufﬁcient to
accommodate the trafﬁc demand. Koizumi et. al [7] points
out that, when there are overlay networks on top of the
network controlled by the VNT control mechanism, trafﬁc
demand ﬂuctuates greatly and changes in trafﬁc demand
are unpredictable. Therefore, VNT control methods that are
adaptive to the trafﬁc changes become important to avoid
trafﬁc congestions and to use network resources efﬁciently.
Recently, the dynamic VNT control that dynamically
reconﬁgures VNTs based on their detection of degraded
performance or periodic measurements of the network status
without a priori knowledge of future trafﬁc demand has been
proposed [8,9]. In Ref. [8], the authors propose VNT control
by assuming that trafﬁc demand is changing gradually with
a period of more than several hours. The method rely on the
trafﬁc demand matrices, and therefore the method cannot ap-
ply to VNT controls with short intervals of reconﬁgurations
since trafﬁc demand matrices is difﬁcult to obtain with in
a short period of time. In Ref. [9], the authors consider an
hour-order trafﬁc change and propose a VNT control method
to adapt to the change. The method measures the trafﬁc
volume on each lightpath for short period and reconﬁgures
VNT by using trafﬁc demand matrices estimated from the
measurement. The VNT control method again relies on
the trafﬁc demand matrices and the authors therefore try
to estimate the trafﬁc demand matrices more accurately.
However, it requires several trafﬁc measurements to estimate
the trafﬁc demand matrix. Thus the method cannot estimate
trafﬁc demand matrices correctly with a short period of time,

80
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and cannot be applied when the trafﬁc demand is highly
ﬂuctuated.
We therefore developed a VNT control method that is
adaptive against changes in network environment without
using trafﬁc demand matrices [10, 11]. Our method uses
an attractor selection that models behavior where living
organisms adapt to unknown changes in their surrounding
environments and recover their conditions. The fundamental
concept underlying the attractor selection is that a system is
driven by stochastic and deterministic behavior, and these
are controlled by simple feedback of current condition.
This characteristic is one of the most important differences
between the attractor selection and other existing heuristic
algorithms and optimization approaches. Our method mea-
sures only the trafﬁc load on each lightpath (hereafter, we
call the trafﬁc load as link utilization). The quantity of
information on the link utilization is less than that obtained
from trafﬁc demand matrices, but information about the link
utilization is retrieved directly using, for example, SNMP
(Simple Network Management Protocol).
Koizumi et al. [10,11] demonstrated that the VNT control
based on attractor selection could reconﬁgure VNT with
fast reaction and adaptation against changes in trafﬁc de-
mand. However, the simulation conditions are limited. In
their simulation, they used a 19-node physical topology
and evaluate with the randomly changing trafﬁc demand.
In the paper, only the concept of VNT control based on
attractor selection was demonstrated, and did not understand
well for the beneﬁt of the method against the existing
heuristic VNT control methods. In this paper, we evaluate
the adaptability of the VNT control method against unknown
and/or unexpected changes in surrounding environments and
the range of network resource amount the method needs. We
conduct simulations with various changes in trafﬁc demand
and physical topologies, and quantitatively show that the
VNT control method can adapt to more various trafﬁc
changes than the existing heuristic methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II shows our network model. Section III brieﬂy explains
attractor selection and Section IV brieﬂy explains our VNT
control based on attractor selection. Section V shows the
evaluation results and the performance our VNT control
method. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section VI.
II. NETWORK MODEL AND RELATED WORKS
In this section, we describe the network model that we will
use for the VNT conﬁguration. Each node in the physical
topology has IP routers and OXCs (Figure 1) and nodes are
connected with optical ﬁbers (Figure 2). The OXCs consist
of three main blocks: input section, non-blocking optical
switches, and output section. In the input section, optical
signals are demultiplexed into W ﬁxed wavelengths. Then,
each wavelength is transferred to an appropriate output port
by the non-blocking optical switch. Finally, at the output
Figure 1.
Node architecture
Figure 2.
WDM network
section, each wavelength is multiplexed again and sent to
the next node. By conﬁguring the switches along a path, a
lightpath is conﬁgured and a particular wavelength is carried
from a transmitter at a node to a receiver at the other node
without any electronic processing.
VNT is then constituted by setting up lightpaths on top
of the physical topology (Figure 3). The actual trafﬁc of
the upper layer protocol, such as the IP, is carried on the
constructed VNT. When a lightpath terminates at this node,
the IP packets on the lightpath are converted to electrical sig-
nals and forwarded to the electronic router. When a lightpath
begins at this node, IP packets from the electronic router are
transmitted over the lightpath after being converted to optical
signals. If lightpath is conﬁgured between all node-pairs, we
do not need IP’s packet processing in the VNTs. However,
since the number of transmitters/receivers is limited, we
should properly conﬁgure and reconﬁgure VNT.
In recent years, GMPLS (Generalized Multi-Protocol La-
bel Switching), that is the technology to set and release
lightpaths constructing VNT, is standardizing [12]. While
international standard is being developed, advances in op-

81
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3.
VNT conﬁguration in IP-over-WDM network
tical technologies, such as optical switch with fast switching
time, adaptability against changes of trafﬁc demand becomes
one of the important characteristics for the VNT controls.
For example, in Ref. [8], authors try to keep the link
utilizations between an upper limit and a lower limit against
the trafﬁc that grows during peak hours and falls during
off-peak hours. The approach is different from previous
studies that redesign the virtual topology according to an
obtained trafﬁc demand matrix through trafﬁc measurements
[4]. Ohsita et al. developed a VNT control method with an
estimation of trafﬁc demand matrices, and show that the
method works with an hour-order trafﬁc change [9]. More
recently, Koizumi et al. demonstrated a VNT control based
on the attractor selection model, which does not use the
trafﬁc demand matrix for VNT controls and thus achieves
more shorter intervals of VNT reconﬁgurations [10,11].
III. ATTRACTOR SELECTION
We ﬁrst explain an attractor selection model that describes
biological activities in a cell. The model is developed for
a cell biology and please refer to Ref. [13] to understand
the biological context of the model. This section explains
an overview of attractor selection model, which will be use
to explain the VNT control based on the attractor selection
model in Section IV.
A. Outline of Attractor Selection
The attractor selection model represents metabolic reac-
tions controlled by gene regulatory networks in a cell. Figure
4 illustrates a schematic representation in a cell. Each gene
in the gene regulatory network has an expression level of
proteins and deterministic and stochastic behaviors in each
gene control the expression level. An attractor selection
model is consists of regulatory behaviors having attractor
which is determined by activation and inhibition between
each genes, growth rate as feedback of the current condition
of the network, and noise, which is stochastic behavior.
Attractors are a part of the equilibrium points in the
solution space in which the current condition is preferable.
The basic mechanism of an attractor selection consists of two
behaviors: deterministic and stochastic behaviors. When the
current condition is suitable for the current environment, i.e.,
the system state is close to one of the attractors, deterministic
behavior drives the system to the attractor.
When the current condition is poor, stochastic behavior
dominates over deterministic behavior. While stochastic be-
havior is dominant in controlling the system, the system
state ﬂuctuates randomly due to noise and the system
searches for a new attractor. When the current condition has
recovered and the system state comes close to an attractor,
deterministic behavior again controls the system. These two
behaviors are controlled by simple feedback of the current
condition in the system. In this way, attractor selection
adapts to environmental changes by selecting attractors
using stochastic behavior, deterministic behavior, and simple
feedback. In the following section, we introduce attractor
selection that models the behavior of gene regulatory and
metabolic reaction networks in a cell.
Figure 4.
Networks in a cell

82
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Mathematical Model of Attractor Selection
The internal state of a cell is represented by a set of
expression levels of proteins on n genes, (x1, x2, ..., xn), and
concentrations of m metabolic substrates, (y1, y2, ..., ym). The
dynamics of the expression level of the protein of the i-th
gene, xi, is described as
dxi
dt = f

n
∑
j=1
Wijx j − θ
 · vg − ·xivg + η
(1)
The ﬁrst and second terms at the right hand side represent
the deterministic behavior of gene i, and the third term
represents stochastic behavior.
In the ﬁrst term, the regulation of protein expression levels
on gene i by other genes are indicated by regulatory matrix
Wij, which takes 1, 0, or － 1, corresponding to activation,
no regulatory interaction, and inhibition of the i-th gene by
the j-th gene. The rate of increase in the expression level
is given by the sigmoidal regulation function, f(z) = 1/(1 +
e − µz), where z = ΣWi jx j − θ is the total regulatory input
with threshold θ for increasing xi, and µ indicates the gain
parameter of the sigmoid function.
The second term represents the rate of decrease in the
expression level on gene i. This term means that the expres-
sion level decreases depending on the current expression
level. The last term, η, represents molecular ﬂuctuations,
which is Gaussian white noise. Noise η is independent
of production and consumption terms and its amplitude is
constant. The change in expression level xi is determined
by deterministic behavior and stochastic behavior η. The
deterministic and stochastic behaviors are controlled by
growth rate vg, which represents the conditions of the
metabolic reaction network. In the metabolic reaction net-
work, metabolic reactions, which are internal inﬂuences,
and the transportation of substrates from the outside of the
cell, which is an external inﬂuence, determine the changes
in concentrations of metabolic substrates yi. The metabolic
reactions are catalyzed by proteins on corresponding genes.
The expression level decides the strength of catalysis. A
large expression level accelerates the metabolic reaction
and a small expression level suppresses it. In other words,
the gene regulatory network controls the metabolic reaction
network through catalyses. Some metabolic substrates are
necessary for cellular growth. Growth rate vg is determined
as an increasing function of the concentrations of these
vital substrates. The gene regulatory network uses vg as the
feedback of the conditions on the metabolic reaction network
and controls deterministic and stochastic behaviors. If the
concentrations of the required substrates decrease due to
changes in the concentrations of nutrient substrates outside
the cell, vg also decreases. By decreasing vg, the effects
that the ﬁrst and second terms have on the dynamics of
xi decrease, and the effects of η increase relatively. Thus,
xi ﬂuctuates randomly and the gene regulatory network
searches for a new attractor. The ﬂuctuations in xi lead to
changes in the rate of metabolic reactions via the catalyses
of proteins.
When the concentrations of the required substrates again
increase, vg also increases. Then, the ﬁrst and second terms
again dominate the dynamics of xi over stochastic behavior,
and the system converges to the state of the attractor. In
next section, we describe our VNT control method based
on attractor selection.
IV. VNT CONTROL BASED ON ATTRACTOR SELECTION
In this section, we brieﬂy explain VNT control methods
based on attractor selection. Attractors are a part of the
equilibrium points in the solution space in which the current
condition is preferable. In our VNT control method, we
regard the attractor as VNT, and then select it based on the
attractor selection model.
A. VNT Control Method
In the cell, the gene regulatory network controls the
metabolic reaction network, and the growth rate, which is
the status of the metabolic reaction network, is recovered
when the growth rate is degraded due to changes in the
environment. In our VNT control method, the main objective
is to recover the performance of the IP network by appro-
priately constructing VNT when performance is degraded
due to changes in trafﬁc demand. Therefore, we interpret
the gene regulatory network as a WDM network and the
metabolic reaction network as an IP network (Figure 5).
Outline of our VNT control method is as follows:
Step. 1 Measure the link utilization via SNMP (Simple
Network Management Protocol).
Step. 2 Determine growth rate from the link utilization.
Growth rate express if IP network is in good condi-
tion or not. We describe detail of how to determine
growth rate in Section II-C. Note that the degree of
inﬂuence of deterministic behaviors and stochastic
behaviors is determined by the growth rate.
Figure 5.
VNT control based on the attractor selection

83
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Step. 3 The number of lightpaths is determined based on
the expression level of each gene. Then, the VNT is
reconﬁgured. We describe how to decide the number
of lightpaths in Section II-C.
Step. 4 Transfer the IP trafﬁc over the newly constructed
VNT. Consequently the link utilization changes
again, so we repeat these steps again.
B. Interaction in VNT Control
This section describes our VNT control method in detail.
We consider the dynamical system that is driven by the at-
tractor selection. We place genes on every source-destination
pair (denote pij for nodes i and j) in the WDM network, and
the expression level of the genes xpij determines the number
of lightpaths on between nodes i and j. To avoid confusion,
we refer to genes placed on the network as control units and
expression levels as control values. The dynamics of xpi j is
deﬁned by the following differential equation,
dxpij
dt
=
vg · f

∑
psd
W(pij, psd) · xpsd − θpij

−vg · xpij + η
(2)
where η represents Gaussian white noise, f is the sigmoidal
regulation function, and vg is the growth rate. vg indicates
the condition of the IP network.
The number of lightpaths between node pair pij is deter-
mined according to value xpij. We assign more lightpaths to
a node pair that has a high control value than a node pair
that has a low control value. θpij in the sigmoidal regulation
function f is the threshold value to control the number of
lightpaths.
The regulatory matrix W represents relations of the ac-
tivation and inhibition between control units. Each element
in the regulatory matrix, denoted as W(pij, psd), represents
the relation between node pair pij and psd. The value of
W(pij, psd) takes a positive number αA, zero, or a negative
number αI, each corresponding to activation, no relation, and
inhibition of the control unit on pij by the control unit on
psd. For example, if the lightpath on pij is activated by that
on psd, increasing xpsd leads to increasing xij. That is, node
pair psd increases the number of lightpaths on pij in our
VNT control method. In our method, we deﬁne αA as αA =
1.08N/NA, αI as αI = 1.08N/NI, where N is the number
of control units, NA is the number of control units that
is activated, and NI is the number of control units that is
inhibited.
We consider three motivations for deﬁning the regulatory
matrix in WDM networks. First, when we assign a new
lightpath to detour trafﬁc from node i to j for substitute
of another lightpath, the trafﬁc passing from node i to j will
be transmitted by the new lightpath. Therefore, the control
units on each node pair along the route of the lightpath
from node i to j activate the control unit on pij. Next, we
consider the situation where a path on the IP network uses
the lightpaths on pij and psd. In this case, some trafﬁc on
pij is also transported on psd. If the number of lightpaths on
pij is increased, the number of lightpaths on psd should also
be increased to transport IP trafﬁc efﬁciently. Therefore, the
control units on pij and psd activate each other. Finally, we
consider the situation that node pairs share a certain ﬁber.
Here, if the number of lightpaths on one node pair increases,
the number of lightpaths on the other node pairs should
decrease because of limitations on wavelengths. Therefore,
the control unit on pi j is inhibited by the control unit on psd
if lightpaths between these node pairs share the same ﬁber.
The growth rate indicates the current condition of the
IP network, and the WDM network seeks to optimize the
growth rate. In our VNT control method, we use the maxi-
mum link utilization on the IP network as a metric that indi-
cates the current condition of the IP network. To retrieve the
maximum link utilization, we collect the trafﬁc volume on
all links and select their maximum value. This information
is easily and directly retrieved by SNMP. Hereafter, we will
refer to the growth rate deﬁned in our VNT control method
as activity. Figure 6 indicates the function determining the
activity. The activity must be an increasing function for the
goodness of the current condition of networks. We therefore
convert the maximum link utilization on the IP network,
umax, into the activity, vg, by the following equation.
vg =
{
γ
1+exp(δ·(umax−ζ))
if umax ≥ ζ
γ
1+exp(δ′·(umax−ζ))
if umax < ζ
(3)
Here, γ is the parameter that scales vg and δ represents the
gradient of this function. The constant number, ζ, is the
threshold for the activity. If the maximum link utilization
is more than threshold ζ, the activity approaches 0 due to
the poor condition of the IP network. Then, the dynamics of
our VNT control method is governed by noise and search
for a new attractor. If the maximum link utilization is less
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
Activity
Maximum link utilization
Figure 6.
Activity function

84
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
than ζ, we increase the activity. Then the system is driven
by deterministic behavior and the system will be stable.
C. The Number of Lightpaths
The number of lightpaths between node pair pij is calcu-
lated from xpij that is the expression level of gene placed for
pij. To simplify the model of our VNT control method, we
assume that the number of wavelengths on optical ﬁbers will
be sufﬁcient and the number of transmitters and receivers of
optical signals will restrict the number of lightpaths between
node pairs. Each node has PR receivers and PT transmitters.
We assign transmitters and receivers to lightpaths between
pij based on xpi j normalized by the total control values for
all the node pairs that use the transmitters or the receivers
on node i or j. The number of lightpaths between pij, Gpij,
is determined as
Gpij = min
(
⌊PR ·
xpij
∑
s xpsj
⌋, ⌊PT ·
xpij
∑
d xpid
⌋
)
(4)
Since we adopt the ﬂoor function for converting real num-
bers to integers, each node has residual transmitters and
receivers. We assign one lightpath in descending order of
xpij while the constraint on the number of transmitters and
receivers is satisﬁed. Note that other constraints derived from
physical resources can easily be considered for determining
Gpij. For instance, when we pose a constraint on the number
of wavelengths on ﬁbers, we assign wavelengths on ﬁbers
through which the lightpath passes based on xpij normalized
by the sum of expression levels on the corresponding ﬁber.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We next evaluate the adaptability of our VNT control
method against changes of trafﬁc demand via computer
simulations. For comparison purpose, we ﬁrst introduce an
existing heuristic method in Section V-A and then present
some simulation results.
A. Existing Heuristic Method
Ref. [8] proposed a heuristic VNT control method, which
we will refer to “ADAPTATION”. ADAPTATION aims at
achieving adaptability against changes in trafﬁc demand.
This method reconﬁgures VNTs according to the link
utilization and the trafﬁc demand matrix. ADAPTATION
has a lower limit and an upper limit for link utilization
and reconﬁgure VNT to put link utilization in the region.
ADAPTATION measures the actual link utilization every 5
minutes and adds a new lightpath to the current VNT when
congestion occurs. This method places a new lightpath on
the node pair with the highest trafﬁc demand among all node
pairs that use the congested link.
ADAPTATION uses the information of trafﬁc demand
matrix to identify the node pair that has the largest trafﬁc
demand. However, collecting the information of trafﬁc de-
mand matrix is difﬁcult in general because measurements of
individual ﬂows in a real-time manner are required. In this
paper, we use the tomogravity method [14] that estimates
the trafﬁc demand matrix based on the information of link
utilization, and we apply the estimated trafﬁc demand matrix
to the ADAPTATION. Note that both our VNT control
method and ADAPTATION use only the information of link
utilization that we can get easily by SNMP to calculate the
activity of the IP network, but our VNT control method does
not estimate the trafﬁc demand matrix.
B. Simulation Conditions
We use the European Optical Network (EON) topology
as shown as shown in Figure 7. The EON topology has
19 nodes and 39 bidirectional ﬁbers. Each node has eight
transmitters and eight receivers.
We focus on changes in trafﬁc demand in the IP network
as the environmental changes. For the evaluation, we prepare
the trafﬁc demand matrices where trafﬁc demand from node
i to j, dij, follows a lognormal distribution. We set the
variance of logarithm of dij to be σ2 and with the mean
to be 1. Then, we change the σ2 to evaluate the adaptability
against the changes of network environments. Each trafﬁc
demand matrix is normalized such that the total amount of
trafﬁc, ∑
pij dpi j, is the same and is set to 10 in a unit of
bandwidth of lightpaths.
In the simulation, Our VNT control method collects
information about the link utilization every 5 minutes by
SNMP. The parameter settings of our VNT control method
are shown in Table I. η used in Equation 2 follows normal
distribution with variance of 0.2 and the mean of 0.
For the parameter settings for the ADAPTATION method,
we set the lower limit to 0.1 and the upper limit to 0.5.
ADAPTATION measures the actual link utilization every 5
minutes and control VNT in the simulation.
C. Simulation Results
We ﬁrst show the maximum link utilization dependent
on time in Figure 8. In obtaining the ﬁgure, we set σ2 to
Figure 7.
EON topology

85
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table I
PARAMETER SETTINGS OF OUR VNT CONTROL METHOD.
Name
Values
γ
100
δ
13
δ′
3
ζ
0.5
µ
1
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
Maximum link utilization
Time(Round)
Attractor
Adaptation
Figure 8.
Changes of maximum link utilization
2.0 and change the trafﬁc demand at time 500 by setting
the different value of random seed for dij. In both methods,
the maximum link utilizations gradually decrease after the
change of trafﬁc demand occurs, while our VNT control
method sharply decreases the maximum link utilization. In
the ﬁgure, our VNT control method successfully decreases
the maximum link utilization to be lower than 0.5, while the
ADAPTATION cannot decrease. We regard that the VNT
control is successful when the maximum link utilization is
decreased to less than 0.5. Otherwise the control is fail.
We evaluate the success rate of VNT reconﬁgurations by
changing the parameter σ2 from 0 to 2.4, and conducting
the simulation 100 times for each value of σ2. The results
are shown in Figure 9 where the horizontal axis represents
the value of σ2 and the vertical axis represents the average
of success rate.
We observe that our method achieves 100% success rate
when σ2 is less than 1.1. Comparing with the results of
the ADAPTATION method, our virtual topology control can
successfully adapt changes of trafﬁc demand around twice
higher variance comparing with the ADAPTATION method.
In both methods, the success rate more decreases as σ2
takes larger values. However, when σ2 is 2.4, the success
rate of our method is higher than 80%, while that of the
ADAPTATION method decreases signiﬁcantly.
We next discuss the control duration, deﬁned as the
time from when the trafﬁc change occurs to when the
maximum link utilization becomes less than 0.5. Figure
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Success rate
σ2
Attractor
Adaptation
Figure 9.
Success rate of VNT reconﬁgurations in EON topology
10 shows the average and 90% conﬁdence interval of the
control duration dependent on σ2. For calculating the control
duration, we use only the cases when VNT reconﬁgurations
are successful. We observe that our method achieves lower
control duration comparing with the ADAPTATION method.
As the σ2 increases, the difference between our method
and ADAPTATION method increases. Looking at the re-
sults when σ2 is 2.4, the averaged control duration of the
ADAPTATION method is 90 minutes, while the averaged
control duration of our method is only 30 minutes. More
importantly, the conﬁdence interval of the ADAPTATION is
wide: the interval ranges from 30 minutes to 150 minutes.
However, results of our method are ranging from 5 minutes
to 60 minutes.
A disadvantage of our method is shown in Figure 11.
The ﬁgure shows the maximum value of control durations.
When σ2 is 1.1 and 1.5, the control duration of our method
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Time until recovery
σ2
Attractor - average
Attractor - confidence interval
Adaptation - average
Adaptation - confidence interval
Figure 10.
Average and 90% conﬁdence interval of control duration in
EON topology

86
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is larger than that of the ADAPTATION method because
of the stochastic behavior of our method; the noise term in
Equation 2 does not work well in some cases. Note however
that the success rate of our method is higher than that of the
ADAPTATION method when σ2 is 1.1 and 1.5.
We next show the results of our method in the Abilene
topology (Figure 12). Figure 13 shows the success rate in
Abilene topology. We can see that our method achieves
100% success rate when σ2 is less than 2.0 and our method
keep high rate compared with ADAPTATION. Looking at
the Figure 14 that show the time until recovery, we again
observe that our method reconﬁgure the VNT with fast
reaction; the 90% conﬁdential interval ranges from 5 minutes
to 20 minutes.
We also conduct simulations for larger physical topol-
ogy having 100 node and 200 bidirectional ﬁbers that are
connected randomly. Results are summarized in Table II.
In the simulation, the total trafﬁc volume is set to 30 in
a unit of bandwidth of lightpaths. We also set the number
of transmitters/receivers on each node to be 24. With these
parameter settings, our method decreases the maximum link
utilization as shown in Figure 15 and the success rate is
higher than 90% as shown in Table II. Note that when the
number of transmitters/receivers is too small for the physical
topology, the number of attractors, i.e., the number of VNT
candidates, is also small. In this case, the VNT control based
on the attractor selection is difﬁcult to search for a new
attractor through a noise term in Equation 2.
To see the effect of number of transmitters/receivers more
clearly, we conduct a set of simulations for the EON topol-
ogy by changing the number of transmitters and receivers
and evaluate the success rate for each VNT control method.
We prepare three trafﬁc scenarios shown in Table III by
changing trafﬁc volume and σ2. In scenario 1, we set the
trafﬁc volume to the same as above simulation and σ2
to 1.0. In scenario 2, we set the trafﬁc volume to 1.5
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Time until recovery
σ2
Attractor - maximum
Adaptation - maximum
Figure 11.
The maximum control duration in EON topology
Figure 12.
Abilene topology
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Success rate
σ2
Attractor
Adaptation
Figure 13.
Success rate of VNT reconﬁgurations in Abilene topology
times larger than scenario 1, but use the same value for
σ2. For scenario 3, we increase both the trafﬁc volume
and the σ2. We generate a trafﬁc demand matrix based on
the parameters for each trafﬁc scenario and then evaluate
whether VNT control methods successfully adapt to the
trafﬁc demand. The other simulation conditions are the same
as the simulation conditions of the EON topology (See
Section V-B).
Table II
SUCCESS RATE OF VNT RECONFIGURATIONS IN 100-NODE TOPOLOGY
σ2
Success Rate
1.3
100
1.4
100
1.5
100
1.6
100
1.7
100
1.8
100
1.9
100
2.0
100
2.1
100
2.2
98
2.3
98
2.4
97

87
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Time until recovery
σ2
Attractor - average
Attractor - confidence interval
Adaptation - average
Adaptation - confidence interval
Figure 14.
Average and 90% conﬁdence interval of control duration in
Abilene topology
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
 900  1000
Maximum link utilization
Time(Round)
Figure 15.
Attractor - Changes maximum link utilization in 100-nodes
topology
Table IV summarizes the success rate of VNT reconﬁg-
urations. In the table, we introduce the results of MLDA
(Minimum-delay Logical topology Design Algorithm) [4]
which is a heuristic and centralized VNT control method
on the basis of a given trafﬁc demand matrix. MLDA
simply places lightpaths between nodes in descending order
of trafﬁc demand. We show the results of MLDA with
the actual trafﬁc demand matrix to see how transmitters
and receivers are effectively used in VNT control methods.
From the table, we observe that each VNT control method
Table III
THREE TRAFFIC SCENARIOS IN THE EON TOPOLOGY
Total trafﬁc volume (relative to Figure 9)
σ2
Scenario 1
1.0
2.0
Scenario 2
1.5
1.0
Scenario 3
1.5
2.0
have signiﬁcantly low success rate with the small number
of transmitters/receivers. This means that enough number
of transmitters/receivers is crucial for VNT controls in
changing network environments.
The beneﬁt of heuristic VNT control methods appears
with the small number of transmitters/receivers; ADAPTA-
TION and MLDA have a higher success rate than AT-
TRACTOR when the number of transmitters/receivers is 5
or 6 for trafﬁc scenario 1, but the differences are marginal.
More importantly, the beneﬁt of MLDA disappears as the
number of transmitters/receivers increases; the success rate
of ATTRACTOR and MLDA is mostly the same for trafﬁc
scenarios 1 and 2. Looking at the case of trafﬁc scenario 3,
we observe a disadvantage of MLDA. That is, the results of
MLDA show poor success rate comparing with the results
of ATTRACTOR. The reason is that when the variance of
trafﬁc demand matrix increases, the heuristic behind MLDA
fails. ADAPTATION has a much lower success rate than the
other VNT control methods due to the estimation error in
obtaining the trafﬁc demand matrix from the information of
link utilization.
In summary, heuristic VNT control methods based on
the trafﬁc demand matrices have a capability to obtain
good VNTs with the small number of transmitters/receivers.
Therefore, the heuristic VNT control methods are useful for
the network with gradual change in trafﬁc demand matrices.
However, for the network having large ﬂuctuations on trafﬁc
demand, enough number of transmitters/receivers is crucial.
With this case, our VNT control based on attractor selection
achieves good adaptability to the trafﬁc change and lower
control durations.
VI. CONCLUSION
Adaptability against changes of trafﬁc demand is one of
the important characteristics. In this paper, we evaluated
the adaptability of VNT control based on the attractor
selection. Simulation results with various physical topologies
and trafﬁc demand matrices showed that our VNT control
method could successfully adapt changes of trafﬁc around
twice higher variance comparing with existing heuristic
method. We also demonstrated that our VNT control method
achieves short control duration of VNT reconﬁguration in
most cases. We then evaluated the success rate with different
number of transmitters/receivers for three trafﬁc scenarios,
and compared our VNT control methods with existing two
heuristic VNT control methods. The results indicate that
existing methods have a higher success rate than our VNT
control method when the number of transmitters/receivers is
small, but its differences are marginal. To achieve an adap-
tive VNT controls to the changes of network environments,
enough number of transmitters/receivers is crucial. With this
case, our VNT control based on attractor selection achieves
good adaptability to the trafﬁc change and lower control
durations.

88
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table IV
SUCCESS RATE (IN PERCENTAGE)
Number of transmitters/receivers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
scenario 1 ATTRACTOR
0
0
0
0
6
12
52
89
96
scenario 1 ADAPTATION
0
0
0
0
7
23
30
37
51
scenario 1 MLDA
0
0
0
0
7
17
52
85
92
scenario 2 ATTRACTOR
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
82
100
scenario 2 ADAPTATION
0
0
0
0
0
2
8
18
32
scenario 2 MLDA
0
0
0
0
0
0
23
79
97
scenario 3 ATTRACTOR
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
44
96
scenario 3 ADAPTATION
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
7
scenario 3 MLDA
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
42
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly supported by SCOPE (Strategic Infor-
mation and Communications R&D Promotion Programme)
operated by Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communica-
tions of Japan and by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research
(B) 22300023 of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology in Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Minami, Y. Koizumi, S. Arakawa, T. Miyamura, K. Sh-
iomoto, and M. Murata, “Adaptive virtual network topology
control in WDM-based optical networks,” in Proceedings of
INTERNET 2010, pp. 49–54, Sept. 2010.
[2] S. Arakawa, M. Murata, and H. Miyahara, “Functional
partitioning for multi-layer survivability in IP over WDM
networks,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. 83,
pp. 2224–2233, Oct. 2000.
[3] N. Ghani and S. Wang, “On IP-over-WDM integration,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 38, pp. 72–84, Mar. 2000.
[4] R. Ramaswami, K. Sivarajan, I. Center, and Y. Heights,
“Design of logical topologies for wavelength-routed optical
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, vol. 14, pp. 840–851, June 1996.
[5] F. Ricciato, S. Salsano, A. Belmonte, and M. Listanti, “Off-
line conﬁguration of a MPLS over WDM network under time-
varying offered trafﬁc,” in Proceedings of INFOCOM, pp. 57–
65, June 2002.
[6] Y. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Gong, and D. Towsley, “On the
Interaction Between Overlay Routing and Underlay Routing,”
in Proceedings IEEE 24th Annual Joint Conference of the
IEEE Computer and Communications Societies (INFOCOM
2005), vol. 4, pp. 2543–2553, Mar. 2005.
[7] Y. Koizumi, S. Arakawa, and M. Murata, “Stability of virtual
network topology control for overlay routing services,” OSA
Journal of Optical Networking, vol. 7, pp. 704–719, July
2008.
[8] A. Gencata and B. Mukherjee, “Virtual-topology adaptation
for WDM mesh networks under dynamic trafﬁc,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 11, pp. 236–247, Apr. 2003.
[9] Y. Ohsita, T. Miyamura, S. Arakawa, S. Ata, E. Oki, K. Sh-
iomoto, and M. Murata, “Gradually reconﬁguring virtual
network topologies based on estimated trafﬁc matrices,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 18, pp. 177–
189, Feb. 2010.
[10] Y. Koizumi, T. Miyamura, S. Arakawa, E. Oki, K. Shiomoto,
and M. Murata, “Application of attractor selection to adaptive
virtual network topology control,” in Proceedings of BIONET-
ICS, pp. 1–8, Nov. 2008.
[11] Y. Koizumi, T. Miyamura, S. Arakawa, E. Oki, K. Shiomoto,
and M. Murata, “Robust virtual network topology control
based on attractor selection,” in Proceedings of ONDM,
pp. 123–128, Feb. 2009.
[12] K. Shiomoto, “Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-region
and multi-L.” RFC 5212, July 2008.
[13] C. Furusawa and K. Kaneko, “A generic mechanism for adap-
tive growth rate regulation,” PLoS Computational Biology,
vol. 4, p. e3, Jan. 2008.
[14] Y. Zhang, M. Roughan, N. Dufﬁeld, and A. Greenberg, “Fast
accurate computation of large-scale IP trafﬁc matrices from
link loads,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Re-
view, vol. 31, pp. 206–217, June 2003.

