An Intelligent Management System to Support Sustainable Urban Agriculture: the 
Case Study of the CIRC4FooD Platform 
 
Dimitra Tsiakou, Lucyna Łękawska-Andrinopoulou, Marios Palazis-Aslanidis, Vassilis Nousis, Georgios 
Tsimiklis, Maria Krommyda, Angelos Amditis, Evangelia Latsa 
Institute of Communication and Computer Systems, National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
email: dimitra.tsiakou@iccs.gr 
 
 
Abstract—The objective of this work is to improve the 
management of a vegetable garden through an Intelligent 
agriculture management system based on IoT, where the 
activities of a garden are handled through an online 
monitoring platform. The platform has been developed within 
the project ‘A circular economy inspired food production 
system’ (CIRC4FooD) as a part of the intelligent management 
system for the urban vegetable gardens, with the wider aim to 
engage the user and to promote and inform about circular 
economy and sustainable food systems. The CIRC4FooD 
integrated system consists of a garden equipped with a 
rainwater harvesting system, composting bin, and intelligent 
management system, namely the platform and incorporated 
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies: various sensors for soil 
and air parameters, rainwater tank and compost. The 
implementation of a dynamic rule engine consisting of three 
modules: i) environmental, ii) water tank, and iii) compost, 
allows the users to get notifications about any actions required 
or recommended from their side to keep the garden in proper 
condition, but also to assure environmental benefit (i.e., saving 
water resources by using harvested water, watering the garden 
only when the real need arises, use of compost as fertilizer, 
etc.). In this paper, the preliminary system and platform design 
are presented, which might be further improved, followed by 
the next steps that will be scheduled within the CIRC4FooD 
project to test the platform in real-life conditions and on 
different scales. 
Keywords-intelligent management system; platform; dynamic 
rule engine; urban agriculture; sustainability. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the original conference paper [1], about CIRC4FooD 
platform, we briefly introduced the project's benefits, 
focusing on the system's main functionalities. Thereafter the 
study aims to introduce in depth the additional developed 
features of the intelligent management system, highlighting 
the support for sustainable agriculture. 
Food production poses a significant environmental 
burden that accounts for 10%-30% of an individual’s 
environmental impact [2]. According a recent report from the 
Food and Agriculture Organization [3], current food 
production systems are facing several challenges: (a) 
growing demand for food, driven by increasing world 
population and urbanization; (b) diminishing land and water 
resources and their declining quality; (c) climate change, and 
at the same time significant contribution of the agricultural 
sector to this phenomenon; and (d) too few investments in 
solutions contributing to sustainable agriculture. 
Due to the environmental stress on water bodies, harmful 
land use practices, soil depletion, and greenhouse gas 
emissions, the need for sustainable agriculture solutions is 
rapidly growing. The ever-present efforts to improve 
agricultural yield with fewer resources and labor have 
resulted in significant innovations throughout human history. 
Despite those efforts, the growing population rate never let 
the demand match the actual supply. Demand for food is 
growing at the same time the supply side faces constraints in 
land and farming inputs. The world population is expected to 
reach 9.8 billion in 2050, increasing approximately 25% 
from the current figure [4]. 
The listed challenges, in line with the destructive effect, 
that the traditional, linear economy has on the food system, 
pose increasing pressure on the food system, creating 
urgency for resilient and sustainable food systems. 
CIRC4Food project introduces a solution for local food 
production systems, contributing to the following: 
• 
the 
promotion 
and 
dissemination 
of 
a 
sustainable food system 
• 
the facilitation of social interaction between 
residents 
• 
the transformation of physical space 
• 
the increase in awareness of healthy eating 
• 
the education about affordable and fresh food 
production. 
CIRC4Food system for food production consists of a 
vegetable garden equipped with a rainwater harvesting 
system and a composting bin. Many studies have proven the 
numerous environmental, social, and health benefits of urban 
vegetable gardens [5-7]. The CIRC4FooD system will be 
supported through an intelligent management system and 
will introduce a user-friendly CIRC4FooD platform with 
user-engaging functionalities to promote the sustainable use 
of natural resources. 
The rest of the manuscript is structured as follows. 
Section II describes the smart farming concept and the 
integrated system for application in urban vegetable gardens 
proposed by the CIRC4FooD project. Section III describes 
the system design, including user requirements collection, as 
well as user journey and user flow, user types and the 
concept behind reward system to be developed. Section IV 
20
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

addresses the platform design including its architecture, the 
rule engine and the platform view. Finally, Section V 
concludes on the work and outlines next steps. The work is 
closed by acknowledgements. 
II. 
SMART FARMING AND CIRC4FOOD 
The introduction of technology in agriculture aims to an 
intensive increase in food productivity as well as removing 
any apprehensions concerning the scarcity of food in the 
future. The technological applications related to agricultural 
aspects were classified into three categories, namely data 
sources 
and 
collection, 
machine 
learning 
(ML) 
methodologies 
for 
agricultural 
data, 
and 
intelligent 
knowledge acquisition. Considering the imperative need for 
action in the promotion of sustainable food systems, in 
Figure 1 are highlighted the key drivers of technology in the 
agriculture sector. 
 
Figure 1.  Key drivers of Technology in Agriculture sector. 
Smart 
farming, 
as 
a 
coupling 
of 
information, 
communication, and control technologies in agriculture, is an 
idea that gains ground gradually. Smart farming is a 
management concept of using modern technology to increase 
the quantity and quality of agricultural products. The concept 
involves an integration of information and communication 
technologies into machines, sensors, actuators, and network 
equipment for use in agricultural production systems [8]. 
These applications are the driving force for the 
development of innovation in precision and sustainable 
farming. Although, there are some notable barriers regarding 
the technology implementation in smart farming, presented 
in Figure 2. 
In a smart farming scenario, large amounts of real-time 
and high-resolution data are generated from remote and 
automated sensor systems. The data can represent different 
aspects of farming, including but not limited to livestock, 
crops, soil, and the environment [9]. Numerous software 
developments are available in the market [10-11], designed 
to make the farmer’s tasks more efficient. However, as every 
particular application has specific characteristics, no “one-
size fits all” technology is available. To improve 
sustainability, there is a need for site-specific strategies for 
both decision-makers and farmers. Some of the specific 
aspects of interest of the system design and selection involve 
the assessment of the techno-economic and environmental 
impact of an urban farming system, the choice of crops and 
the optimization of economic and environmental parameters. 
The optimal design and operational plan pose a significant 
challenge [12]. Nevertheless, the usage of all these 
information in the field is usually limited to the 
aforementioned aspects, and for this reason, an inclusive and 
multipurpose monitoring platform is proposed, which 
explicitly supports the management and optimization of the 
performance of a vegetable garden, with special attention to 
compost fertilizers production and use and operation of water 
harvesting system contributing to sustainable urban farming 
systems. 
 
Figure 2.  
Notable barriers of Technology implementation in 
smart farming. 
Most of the proposed platforms in smart farming have 
focused on a specific aspect of smart farming, such as crop 
production recommendations [13], big data technologies, 
data transformation [14], reliability [15], and business 
models [16]. In this paper, we propose the CIRC4FooD 
platform approach as a unified solution that facilitates smart 
farming applications following the sustainable use of 
resources. Additionally, this approach imposes learning 
techniques for urban farming and provides data to track crop 
cycle information, fertilizer, and water in a secure manner 
for their decisions and data management.  
In regards to that, the intelligent urban vegetable gardens 
in CIRC4FooD project, use technological resources that help 
in various stages of the production process, such as 
monitoring of crops, irrigation and composting process 
control. More precise, CIRC4FooD integrated system, as 
revealed in Figure 3, for implementation in urban vegetable 
gardens consists of the following elements: i) the garden 
itself, ii) rainwater harvesting and storing system, iii) 
composting bin, 
iv) 
intelligent 
management 
system 
integrating on-line monitoring platform and IoT technologies 
(including sensors).  
 
21
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3.  CIRC4FooD integrated system. 
Τhe aforementioned sensors will be acquired within the 
purpose of the project, and upon completion, the 
participating users will retain those sensors. More 
specifically, soil moisture sensors will be installed in the 
vegetable garden, humidity and temperature sensors inside 
the compost bin, as well as water level and Total Dissolved 
Solids (TDS) sensors inside the water tank. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
A. User Requirements Collection and KPIs clarification 
The purpose of the requirements collection is to 
understand the needs of the end-users and the problems they 
seek to resolve with the specific platform. 
The process of gathering the requirements of the system 
followed the subsequent four main stages: 
• 
Elicitation: In this stage, the project team collected 
the requirements of the end-users 
• 
Analysis/Processing (Analysis): In this stage, the 
project team tried to understand the requirements of 
the end users and model the desired operation of the 
system based on their requirements. 
• 
Specification: In this stage, the project team tried to 
document the functionality of the proposed software 
system. 
• 
Validation: In this stage, the project team checked 
that the system specifications match the initial 
requirements of the end users. 
All involved/interested members jointly came to a 
decision on what the final system requirements/specifications 
will be. For the CIRC4FooD system, the stakeholders 
involved in gathering the requirements were: 
• 
Domain experts: People who have been in the field 
for 
years 
and 
could 
contribute 
to 
the 
requirements/specifications of the CIRC4FooD 
system since they know very well the needs that the 
system will cover, as well as the risks that are or 
may arise during the pilot period. The experts in the 
area are made up of experts/professionals on the 
cultivation, employees of the green service of the 
Municipality, 
and 
experts 
on 
the 
specific 
technology. 
• 
End users: People or groups of people who will use 
the final product and will be able to evaluate it. The 
end users are the owners of non-private vegetable 
gardens who wish to use the CIRC4FooD system. 
• 
Software Engineers: Engineers who will develop 
the system and will be able to train the end users on 
the innovations of the product, both in terms of 
hardware and software technology. The software 
engineers, in this case, are from the CIRC4FooD 
project team. 
After the consideration of the aforementioned, in order to 
extract the requirements from the end-user’s standpoint, the 
following factors affecting urban farming were taken into 
consideration: 
• 
Weather: Farming mainly depends on weather 
conditions. Farmers face great risk in growing crops, 
as insufficient rainfall and water supply can damage 
the crop or lead to a decrease in farm produce. 
Considering the fact that different plants require 
different parameters of weather conditions, an all-
purpose and simplified system – that is suitable for 
numerous crops – was established. 
• 
Lack of knowledge and skill: Literacy is one of the 
most important factors affecting all the sectors. Lack 
of literacy results in farmers being unaware of 
changes occurring in the farming sector. Informing 
end-users about the dedicated activities regarding the 
vegetable garden motivates the interested parties to 
sustainable thinking. 
• 
Seeds/fertilizers/disease: To grow crops of good 
quality, 
selection 
of 
seeds 
and 
appropriate 
knowledge 
about 
fertilizers 
are 
required. 
Additionally, timely and proper detection of plants 
affected by disease can save the farmer from loss 
and helps in gaining crop security. A repository with 
information about plants, their characteristics, 
possible diseases, and advice on handling them will 
be available for users. 
• 
Water 
scarcity: 
A 
more 
efficient 
irrigation 
management focused on reducing the capacities of 
water 
applied 
and 
therefore 
optimizing 
the 
conservation of irrigation water, is conceivable 
through the platform which helps the end-user to 
plan the irrigation activities. 
• 
Promotion of circularity in food production: The 
shift from a linear model to a circular model can 
meaningfully decrease the negative burdens on the 
environment 
and 
contribute 
to 
reestablishing 
biodiversity and natural resources. With this aim, the 
presented platform can play a relevant role in setting 
the paths of this transition, nurturing the shift 
towards a more sustainable agriculture. 
Based on the above-mentioned factors and through a 
dedicated questionnaire that was conducted during the 
CIRC4FooD project by e-Trikala, which is the responsible 
partner for the implementation of the urban vegetable 
gardens in the city of Trikala during the CIRC4FooD project, 
user requirements were collected. With the completion of the 
22
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

user requirements, as it emerged from filling out the 
questionnaire, the analysis/processing of the results followed, 
where the next step was to better understand the user 
requirements and to model the desired operation of the 
system based on the gathered requirements. 
 Moreover, in addition to the requirements that focus on 
factors affecting urban agriculture, called standardized data 
(sensor data, weather data, user data, or coded data), another 
set of requirements was selected, which focus on functional 
requirements. Finally, the users, beyond the functional 
requirements that they wish the system to perform, also 
have 
expectations 
for 
how 
it 
should 
work. 
The 
characteristics that fall into this category are how easy a 
system is to use, how fast it is, how often it fails and how it 
will be able to handle unforeseen conditions. The above are 
features or quality factors of the software and are part of the 
non-functional system requirements. These characteristics 
are difficult to define, but in order to perceive the success or 
failure of the systems, compliance with the non-functional 
requirements plays an important role. Therefore, while 
eliciting the requirements, the quality expectations of the 
users also were taken into consideration. 
Functional 
requirements 
describe 
the 
functional 
capabilities or services of the system and depend on the type 
of software, the expected users, and on the type of system in 
which the software is used. On the other hand, non-
functional requirements describe system properties that are 
usually 
expressed 
based 
on 
form 
characteristics: 
Performance, Usability, Security, Legislative and Privacy. 
In other words, they describe how (or how well) the system 
will support the functional requirements and are considered 
"constraints" that limit the ways in which users can realize 
the functional requirements. Some of the functional and 
non-functional requirements used to finalize the user 
requirements are as follows: 
• 
Personalization 
• 
Authentication/Security 
• 
Authorization 
• 
Scalability 
• 
Reusability 
• 
Usability 
• 
Performance 
• 
Localization 
Having 
concluded 
on 
user 
requirements, 
Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) were clarified, which will 
measure the performance of the pilot applications of the 
project, as well as the indicators that will be able to identify 
the social acceptance and social impact of CIRC4FooD. The 
methodology followed is, on the one hand, based on the 
initial objectives set when designing the food production 
system inspired by the CIRC4FooD circular economy, but 
also on its expected results and on the other hand, on the 
design of the system and the characteristics of the pilots. 
In addition to the quantitative objectives related to the 
performance of the system, the environmental, economic, 
and social benefits expected as a whole from the 
implementation of CIRC4FooD, but also from its specific 
applications at three scales within the city of Trikala, were 
taken into account. The methodology followed is described 
in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  
CIRC4FooD indicator selection methodology.  
The user journey and flow were considered to guarantee 
that the interaction process between the users and the system 
will be effective and are analysed in the following section. 
While both tools are used to communicate the design of the 
system through the lens of the users’ goals, they aren’t 
synonyms because they focus on different aspects of the 
created system. 
B. User Journey and User Flow 
User Journey refers to the scenarios in which the user 
interacts with the product. This visual representation is 
commonly created as a timeline of actions or steps by a 
facilitator, built up on feedback collected methodically (via 
observations, interviews, focus groups, etc.). As a result, the 
technique’s main function is to assume and demonstrate the 
current and possible way in which the user can interact with 
the process. User Journeys deal with the emotions, pain 
points, and motivations of the end-users [17]. For this aim, 
the establishment started with the completion of a user 
journey map. The developed map is a visualization of the 
step-by-step experience as the user goes through the 
platform, following the diagram as shown in Figures 5 and 6 
for climate and sustainability activities. 
23
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5.  Concept of User Journey. 
Figure 6.  
User Journey for climate and sustainability activities. 
In order to put the users’ needs and wants at the forefront 
of this design process, a guaranteed way to achieve this is via 
user flows. User Flow refers to the process in which user 
takes advantage of the complex routes through a series of 
templates designed for a product to accomplish their goal. It 
is created to predict and show the possible routes through 
which the user interacts with the product. User Flows are 
usually depicted by flow charts, and they are a set of steps 
taken by a user to achieve a goal using a digital product. 
Rather than demonstrating how the users are supposed to 
feel, a User Flow is the breakdown of the actual user 
interface. Designing how a user interacts with a product is a 
key step in figuring out where the issues may arise in task 
flows [18]. 
Having finalized the User Journey and the User Flow, 
user types were selected, and ways to accomplish user 
engagement with maximum impact were identified in order 
to understand users, challenge assumptions, redefine 
problems and create innovative solutions to prototype and 
test. 
C. User Types and Reward System 
To assure comprehensive and effective knowledge 
acquisition, users of the platform are assigned into one of the 
following user types: novice, advanced beginner, competent 
and experienced. The assignment is based on the self-
assessment performed by the user based on the information 
provided for each level of expertise and adapted from [19] 
for the needs of the platform. Nevertheless, the platform is 
able to accommodate a variety of user types besides the 
intended core set of users. 
After identifying the core qualities of the target users, the 
benefits of a reward system in any working environment 
were explored [20]: 
• 
It boosts the user base and encourages more users to 
get on board with the system. 
• 
It improves confidence and esteem towards the 
system. 
• 
It makes the users share this concept with others. 
• 
It helps the users develop a trust factor for the 
system when they see some positive benefits of the 
system. 
A reward system will be implemented during the user 
training phase and will be based on user engagement, 
allowing the users that are most active to be upgraded to 
higher levels of expertise as they gain knowledge and know-
how. One of the excessive aspects of rewards is that they 
gather much larger sets of data. Simple rewards may 
incorporate a few data elements. More sophisticated 
rewarding rules may aggregate scores from multiple more 
attentive rewarding rule sets and integrate important 
supplementary metrics. With the capability of rewarding 
rules to summarize data, decisions and actions can be made 
much faster. 
CIRC4FooD platform follows a method of reward with 
points and scores, which are the most common type of 
reward. Points and scores were the results of a change in 
behavior. Aiming to support sustainable urban agriculture 
through this intelligent management system, the points of the 
reward system are inextricably linked with the rule engine of 
the platform (described below in Section Dynamic Rule 
Engine). Furthermore, some points are awarded based on 
some of the users' actions that are directly related to the work 
in their vegetable garden, and some points are related to 
more simplified actions (e.g., rate of visiting the notification 
page, signing in, etc.). 
The role of a reward aligned with personal values may 
serve as a driver of integrated sustainability, thereby 
24
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

increasing motivation to apply conservation practices over 
time. To increase the likelihood that motivation is 
maintained or enhanced, CIRC4FooD recommends that 
specific values of rewards should be explored in future 
interventions after the user training phase. A survey will be 
distributed to participators to determine whether the positive 
motivation for the use of the platform predicts the scale for 
satisfaction with urban farming and sustainable practices in 
agriculture. This survey will contribute to relevant issues by 
identifying factors that could be improved to enhance 
learning and adaptation to circular economy practices. 
IV. 
PLATFORM DESIGN  
A. Architecture  
The architecture of the web platform follows the 
principles of a MERN full-stack development. MERN stack 
is a JavaScript stack, that is used for easier and faster 
deployment of full-stack web applications. MERN Stack 
comprises of 4 technologies namely: MongoDB, Express, 
React and Node.js and it is designed to make the 
development process smoother and easier as depicted in 
Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7.  Architecture of the CIRC4FooD platform (own work). 
MongoDB is an open-source document database built on 
a horizontal scale-out architecture that uses a flexible schema 
for storing data [21]. In the CIRC4FooD platform, 
MongoDB is used to store as object-collections information 
related to the system users, their integrated system and the 
notifications extracted from the rule-engine. 
Express is a prebuilt Node.js framework that can help 
creating server-side web applications and APIs faster and 
smarter. Simplicity, minimalism, flexibility and scalability 
are some of its characteristics, and since it is made in Node.js 
itself, it inherited its performance as well. 
On the client-side part there is React.js. React is an open-
source, component-based front-end library, responsible only 
for the view layer of the application. It is maintained by 
Facebook. Using functional programming, hooks and JSX, 
React designs simple views for each state in the application, 
and will efficiently update and render just the right 
component when the data changes. As a front-end 
framework, React communicates with the back-end by 
making API calls on the endpoints created by Express. 
The last technology is Node.js. Node is an open-source 
development platform for executing JavaScript code server-
side. It is intended to run on a dedicated HTTP server and to 
employ a single thread with one process at a time [22]. 
Node.js 
applications 
are 
event-based 
and 
run 
asynchronously. In the CIRC4FooD platform, Node.js has a 
central role as it is the one responsible for serving the client-
side code, managing the Express APIs and communicating 
with the MongoDB database. Moreover, Node.js fetches data 
from a third-party API related to the current values of each 
sensor placed on the gardens and stores them to the proper 
collections in the Mongo database. Furthermore, it handles 
the authentication and role system for the users as long as the 
reward system and the dynamic rule-engine, that creates the 
proper notifications for the platform users. More about the 
rule-engine and the reward system will be presented in the 
following paragraphs. 
B. Dynamic Rule Engine 
The ﬁrst step to develop our intelligent management 
platform was to know the variable inputs the system has and 
how they have to be handled by using a set of rules, aiming 
to enhance the sustainability and competitiveness of the 
activities taking place. The data from the garden sensors and 
weather stations, once pre-processed and formatted, are sent 
to the rule engine for rule-based processing to produce 
relevant outcomes. Historical database information may be 
required for some rules. 
The process of preparing a rule base in CIRC4FooD can 
be divided into several consecutive steps that are presented 
in Figure 8 below, wherein several layers are created: data 
collection from several sensors (as described in Figure 3), 
system modelling and rule selection, environmental 
sustainability, deployment of rules and also system 
optimization. The rules guiding the dynamic rule engine 
were constructed to increase the productivity, effectiveness, 
and performance of connected sensors, with two primary 
purposes: i) to promote sustainability and natural resource 
preservation and ii) to maximize user engagement.  
CIRC4FooD solution helps the end users in smart 
farming operations in a more user-friendly format, informing 
the latter about the circular economy and guiding them 
towards increasing productivity and reducing resource 
wastage. Additionally, this approach increases food security, 
production, and also sustainability by providing data from 
the installed sensors during the whole process of farming. 
Moreover, this solution provides an exceptional prospect for 
building management systems by combining data from 
varied sources. 
25
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In order to assure user engagement, the number of 
received notifications, but also their exact content, is 
adjusted to the level of experience of the user. The higher the 
level of experience, the higher number of notifications the 
user gets, while their content becomes less explanatory and 
more informative. This is illustrated well in Figure 8 and 
with the examples of notifications presented in Table 1. 
 
Figure 8.  Outline of the process of prepearation of the rule base in 
CIRC4FooD. 
 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF NOTIFICATIONS FOR FOUR USER TYPES 
Condition 
User Type 
Novice 
Advanced 
Beginner 
Competent 
Experienced 
Air 
humidity < 
30% 
and 
soil 
moisture 
<20% 
 
The soil 
moisture 
levels are 
below optimal 
and air 
humidity is 
low. Consider 
watering your 
crops. 
Crops in 
conditions 
like today's 
will most 
probably 
need water. 
 
Air humidity 
today will be 
low and soil 
moisture 
readings 
indicate that 
your crops 
need water. 
Air humidity 
< 30% and 
soil moisture 
<20% 
 
Water tank 
level: full 
N/A 
Your water 
tank is full, 
now is the 
time to save 
natural water 
resources. 
Water tank is 
full. 
 
Water tank is 
full. 
 
Compost 
moisture 
>60 % 
Your pile 
moisture 
levels are 
above the 
optimum. To 
keep them 
within the 
optimal range 
mix in some 
newspaper 
strips, dry 
wood chips or 
pieces of 
cardboard. 
Your 
compost is 
too wet. Mix 
in  
newspaper 
strips, dry 
wood chips 
or pieces of 
cardboard. 
 
The optimal 
levels of 
moisture 
range 
between 40 
to 60 %. 
Today the 
moisture 
level is >60 
%. Take 
appropriate 
actions! 
Compost 
moisture > 
60 % 
 
Probability 
of 
precipitation 
>60 % 
Today most 
probably it is 
going to rain. 
Today most 
probably it is 
going to rain. 
Today most 
probably it is 
going to 
rain. 
Probability 
of 
Precipitation 
>60 % 
Probability 
of 
precipitation
The soil 
moisture of 
your crops is 
The soil 
moisture of 
your crops is 
Soil 
moisture < 
20 %, but 
probability of 
precipitation
>60%, soil 
Condition 
User Type 
Novice 
Advanced 
Beginner 
Competent 
Experienced 
>60%, soil 
moisture 
< 
20 % 
low and today 
there is a high 
probability of 
precipitation. 
Wait for the 
rain to water 
your crops and 
save water. 
below 20% 
and today 
there is a 
high 
probability of 
precipitation. 
Wait for the 
rain to water 
your crops 
and save 
water. 
rain is 
expected! 
Wait with 
watering 
your garden, 
and water it 
only if the 
weather 
forecast 
proves 
wrong and 
there is no 
rain. 
moisture < 
20 % 
Compost 
temperature 
<25°C 
Have an eye 
on your 
compost, the 
temperature is 
too low, the 
process is not 
taking place! 
Action 
necessary. 
Have an eye 
on you 
compost, the 
temperature 
is too low, 
the process is 
not taking 
place! Action 
necessary. 
Compost 
Temperature 
<25°C 
Compost 
Temperature 
<25°C 
TDS 
>2000ppm 
If water 
uptake is 
appreciably 
reduced, the 
plant slows its 
rate of growth. 
A TDS level 
above 2000 is 
completely 
unsafe and 
dangerous for 
any use. 
If water 
uptake is 
appreciably 
reduced, the 
plant slows 
its rate of 
growth. A 
TDS level 
above 2000 
is completely 
unsafe and 
dangerous for 
any use. 
The TDS 
level inside 
your water 
tank is 
unsafe for 
any use. 
Consider not 
to use this 
water for 
your 
activities. 
TDS > 
2000ppm 
 
The rule engine consists of three modules: i) 
environment, ii) water tank, and iii) compost. The module 
environment gathers rules related to the environmental 
parameters influencing plant growth, with special attention 
to those related to watering. Parameters taken into 
consideration in this module are the following: soil 
moisture, air humidity, the likelihood of precipitation, 
temperature, light intensity, and wind speed. 
Module water tank describes the rules associated with 
water level and TDS amount in the water tank, but also the 
water level in combination with the probability of 
precipitation and soil moisture, to assure that water is used 
only when a need arises. 
Module compost is built to support the composting bin 
notifications in relation to compost temperature and 
compost moisture. Compost temperature and compost 
moisture are two critical parameters for the process of 
compost production. Compost temperature is additionally a 
crucial parameter in compost monitoring [23]. Monitoring 
temperature 
evolution 
over 
time 
provides 
critical 
information about the course of composting and assures the 
safety of the produced material (eliminating the risk of 
microbial contamination) [24], as well as the safety of the 
process itself (avoiding fire hazards). 
26
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The conditions are assigned impact values based on the 
literature research and the CIRC4Food aspirations, namely 
user engagement, awareness raising, and saving natural 
resources, especially water. The impact values affect the 
notifications scheme of the rule engine, which is built on 
threshold values. The user receives a notification only if the 
threshold value is equal to or surpasses the impact value. 
The threshold value (and, therefore, whether or not the 
notification will be received) is determined by the user type.  
 
Figure 9.  
Dynamic rule engine for the three modules. 
The dynamic rule engine is designed in such way that 
additional rules can be implemented if the need arises. The 
followed procedure for the implementation of a dynamic 
rule engine for the three modules is defined in Figure 9.  
C. CIRC4FooD Platform view 
The last step to make the management platform usable 
was to develop a user interface (UI) to simplify its use by 
dedicated users. Additionally, CIRC4FooD should be tested 
in terms of data collection and operation. In this section, the 
platform view development is presented, with the aim of 
oﬀering from top to bottom usability level for non-IT-
experts. CIRC4FooD platform integrates a web-based data-
mining system (third-party APIs). The platform provides an 
important interaction model for the smart farming sensors 
by letting users acquire information related to the integrated 
garden sensors. 
The front-end application exposes to the user a pleasant 
and interactive interface through which the user can access 
all the services exposed by the back-end application. The 
CIRC4FooD interface is responsive, so the user experience 
on the platform is of high quality regardless of the device 
used (laptop, PC, tablet, or phone). In addition, the 
CIRC4FooD platform allows end-users to explore and 
analyse 
agricultural 
and 
weather 
data 
with 
zero-
programming efforts. The initial UI is depicted in Figures 
10-16. 
 
Figure 10.  Welcome Page of the CIRC4FooD Platform. 
Figure 10 shows the welcome page of the platform, 
where the user can read a few words about the project 
within the platform that was created, as well as log in if they 
are already a registered user, otherwise create their profile. 
For usual registration, the information that must be filled in 
is as follows:  
• 
Personal data: first name, last name, email address 
(used for sending activation email and other 
platform-specific emails); 
• 
Information used by the CIRC4FooD platform: 
username, password (both used for authentication), 
and preferred language (the default, for now, is 
English). 
Figure 11.  Homepage/Dashboard view. 
When the user is logged in, the platform looks like a 
dashboard. The homepage contains a map which is 
resembling with google maps, with the difference that the 
location of public vegetable gardens that have been created 
in the city of Trikala is displayed, and the gardens owned by 
27
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the current user are represented with a bold point. In Figure 
11, there is the homepage of the platform. On this particular 
page, the user can initially be familiar with the tutorial, 
where useful instructions guide the user in using the 
platform. The user also has access to the tip of the day 
section and has the chance to explore useful information 
related to urban agriculture and the individual systems 
installed in the garden. 
Figure 12 reflects the ‘My garden’ page. Here the user 
comes into first contact with the measurements of the 
sensors installed in the garden, compost, and water 
collection tank. Also, the user can see some of the 
measurements of the meteorological stations located near 
the garden, which are considered important for agricultural 
processes. Additionally, the user will have the opportunity 
to update the system about the actions taken regarding the 
three subsystems (water tank, garden, compost), as well as 
to see all the notifications that have been produced by the 
dynamic rule engine. Within the ‘My gardens’ page, the 
user can create a new garden or edit the already existing 
garden and must provide advanced data about the garden. 
The process of creating a new garden is clear in Figure 13, 
where the user follows five steps: 
1. garden title 
2. crop information 
3. input of sensor IDs to connect to own garden 
4. garden locations 
5. declare the gardem as public garden or not. 
 
Figure 12.  My gardens page. 
In Figure 14, there is the ‘Public gardens’ page, in which 
the user has access only in view mode to the different public 
vegetable gardens in the city of Trikala. The purpose of this 
page is to inform the user about the development of other 
gardens and to educate them about the processes of urban 
agriculture through general information about other gardens 
as best practices. 
 
Figure 13.  
Add new garden page. 
Figure 14.  
Public gardens page. 
In Figure 15, the user can edit the existing garden, 
change the imported information and then update the new 
information about their own garden. The information 
regarding the sensors is provided to the user upon 
installation in order to make the process easier. As 
mentioned before, all information about the sensors comes 
from third-party APIs within the project, so the process of 
creating gardens is a bit more complicated. The goal is, after 
the project is over, to simplify this process as much as 
possible and make it more user-friendly and engaging. 
In Figure 16, the weather forecast is depicted alongside 
weather service, in which the user can view various 
information about the conditions regarding each garden 
individually, based on its location. The user can choose 
through a drop-down menu the desired weather station. For 
28
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

each selected station, the CIRC4FooD platform displays the 
basic weather information (temperature, humidity, daily 
rainfall, hourly rainfall, wind speed, wind direction, light 
intensity, UV power, and soil moisture). Regarding weather 
forecast, the information is taken from an embedded 
weather widget, and the provider is called windy.com. This 
provider is open and can be used by anyone. Also, the 
platform has used some parameters to simplify the use of 
this widget, like the latitude and longitude of the city of 
Trikala and the zoom feature (value 11) to create a closer 
map. Moreover, this widget gives a ten days period of time 
forecast, and a variety of information are displayed: 
temperature, clouds, CO and SO2 concertation, pressure, 
wind information, rainfall, real-time lightning strikes, 
weather radar, and much more parameters.  
Some of the used units are: 
• 
Celsius degrees (°C) for temperature;  
• 
Cloud color, shape, and size for cloud indicator; 
• 
Parts Per Billion by Volume (PPBV) for CO 
concertation indicator 
• 
kg/m2 for Sulfur dioxide (SO2) 
• 
Millimeter for rainfall; 
• 
Knot (kt) for wind speed and wind gusts; 
• 
Wind direction using the flag as an indication, etc. 
 
Figure 15.  
Edit garden page. 
Figure 16.  
Weather forecast page. 
The User Interface (UI) exploits concepts that the user is 
familiar with and facilitates further understanding (through, 
e.g., data diagrams, sensor devices, tutorial, etc.), as defined 
in the data model and the rule engine. 
The UI is still a work in progress, aiming to achieve an 
intuitive visualization that will depict the requirements of 
the end-users in order to contribute to the promotion of 
sustainable urban agriculture. For this specific purpose, the 
CIRC4FooD platform is intended to integrate, in the next 
version, the following five key elements: 
First, it will be useful for the user to click on a garden 
and be redirected to the garden visualization page of the 
clicked garden (public and private). On the right side of the 
platform, the user will see their profile picture (by clicking 
on it will have access to the profile page) along with a drop-
down menu where they will access all the components 
offered by the platform or can go to the view page of any of 
their registered gardens. On its profile page, the user will 
have the opportunity to review any activity on the platform, 
like viewing registered gardens, the tip of the day, tutorial, 
weather forecast, etc. When watching other gardens, the 
number of details displayed is in accordance with the 
privacy 
options 
selected 
during 
garden 
creation. 
CIRC4FooD is intended to give the user the opportunity of 
sending an email to the users of public gardens and be 
informed about various procedures regarding their farming 
activities, with the main purpose of training and educating 
themselves.  
Second, there will be, at the top, a navigation bar 
through which the user will be able to search for private 
gardens and public ones. The user will also be able to find a 
new message indicator and a notification indicator. Clicking 
on a specific notification will open a dropdown menu with 
all the notifications, while clicking on the new message 
indicator will open the new notifications that are not yet 
addressed by the user. Also, from the top bar, the platform 
language will be able to change. After authentication, the 
default language is the one chosen by the user while 
creating the account. For the moment, the available option is 
English, but in the following version, the user will have the 
chance to choose between Greek and English. 
Third, in the current version, in order to register into the 
platform, the user must fill in and submit a form from the 
registration page. They will also have the option to use a 
social sign-up, choosing an identity provider from various 
sources (e.g., Google, Facebook). 
Fourth, more weather providers will likely be available, 
or if the user simply wants to change the initial choice, the 
platform will give him the possibility to modify the selected 
providers or just change the color palette. 
Fifth, the CIRC4FooD platform intends to add one more 
page called Sensor Dashboard, in which the user will have 
access to diagrams and a time series of data coming from all 
the sensors installed in the garden. The goal of this 
integration is for the user to have, in a more user-friendly 
manner, data from a more extended period of time. The user 
is going to have access to three types of time series: 
• 
Daily 
• 
Monthly 
29
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Yearly 
The aim of this extra feature is for the user to be fully 
informed and keep track of the measurements of each 
sensor. This way, the user will be able to collect all the 
agricultural tasks waiting to be executed and maximize the 
performance of the intelligent management system and the 
sustainability of urban farming. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A main challenge in smart farming platforms is 
consistency and compatibility among the utilized protocols, 
technologies, and actions. To address this issue, in this paper, 
we present the CIRC4FooD platform approach, which is an 
intelligent management system supporting sustainable urban 
agriculture. Existing smart farming platforms are not 
designed to support near-real-time data ingestion, quick 
analysis, and visualisation of large volumes of sensor data. 
For that purpose, one of the key components of the 
CIRC4FooD platform is its aptitude to deal with the high 
rate of sensor data by providing notification for fast and 
easily performed urban agriculture activities. The user 
interface of the platform allows complex data workﬂows to 
be collected, visualized, and executed without the need for 
programming skills. 
Another important functionality of the platform is the 
ability to integrate automation on actuators based on the 
collected data from the sensors for optimizing food 
production in open or closed systems. The platform is 
designed in an adaptive way, able to fit in agricultural 
automation, enabling remote controlling and monitoring for 
irrigation scheduling to manage water usage for optimizing 
water resources. The automation functionality can be 
achieved through the connection with the developed dynamic 
rule engine, and its performance will be evaluated by 
monitoring the conditions of the sensors and actuators. Also, 
a quality assessment will be employed for adjusting the 
dedicated parameters of the dynamic rule engine with respect 
to the users’ requirements.  
The CIRC4FooD platform is created to enable the 
efficient management of urban vegetable gardens. In parallel, 
by engaging the user at different levels, it has the ambition to 
offer educational and awareness-raising advantages. In this 
paper, we present the ongoing work related to platform 
development describing the system and platform design. 
An important feature requirement of the CIRC4FooD 
platform is to be able to scale, store, and visualize different 
kinds of sensors. The volume of data generated by the 
installed sensors is not a problem. Nonetheless, the velocity 
at which the data is produced is very high and results in a big 
set of sensor data and user data. Addressing this problem, we 
are aiming to do a performance analysis of the platform by 
measuring the load time from different sensors around the 
city of Trikala and specifying critical points, alongside with 
the adaptation of the platform from the users. The main 
objective of this performance analysis is to evaluate the 
scalability of the CIRC4FooD platform.  
The CIRC4FooD platform will be tested in real-life 
settings in the coming months. The demonstration will last 
around six months in the city of Trikala in Greece and will 
start once the complete CIRC4FooD system is set up. 
Demonstrations will be performed in private gardens 
belonging to citizens of Trikala, in public, popular spaces of 
the city, and in several schools. The testing phase will be 
accompanied by a series of seminars of informative and 
educational character aimed at the users of the CIRC4FooD 
platform. It is expected that as a result of demonstration 
activities and received feedback, some features of the 
platform might be subject to change. Additionally, the user 
reward system will be implemented, and a repository for the 
users with information about how to use the platform and 
facts about the plants (e.g., preferences and common 
diseases) will be developed. 
  
AKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is co-funded by Greece and the European 
Union 
through 
the 
Operational 
Programme 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation 2014-
2020 
(EPAnEK) 
[code: 
T2EΔΚ-03899, 
project: 
CIRC4FooD – A circular economy inspired food production 
system].  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Tsiakou, L. Łękawska-Andrinopoulou, M. Palazis-
Aslanidis, V. Nousis, G. Tsimiklis, M. Krommyda, A. 
Amditis, E. Latsa, “CIRC4FooD Platform: An Intelligent 
Management 
System 
Supporting 
Sustainable 
Urban 
Agriculture”, in Proceedings of The Tenth International 
Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based 
Environments (WEB 2022), IARIA Conference. [Online]. 
Available:http://thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articl
eid=web_2022_1_10_40005 
[2] F. Stoessel, R. Juraske, S. Pfister, and S. Hellweg, “Life Cycle 
Inventory and Carbon Water FoodPrint of Fruits and 
Vegetables Application to a Swiss Retailer” Environ. Sci. 
Technol vol 46, 6, pp. 3253–3262, February 2012, doi: 
10.1021/es2030577. 
[3] FAO, 2021, “The State of the World’s Land and Water 
Resources for Food and Agriculture – Systems at breaking 
point”, 
Synthesis 
report 
2021, 
Rome, 
https://doi.org/10.4060/cb7654en. 
[4] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division (2017), “World Population Prospects: 
The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables”, 
Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP/248. 
[5] V. Egli, M. Oliver, and E. Tautolo, “The Development of a 
Model of Community Garden Benefits to Wellbeing” 
Preventive Medicine Reports, Vol. 3, 2016, pp. 348-352, 
doi:10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.04.005. 
[6] M. I. Cabral, S. Costa, U. Weiland, and A. Bonn, “Urban 
gardens as multifunctional nature-based solutions for societal 
goals in a changing climate.” in: Nature-based solutions to 
climate change adaptation in urban areas. Theory and practice 
of urban sustainability transitions. N. Kabisch, H. Korn, J. 
Stadler, A. Bonn, Eds. Springer, Cham, pp. 237-253, 2017. 
[7] M. Clarke, M. Davidson, M. Egerer, E. Anderson, and N. T. 
Fouch, “The Underutilized Role of Community Gardens in 
Improving Cities’ Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review”, 
People, Place and Policy 12 (3), pp. 241-251, Feb. 2019 doi: 
10.3351/ppp.2019.3396732665. 
[8] D. Pivoto et al.,“Scientific development of smart farming 
technologies and their application in Brazil”, Information 
30
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Processing in Agriculture, Vol 5 (1), pp. 21-32, March 2018, 
doi: 10.1016/j.inpa.2017.12.002. 
[9] N. Islam, M. M. Rashid, F. Pasandideh, B. Ray, S. Moore, R. 
Kadel, “A Review of Applications and Communication 
Technologies for Internet of Things (IoT) and Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Based Sustainable Smart Farming”, 
Sustainability, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/su13041821.  
[10] W. M. Júnior, T. T. B. Valeriano, and R. G. de Souza, 
“EVAPO: A smartphone application to estimate potential 
evapotranspiration using cloud gridded meteorological data 
from NASA-POWER system”, Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture, 
Volume 
156, 
2019, 
pp. 
187-192, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.10.032. 
[11] A. J. Johnson et al., “Flavor-Cyber-Agriculture: Optimization 
of plant metabolites in an open-source control environment 
through surrogate modeling”, PLoS ONE 14(4), 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213918. 
[12] L. Li, X. Li, C. Chong, C. Wang, and X. Wang, “A decision 
support framework for the design and operation of sustainable 
urban farming systems”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 
Volume 
268, 
2020, 
121928, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121928. 
[13] P. P. Jayaraman, A. Yavari,  D. Georgakopoulos, A. Morshed, 
A. Zaslavsky, “Internet of things platform for smart farming: 
Experiences 
and 
lessons 
learnt”, 
Sensors 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s16111884. 
[14] E. M. Ouafiq, A. Elrharras, A. Mehdary, A. Chehri, R. 
Saadane, M. Wahbi, “IoT in smart farming analytics, big data 
based architecture. ”, In Human Centred Intelligent Systems, 
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021, pp. 269–279. 
[15] M. A. Zamora-Izquierdo, J. Santa, J.A. Martínez, V. 
Martínez, A. F. Skarmeta, “Smart farming IoT platform based 
on edge and cloud computing”, Biosystems Engineering, 
Volume 
177, 
2019, 
pp. 
4-17, 
ISSN 
1537-5110, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2018.10.014. 
[16] G. E. Mushi, G. D. M. Serugendo, P. Y. Burgi, “Digital 
Technology and Services for Sustainable Agriculture in 
Tanzania: A Literature Review”, Sustainability 2022, 14(4), 
2415, https://doi.org/10.3390/su14042415. 
[17] T.Howard, 
“Journey 
mapping: 
a 
brief 
overview.”, 
Communication Design Quarterly vol 2, (3), pp. 10–13, May 
2014, doi:10.1145/2644448.2644451. 
[18] Product 
School 
Inc., 
2022 
https://productschool.com/blog/product-management-
2/experience/user-flows-vs-user-journeys/ 
(last 
visited: 
15/02/2022). 
[19] H. L. Dreyfus, S. E. Dreyfus, and T. Athanasiou. 
(1986), “Mind over machine: The power of human intuition 
and expertise in the era of the computer”, New York: Free 
Press. 
[20] A. K. Sharma, R. Jain, D. Kumar, A. Teckchandani, V. Jain, 
“Implementation of reward-based methodology in web 
blogging environment”, Global Transitions Proceedings, 
Volume 
2, 
Issue 
2, 
2021, 
pp. 
579-583, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gltp.2021.08.031 . 
[21] MongoDB, Inc. 2021 https://www.mongodb.com/why-use-
mongodb (last visited: 20/02/2022). 
[22] OpenJS Foundation, Node.js https://nodejs.org/en/ (last 
visited: 20/02/2022). 
[23] B. Paulin and P. O’Malley “Compost production and use in 
horticulture”, Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development, Western Australia, Perth. Bulletin 4746, 2008. 
Compost production and use in horticulture (agric.wa.gov.au). 
[24] E. Vandaele, Vlaco, “Hygienisation requirements for 
composting”, Workpackage 5, Repost 2, Oct. 2019, available 
at: https://northsearegion.eu/media/16203/hygienisation_-for-
soilcomher.pdf 
(last 
visited: 
23/02/2022).
 
31
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

