State of the Art and Innovative Communications and Networking Solutions for a
Reliable and Efficient Interplanetary Internet
Giuseppe Araniti
DIMET
University “Mediterranea” of
Reggio Calabria
Reggio Calabria, ITALY
araniti@unirc.it
Igor Bisio
DIST
University of Genoa
Genoa, ITALY
igor@dist.unige.it
Mauro De Sanctis
Dept. of Electronics Engineering
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”
Rome, ITALY
mauro.de.sanctis@ uniroma2.it
Abstract — In the last few years deep space exploration missions
are
undergoing
a
significant
transformation
as
are
the
expectations of their scientific investigators and the public who
participate in these experiences. National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) and European Space Agency (ESA),
recently, decided pursuing a mission to study Jupiter and its
moons, and another to visit the largest moons of Saturn. Those
missions
need
new
communication
and
networking
infrastructures able to support space exploration, to connect
scientists and their instruments, and also to involve the public via
common web interfaces. A possible solution is represented by the
so called InterPlaNetary (IPN) Internet that introduces new
challenges in the field of deep space communications.
In that framework, the paper proposes a description of the
challenging
scenario,
surveys
its
technical
problems
and
envisages possible advanced communications and networking
solutions starting from the analysis of a specific IPN architecture.
In more detail, we study the network performance changes due to
the
nodes’
movements
from
the
communications
and
the
networking viewpoint. It represents the main contribution of the
paper and opens the doors to future advanced solutions suited to
be employed in the IPN Internet.
Index Terms — Interplanetary Networks Architecture,, Delay
Tolerant Network, Advanced IPN Node, Multicast, Link Selection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays the early exploration missions, sponsored by
both NASA and ESA, are giving way to a new data-intensive
era of long duration observational outposts, landed vehicles,
sample returns, and multi-spacecraft fleets and constellations.
These missions and the future ones will require a robust,
efficient and flexible communication infrastructure able
to
connect earth mission centres with space elements (Mission
Applications), scientists with remote instruments (Scientific
Applications) and engage the public by giving them traditional
Internet
visibility
into
the
space
missions
(Public
Applications). This new connection capability matches the
vision of the InterPlaNetary (IPN) Internet. In this view, the
IPN Internet means orders of magnitude increases in data rates
and highly automated communications between remote planets
and Earth.
In synthesis, the purposes of this paper are:

to survey the Interplanetary communication scenario,
its characteristics, problems and existing/innovative
solutions;

to analyze a possible IPN network infrastructure,
proposed in the following Section;

to test some networking solutions applied to the
Interplanetary network.
Starting from a preliminary study reported in [1] in this
paper we aim to highlight the problems that compromise
communications among planets, such as huge delays, limited
bandwidth availability and link blackouts. In that environment,
a set of partially unexplored technical solutions, aimed at
connecting the IPN network reliably and efficiently, represents
the starting point of the research [2]. In more detail, in this
work a study of a IPN network architecture has been proposed
and the extremely complex situation in which communication
and networking systems operate is shown. In particular the
enormous delays and the scarce available resources may
compromise a communication process over that network
significantly.
Furthermore, together with the study introduced previously,
the paper also analyzes the possible exploitation of networking
solutions,
which
plays
a
crucial
role:
the
Multicast
Transmissions [3] and the Link Selection [4]. In the former
case, the necessity is due to the scarce resource availability: in
case of multiple destinations of the same information, the
minimization of the number of traffic flows is strictly needed.
For example, if a Mission Control Centre needs to upgrade the
software onboard of several IPN nodes (e.g., rovers over
planets or orbiting satellites) just one traffic flows will be sent
from Earth. Analogously, if a planetary image, acquired by a
rover, should simultaneously reach two different ground
stations on the Earth, just one copy of that image will be sent
from the rover through the IPN network.
The latter considered solution, the link selection, is a
network control approach, based on the employment of the
Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) paradigm [5], which
allows selecting the best available IPN channel to forward the
traffic
flows.
It
is
aimed
at
maximizing
the
network
performance because it permits the exploitation of the best
link currently available for a given IPN node that sends data
traffic.
All the previously mentioned purposes of the paper are
pursued in this work starting from the ongoing research
activity of the authors [1].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
introduces the general IPN network architecture and describes
the network analysed in this work. Section III illustrates the
essentials research challenges of the IPN environment and
surveys the state of the art in the field. The simulative IPN
network study concerning bandwidth availabilities, delays and
link blackouts is presented in Section IV. Section V proposes
an overview of possible technological communications and
networking solutions for the future IPN Internet. Section VI
proposes a functional architecture suited to be employed in the
IPN scenario and, in particular, analyses the Multicast
Transmission
and
Link
Selection
necessities
with
an
118
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

introductive performance investigation carried out by ns-2
simulation. Conclusions are drawn, finally, in Section VII.
II.
SCENARIO
An interesting overview of IPN network architectures is
reported in [2] and it is briefly synthesized in this section. As
depicted in Figure 1, an interplanetary network can be split
into three different sub-networks:

IPN Backbone Network;

IPN External Networks;

PlaNetary (PN) Networks.
Figure 1.
IPN Network.
The
IPN
Backbone
Network
provides
a
common
infrastructure for communications among Earth, planets,
moons, space probes and rovers through spacecrafts (e.g.
satellites or orbiters), which operate as network nodes
allowing transmissions over deep space channels.
The IPN External Network consists of nodes that are
spacecrafts flying in deep space between planets, space probes,
and orbiting space stations. Nodes of the IPN External
Network have both long and short-haul communication
capabilities. The former are employed if the nodes are at long
distance from the other IPN nodes, the latter are employed at
nodes flying in proximity of other ones.
The PN Network, depicted in Figure 2, is composed of the
PN Satellite Network and the PN Surface Network. The former
includes links among surface nodes, orbiting satellites and IPN
Backbone Nodes, providing a relay service between surface
network and backbone network and between two or more parts
of the surface network. The latter provides the communication
links among surface elements, such as rovers and sensor nodes
which may have the communication capability towards
satellites. It also provides a wireless backbone over the planet
employed by surface elements that cannot communicate with
satellites directly.
Concerning the Mission Applications, a first example is the
reporting to the mission centre of astronauts’ health and
spacecrafts
status
telemetries.
Another
space
mission
application is the Command and Control of in-situ elements
from Earth or from proximity spacecrafts.
Concerning Scientific Applications, a new approach is the
so called “Virtual Presence”. This type of application is
intended to send great volumes of information about a
monitored remote planet in order to allow scientists, or in-situ
robots and astronauts to interact with high-fidelity models of
the monitored area.
Figure 2.
PN Network.
The prospective applications of a space mission, and its
related communications network, can be extended beyond the
mere
space
missions’
management
or
the
scientific
applications. People surfing the Internet today access websites
in extreme locations (e.g., Antarctica) and in the future they
may be able to access servers on space to request data directly.
This concerns the Public Applications. New technologies will
enable communications to web servers on International Space
Stations, space probes and crafts, on the Moon and other
planets of the solar system.
In this paper, we utilize the previous mentioned network
subdivision to define a specific IPN internet architecture able
to provide connectivity between the Earth and two different
PlaNetary networks. In more details, as shown in Figure 3,
two PN networks are employed over a remote planet (e.g.,
Mars) and over the Moon. In both cases, the Surface PN
network is composed of two landers (MS1 and MS2 over the
remote planet and LS1 and LS2 over the Moon), able to
transmit information such as images, sensed data (e.g.,
temperature, humidity etc.), towards the PN Satellite Network.
PN satellite networks are structured with four orbiting
satellites (MO1, MO2, MO3 and MO4) in the case of the
remote planet and two orbiting satellites around the Moon
(LO1 and LO2). Over Earth, the PN surface network is
composed of six surface nodes. They are typically the
destination of the information sent from remote planets and,
simultaneously, the source of possible control messages
transmitted towards the IPN nodes (e.g., from Mission Control
Centres). In detail, Earth Surface nodes are the ones of the
well-known DSN - Deep Space Network (ES1, ES2 and ES3)
and other possible nodes, such as Space Science Research
Centres, distributed over the planet (ET1, ET2 ET3 and ET4).
Concerning the PN Satellite Network, three Geostationary
satellites (GEO1, GEO2 and GEO3) have been included in the
architecture. They are supposed spaced of 120° so allowing
the maximum coverage of Earth surface.
119
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ES1
ES2
ES3
ET1
ET2
ET3
ET4
GEO1
GEO2
GEO3
LO1
LO2
LS1
LS2
MO1
MO2
MO3
MO4
MS1
MS2
ES1
ES2
ES3
ET1
ET2
ET3
ET4
GEO1
GEO2
GEO3
LO1
LO2
LS1
LS2
MO1
MO2
MO3
MO4
MS1
MS2
ES1
ES2
ES3
ET1
ET2
ET3
ET4
GEO1
GEO2
GEO3
LO1
LO2
LS1
LS2
MO1
MO2
MO3
MO4
MS1
MS2
Figure 3.
Example of IPN Network Architecture.
Each orbiting satellite of the IPN network has been also
considered as a node of the Backbone Network. No External
Networks have been considered in this architecture. All details
concerning the link: available data rate, propagation delays,
network movement and the consequent link blackouts, will be
the object of investigation in Section IV where the simulative
study of the IPN network architecture has been proposed.
III.
CHALLENGES AND STATE OF THE ART
a) Challenges
From the communications viewpoint, the main problems
of the IPN scenario concern: extremely long and variable
propagation delays (e.g., 3-20 minutes for Mars to Earth);
asymmetrical forward and reverse link capacities; high error
probability; intermittent link connectivity (due to satellites,
spacecraft and space probes eclipses and common link failures
due
to
disturbances);
absence
of
fixed
communication
infrastructure; attenuation of the transmitted signals due to
distances; power, mass and size of communications hardware
and costs, of both in terms of hardware and protocols’
complexity; backward compatibility requirement due to high
cost involved in deployment and launching procedures. These
problems
strongly
compromise
the
reliability
and
the
efficiency of a communications process over an IPN network
and, as a consequence, the reduction of the impact of them on
the communications represents the research challenge of the
considered environment.
b) State of the Art
In this Sub-Section the State of the Art in the field has
been surveyed and it constitutes the starting point for the
solutions proposed and investigated in the following.
b1) Satellite Constellations
An important element of the IPN network architecture is
the
planetary
satellite
constellation.
Generally,
satellite
constellations are needed instead of a single satellite, because
the latter can cover only a limited portion of the Earth and
only a limited number of planets [6]. On the other hand,
satellite constellations can provide: simultaneous multiple
coverage, continuous global coverage, continuous regional
coverage or low revisit interval. Constellation design is
generally a very difficult problem because each orbit has an
infinite number of choices for the six orbital parameters, so for
many
satellites,
the
problem
is
of
exceedingly
high
dimensionality. This is one of the primary reasons why the art
of constellation design is presently suffering from a deep
technology development delay. In order to solve this complex
problem, satellite constellation designers adopt very limiting
assumptions preventing the discovery and development of new,
useful solutions. For instance, the assumption of circular orbits
(e.g. Walker constellations), while simplifying the problem
from one side, strongly limits the varieties of potential
configurations.
120
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

b2) Physical Layers
Another hot topic in relation to IPN network concerns the
physical layers. Novel physical layers are currently under
investigation by considering power efficient modulation and
coding
schemes,
the
exploitation
of
Extremely
High
Frequency (EHF) bands
and
the employment of Ultra
Wideband (UWB) communications technologies for satellite
and IPN links.
In particular, the utilization of EHF bands allows obtaining
a good trade-off between antenna size, bandwidth availability
and path loss, [7]. They can be fully exploited in space
communications and may represent an answer to the saturation
of lower frequency bands, the growth of data-rate requests and
the reduction of mass and size of equipment.
Ultra Wideband (UWB) communications for satellite and
IPN
links
is
another
topic
under
investigation.
The
performance studies in the literature [8] concerning UWB
signals over satellite links with the constraints on the received
power on the Earth surface shows that, in the mentioned
conditions, it is possible to achieve a data rate of 236 Mb/s.
b3) Networking Aspects
Concerning networking, traditional TCP/IP systems are not
suitable for the IPN networks where transmissions are affected
by very large delays and possible lack of connectivity. This
does lead to exploit the DTN networking paradigm [5] in the
IPN context.
As regards Transport Layer protocols, in [2] it emerges clearly
that windows-based mechanisms used by the current TCP
protocols, both for wired and wireless networks, achieve very
poor performance in deep space communication networks,
because of extremely high propagation delays. Also the TCP
extensions
for
the
space
segment,
such
as
the
Space
Communications Protocol Standards - Transport Protocol
(SCPS-TP) developed by Consultative Committee for Space
Data
Systems
(CCSDS),
have
not
demonstrated
to
be
satisfactory enough. The introduction of a bundling approach
has
allowed
reliable
transport
over
intermittent
links.
Nevertheless, a transport layer protocol, specifically tailored
for IPN communication, is needed. In [9], the Licklider
Transmission Protocol (LTP) is introduced for transmission of
the bundles between bundling nodes. To achieve efficient
routing, new mechanisms are needed. In more detail, the DTN
architecture provides a framework for routing and forwarding
at the bundle layer for unicast, anycast, and multicast
messages that need to be exploited and enhanced. As
explained in [2], also possible Data Link Layer solutions
suited to be employed in the IPN Internet exist. Nevertheless,
this area is vastly unexplored and open to extensive research
efforts to develop innovative solutions coherent with the
requirements of the IPN Internet.
b4) Network Controls
Another important topic concerning IPN networks is the
reconfigurable protocol stack, which is aimed at using
information from other protocol layers, and automating the
communication process in extreme environments such as the
IPN one. It is the principle of cross-layer design, which is
envisaged again in [2] as a necessary solution for highly
challenging environments. In this perspective, future extension
of this work want to explicitly fill the control gap in the
currently employed communications and networking solutions
applied to IPN networks.
IV.
IPN NETWORK ARCHITECTURE STUDY
The design of the system architecture of an IPN network
concerns the definition of the number and type of required
satellites and ground stations and their location/trajectory. The
design of the system architecture is driven by:

the
minimization of number of events of link
blackouts;

the
minimization
of
average
duration
of
link
blackouts;

the minimization of point-to-point link propagation
delay;

the maximization of number of alternative routes .
The causes of blackouts can be: link obscuration between
planets, situations of solar conjunctions or out of coverage.
The analysis of the proposed architecture (described in Section
II) has been carried out for a sample period of 24 hours and in
this analysis only the former cause has occurred. It is evident
that the complete study of all the events that occur in an IPN
mission requires a prohibitively long sample period (many
years) which should include all the possible geometric
configurations of the architecture. However, in order to set up
a significant and feasible simulation scenario, this 24 hours
sample period has been selected so that the most important
events regarding link blackouts are included.
The architecture considered in this paper is an example of
a possible realization of IPN Internet with planetary networks
on Earth, Moon and Mars. The proposed example represents
an interesting benchmark for the comparison with more
complex
system
architectures.
Furthermore,
this
system
architecture
is
here
analyzed
so
that
the
performance
evaluation of link parameters (i.e. availability, delay and path
loss) can be used for the simulation of network protocols (as
introduced in Section VI) employing ns-2 simulator.
It is worth noting that no cable connections between
ground stations have been considered and landers can only
communicate with the relative planetary network of orbiters.
Furthermore, the lunar lander LS1 is positioned on the
dark side of the Moon, and hence, it could not communicate
directly with the Earth without using a Lunar relay orbiter.
Lunar orbiters has the further task to relay the communications
between Mars and Earth when direct communication is not
possible.
The average blackout duration for a selected set of IPN
links between external nodes is summarized in Table I.
TABLE I AVERAGE BLACKOUT DURATION FOR A SELECTION OF IPN LINKS.
Link
Average
blackout
duration
Link
Average blackout
duration
LO1-GEO1
2286 s
LO1-MO1
2157 s
LO1-GEO2
2496 s
LO1-MO2
2258 s
LO1-GEO3
2170 s
LO1-MO3
1209 s
LO2-GEO1
2453 s
LO1-MO4
1209 s
LO2-GEO2
2410 s
LO2-MO1
2157 s
LO2-GEO3
2156 s
LO2-MO2
2258 s
ES1-LO1
10230 s
LO2-MO3
1209 s
ES1-LO2
8939 s
LO2-MO4
1209 s
ES1-MO1
6797 s
ES1-MO3
17198 s
ES1-MO2
6726 s
ES1-MO4
17199 s
121
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

From the values of the average blackout duration, it can be
noticed that the DSN Earth station ES1 (Canberra), and hence
similarly ES2 (Goldstone) and ES3 (Madrid), shows a long
blackout duration of the links to the Lunar or Martian orbiters.
However, this is overcome by using alternative links through
three GEO satellites.
Another important aspect of the system architecture is the
propagation delay. The mean value of the propagation delay is
shown in Table II for a selection of IPN links. The
propagation delay can be as long as 20 minutes in the case of
Mars-Earth connection. However, since the shortest path from
Mars to Earth (i.e. the MSx-MOy-ESz path) is not always
available, in many cases the total end-to-end delay can be
much higher.
TABLE II AVERAGE PROPAGATION DELAY FOR A SELECTION OF IPN LINKS.
Link
Average
propagation
delay
Link
Average
propagation
delay
LO1-GEO1
1.25 s
LO1-MO1
1210 s
LO1-GEO2
1.25 s
LO1-MO2
1210 s
LO1-GEO3
1.25 s
LO1-MO3
1210 s
LO2-GEO1
1.25 s
LO1-MO4
1210 s
LO2-GEO2
1.25 s
LO2-MO1
1210 s
LO2-GEO3
1.25 s
LO2-MO2
1210 s
ES1-LO1
1.3 s
LO2-MO3
1210 s
ES1-LO2
1.3 s
LO2-MO4
1210 s
ES1-MO1
1210 s
ES1-MO3
1210 s
ES1-MO2
1210 s
ES1-MO4
1210 s
The data rate of each link has been computed on the basis
of
the
DVB-S2
standard
and
with
realistic
values
of
transmission power and antenna size [10]. The performance of
the DVB-S2 standard in terms of Bit Error Rate (BER) versus
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) Es/N0 follows a threshold
behavior which is due to the adopted modulation and coding
schemes. In fact when the SNR is lower than the required
Es/N0 the BER is very large, while when the SNR is larger
than the required Es/N0 the performance of the system is quasi
error free (BER=10-10) [11]. Therefore, a constant data rate has
been considered. It has been computed in each link for the
maximum
distance
(worst
case)
by
using
the
lowest
modulation index and code rate (i.e. QPSK 1/4) with a packet
length of 64,800 bits. However, since the DVB-S2 standard
foresees adaptive coding and modulation schemes and the
propagation losses are highly variable, another possible
approach is to consider variable data rates on the basis of the
selected modulation and coding scheme for every set of
propagation losses.
TABLE III DATA RATE FOR A SELECTION OF IPN LINKS.
Link
Forward link data rate
Reverse link data
rate
LOx-GEOx
100 kbps
100 kbps
LOx-MOx
1 kbps
1 kbps
ESx-GEOx
10000 kbps
10000 kbps
ESx-LOx
1000 kbps
100 kbps
ESx-MOx
10 kbps
1 kbps
The parameters reported in Table I, II and III have been
also employed in the performed simulations described in the
following Sections.
V.
COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING
SOLUTIONS: A GENERAL OVERVIEW
a) Topological Solutions
The first important topic to be addressed in an efficient and
reliable IPN network, which suffers the problem previously
described, is the design of a system of space systems such that
the durations of the link unavailability and the propagation
delay (i.e., the path length) are minimized. Therefore, the
research, currently ongoing and object of future extension of
this paper, concerns the optimization of the architecture,
defining the number and type of the required satellites and
ground stations and their location [6, 12]. The envisaged
optimization will consider a combination of the average
duration of the link unavailability and the average propagation
delay and it will deal with the orbital parameters of each
satellite included in the IPN architecture. In general it is
possible to design a planetary satellite constellation network
and a set of ground stations such that the availability of
communication links is ensured, but this implies very high
costs. As a consequence, a constraint on the maximum number
of satellites will be fixed and the performance of the
architecture in terms of link availability and propagation delay
will be optimized. A new type of satellite constellations that
can be used in the system optimization process is represented
by
the
Flower
Constellations
set.
The
name
Flower
Constellation (FC) has been chosen because of the compatible
orbit relative trajectories in the Earth-Centered Earth-Fixed
(ECEF) reference frame, resemble flower petals. A FC is a set
of spacecrafts characterized by the same repeating space track,
a property obtained through a suitable phasing scheme [12].
The FC approach provides great flexibility and interesting
dynamics. In particular, the FCs can be designed to offer dual
compatibility, hence providing synchronization with both the
Earth and the target planet (e.g. Mars). This synchronization
can be exploited in such a way that the link availability is
maximized and the propagation delay is minimized.
b) Communications and Networking.
The second scientific topic to address in the considered
IPN
environment,
concerns
advanced
physical
layers,
networking
layers
and
control
procedures
suited
for
application in the IPN scenario. It is worth noting that the IPN
nodes will not be based on traditional Internet Protocols, but
on innovative optimized protocols, though compatible with the
former ones. This point has been highlighted since the origin
of the IPN Internet when, at the beginning of this decade, the
first short-lived IRTF “Interplanetary Internet” group was
founded by Vint Cerf and a couple of internet-drafts were
proposed. In particular, at the turn of 2002 and 2003 the IPN
problem scope widens to “Delay Tolerant Networking”
(proposed by Kevin Fall, mainly) and the concept of bundle,
briefly described below in Section VI.a, was created.
The IPN nodes will include adaptive functions that will
allow employing them in each part of the considered network
whatever channel conditions are experienced.
TCP/IP systems are poorly suited for adoption in networks
where links operate intermittently and over extremely long
122
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

propagation delay. This analysis leads to propose a network
architecture based on an independent middleware, the Bundle
Layer, which is the key element of the Delay/Disrupt Tolerant
Network (DTN) paradigm [5, 9]. This architecture uses an
overlay protocol, which allows storing packets, between the
application and the locally optimized protocol stacks. The
overlay protocol serves to bridge different stacks at the
boundaries between environments (e.g., PN Network and IPN
Backbone)
providing
a
general-purpose
application-level
gateway. It is the networking paradigm considered. However,
it is not sufficient to offer reliable and efficient transmission
over the IPN Internet because of the dynamics of the
considered environment. A more insightful approach is needed
for the join optimization of the bundle overlay layer and the
other layers.
VI.
THE IPN NODE FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE
Starting from the general overview proposed previously, in
this paper a functional architecture suited to be employed in
IPN networks has been proposed. In this Section, moreover,
the introductive performance investigation of some features of
the
proposed
node
(Multicast
Transmission
and
Link
Selection) have been included.
The envisaged IPN Node architecture is reported in Figure
4. It includes the Bundle Layer and a Higher Convergence
Layer that act as bridge between two different portions: a
standard stack (e.g., the TCP/IP one) used to connect common
network devices to the IPN Node and the space protocol stack
suited to be employed in the IPN environment. The Higher
Convergence Layer will allow managing traffic flows both
sent by standard
and DTN-compatible hosts. It acts as
adaptation layer and realizes the backward compatibility with
common protocol stacks. After the adaptation phase all
packets become bundles (the transmission unit of DTNs) and
they are sent though specific transport and network layers
designed for the space portion of the IPN network. The IPN
Node transport and network protocols parameters will be
adaptively optimized starting from the employed channel
conditions. Data Link and Physical Layers have been again
differentiated into two families: Long and Short-haul. In the
former case, the lower layers solutions will be specialized for
very long distance channels (e.g., between satellites of the IPN
backbone). In the latter case, solutions are suited to be used in
short
distance
channels
(e.g.,
between
spacecrafts
and
proximity satellites of the IPN network or between PN
satellites and planet surfaces). The Lower Convergence Layer
acts as selector between the Long or Short-haul layers in
dependence on the position of the IPN network elements.
Long and Short-haul protocols, opportunely designed for the
IPN environment, allow implementing possible adaptive
functionalities of the lower layers.
In the following, each layer of the IPN node has been
briefly described and some considerations concerning the
related open research issues have been included.
Figure 4.
IPN Node Protocol Stack
a) Bundle Layer
To match the IPN environment requirements, the Bundle
Layer needs to be extended. In more detail, its current
specification does not include error detection mechanisms of
bundles. It opens the doors to the employment of application
layer coding, both in terms of source coding and error
detection and recovery approaches. Other important open
issues related to the Bundle Layer will be taken into account:
the bundle size optimization and the related problem of
fragmentation; the study and the design of common bundle
layer routing approaches for the IPN environment; the Quality
of Service (QoS) concept, whose meaning in the IPN network
differs from the common one, together with new QoS
mechanisms
suited
to
be
exploited
in
the
considered
environment.
b) Transport and Network Layers
The performance issues of the space transport and network
layers represent another important research topic of the IPN
node design [2]. In terms of recovery procedures and
congestion control schemes, new transport protocol will be
developed. For example, Additive Increase/Multiplicative
Decrease concepts, able to cope with blackout events by
taking advantage of probing packets will be taken into account
to realize the transport layer. In turn, in the case of unavailable
or strongly asymmetric return links, the transport protocol’s
reliability will be ensured by using appropriate strategies
based on erasure codes. The problem of congestion events
occurring at deep space IPN Node will be also solved by
considering call admission and flow control schemes together
with effective storage routing strategies.
The IPN Node protocol stack will also support the point-
multipoint applications. Multicast/broadcast transmissions will
allow reaching several IPN nodes, so optimizing the resource
utilization.
This
requires
the
introduction
of
Multicast
123
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Transmission approaches whose possible enhancements will
be object of future and extensive research.
In this sub-section some preliminary simulation results,
carried out by means of ns-2 simulator, have been provided.
Performance analysis has been conducted by implementing in
ns-2 the network topology and its evolution respectively
described in Figure 3 an Section IV. In particular, two
different files have been used as input for ns-2 simulator: the
former providing bandwidth capacities and propagation delays
of different links, while the latter giving information regarding
to all the link blackouts. These files are obtained from IPN
network simulative studies described in Section IV. It is worth
noting that results shown in this sub-section (VI.b) are
obtained utilizing the standard version of ns-2, where packets
delivery is based on the standard internet protocols, while in
the remaining sub-sections, the ns-2 simulator has been up-
grated with ns-DTN module introducing an DTN-Agent with
Bundle Protocols functionalities. In more details, in the
network simulator-2 the DTN module is implemented like a
transport layer protocol, defining for each DTN node an Agent
able to manage efficiently the routing and the reliable packets
delivery. Moreover, the DTN-Agent supports the custody
transfer procedure and
allows to exchange bundle protocol
signaling among the different DTN nodes.
They show the impact of multicast data delivery in deep
space
exploration
missions.
In
particular,
it
has
been
highlighted the advantages that could be obtained utilizing
groups
oriented
applications
respect
to
point-to-point
transmissions in the IPN scenario.
It is worth noting that, in the depicted IPN topology,
(reported in Figure 3) two different kind of Multicast
Connections
could
be
thought:
(i)
Multicast
Forward
Connections (MFC), where sources are, for instance, Earth
Mission Centers and receivers are the deep space nodes;
Multicast Reverse Connections (MRC), for communications
from
remote
planets
to
Earth.
As
mentioned
in
the
introduction, the MFC could be used for Mission Applications
to provide control information and to upgrade the software
implemented in the IPN nodes. While, MRC could be utilized
for Scientist and Public Applications to receive planetary
images, videos and experimental results acquired by space
stations.
The results highlight how a multicast approach could lead
to a most efficient resource management compared with
Unicast techniques. For instance, considering a scenario where
a terrestrial node (i.e. ES1) sends data to receivers of a
multicast group located on two different planets and supposing
that four receivers belong to such a multicast group (two
scattered on the Moon and the other ones located on Mars) the
situation is as follows. Unicast approach foresees four
connections between sender and receivers; this means that the
same information is sent on the channel four times. Therefore,
in this case a Unicast approach increases the accesses to the
links needed to forward the same packet. Clearly, such a issue
is more manifest when the number of receivers increases.
While, a multicast approach always foresees the same number
of accesses (i.e. one each planet) regardless of the number of
receivers belonging to the same multicast group. These result
are depicted in Figure 5 varying the number of multicast
receiver for region/planet. The obtained result demonstrates
that a multicast approach in IPN networks gives the following
advantages: (i) it reduces the links utilization, saving radio
resources that could be utilized to supply transmission of
further services; (ii) it optimizes the memorization units size
(buffer
size)
and
reduces
the
signalization
due
to
acknowledgment procedures and routing.
Figure 5.
Number of accesses to the links varying the number of receivers
per region.
The next results concern how Unicast and Multicast
transmissions affect the buffer size (in terms of maximum
number of packets that can be memorized) of IPN nodes. We
assumed that the buffer size is equal for each IPN node. Figure
6 depicts the obtained results for a MFC connection in term of
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR).
Figure 6.
MCF: PDR varying buffer size.
How mentioned above Unicast transmissions foresee that
the same information is sent on the channel for all the
receivers. From Figure 6 such an issue affects the limits in
terms of buffer size more in Unicast approach than in
Multicast ones, clearly. On the other hands whether the buffer
size is increased then the PDR also increases. From a buffer
size equal to 500 packets (i.e. 83,4% of the overall forwarded
traffic) there are not loss due to congestion of the buffers,
considering multicast transmission.
In this case, the bottlenecks in the nodes MO1 and LO1 are
the main reason of packets loss. Therefore, also in this case a
Multicast
approach
improves
the
performances
in
IPN
network with respect to Unicast transmission. Moreover, it is
worth noting that these results have been obtained by
considering unreliable traffic only. This means that a packet is
removed from the buffer as soon as it is sent on the radio link.
In case of reliable Multicast transmissions the propagation
124
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

delays on the links have to be taken into account; they clearly
can get worse the performance showed in Figure 6 in both
Unicast
and
Multicast
approach,
but
affecting
Unicast
Transmissions significantly.
Future activities are aimed to improve the performance of
Multicast Transmission in IPN network implementing DTN
paradigm. In particular, the research activity will deal with the
following issues: (i) definition of procedures for notifications
and
registration/de-registration
of
multicast
groups;
(ii)
definition of multicast routing protocols that utilize models
based on both tree or mesh topologies, in order to minimize
the path length between source and destinations and to
increase the probability that the bundle is delivered to as many
destination nodes as possible; (iii) definition of transport and
bundle
layers
suitable
to
provide
end-to-end
reliable
connections,
defining
efficient
transmission
and
retransmission
procedures.
In
this
context,
the
storing
functionalities for the store-and-forward policies have to be
design in order to guarantee data persistence in DTN nodes
also for relatively large time slots. For dealing with that, DTN
aggregates data into bundles and stores them in persistent
storage of different IPN nodes so that in case of loss of
connectivity, the bundles could be retransmitted from the
closest storage points rather than from the source node. A key
Bundle Protocol innovation is known as Custodial Delivery.
The memorization functionality in DTN nodes will be
considered as a new network resource that has to be
administered and protected. Fundamental open issues in the
definition of a new protocol stack are related to these topics.
At the moment, the Bundle Protocol specifies the procedures
for supporting custodial delivery of bundles destined to
unicast applications. However, it does not discuss how
Custodial Delivery should be provided for bundles destined to
multicast
groups
(multicast
bundle). There
is
a
strong
motivation for using custodial multicast in IPN to preserve the
already-scarce resource of bandwidth during transmission and
retransmission procedures [3].
c) Data Link and Physical Layers
Data Link Layers protocols of the IPN node include
functionalities concerning the medium access control (MAC)
and error control functions. Also in this case, advanced
network control features need to be considered and they are
aimed at optimizing the utilization of IPN channels. For both
Long and Short-haul physical layers, specific solutions will be
studied in terms of bandwidth/power efficient modulations and
low complexity channel
codes
with
high
coding
gain.
Waveforms design and the exploitation of Ultra WideBand
(UWB) systems needs to be considered with the goal to reduce
the complexity of the system and the sensitivity to IPN
channels’ non-linearity [8].
Also space physical layer solutions that exploit Extremely
High Frequency (EHF) bands can be taken into account. EHF
employment, in particular the W-band [7], represents an
answer to the needs of IPN links: the saturation of lower
frequency bands, the growth of data-rate request and the
reduction of mass and size of equipment. Considering that the
main disadvantage of the use of W-band frequencies is the
atmospheric attenuation, the benefits of its employment could
be
fully
exploited
in
deep
space
channels
where
the
atmosphere is absent. The reduced antenna size due to the use
of higher frequencies represents a further advantage of this
choice.
Two important factors that should be considered when
dealing with the physical layer design are: antenna pointing
and energy consumption. The reduction of antenna size has a
positive impact on the pointing subsystem. On the other hand,
the design of the physical and link layers should constrained in
terms of QoS metrics and should be optimized in terms of
energy efficiency.
d) Convergence Layers
Convergence Layers, both Higher and Lower, and IPN
Network
Control
approaches
concern
another
group
of
innovative solutions, envisaged in this work, which needs to
be developed. As previously said, the action of the Higher
Convergence Layer is to offer a common interface to the
transport layers (space and standard). The Lower Convergence
Layer will offer a common interface towards data link and
physical layers and vice versa and it will offer innovative
control functions in terms of selection of the opportune lower
layer stack (e.g., vertical handover) by considering the
situation in which the IPN Node operates (long- or short-haul
network segment).
e) Network Controls
In order to smooth the effect of the intrinsic heterogeneity
of the IPN network, adaptive mechanisms [13], based on the
cross-layer principle [2], are needed. It means that appropriate
solutions are necessary to harmonize each single layer solution
and jointly optimize the capabilities of IPN Node layers. For
example, the transport and network protocol parameters need
to be dynamically tuned in dependence on the channels and
network status, which is unpredictable, and on the basis of
blackouts, which are predictable due to the knowledge of the
IPN Network Elements’ orbits (for satellites and orbiters) and
trajectories (in the case of spacecrafts and probes).
The same concept holds true for all protocol layers, also
with respect to the position of the IPN Node within the IPN
topology.
Figure
7
reports
the
envisaged
main
blocks
concerning both data and control planes and synthetically
indicates the main envisaged functions of each control
component.
The chosen DTN paradigm, and the developed protocol
solutions jointly used with novel network control procedures
will
allow
the
optimization
of
the
networking
and
communication mechanisms of the IPN Node so guaranteeing
a reliable and efficient communication process over the IPN
Internet.
125
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7.
IPN Node Data and Control Planes.
In the set of possible Network Controls, a partially
unexplored solution concerns the Link Selection strategies
based on the exploitation of the Bundle Layer of the DTN
paradigm. In more detail, Link Selection techniques, also
called Congestion Aware Routing, have been proposed in [4]
where the mathematical framework has been formalised. It has
been taken as example in this paper.
In synthesis, the approaches proposed allow selecting a
forwarding link, among the available ones, by optimising one
or different metrics, simultaneously. In fact, in this paper, the
optimization of one metric has been considered: the Bundle
Buffer Occupancy (BBO). The Bundle Buffer Occupancy is
the ratio between the number of bundles stored in the bundle
layer buffer and the maximum size of the buffer itself. The
evaluated
Link
Selection
technique
is
based
on
its
minimization.
As previously introduced, performance analysis has been
conducted by taking network topology depicted in Figure 3 as
reference and by considering the bandwidth capacities and
propagation delays reported in the analysis of Section IV. All
the link blackouts, due to IPN node movements, have been
also included in the simulations whose results have been
reported in the following. Moreover, each node implements a
bundle layer buffer size equal to 400 bundles. Constant Bit
Rate (CBR) traffic sources are considered: they are kept active
for 50 s each hour of simulation and generate data bundles of
64 Kbytes at rate of 1 bundles/s, yielding 512 Kbit/s.
Furthermore, in this case, the traffic sources have been set on
the planetary regions, and in particular the traffic sources are
the nodes MS1 and MS2 from the remote planet, LS1 and LS2
from the Moon. They send data over Earth to ET1, ET2, ET3
and ET4, respectively, which are set as receivers. The
simulation duration was of 7200 s (2 hours out of 24, which is
the duration of the analysis proposed in Section IV) for each
test carried out by ns-2 simulations.
The proposed results concern a macroscopic analysis of the
Link
Selection
method’s
performance.
It
looks
into
performance provided by the whole network and, in this view,
two metrics have been considered: Bundle Loss Rate (BLR)
and Data Delivery Time (DDT) coherently with [4]. The first
is defined as ratio between the number of received and of
transmitted bundles. The second accounts for the time interval
required to complete the data delivery to destinations. It is
possible to observe, in Figure 8, the Bundle Loss Rate
(BLR %) performance for each Flow where Flow1 is the data
flow between LS1 to ET1, Flow2 is the data flow between
LS2 to ET2, Flow3 is the data flow between MS1 to ET3 and
Flow4 is the data flow between MS2 to ET4. The BLR
measured highlights quite effective results. This means that a
Link Selection Control (or Congestion Aware Routing) allows
reaching good network performance also in challenging
network as the IPN ones. In more detail, Flow1 is privileged
with respect to the others. Actually, it is mainly due to the
simulated period: in the first 2 hours, out of 24, the link
blackouts have penalized Flow4 and, partially, Flow2 and
Flow3. Moreover, Flow3 and Flow4 experience very low link
capacities over the IPN network due to the very high distance
between Mars and Earth.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Flow1
Flow2
Flow3
Flow4
BLR %
Figure 8.
Bundle Loss Rate [%]
On the other hand, as far as Data Delivery Time (DDT) is
concerned, it can be observed from Figure 9 that the Link
Selection solution offer satisfactory performance. The shown
DDT can appear very high but the enormous propagation
delays and the very small available link capacities do not
allow better performance. It is obvious in particular in case of
transmissions from the remote planet (Mars in Figure 3): they
require almost the overall time that has been simulates (about
two hours). Transmission from the Moon requires about 260
[s] in average.
126
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Flow1
Flow2
Flow3
Flow4
DDT [s]
Figure 9.
Data Delivery Time [s]
However, from the introductive evaluation proposed, it is
worth noting that the proposed control technique have
promising performance. This opens the doors to future
extensions and investigations that will analyse in-depth the
performance of the Link Selection over the considered
network architecture.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
From
the
proposed
IPN
network
analysis
and
the
envisaged IPN node architecture, it appears clear that the
technological challenges described in this paper are of great
interest on a basic research perspective, and, simultaneously,
let the space communications sector be strategically capable to
provide
future
competitive
services
and
solutions.
The
presented work opens the doors to new communications and
networking challenges, which are the ones of the so called
InterPlaNetary (IPN) Internet. In particular, the described
innovative protocol solutions jointly used with novel network
control
procedures
will
allow
the
optimization
of
the
networking and communication mechanisms of the network’s
nodes so guaranteeing a reliable and efficient communication
process over the IPN Internet.
These solutions will be the object of ongoing and future
research that will be developed as extensions of this work,
which represents an introductive overview of them.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Araniti, I. Bisio, and M. De Sanctis, “Towards the Reliable and
Efficient Interplanetary Internet: a Survey of Possible Advanced
Networking
and
Communications
Solutions”,
First
International
Conference on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications,
SPACOMM 2009, Colmar, France, July 20-25, 2009.
[2]
I. Akyildiz, O. E. Akan, C. Chen, J. Fang, and W. Su, “The State of the
Art in InterPlaNetary Internet,” IEEE Communications Magazine, July
2004 pp. 108–118.
[3]
S. Symington, R. C. Durst, and K. Scott, "Custodial Multicast in Delay
Tolerant
Networks"
Consumer
Communications
and
Networking
Conference, 2007. CCNC 2007. 4th IEEE Jan. 2007 Page(s):207 - 211.
[4]
I. Bisio, T. de Cola, and
M. Marchese, “Congestion Aware Routing
Strategies for DTN-based Interplanetary Networks,” IEEE GLOBECOM
2008, New Orleans, LA, USA, Nov.-Dec. 2008.
[5]
V. Cerf, et. al., “Protocol Specification”, IETF RFC 4838, experimental,
April 2007.
[6]
M. Lo, “Satellite-Constellation Design”, IEEE Computing in Science
and Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 58-67, January 1999.
[7]
E. Re,
M. Ruggeri,
V. Dainelli, M. Ferri, , “Millimeter Wave
Technology for
Moon
and Mars
Exploration”,
IEEE
Aerospace
Conference 2008, Big Sky (MO), 1-8 March 2008.
[8]
Y. Kunisawa, H. Ishikawa, H. Iwai, and H. Shinonaga, “Satellite
Communications using Ultra Wideband (UWB) Signals,” Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Advanced Radio Technologies
(ISART 2004), March 2-4, 2004.
[9]
S. K. Burleigh, M. Ramadas, and S. Farrell, “Licklider Transmission
Protocol - Motivation,” RFC 5325, Sept. 2008.
[10] G.K. Noreen, et al., “Integrated network architecture for sustained
human and robotic exploration,” IEEE Aerospace Conference 2005 (Big
Sky, Montana), 5-12 March 2005.
[11] Digital
Video
Broadcasting
(DVB),
Second
generation
framing
structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting,
Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite
applications, ETSI EN 302 307, v1.1.2, 2006.
[12] M. De Sanctis, et al., “Flower Constellation of Orbiters for Martian
Communication”, IEEE Aerospace Conference 2007, Big Sky (MT,
USA), March 3-10, 2007.
[13] C. Peoples, G. Parr, B. Scotney, and A. Moore, “A Reconfigurable
Context-Aware Protocol Stack for Interplanetary Communication,” In
proc. IWSSC 2007, Salzburg, Austria, September 2007, pp. 163-167.
127
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

