Blockchain and Image Processing to Reinforce  
Provenance in the Narrative of a Handwoven Carpet 
Amirhossein Roshanzamirᵃ, Vishanth Weerakkodyᵃ, Nripendra Ranaᵃ, Mohammad Rahmatiᵇ, Mehdi Shajariᵇ 
ᵃFaculty of Management, Law and Social Sciences, University of Bradford  
Bradford, UK 
ᵃ{A.H.Roshanzamir, V.Weerakkody, N.P.Rana}@bradford.ac.uk 
ᵇDepartment of Computer Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology  
Tehran, Iran  
ᵇ{Rahmati, Mshajari}@aut.ac.ir 
Abstract—The sharing economy, which is empowered by 
digital technologies, drives platform business models and 
creates new forms of growth and value, which disrupts many 
businesses. The essential challenge for the formation of 
business interactions between individuals in the context of 
platforms is mutual trust. Blockchain, with broad applications 
in different domains, is an emerging technology to build trust 
and improve transparency and traceability within the sharing 
economy and platform business models. The purpose of this 
paper is to explore the role of blockchain in disrupting the 
luxury industry and leveraging storytelling to create an 
immutable digital identity. The paper will review the business 
model of Chamrosh Technology, which transforms a 
handwoven carpet into the smart carpet. Within the model, 
blockchain is reinforcing provenance in the narrative of a 
handwoven carpet, and image processing is generating 
a digital fingerprint to deal with counterfeits.  
Keywords–Smart Carpet; Startup; Storytelling; Handwoven 
carpet; 
Blockchain; 
IoT; 
Identity 
management; 
Image 
processing; Carpet fingerprinting  
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extension of the work initially presented 
in the Eighth International Conference on Ambient 
Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies [1] 
which discussed the role of digital technologies in 
transforming handwoven carpet to the smart carpet and co-
creating value with carpet fans to influence their behavior.   
The rise of the sharing economy, which is empowered 
by innovation and growth in digital technologies, drives 
online peer-to-peer platforms where individuals can 
leverage their existing and under-utilized assets to create 
value together [1]. The essential challenge for the formation 
of interactions between individuals is mutual trust [2]-[5]. 
Many businesses and industries are being transformed by 
these digitized, open, and participative platforms, which act 
as a Trusted Third Party (TTP) and commercially connect 
suppliers and consumers. Through these platforms, 
companies such as Alibaba, Uber, and Airbnb are disrupting 
retail, 
transportation, and accommodation industries, 
respectively. Disruption is associated in part with 
“Disruptive Innovation Theory” coined by Clayton 
Christensen [6] and refers to the fact that even successful 
companies are at high risk that their product, system, or 
technology become obsolete. Disruption usually happens 
when a newcomer displaces the value proposition of the 
incumbent by offering a cheaper and more accessible 
solution and later poses a barrier that would prevent the 
incumbent from quickly imitating a similar model [7].  
The luxury goods industry has also experienced 
disruption by innovation in the sharing economy, which is 
driven by digital technologies. On the one hand, the sharing 
economy has displaced the value proposition of luxury 
brands by providing access to goods and services through 
online platforms [1]. On the other hand, the entire value 
chain of luxury goods from procuring raw materials, design, 
and production up to in-store experience, and even 
consumption is personalized and transformed by digital 
technologies [1].  
Blockchain with broad applications in different 
industries can improve transparency and traceability within 
the supply chain of luxury goods and verify authenticity. A 
blockchain is a data structure which combines multiple 
technologies including cryptography and peer-to-peer 
networks to create a digital and decentralized ledger of data 
and share it among a network of independent parties 
[2][3][8]. Decentralized system and cryptography enable 
each participant to manage the ledger securely without the 
need for a central authority to enforce the rules [2][8]. 
Blockchain can, therefore, generate trust for the entities who 
do not know each by building a secured medium in which 
data are protected from unauthorized access. That is why 
blockchain is proliferating in different sectors especially 
where identity management and verification are required 
This study explores the emerging role of blockchain to 
disrupt the luxury Industry and further discusses how to 
reinforce the provenance of a handwoven carpet and deal 
with counterfeiting. The rest of this paper is organized as 
follows. A brief overview of the smart carpet and 
background of blockchain is presented in Section II. The 
four elements of storytelling are presented in Section III 
where it is also discussed how they can be reinforced  by 
digital technologies. In Section IV, the smart carpet business 
model is reviewed to show how blockchain can reinforce the 
provenance and leverage the power of storytelling to prove 
the origin and verify the authenticity of a handwoven carpet. 
The collaboration of two startups is discussed in Section V. 
The challenges of the smart carpet model are identified in 
Section VI where image processing is reviewed as an 
innovative solution to generate a digital fingerprint to deal 
with counterfeit carpets. Discussion is presented in Section 
VII which is followed by the conclusion and future works in 
Section VIII. Contribution is summarized in Section IX. 
61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II.
BACKGROUND
The concept of smart carpet was first introduced in a 
research project which aimed at developing a sensor system 
to detect falls and summon assistance for older adults who 
cannot use wearable devices due to cognitive deficits [9]. 
Later, other applications of a smart carpet such as physical 
therapy emerged where the walking pattern of the owner is 
detected and analyzed. With the help of the therapist, it is 
argued that these patterns can predict mobility problems and 
correct them [10]. Also, it is shown that the smart carpet can 
identify the presence of an intruder by acting as a kind of 
alarm system which detects environmental threats, like fires 
[10].  
Roshanzamir et al. [1], for the first time, discuss how the 
Internet of Things (IoT), blockchain, and platform business 
can offer a game-changing solution and disrupt handwoven 
carpet business by bringing transparency and trust to the 
supply chain, dealing with counterfeiting and increasing 
customer engagement. They suggested an extension built 
upon the EIC model [11] in which it is argued that digital 
technologies can improve operations and contribute to the 
marketing campaign and create strong brands by generating 
an immutable digital certificate [1].  
Figure 1. The practical extension of the EIC model [1] 
The framework breaks down the narrative of a carpet 
from the time procuring of knots and weaving starts in a 
simple connection of cause and effect. The blockchain 
globally stores, and collaboratively writes a list of all 
transactions that have ever taken place within a given 
system [12] and offers the possibility to keep the whole 
story of a carpet in a decentralized system. 
Blockchain technology can, therefore, reinforce trust 
between individuals because it is a decentralized database, 
without a central repository and usually without a central 
authority. Blockchain functions as an immutable digital 
ledger and generates the list of records that are bundled 
together in so-called blocks. The ledger is distributed across 
many participants in a peer-to-peer network as a block that 
is duplicated thousands of times across a network of 
computers. Each block has three major components that are: 
data including facts or transactions plus timestamps, a hash 
of the previous block, and a hash of the existing block to be 
added in the next block [13][14].  
A hash is created by using a mathematical function or 
algorithm to convert the input of letters and numbers into an 
encrypted output of a fixed length. Processing the hash 
functions to encrypt new blocks or decrypt previous blocks 
requires substantial computer processing power, which is 
very costly.  
Figure 2. Connecting blocks and checking the hash function 
Types of transactions and rules, which can be carried 
out, must be agreed between participants in advance and 
stored in the blockchain as a smart contract which was 
introduced in 1997 by Nick Szabo [15] to ensure that 
everyone is fulfilling the rules. The main components of 
the smart contract are a set of executable functions and 
state variables. Each transaction has some input 
parameters which are required by a function in the 
contract. During the execution of a function, the status of 
the state variables is changed depending on the logic 
implementation. The new blocks are constantly added and 
updated to the chain, and data in any given block can only 
be altered by modifying all previous blocks, which would 
require the control over a majority of computing power in 
the network. The benefits and innovation of blockchain, 
described in below key characteristics  from a combination 
of four technologies: a distributed data storage; peer-to-
peer 
networks; 
cryptographic 
algorithms; 
and 
decentralized consensus mechanism [16]-[18]: 
• Distributed ledger: Blocks are recorded, duplicated,
shared and synchronized on independent computers 
(referred to as nodes) with no centralized data storage. The 
indistinguishable copies available on different nodes allow 
participants to validate information without a central 
authority and make it failure resistant, even if few nodes 
fail.  
• Immutable: Blocks are time-stamped, and each block
is connected to the one before and after it within the same 
transaction in a growing chain structure. This creates an 
irreversible, immutable chain in which the trail and history 
of blocks and transactions cannot be modified.  
• Secure: Blocks are permanently recorded and
encrypted in a growing chain, which makes them impossible 
to delete, edit, or even copy already created block and add 
them in the network. This ensures a high level of robustness 
and trust.  
• Consensus 
mechanism: 
A 
transaction 
on 
the
blockchain can be executed once the parties on the network 
unanimously approve it. This stop illegal and bad 
transactions and blocks.  
Blockchain can, therefore, generate trust for the entities 
who do not know each other by making data and the 
relevant digital identity tough to change due to decentralized 
62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

features and very hard to read due to cryptography (hash 
function). That is why blockchain has been successfully 
expanding its application across different domains including 
investment, logistics, global organizations, and even 
governments where identity management and verification 
are required. More importantly, blockchain can provide 
emerging opportunities in the platform business model since 
it facilitates real-time granular visibility, ensures trust, and 
enforces security using a chronological order of smart 
contracts. These contracts can automatically implement a 
binding agreement between two or more parties, where 
every entity must fulfill their obligations according to the 
agreement. In the next section, we will explore the role of 
storytelling with an implication in the luxury industry and 
how these stories can be verified through the blockchain. 
III. AUTHENTICATED STORYTELLING IN THE
LUXURY INDUSTRY 
Storytelling is defined as ‘‘sharing of knowledge and 
experiences 
through 
narrative 
and 
anecdotes 
to 
communicate lessons, complex ideas, concepts, and causal 
connections’’ [19]. It is one of the oldest and most powerful 
modes of communication and has been an integral part of 
cultures throughout history, both as entertainment and as a 
means of passing on knowledge, values, and desired 
behaviors from generation to generation [20]. The fact that 
people naturally organize their experiences through the 
construction of stories has an essential implication in 
marketing and branding. In fact, stories are the pillars of 
Word of mouth (WOM) communication, and a significant 
dimension of brands and advertising needs to support them 
[21]. McKee [22] argues that stories are effective at 
persuasion because they emotionally involve audiences as 
many people are interested to know more than just the 
product or service by observing behind the scenes stories of 
organizations according to market research [23]. That is 
why the appropriate way to convince someone to purchase 
something is by telling a compelling brand-oriented story 
rather than providing rational arguments, statistics or facts. 
For example, Woodside et al. [19] consider storytelling 
through blogs as a more effective way of driving purchase 
intentions than traditional websites. These stories can 
provide a strong point of differentiation that cannot be 
copied [23] [24], and that fulfills the purpose of a brand to 
differentiate goods or services of one seller from a 
competitor, 
according 
to 
the 
American 
Marketing 
Association’s definition. In fact, a brand is what people feel 
about us and our products and services. Therefore, it is 
partly rational but mostly emotional. Nonetheless, our brand 
and story, however visionary and brilliant, carry no weight, 
unless we can win the hearts and minds of customers and 
deeply motivate them on a personal level to act not because 
they need to, but because they want to. We must be mindful 
that at the heart of a strong brand are great products and 
services, but every brand contact matters [24] and 
storytelling is the most important one [25].  Therefore, 
organizations need to build a strong brand story to 
communicate with their potential and existing customers 
and regularly reveal the compelling benefits of using our 
ideas, products, or services. 
Therefore, we can argue that stories are considered to 
be powerful tools to structure reality, facts, conclusions, and 
recommendations about a brand in a persuasive manner that 
play to the emotions and rely upon empathy.  Literature 
review and different studies have identified four elements of 
good brand stories [26], and we will discuss here how two 
elements including authenticity and humor, can be verified 
and reinforced by integrating technologies including the 
Internet of Things (IoT), blockchain, and platform business. 
The goal should be to cultivate an authentic, trustworthy, 
and compelling narrative to inform, engage, persuade, and 
build trust with customers.   
A. Authenticity
Authenticity is a sense which readers or audiences
obtain that makes them believe and associate the story with 
reality. In fact, the authenticity of narratives, which should 
tell real and incredible stories, is a critical issue since how 
they reflect the truth within an organization can be 
questioned [27].  The corporate reputation is defined as a 
stakeholder’s perception of the organization. Brown et al. 
[28], and Dowling [29] suggest that if the story causes 
stakeholders to perceive the organization as more authentic, 
distinctive, expert, sincere, powerful, and likable, then it is 
likely that the overall corporate reputation will be enhanced. 
Recent studies show that digital technologies, including 
blockchain, can provide promising possibilities for 
authentication and verification of corporate stories. For 
example, Maxwell et al. [12] argue that digital technology 
has transformed the ways we create and consume narratives, 
from moving images and immersive story worlds to digital 
long-form and multi-branched story experiences.  
B. Conciseness
A story should deliver complete thoughts in a few
words, while still covering essential points. This is 
sometimes referred to as plot, which is a sequence of events 
starting from anticipation and then progresses towards 
crisis, getting help, and finally achieving a goal [24]. The 
story must also be presented as something inherently 
valuable where the value comes from the story itself and 
from the role it is playing for a broader significance that is 
promoting a brand. In this manner, we try to give the events 
a meaning that our potential and existing customers may not 
otherwise grasp. 
C. Reversal
A climax is a turning point when the emotion takes a
surprising twist. Corporate stories bring an emotional 
dimension to an organization and enable people to make a 
personal connection to learn, understand, and share 
information and ideas [23]-[25]. Here participating in our 
customer’s transformation can give new life and meaning to 
our business suggested by Miller [30]. He argues that we 
need to think about who we want our customers to become 
and how we can improve the way they see themselves [30].   
D. Humour 
A statement, picture or other things which call for
action or give rise to a kind of emotions. Peter McGraw [31] 
63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

posited the “Benign Violation Theory,” which states that 
humor occurs when a situation is both benign and a 
violation of moral or social norms, or some other 
expectation. That is how humor can challenge expectations, 
make connections between conflicting ideas or emotions to 
surprise the audiences.  
Also, it should be noted that we have moved from mere 
consumers of content in web 1.0 towards increasing our 
participation and documenting our activities in social media, 
which is referred to Web 2.0 as proposed by Tim O’Reilly 
[32][33]. Unlike Web 2.0, which refers to the participation 
of users, Web 3.0 is based on users’ cooperation [34]-[36], 
which integrates the generated data to create new meaning. 
In fact, the concept of Web 3.0 is often associated with the 
idea of the Semantic Web which was first coined in 1999 by 
Tim  Berners-Lee,  the creator of the  World  Wide  Web, 
who foresaw the possibility of enabling machines to ‘talk to 
one another’ and to understand and create meaning from 
semantic data  [37] [38].  The blockchain is a technology 
that can reinforce semantic data by building up trust 
between the parties and ensuring data integrity. That is why 
blockchain empowers Web 3.0 to have a user-centric 
transparent and secured internet, which is based on a 
decentralized network.  Maxwell et al. [12] conduct three 
experiments that draw on some of the fundamental 
principles of blockchain including the ledger, the blocks and 
the mining process and argue that blockchain opens up new 
possibilities to explore how storytelling might adapt as 
distributed ledger technologies become part of how we read, 
write and share stories. They further argue that blockchain 
could significantly transform the distribution, promotion, 
and propagation of stories, especially with regards to data 
archival, 
originated 
from 
time-stamping 
principles. 
Managing collaboration, contribution, and attribution, as 
well as ethical and moral issues, are other implications of 
generating narrative through blockchain as they discuss.  
In Section IV,  we are going to review the case study of 
a new venture who integrates blockchain technology to offer 
a solution in one of the most traditional businesses i.e., 
handwoven carpet. 
IV. SMART CARPET BUSINESS MODEL
Founded in early 2018, Chamrosh Technology [39] is a 
startup in the Middle East, who aims to transform a 
handwoven carpet to the smart carpets through digital 
technologies. It is an Intelligent System of identifying, 
recording, and verifying the provenance of a handwoven 
carpet by generating the fingerprint and issuing and storing 
a digital certificate on the blockchain with data-backed 
evidence. 
Chamrosh 
integrates 
digital 
technologies 
including the Internet of Things (IoT), image processing, 
steganography, blockchain, asymmetric encryption and 
mobile technology to issue an irrevocable and immutable 
digital certificate for a handwoven carpet and store it on the 
blockchain.
Figure 3. The narrative of carpet is stored on the blockchain [1] 
The narrative of a handwoven carpet begins by 
collecting data-backed features as well as multimedia 
evidence from the weaving process. Also, a smart chip is 
embedded inside the carpet from the beginning with a low 
energy wireless IP network via the Internet of Things (IoT) 
or Bluetooth to integrate with Global Positioning System 
(GPS). This is achieved through a mobile app that pings out 
to the GPS every month to fetch the location of the carpet 
weaving and communicate it through the smartphone of the 
weaver(s) with the system as illustrated in Figure 3. Data-
backed features of carpet including original map, designer’s  
Figure 4. Chamrosh business model can reinforce the provenance by immutable digital certificate [1] 
64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

name, size, number of knots and colors, etc. together with 
audio, video, and pictures from the weaving process are 
stored in story blocks as successive stages. Therefore, the 
potential customers feel what the weaver feels and see what 
the weaver sees [1]. Most importantly, the ownership 
history and other environmental data, including temperature, 
moisture, location of use, and even the number of times 
carpet was walked over, can be recorded as new blocks and 
be verified later, as shown in Figure 4. Here, we see a 
paradigm shift in story-giving where the customers can 
actively contribute to composing the story of the brand 
before selling the carpet [1] which makes the product part of 
a bigger story and more meaningful to the customers’ lives 
[40]. Customers can both buy and sell their smart carpets 
within the platform. This is highlighted by blue and red 
arrows within Figure 4. Also, the owners of a smart carpet 
can use the Chamrosh platform to sell his or her carpet, and 
the new customer can verify the ownership, and that is how 
the legal norms and ownership rights are enforced without 
the need for a third-party authority. This resonates with 
recent arguments that the hybrid institution of property is a 
distributed ledger that can hold information about the 
intellectual property of right holders instead of a centralized 
government database [41].   
Kapferer [42] argues that a luxury strategy places a high 
priority on localized production to support the brand story 
and increase intrinsic value. That is why the country of 
origin symbolizes expertise and cache. For example, Swiss 
watches and German cars are endowed with unique local 
know-how and the magic spirit of place of production. The 
same argument holds true for Persian handwoven carpets
or Persian rugs which were first referenced around 400 BC, 
by the Greek author Xenophon in his book "Anabasis". 
He described them as precious, and worthy of being 
used as diplomatic gifts which put them into a context of 
luxury and prestige[1]. “Carpet” and “Rug” are terms 
that are used interchangeably. In the US, a carpet is a 
floor covering that is laid wall to wall, and rugs cover a 
small specific area. But in business “carpet” and “rug” are 
used to denote a covering over the floor. 
In fact, Persian rugs are the singular and invaluable 
symbol from one of the most ancient civilizations in the 
world. Persian rugs carries more than 2500 years of 
heritage, culture, and art that covers stories of failures, 
victories, peace, passion, prosperity, and love and that is 
how two pieces of rug can be made of the same material 
within the same size, and even have a similar design, yet, 
Persian origin can reel the price by 5 to 10  times [1]. That is 
why the Persian rugs have always been subjected to 
counterfeiting due to their supremacy in all aspects over 
handwoven carpets from other countries. 
Adored for their intricate designs, elegant colors, and 
perfect craftsmanship as well as intrinsic value, Persian rugs 
have found their way into households, catwalks, and concert 
stages, as well as in scores of artworks [43]. Persian rugs 
also become important ingredients of the luxury ambiance 
in many premium locations such as China Room on the 
Ground Floor of the White House. Despite advancements in 
technology used to produce machine-made carpets, the 
handwoven carpets or rugs have retained their value as an 
attractive and masterful product.  
Persian handwoven carpets are exported to about 80 
countries, and the exported value is estimated to be $500B 
per year, according to the Persian Carpet Research Center 
[44]-[46]. The tallies, however, do not cover the potential 
value of the millions of carpets woven and remaining in Iran 
as well as sold before throughout the world, since, it is 
nearly impossible to track or quantify them [44]. Most of 
the designs are named after the village or area that is expert 
at a unique pattern or style of weaving such as Tabriz, 
Kashan, Naeen, Isfahan, Qom, and Kerman. In addition to 
data-backed evidence of carpet including origin, place, 
pattern, map, designer name and other physical features like 
size, the number of colors, weaving style. Every handwoven 
carpet can carry provenance and much trustworthy 
information about the owner and environmental parameters 
that form the ingredients of a successive story and 
potentially increase the intrinsic value of a carpet. For 
example, those carpets which are placed at the holy sites of 
Islam, Christianity, and other religions are traded at 
premium prices because the potential buyers assumed them 
to be blessed and cherished by the location of use [1]. The 
smart chip which pings out to the GPS offers an innovative 
solution to trade these used carpets by verifying the 
location. This positively influences the purchase intentions 
and willingness of customers to pay a premium [1].  
V.
CHAMROSH AND BLOCKTAC
BlockTac [47] is a Spanish startup who offers solutions 
in the Identity Management and Authentication field for 
various industries through in house technology, which is 
built on the integration of blockchain, cloud, and mobile 
app. Founded in 2018, BlockTac has developed a cost-
effective technology in the educational sector which 
empowers Universities, Business Schools and other 
educational institutes to register the certificate of their 
students on the blockchain. BlockTac further provides a 
mobile platform to enable the third party to verify the issued 
certificate. The technology is implemented in five simple 
steps as illustrated in Figure 5. 
Figure 5. BlockTac methodology to verify certificates 
65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

First, the University or Educational Institute who has the 
record of registered students will issue the certificate for 
those who fulfilled the requirements and then communicates 
the details to BlockTac through a private and secure 
channel.  Second, BlockTac notifies the student and 
facilitates an Android or iOS application to view the 
certificate and get the student’s confirmation on personal 
and other details. Third, BlockTac registers the certificate 
on the Blockchain through in-house technology and sends 
the blockchain certificate with a relevant link to the student. 
Forth, the student can share the certificate with whomever 
he or she wishes. Fifth, any person or third party can verify 
the authenticity of the certificate without having to contact 
the University or Institute.  
Relying on Blockchain technology to provide the 
properties 
of 
inviolability, 
immutability 
and 
open 
verification for all digital certificates, BlockTac is now 
diversifying the technology and integrating it with the value 
chain 
of 
industries 
such 
as 
luxury, 
healthcare, 
pharmaceutical, insurance, supply chain, food, and logistics 
as well as government administration and financial sectors. 
For example, BlockTac has developed a digital seal for food 
products, including oil, wine, and saffron as well as 
medicines and perfumes, to battle counterfeiters. In the food 
supply case, for instance, all information is digitally 
connected to a particular food including farm-origination, 
processing protocol, factory information,  storage, and 
transportation details, most importantly expiration dates are 
collected, agreed and stored in a digital certificate which 
becomes a permanent record that cannot be changed. The 
records are approved by consensus among participants and 
then verified through the mobile app by consumers.  
The solution works as follows: in the first step, the seal 
of a bottle or package will be opened, and the mobile scans 
the Quick Response (QR) trackable code.  The digital 
certificate in the blockchain is just valid for one-time 
verification. Upon scanning, the system verifies the 
credentials and confirms that the package is original and the 
seal has never been opened. In the second step, if we rescan 
the code or try to use it on another product or package, the 
system disproves the credentials and indicates that the 
package was opened before.  
Figure 6. Digital seal for food products by BlockTac [47] 
In most industries and sectors, including investment, 
logistics, and even governments, the issue of identity 
management, traceability and authentication are critical. 
BlockTac technology would contribute to reinforcing 
identity via blockchain and enabling verification through a 
mobile application without Trusted Third Party (TTP).  
BlockTac and Chamrosh are now collaborating on a well 
thought strategic partnership to forge a technology to 
transform handwoven carpets to smart carpets. Synergizing 
each other’s core competencies, both startups are expecting 
to seize evolving opportunities by leveraging mutual 
resources and expanding their geographical reach in the 
digital era where most companies become increasingly 
interdependent. The technology is developed by using a 
smart chip and seal containing QR code, embedded in a 
handwoven carpet, to store the data-backed features of 
carpet on the blockchain system as successive story blocks. 
The process is shown in Figure 7 when data to be collected 
through a protocol every month and recorded in an 
individual block basis where the last block will contain the 
whole story. The immutable history of ownership will also 
be recorded, and once the real owner verifies a purchase, as 
an update, the system automatically forms a new block of 
ownership with all other features for the next owner. 
The sharing economy can also provide an emerging 
opportunity to rent or lease luxury handwoven carpet on a 
daily or weekly basis for special occasions including 
weddings, and anniversaries. Blockchain and IoT can help 
to trace this luxury item during the rental period.  
Figure 7. A narrative of weaving to be stored in story blocks 
Powered by blockchain, the smart carpet business model 
can offer significant benefits for carpet weavers, dealers and 
customers, by improving efficiency, transparency, and 
traceability of supply-chain. The platform  gathers, shares 
and verifies key information and evidences about a woven 
carpet by integrating secure, trustworthy and accessible 
technologies. We can enumerate the benefits as indicated in 
Figure 8.  
Figure 8.  Smart carpet can offer six significant benefits [39] 
66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

First, through smart chip, which identifies the place of 
production, the system determines genuine carpets woven 
within Persian territory and essentially differentiates them 
from fake carpets that copy the design and are produced in 
other places. This proves the origin and craftsmanship 
quality. Second, the system creates an immutable and live 
digital identity with a mobile application to verify 
authenticity. This deals with counterfeiting and fake items 
and gives peace of mind to the customers. Third, the system 
generates a platform to directly interact with consumers and 
make them part of a weaving story. This wins the hearts and 
minds of Handwoven carpet’s fans in a new and innovative 
way and creates loyalty. Forth, the system records and 
tracks the ownership, and this makes the carpet transferable 
and updatable once the status changes.  Fifth, the system 
reinforces scarcity and exclusivity by making the item 
unique and irreplaceable. Sixth the system increases the 
value of a smart carpet since its aesthetic, historical, and 
sole significance and all former benefits contribute to the 
value.  
The aforementioned business model aims to bring back 
confidence to handwoven carpet fans and empowers them to 
interact with their luxury items in the most direct, secure, 
and transparent way that cutting-edge technologies allow. 
The possibility to track ownership and update the changes 
once the real owner of carpet requests, provides a unique 
opportunity to earn money for transferring ownership to the 
next owner. This can justify the commercialization of 
technology and business model. 
The prototype of the solution is shown in Figure 9 in 
which the credentials of a carpet is framed into a digital 
certificate and then stored on blockchain with Quick 
Response (QR) trackable code. A QR code, which is a two-
dimensional code in square shape image, mostly represented 
by black and white pixels in a binary format and is used in 
consumer advertising such as web pages and posters.  
Figure 9.  Digital certificate of carpet stored on the blockchain [48] 
QR code has fast readability, and larger storage 
capacity compared to barcodes and used to hold and record 
the credentials of carpet on the blockchain by distributing a 
full copy of the database to multiple computers or nodes. All 
participants must approve the changes, so it is incredibly 
challenging for individuals to tamper with the carpet’s 
digital certificate or commit fraud. 
The QR tag is attached at the back of the carpet and 
once an app scans it, the relevant certificate paired with the 
carpet credentials will appear on the mobile. The user can 
scroll down to verify the certificate as shown in Figure 10 
by clicking on the verification button, and within a few 
seconds, the features of the carpet will be authenticated 
through blockchain.  
Figure 10. Mobile App verifies the credential of carpet [48]  
VI. CHALLENGES AND IMPLICATIONS
One of the emerging challenges in the smart carpet 
business model is the fact that smart tag can be removed and 
then attached to a replica carpet. In these circumstances, the 
owner has an option to push another carpet of similar kind 
and lower value into the system. Obviously the owner 
cannot own two carpets with the same smart tag, yet, he or 
she can still sell the first carpet in the market and leverage 
the value of the second replica because of smart tag. In this 
section, we offer a solution to address this challenge by 
digital image processing and steganography.  
With the advancement of Artificial Intelligence 
abbreviated as AI technology and the power of computers, 
digital 
image 
processing 
is 
now 
among 
growing 
technologies with various applications in business,  science, 
and 
everyday 
life. 
Traditional 
image 
processing 
technologies 
mainly 
focus 
on 
image 
acquisition, 
transformation, enhancement, restoration, compression 
coding, segmentation, and edge extraction [49]. Yet, image 
feature analysis, image registration, image fusion, image 
classification, image recognition, content-based image 
retrieval, and image digital watermarking have made 
significant progress in different fields [49][50], which 
reflect on human intelligence activities [49] and are 
empowered by Artificial Intelligence. The recent and major 
applications of image processing include but not limited to 
aerospace, land mapping, urban planning, medical research 
and treatment, product anti-counterfeiting, surface damage 
identification, real-time monitoring, iris recognition, and 
military, cultural, artistic and communications aspects of 
human life and work [50].  
Image processing includes two key steps or two-
dimensional functions, namely sampling and quantization 
67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[49][50], which enable a computer to recognize images. 
Sampling and quantization are sometimes referred to as 
acquisition/scanning and preprocessing in image processing 
literature, respectively. Ponti et al. [51] argue that the 
image-based visual recognition pipeline includes a step that 
converts colored images into images with a single channel, 
obtaining a color-quantized image that can be processed by 
feature extraction methods.  
Figure 11. The pipeline of image processing [51] 
Digital images are generally obtained by optical 
scanners or cameras. The allocation of pixels to locations in 
the original image is called sampling, which means each 
pixel represents a sample of the image from a particular 
place  [50]. Quantization assigns numbers from 0 to 255  in 
color images for each pixel from  3 channels (Red, Green, 
Blue). Each channel has 8 bits, which contains 256 grades 
starting from 0 which is the darkest color to lightest that is 
255. Therefore, (2⁸)  x (2⁸) x (2⁸) = 16,777,216 choices of
color are available for each pixel. The next step in image
processing would improve the quality of the image, which
can be done via Contrast & Brightness, Filters, Threshold,
Edge Detection and Contour, Sharpening and Blurring, and
Noise Reduction.
A. Carpet fingerprinting by detecting human errors
It is often said that all carpets are perfectly imperfect
which means that slight inconsistencies and imperfections 
prove that a carpet was woven by hand [48]. The fact is 
reflected in David Benioff and DB Weiss interview with 
Japan's Star Channel addressing Game of Thrones' 
controversial eighth season in which a coffee cup left in a 
scene in front of Daenerys Targaryen. David Benioff called 
it their "Persian rug" to justify the issue by saying, "In 
Persian rugs, it's a tradition that you make a little mistake 
when making the rug because only God can do anything 
perfectly." [52] 
A carpet is usually woven by a reader who speaks out 
the color of each knot pixel by pixel from the original carpet 
map. The weavers, who listen to the reader, select the colors 
and weave them in the same sequence, which they hear. Yet, 
they are likely to commit a few random mistakes by 
weaving a wrong color specially when they are tired or lose 
their concentration.  Other errors such as knot loss, and 
Figure 12. Comparison between original and 1st woven layout  
Therefore, we identify pixels 4, 18, 30, which are 
mistakenly woven in different colors, as the unique feature 
carpet ragging i.e., changing the width of the carpet due to 
the aggregation of the pulling force of the carpet weft are all 
exclusive and distinct features of any handwoven carpet. 
Therefore, we can argue that every carpet has unique and 
distinct features that cannot be replicated whatsoever, and 
that is how every carpet is perfectly imperfect.  This is 
exactly like human fingerprints, which are detailed and 
unique i.e., no two people, not even identical twins, have the 
same fingerprint. That is why we use fingerprint term for 
handwoven carpets since no two handwoven carpets can 
have exactly the same errors.  
For example, it is very much possible that in a 
handwoven luxury carpet of 5 Million knots, 5,000 knots 
are woven with the wrong color which indicates 0.1% 
errors. These errors are the unique characteristic of a carpet 
that randomly took place and are unlikely to happen in the 
same knot or pixel in another carpet, even if the original 
map, reader, and weavers are the same. These errors are 
considered to be the fingerprint of a carpet and are stored on 
the blockchain as a part of the immutable digital certificate. 
We can then use this innovative idea to identify a 
handwoven carpet by using image processing technology. 
The first step is to utilize a high-resolution scanner for 
scanning the back of the first carpet to record the woven 
layout in the computer. The scanned layout then must be 
compared to the original map through image processing 
algorithms to reduce noise and contrast and sharpen 
the brightness. For example, in Figure 12, we can observe
that in pixel 6, 13, and 15, there are slight brightness errors, 
and the real colors are not properly sampled and 
quantized. That is why our image processing algorithms 
should enable us to correct the color according to the color 
of the original map. 
Moreover, 
the 
weavers 
of 
the 
first 
carpet 
have committed few mistakes on the color of pixels 4, 18, 
and 30. These are originally red, green, and yellow 
respectively in the carpet’s original map. Yet, we can 
see that they are wrongly woven as blue instead of red 
(pixel 4), yellow instead of green (pixel 18), blue 
instead of yellow (pixel 30).   
68
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the first carpet and add them to the next block in the 
blockchain as an element of carpet’s digital certificate.  
TABLE I. THE ERRORS IN WEAVING PROCESS 
Pixel 
Original  layout 
1st Woven Pattern 
4 
Red 
Blue 
18 
Green 
Yellow 
30 
Yellow 
Blue 
Now,  let us say that in a very optimistic scenario, there 
is a new weaving team who have access to the original map 
and try to weave a replica. They cannot succeed to copy 
exactly the same carpet simply because the errors will 
randomly take place in different pixels during the weaving 
process of the second carpet. Therefore, it is absolutely 
unlikely that the errors on the second carpet happen in the 
same pixel as the first carpet.  
For example, we assume that the random errors of the 
second carpet happen in pixel 6, 21, 26 as indicated in 
Figure 13. These are originally dark blue, red and green 
respectively in the carpet hardcopy layout. Yet, we can see 
that they are wrongly woven as red instead of dark blue 
(pixel 6), blue instead of red (pixel 21), red instead of green 
(pixel 26).  
Figure 13. Comparison between 1st and 2nd woven patterns 
Therefore, we can identify more dissimilarities (here 
six) by comparing the layout of the 1st and the 2nd carpet, 
which are highlighted in Table II.  
TABLE II. COMPARISON OF ORIGINAL AND WOVEN PATTERNS 
Pixel 
Original 
1st Woven 
2nd Woven 
4 
Red 
Blue 
Red 
18 
Green 
Yellow 
Green 
30 
Yellow 
Blue 
Yellow 
6 
Dark Blue 
Dark Blue 
Red 
21 
Red 
Red 
Blue 
26 
Green 
Green 
Red 
The theoretical assumptions discussed with examples 
are based on human errors during the weaving process. 
These errors provide an excellent identifiable characteristic 
for any handwoven carpet to be integrated within the digital 
certificate and then stored on the blockchain. These errors 
are as unique as human fingerprints which are detailed, very 
difficult to alter, and durable over the life of an individual 
In addition to colors, there is a good possibility to 
identify symmetric and asymmetric issues within the woven 
layout. The original map of a handwoven carpet is based on 
either symmetric or asymmetric pattern. Yet, due to human 
errors, the woven layout does not fully match with the 
original map in terms of the size and dimensions of features. 
Therefore, we can reutilize image processing to identify the 
errors which took place in the pattern of the woven carpet. 
These errors are always unique for each and every 
handwoven carpet because they happen randomly.  
B. Carpet fingerprinting by a hidden message
In addition to random errors of a handwoven carpet, the
possibility of storing and communicating secret and/or 
private information can provide an invaluable solution to 
identify and verify the original carpet and act as the second 
fingerprint. This can be achieved by committing a few 
intended errors during the weaving process. 
Information security systems are separated into two 
major categories i.e., encryption and information hiding 
[53]. Whereas cryptography keeps the data secret by 
converting it into an unreadable form, information hiding 
which is divided into watermarking and steganography does 
not change the format of data or message and keeps the 
presence of its actual data [54]. Watermarking is a process 
in which the information or message which verifies the 
owner is embedded into carriers such as images, audios, or 
videos. 
Figure 14. Classification tree of information hiding [53] 
In 1993, Tirkel et al. [55] first introduced the digital 
watermarking system, which embeds hidden copyright 
marks 
or 
other 
verification 
messages 
into 
digital 
multimedia. When a dispute of copyright occurs, the owner 
can prove his ownership by revealing the copyright mark 
from the embedded watermark. Watermarking is of two 
types; visible and invisible. The embedded watermark must 
be robust to accidental processes, such as JPEG 
compression, or malicious attacks like cropping, noise 
adding, and rotation. Otherwise, the embedded watermark 
may be distorted or totally lost.  
69
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The 
goal 
of 
watermarking 
is 
one 
to 
many 
communication in which the intruder cannot remove or 
replace the message. Figure 15 shows a watermark in 
EURO banknote which is a recognizable image that appears 
when viewed by reflected light. Here, it is challenging to 
extract the watermark because the image will be distorted 
under some capturing process, such as scanning. 
Figure 15. Watermark in Euro banknote 
Steganography is another technique using digital 
images for secret communication where a hidden message is 
embedded in the image that only the sender and intended 
recipient can reveal. The goal of steganography is one to 
one communication in which the intruder cannot detect a 
message. Therefore, steganography can be used to reinforce 
the identity of a woven carpet by embedding a message such 
as the designer’s name and time and date of design during 
the weaving process. Carpet’s layout offers an excellent 
platform to embed messages because of two major reasons. 
First, layout can be altered to a certain extent without losing 
their beauty and quality. Second, humans are unable to 
distinguish minor changes in image color and a carpet 
pattern once the layout is woven. For example, we can turn 
1000th to 1020th pixels or knots in the layout to colors that 
correspond with a letter of the alphabet or a number. While 
the carpet appearance would not appear exceedingly 
distorted or perhaps slightly corrupted at worst, we can 
decrypt colors and find the message.  
Figure 16. Steganography embeds a secret message inside the patttern
Steganography, as discussed, can embed few 
intended errors during the weaving process that corresponds 
to a secret message like date or place which is hidden in the 
pattern. This method ultimately produces another unique 
feature like a fingerprint that can be stored on the 
blockchain. As such, we can spot a counterfeit carpet that 
does not carry the embedded message within the pattern.  
To sum up, we can integrate both solutions, i.e., 
human errors and a hidden message to generate an 
integrated digital fingerprint 
for 
every 
handwoven 
carpet and store it on the blockchain.  
Figure 17. Carpet fingerprinting by integrating errors and hidden message 
This 
digital fingerprint 
builds 
a 
robust 
and 
immutable connection between physical carpet and digital 
carpet. Even if the QR code is lost from the back of carpet, 
the digital  fingerprint (random human errors and secret 
message) will maintain this connection and we just need 
to take a few photos from the back of carpet and utilize 
the fingerprint stored on the blockchain to compare and 
contrast the so-called layout with the original map. 
Figure 18. Digital fingerprint connects physical carpet  to digital certificate 
The fingerprint verifies the authenticity of the original 
carpet by matching the errors with the original map. If errors 
do not match, the system crackdowns and reports 
counterfeit. 
VII. DISCUSSION
The platform, as discussed by Parker et al. [56], is an 
emerging business model that leverages digital technology 
to connect people, organizations, and resources in an 
interactive ecosystem in which tremendous amounts of 
value can be created and exchanged. The most valuable 
companies in the world Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, and 
Google — have harnessed platform power to achieve rapid 
growth and market dominance as their products and services 
permeate our daily life [57]. These platforms usually consist 
70
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of common technological building blocks that the owner 
and ecosystem partners can share to create new 
complementary products and services, such as smartphone 
apps or digital content from Apple iTunes or Netflix [58]. 
Uber and Airbnb are two other famous companies whose 
business model is to create transaction platforms which 
connect suppliers to the consumers. These platforms are 
largely intermediaries or online marketplaces that make it 
possible for people and organizations to share information 
or to buy, sell, or access a variety of goods and services 
[58]. Platforms generate network effects and positive 
feedback loops where the value each user experiences, 
increases as more users adopt the platform [56]. 
The idea of generating a fingerprint and issuing and 
storing digital certificate of handwoven carpet on the 
blockchain through the platform is novel and still under 
thorough research in order to study the feasibility and value 
proposition for stakeholders who are brought together to 
produce network effects. Yet, Chamrosh Technology is 
already demonstrating the “start-up soul” argued by Gulati 
[59] in which he observed that startups have an essential and
intangible notion such as energy and soul which inspire
people to contribute their talent, money, and enthusiasm and
fosters a sense of deep connection and mutual purpose.
Chamrosh is intended to leverage digital technologies to co-
create the legacy of luxury handwoven carpet to globally
protect and promote Persian carpet, which struggles to keep
the centuries-old industry alive. This is an ambition to fill
needs that handwoven customers had not realized before,
and it is as if Chamrosh is articulating new problems that
cannot be solved by existing solutions. The concept of an
utterly new category was highlighted in  “ How Unicorns
Grow” [60] as a successful strategy formulated by
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Tableau who were carving out
entirely new niches. Ramadan et al. [61] believe that the
most successful start-ups become Category Kings and bury
the competition and therefore, they argue that a common
phrase in technology ‘There’s room in this market for
several players’ seems to be utterly false. The data shows
that there’s room in any well-defined category for one super
successful player and a bunch of companies that wind up as
category serfs and those that just die [60].
The business intent of Chamrosh is, therefore, the first 
element in Gulati’s [59] dimension of the soul which can run 
deeper and spark a different, more intense kind of 
commitment and performance as argued in his framework. 
Moreover, the research-oriented approach resonates with 
improvisation concept suggested by Gulati and DeSantola 
[62] in which they argue that young ventures need to try new
things and react to dynamic markets, but with an eye toward
larger objectives and sustaining the business. The brand is
created with this strategy in mind since Chamrosh is a bird in
Persian mythology with the body of a lion and head and
wings of an eagle. It is said to live on the summit of Mount
Alborz and is sent by an angel to snatch invaders and drop
them from mountaintops in order to protect the Persian Land.
Chamrosh vision is to be the global platform to cherish the 
odyssey of Persian art and culture.  
Figure 19. Chamrosh Brand [39]
The second dimension is customer connection where 
Chamrosh business model tries to inspire carpet fans to 
contribute and be part of the narrative of a handwoven 
carpet and co-create a brand for example through the style 
and location of the carpet which are all collected and stored 
while observing the confidentiality and privacy issues.  
The third dimension is to allow people and employees 
to have a voice and choices. Here, Chamrosh must work 
very hard 
to give employees ‘freedom within a 
framework”—the liberty, i.e., to operate within well-
delineated boundaries—as well as opportunities to influence 
key decisions, such as which strategies or products to pursue 
as suggested by Gulati [59]. This dimension is critically 
highlighted in other studies. For example, Henrich [63] 
argues the internal startups, filled with a small number of 
passionate believers dedicated to one project at a time, can 
experiment rapidly and scale their impact. Gulati and 
DeSantola [62] consider culture a big part of what draws 
people to join start-ups—and what keeps them going. As 
employees battle the odds to turn a fledging business into a 
viable company, working late nights and weekends to make 
it happen, they’re motivated by camaraderie and a sense of 
belonging to something important. Also, the founders must 
develop and practice some crucial skills and traits including 
building a great team, leadership, team management, selling, 
marketing, 
product 
design, 
strategy 
formulation 
recommended on a survey of 141  founders of enterprises by 
Eisenmann et al. [64]. 
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Chamrosh like other successful startups can possibly
preserve and revive its soul and remain innovative and grow 
as long as it keeps those three elements suggested by Gulati 
[59] at the forefront of its strategy and daily operations. This
will take time, effort, and iteration to improve the business
model and enhance technology. But the critical question is
whether the handwoven carpet market can be cultivated into
an active ecosystem that appreciates Chamrosh solution.
This question resonates with the “scalable startup”
definition [65] which argues that startup must aim not only
to prove its business model but to do so quickly, in a way
71
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

that will have a significant impact on the current market. 
There are three key ingredients in this definition :  
• First, the goal is to seek, explore, examine, and validate an
unmet need within the handwoven carpet market by
providing a vision of a smart carpet with a set of features.
• Second, assumptions and hypotheses about carpet platform
model are made to iterate until they are proved.
• Third, Chamrosh must quickly validate the model and
check if customers behave as the model predicts. The
feedback and input of stakeholders, including weavers,
dealers, and carpet fans, are instrumental in answering this.
The above three ingredients are in line with three 
innovation challenges raised by Eppinger [66]. Here 
Chamrosh suggestes digital certificate solution to build trust 
with handwoven carpet fans (People). Then it leverages 
blockchain and image processing to develop the solution 
(Technical). Finally, it formulates a platform model to 
encourage stakeholders to contribute. 
Figure 20. Three innovation callenges [66]
Building on platform model, Chamrosh enjoys two 
significant benefits of platforms highlighted by Parker el. al 
[56]. First, it leverages marginal economics of production 
and distribution, since Chamrosh can expand with minimum 
marginal cost just by integrating digital technologies on 
selected new carpets when the listing fee of carpets is very 
small. Second, the possibility to scale quickly is enhanced 
by network effects of carpet fans. 
The other important question after successfully passing 
former stages is that how quickly Chamrosh can become a 
Category King, dominate the entire technology industry, 
bury the competition and reach a pinnacle that even 
founders could not have dreamed. This demands high levels 
of trust, cooperation and innovation which can be achieved 
by infinite mind set in business as suggested by Sinek [67]. 
He argues that the game of business fits the very definition 
of an infinite game and infinite mind ensures that an 
organization’s employees, customers and shareholders 
remain inspired to continue contributing with their effort, 
their wallets and their investments [67]. Chamrosh can 
embrace surprises and adapt with and even transform by 
changes if it is structured to last forever and this is the 
nature of a company built for resilience i.e.,  as highlighted 
by Sinek [67]. Time will reveal if Chamrosh can do this as “ 
most overnight successes took a long time” Steve Jobs. 
Future research is suggested on evaluating the feedback 
and comments of stakeholders, including handwoven carpet 
fans and the owners of luxury carpets. Also, the image 
processing solution must be put into practice to assess the 
feasibility and technical implications 
Chamrosh has developed Minimum Viable Product 
(MVP) and is planning to introduce the first Blockchain-
Empowered “Carpet” or “Rug” focused on verifying the 
origin and authenticity in the first quarter of 2020. The 
steering committee of the startup has identified a 
masterpiece that crystalizes the craftsmanship quality of 
Persian rug.  
Figure 21. The first Blockchain-Empowered rug in the world  [68]
The creator of this unique 1.5m x 2.46m item, Ali Lahiji, 
spent 8.5 years designing the original map and weaving the 
layout. The rug was completed in early 2019 and has 1000 
different artistic elements, including flowers, birds, and 
animals in 110 compound colors of pure silk. These 
elements have a significant meaning which reflects their 
close affinity with nature. The rug is woven with 6 million 
knots and will be the first in the world that has equipped 
with electronic fingerprint and certificate of authenticity 
stored on the blockchain. The aim is to create a unique user 
experience through a mobile application where porential 
customers can authenticate and verify the history of this 
masterpiece.  
IX. CONTRIBUTION
The 
sharing 
economy, 
platforms, 
and 
digital 
technologies are disrupting the luxury sector by offering a 
new catalyst for growth and enabling individuals to share 
goods and services and even contribute to their design, 
production, and consumption.  
The first and significant contribution of this study is to 
bring insights into the emerging and disrupting role of 
blockchain in the sharing economy and luxury industry for 
reinforcing provenance, building trust, and verifying the 
credentials and ownership.  
The real application of blockchain technology in one of 
the most traditional businesses, and enumerating the 
benefits is the second contribution. Here, it is highlighted 
how a handwoven carpet can be transformed into the smart 
carpet as a blockchain-empowered product which enables 
carpet fans to verify the authenticity, claim ownership, and 
enjoy scarcity and exclusivity.  
72
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Third, the study points to the vital role of a strategic 
partnership between new ventures to explore and seize 
evolving opportunities for maximizing value for both parties 
especially in the digital era where most companies become 
increasingly interdependent. 
Forth, the study suggests an innovative revenue model 
for strategic partners to earn money from second-hand trade 
onwards on the blockchain.  
Last but certainly not least, this study offers state-of-
the-art solutions by utilizing image processing to generate 
an identifiable feature for any handwoven carpet. 
This feature can be as unique as human fingerprint.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
first 
author 
would 
like 
to 
express 
gratitude to several academics and industry experts who 
have supported him: Kevin Lane Keller, the  E. B. Osborn 
Professor of Marketing at the Tuck School of Business at 
Dartmouth College, for his guidance, and invaluable moral 
support. David Rogers, Faculty Director-Digital Business 
Strategy & Leadership at Columbia Business School, whose 
knowledge was the source of inspiration. Francisco Guillén 
and Enrique Lizaso, the co-founders of BlockTac whose 
dedication and expertise were instrumental in blending this 
research with practice. Ali Roshanzamir, Shahin Emai 
Alaei, and  Narges Roshanzamir for their invaluable 
support. 
Ahmad 
Rahnema, 
Professor 
of 
Financial 
Management at IESE Business School for his immeasurable 
direction and dedication. Ahmad Kardan, Emeritus 
Professor of Information Technology and eLearning at 
Amirkabir University of Technology for his wisdom and 
encouragement. Ahmad Roosta, Professor in Marketing and 
faculty member of Shahid Beheshti University for his 
priceless support. Hamid Reza Baradaran Shoraka, Visiting 
Faculty at the University of Florida for his support and 
guidance. Zahir Irani, Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Academic, 
Innovation and Quality)  at the University of Bradford for 
his support and encouragement. Andrew Smith, Director of 
DBA at the University of Bradford for his continuous 
support. Ahmad Ghoneim, Senior Lecturer and Director of 
Accreditations at the Faculty of Management and Law, 
University of Bradford and  Martin Sedgley, Head of 
Effective Learning at the University of Bradford for their 
encouragement and support. Ali Najafi, Seyed Behrouz 
Safawi and Mohsen Ghaniyari for continuous guidance and 
direction. Arezoo Kheiltash for her immeasurable patience 
and support. Masoud Meshkat for his creativity and 
craftsmanship. Jalal Mirdavoodi,  CEO of Rayan Group for 
his feedback and sharing industry experience. Gita Beyk for 
her invaluable support and reviewing the paper. The authors 
are also grateful to the Industry Experts, Farrokh 
Bahmanyar, Mehdi Fakhkharian, Mohammad Khakbazan, 
Ali Lahiji, Mohmmad Heravi, Hossein Bidabadi, Kambiz 
Norouzi, Mohammad Taheri, Ali Farzad Mohajeri, Hamid 
Ismaili, Alireza Aminifar, Mohsen Roshanzamir, Mojtaba 
Roshanzamir, Alireza Afraz, Farzin Raeeszadeh, Shahram 
Pourshams, Payam Saltanatkhah, Forouzandeh Farrokhi and 
Allahyar Mansubi for their idea, valuable support and 
contribution.  
REFERENCES 
[1]
A.H. Roshanzamir, V. Weerakkody and V. Yoganathan, "A Rhetoric
of Smart Carpet in the Age of Disruption," The Eighth International
Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services, and
Technologies Athens, Greece, 1-10, 2018. 
[2]
T. Laurence, "Blockchain For Dummies," Wiley. Kindle Edition,
2017. 
[3]
W. Mougayar and V. Buterin, "The business blockchain: promise, 
practice, and application of the next Internet technology," Hoboken, 
New Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2016. 
[4]
B. Blöbaum, "Trust and Communication in a Digitized World:
Models and Concepts of Trust," Research by Springer; 1st E., 2016. 
[5]
T. Hardjono, D. Shrier and A. Pentland, "Trust Data: A New
Framework for Identity and Data Sharing,” Visionary Future LLC,
2016. 
[6]
C. M. Christensen, "The innovator's dilemma: When new
technologies cause great firms to fail," Harvard Business School 
Press. 2016. 
[7]
D. L. Rogers, "The Digital Transformation Playbook: Rethink Your 
Business for the Digital Age," Columbia Business School Publishing,
Columbia University Press. Kindle Edition, 2016.
[8]
O. Malekan, "The Story of the Blockchain: A Beginner's Guide to the
Technology Nobody Understands," Triple Smoke Stack. Kindle
Edition, 2018. 
[9]
M. A Aud et al. "SMART CARPET Developing a Sensor System to
Detect Falls and Summon Assistance,"  Journal of gerontological
nursing 36, 8-12, 2010. 
[10] D. Zax, "A Smart Carpet to Detect Intruders," 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/429130/a-smart-carpet-to-
detect-intruders/ 2019.09.01
[11] A.H. Roshanzamir, "Dilemmas of Branding for Start-ups in Digital
Era, "The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and
eGovernments Rome, Italy, 63-72, 2018. 
[12] D. Maxwell, C. Speed and L. Pschetz, "Story Blocks: Reimagining
narrative through the blockchain Convergence," The International 
Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 23(1), 79-97, 
2017. 
[13] A. Morrison, "Blockchain and smart contract automation: How smart
contracts automate digital business.", 2015. 
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology-forecast/blockchain/digital-
business.html / 2019.09.01, 
[14] C.E. Cherry and N.F. Pidgeon, "Is sharing the solution? Exploring
public acceptability of the sharing economy,"  Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 939-948, 2018. 
[15] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008. 
[16] N. Popper, "Digital Gold: Bitcoin and the inside story of the misfits
and millionaires trying to reinvent money," New York City:
HarperCollins Publishers. 2015. 
[17] N. Szabo,  "Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital Markets"
1996.http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/C
DROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart_c
ontracts_2.html/ 2019.09.01
[18] A. Wright and P.  De Filippi, "Decentralized Blockchain Technology
and the Rise of Lex Cryptographia,"  SSRN Electronic Journal. 2015. 
[19] A.G. Woodside, S. Sood and K.E. Miller, “When consumers and
brands talk: storytelling theory and research in psychology and
marketing” Psychology and Marketing 25(2), 97-145, 2008. 
73
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[20] D. Sole and D. G. Wilson, "Storytelling in Organizations: The power 
and traps of using stories to share knowledge in organizations,"
Training and Development, 53(3), 1-12, 1999. 
[21] C. Fill, ” Marketing Communications,” Pearson Education Limited
6th edition, 2013. 
[22] R. McKee, “Storytelling That Moves People: A Conversation with
Screenwriting Coach Robert McKee,” Harvard business review, 
81(6), 51-55, 2003. 
[23] S. Roper and C. Fill, ”Corporate Reputation Brand and
Communication,’ Pearson Education Limited, First Edition, 2012. 
[24] K. L. Keller, "Strategic Brand Management," 4th Edition Pearson HE,
Inc. Kindle Edition, 2013
[25] H.-C. Chiu, Y.-C. Hsieh and Y.-C. Kuo “How to align your brand
stories with your products,”  Journal of Retailing 88(2), 262-275, 
2012. 
[26] C. Fill and S. Turnbull, “Marketing Communications,” Pearson
Education Limited 7th E., 2016. 
[27] S. Spear and S. Roper, “Using corporate stories to build the corporate
brand: an impression management perspective,” Journal of Product 
and Brand Management, 22(7), 491-501, 2013. 
[28] T.J. Brown, P.A. Dacin, M.G. Pratt and D.A. Whetten, “Identity,
intended image, construed image, and reputation: An interdisciplinary
framework and suggested terminology,”  Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 34(2),  99-106, 2006. 
[29] G. Dowling, “Communicating Corporate Reputation through Stories.”
California Management Review, 49(1), 82-100, 2006. 
[30] D. Miller, “Building a Story Brand: Clarify Your Message So
Customers Will Listen,” HarperCollins Leadership. Kindle Edition.
2017. 
[31] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysSgG5V-R3U / 2019.09.01 
[32] V. Barassi, and E. Treré, "'Does Web 3.0 come after Web 2.0?
Deconstructing theoretical assumptions through practice,” New
Media & Society, 14(8), 1269-1285, 2012. 
[33] T. O'Reilley, "What is Web 2.0: design patterns and business models
for the next generation of software,” MPRA, available at
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/4578/  2007. /2019.09.01 
[34] C. Fuchs et al., "Theoretical foundations of the web: cognition, 
communication, and co-operation. Towards an understanding of Web
1.0, 2.0, 3.0", Future Internet, 2(1), 41-59,2010. 
[35] D. Harris, "Web 2. 0 Evolution into the Intelligent Web 3.0: 100 Most
Asked Questions on Transformation, Ubiquitous Connectivity, 
Network Computing, Open Technologies, Open Identity, Distributed
Databases and Intelligent Applications,"  Emereo Publishing,
Newstead. 2008. 
[36] M. Tasner, "Marketing in the Moment: The Practical Guide to Using
Web 3.0 to Reach your Customers First,” FT Press, Upper Saddle
River, NJ. 2010. 
[37] M. Watson, ‘Scripting Intelligence: Web 3.0 Information, Gathering
and Processing’ (Apress Series: Expert's Voice in Open Source),
Springer Publishing, New York, NY. 2009. 
[38] T. Berners-Lee, "Web 2.0 Summit 09 discussion: A Conversation
with Tim Berners-Lee interview by Tim O'Reilly [video]. San
Francisco: 
O'Reilly 
Media. 
Retrieved 
from
https://youtu.be/KY5skobffk0, 2009 /2019.09.01 
[39] www.chamrosh.com / 2019.09.01 
[40] K. Smith and M. Wintrob, "Brand Storytelling: A Framework for
Activation," Design Management Review, 24(1), 36-41, 2013. 
[41] A. Ha, “ Blockai Uses the Blockchain to Help Artists Protect Their
Intellectual Property,” 2016; Retrieved from
https://techcrunch.com/2016/03/14/blockai-launch/  2019.09.01 
[42] J. N. Kapferer, “Kapferer on Luxury How Luxury Brands Can Grow
Yet Remain Rare,” Kogan Page. 2015. 
[43] http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20171206-the-timeless-appeal-of-
the-persian-rug /2019.09.01 
[44] B. Murphy, “The Root of Wild Madder: Chasing the History,
Mystery, and Lore of the Persian Carpet,” Simon & Schuster. Kindle
Edition. 2005. 
[45] Anonymous,”Getting acquainted with samples of Persian Carpets,’
Iran Carpet Co., Vol. 2, 1984.
[46] https://financialtribune.com/articles/economy-business-and-
markets/80480/Hand-woven-carpet-exports-to-hit-400m /2019.09.01 
[47] www.blocktac.com /2019.09.01 
[48] A.H. Roshanzamir, A. Roosta, and M. Shajari “CHAMROSH
Technology: Transforming handwoven carpet to smart carpet,”
World of Export, 10, Fourth year/Summer and Autumn, 9–11, 2019. 
[49] X. Zhang and W. Dahu, “Application of artificial intelligence
algorithms in image processing,” Journal of Visual Communication
and Image Representation, Vol.61, 42–49, 2019. 
[50] W. Burger and M.J. Burge, “Digital Image Processing: An
Algorithmic Introduction Using Java, Springer”  2nd Edition. 2016. 
[51] M. Ponti, T. Nazare and G. Thume, “Image quantization as a
dimensionality reduction procedure in color and texture feature
extraction,” Neurocomputing Vol. 73, 385–396, 2016. 
[52] BBC News “ Game of Thrones makers on that coffee cup blunder and
season eight “, September 2019. 
https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-
49542412?ns_mchannel=social&ns_campaign=bbcnews&ocid=socia
lflow_twitter&ns_source=twitter /2019.09.10 
[53] A. Cheddad, J. Condell, K. Curran and P.M. Kevitt, “Digital image
steganography: survey and analysis of current methods,” Signal 
Processing, 90, 727–752, 2010. 
[54] I.J. Kadhim, P. Premaratne, P.J. Vial and B. Halloran ,
“Comprehensive survey of image steganography: Techniques, 
Evaluations, and trends in future research,” Neurocomputing, 
335(28), 299-326, 2019. 
[55] AZ. Tirkel et al. ‘Electronic water mark.Proceedings of Digital Image
Computing: Techniques and Applications,” Macquarie University,
666–673, 1993. 
[56] G.G. Parker, M.W. Van Alstyne and S.P. Choudary, “Platform
Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the
Economy--and How to Make Them Work for You,” W. W. Norton &
Company. Kindle Edition. 
[57] M. A. Cusumano, A. Gawer and D.B. Yoffie, “How Digital Platforms
Have Become Double-Edged Swords,” MIT Sloan Review, 2019. 
[58] M.A. Cusumano, “The Business of Platforms,” HarperBusiness. 
Kindle Edition, 2019.
[59] R. Gulati, “ The Soul of a Start-Up”, Harvard Business Review July–
August 2019, 85-91, 2019. 
[60] Anonymous “How Unicorns grow’ January–February 2016 Harvard
Business Review, 28-30, 2017. 
74
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[61] Al Ramadan, C. Lochhead, D. Peterson and K. Maney, “Time to
Market Cap: The New Metric That Matters,” Play Bigger Advisors,
LLC, 1-23, 2014.
[62] R. Gulati and A. DeSantola “Start-ups that last,” Harvard Business
Review March 2016, 54-61, 2016. 
[63] S. M. L. Henrich, “Teaching a giant to think like a startup,”
fortune.com /Nov.01.17, 94-102, 2017. 
[64] T.R. Eisenmann, R. Howe and B. Altringer "What Does an Aspiring
Founder Need to Know?," Harvard Business Review Digital Articles.
6/21/2017, pp.1-6, 2017. 
[65] E. Ries,"The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use
Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses,”
The Crown Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 2011. 
[66] S.D. Eppinger, “MIT’s Approach to Design Thinking” Online Course
by Emeritus Institute of Management in collaboration with MIT
Sloan School of Management, 2018. 
[67] S. Sinek, “The Infinite Game,” Penguin Publishing Group. Kindle
Edition. 2019. 
[68] https://www.instagram.com/p/BssaWndgKZp/ 
75
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

