The Future of the Internet: Scenarios and Challenges in the Evolution Path as Seen 
by EIFFEL Think-Tank 
Broka Jerman-Blažič 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Economics, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
University of Stockholm, Computer and System Sciences Department, 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e.mail: borka@e5.ijs.s 
 
Abstract-The paper deals with the current findings of the 
Think Tank group of experts from all over the world 
working within EU FP7 project “Evolving Future 
Internet for European Leadership – EIFFEL”. The 
Think-Tank is working on meetings where the discussion 
about major challenges and scenarios of the current 
Internet is contributing to the debate about the future of 
the Internet trying to provide some answers and identify 
evolutionary mechanisms for its development. In the on-
going work it becomes evident that different views exist 
regarding the missing parts or concepts of the current 
Internet network architecture. Some scenarios of 
Internet evolvements based on the stakeholder’s 
incentives show divers directions of development. This 
paper introduces the major findings regarding the 
identified challenges and the evolutionary mechanism 
suggested by the EIFFEL Think Tank.  
 
Keywords - Future Internet evolving mechanisms; Scenarios 
and visions; EIFFEL project think-tank. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current Internet is considered as remarkable success 
of the technology advancement. The Internet platform 
enabled innovation that far exceeds the original vision of the 
system as a research instrument. The Internet and associated 
services today have transformed the lives of billions of 
people in areas as diverse as democracy, education, 
healthcare, entertainment, commerce, finance and civil 
infrastructure. It can be easily claimed that the Internet is the 
21st 
century's 
fundamental 
societal 
infrastructure, 
comparable to the railways of the 1800s and roadways of the 
1900s. The Internet and the associated services have 
contributed to the transformation of the world economy and 
society. They catalyse new forms of communication, 
collaboration, creativity and innovation. They deeply affect 
the human communication, interactions and transactions, 
and the way humans deal with information and knowledge. 
All the data and statistics related to the Internet are still 
growing at exponential rates. According to the last report of 
the Task Force of the European Commission DG INFSO the 
Internet connectivity is expanding rapidly in both terms: 
geographical distribution and size [1]. Currently there are 
about 1.6 billion Internet users worldwide (from 360 million 
in 2000) and 4 billion mobile users (from 2.7 billion in 
2006); 570 million Internet-enabled handheld devices are in 
use. The number of people who use the mobile phones for 
web surfing has doubled since 2006 [2]. It is expected in 
2012 the number of mobile and wireless users to outnumber 
the wired ones. In parallel with user growth the stored 
information is growing as well or even faster. In 1998, 
Google indexed 26 million web-pages; in 2009 it indexes 1 
trillion. There are 400 million web pages and 55 trillion 
links between these web pages. The Web is processing 100 
billion clicks per day, 2 million e-mails and 1 million instant 
messages per second. Video traffic over the Internet is 
growing by 60% every year and will be multiplied by 1000 
over the next 5 to 8 years. Web 2.0 and social networks with 
popular social sites are attracting more than 125 million 
regular users within just 5 years of existence [2]. Internet is 
today indispensable part of the businesses as most of the 
businesses processes have been significantly automated by 
the underlying Internet technologies in business systems, 
production, development and communication. The current 
Internet is the most important infrastructure of the digital 
society that is adapting itself by use of ad-hoc technical 
solutions that help to meet the demands of the users and 
devices, applications and services enabling human activities 
that were not foreseen in its original design. 
The networking community being aware of the rising 
number of seemingly ad-hoc solutions to the technical 
problems has come to agreement that these problems are of 
architectural nature and for that reason a general re-design 
may be needed. It is common understanding of the 
community that the design of the Future Internet should 
enable smooth evolvement of the current IP network and 
should not lay on the current practice of patches being 
developed and implemented to overcome the existing 
tussles. It is also a common understanding that the structural 
and architectural problems of the current Internet cannot be 
solved without understanding of how a system with the size 
of the Internet interacts with the world either being human 
or just some mechanical part of it. 
This paper presents some of the identified immediate 
problems and challenges that require fundamental rethink of 
the set of mechanisms in use in the today Internet and its 
195
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

architectural origin. It is based on the work within the EU 
FP7 project Evolving Future Internet for European 
Leadership –EIFFEL [3]. The project is organizing semi-
annually think-tank meetings where technical and other 
experts from all parts of the world are contributing to the 
debate about the future of the Internet trying to provide 
answers to the major challenges and tussles. Most of the 
identified agreements and disagreements regarding the 
major problems of the current Internet are provided at the 
FIPEDIA site [4] maintained by the EIFFEL core team. This 
paper introduces the major findings that are presented in 
detail in the EIFFEL White Papers on the Future of Internet 
[3]. 
The paper is organised in five parts, the first part 
introduce shortly the on-going activities about the Future of 
the Internet around the world, then focuses on the EIFFEL 
evolutionary mechanism approach in developing the Future 
Internet and finally provides an insight to the socio-
economic challenges that need to be approached. The paper 
ends with conclusions and ideas for continuation of the 
research agenda debate. 
II. 
THE NETWORK COMMUNITY DEBATE 
The networking community is aware that the Internet 
network in use is still based on the best-effort, point-to-point 
service model, well suited to applications between two 
endpoints 
that 
can 
tolerate 
occasional 
performance 
degradation. Considering the current level of service where 
performance degradation is not acceptable but in the same 
time many of the used applications involve multiple 
endpoints and their identification in the Internet network the 
design of the new model becomes even more difficult. Deep 
consideration of the alternative service and network 
architecture to solve the tussles is becoming even more 
necessary. However, the views and the approaches within 
the research initiatives and efforts towards Internet 
evolvement differ.  
In U.S the NSF NetS research program FIND [6] is the 
major long-term initiative in the area of the Future Internet 
program where "clean slate process" research proposals in 
the broad area of network architecture, principles, and 
design, are trying to answer to many questions within the 
area of Future Internet. The philosophy of the programme is 
to help conceive the Future of Internet by enabling a 
network design that is free from the current collective 
mindset about the constraints of the network. The NSF is 
recently considering the NetSE (Network Science and 
Engineering Committee) report program published in mid-
2009 [7], in which further of R&D activities based on 
theoretical approaches that help to overcome the barriers in 
future network design are recommended. GENI [8] is also 
another U.S based program focusing on a flexible and 
reconfigurable network ―test-bed‖ experimental facilities 
and related experimental projects. 
The EU through the FP7 program is engaged in funding 
a very wide range of research activities that relate to the 
future Internet. Given the scale of this activity, and the rate, 
at which it is generating results, a complete, up-to-date, 
snapshot of all related European R&D activities in the area 
is difficult to be provided. Some form of cross-project, 
cross-domain body that promote information sharing and 
helps to set a balance between coherence in order to exploit 
knowledge generated by number of participants, and the 
existing diversity is happening within the Future Internet 
Assembly that was established in March 2008 in Bled, 
Slovenia. FIA with semi-annual meetings is ensuring 
appropriate coverage of this very large and challenging 
research domain that includes innovative research in the 
area of networking, experimental facilities and testing 
within the FIRE [9] program. Recently the initiative related 
to the Future Internet enterprise system – the project cluster 
FInES [10] was added to the FIA program. Recently in July 
2009 the final report of the EU DG INFSO [2] Task Group 
on Interdisciplinary Research Activities for the Future 
Internet was published where the design, implementation, 
testing and validation platforms are identified as major 
research challenges for the EU in the incoming years. Cross-
disciplinary research activities are the essential part of these 
platforms. Japan, Korea (KOREN) and India have set up 
similar initiatives and Asia with China has as well its own 
research initiative on the Future of the Internet – AsiaFI. 
Cooperation and exchange of information between this 
initiative and the EU FP7 projects have been recently set up. 
The Internet has influenced many changes in the world 
in the society, culture, commerce and technology. Activities 
about the Future of the Internet that includes discussions 
about the Internet governance and business models are on-
going in other communities e.g., in the international 
governmental and non-governmental organizations such as 
OECD [11], ITU [12], UN-IGF [13]. Internet Society as 
well together with ICANN are developing position papers 
and projects on issues such as the Internet Economy, 
Internet Governance, Network neutrality are being presented 
and discussed on ITU and IGF forums. The recently expired 
contract between ICANN and the U.S government (NTUA) 
is one step forward toward building up of real 
internationally governed corporation and inclusion of the 
civil society as its constitutional part. Important observation 
in exploring these initiatives is that the balance between the 
new network design for the expected new Internet in the 
attempt to bias the Internet towards one particular model of 
governance and business model is difficult to be achieved. 
In other words, the architecture to be designed must attempt 
not to prescribe the outcome of particular tussles in the 
(future) market place beforehand rather than allow for 
tussles to commence inside the architecture at runtime. 
Articulating the grand challenges and working towards 
solutions needs a wider debate as well as concrete work 
among 
a 
growing 
community 
of 
(interdisciplinary) 
researchers and major stakeholders. The need is clearly 
understood by the members of the think-tank of the EIFFEL 
project [3]. Different views exist in respect of what may be 
196
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

missing from the current architecture or why such concepts 
are missing. Some of the agreements achieved during the 
think tank meetings are presented in the section 7 of the 
paper. Full report is available in the EIFFEL White paper [5] 
and on the recently set up FIPEDIA portal [4].  
III. 
EVOLUTIONARY MECHANISMS 
EIFFEL think-tank has come to agreement that a 
consideration of a large-scale system such as the Internet 
need to be carefully observed before starting the new design. 
The evolution of the Internet is becoming compromised [14] 
when the architecture does not allow legitimate concerns to 
be expressed after its original design. As a result, users, 
providers and business customers solve their problems in ad 
hoc ways, adding carbuncles in violation of the original 
architecture. Then subsequent requirements are even more 
difficult to satisfy, because of all the feature interactions 
with the number of exceptions to the original architecture. 
The root of this problem lies deep in the processes used 
to design architectures and solutions. Currently, much 
emphasis is placed on the design phase of the architecture, 
with requirements phases and use case definitions, 
accompanied 
by 
processes 
of 
standardization. 
This 
inevitably leads to an emphasis of the concerns that are 
important to the players who are deeply involved in this 
phase while often neglecting the concerns of the actors 
entering the scene after the solution has been fixed. This 
Newtonian-Descartian concept of system design, relying on 
such requirements and use case definition phases, assumes 
the ability to capture all relevant concerns and therefore 
resolve the most probable run-time tussles at design time. 
The widening scope of the Internet beyond mere technology 
and the observed increase of ad-hoc solutions after the 
design of the original architecture bring this design process 
into question. Some authors propose [15] a shift from these 
reductionist 
Newtonian-Descartian 
towards 
Darwinian 
approaches [16], where the evolutionary kernel is a 
component that has been proven to be successful for 
multiple uses, so it may act as a platform for evolution 
around it, (see [15]) and becomes the design process itself, 
i.e., a process, in which concerns of actors are incorporated 
into the system at runtime, recognizing the inability to cater 
to all possible requirements during design time. However, 
this requires an understanding of what had been good and 
should be preserved or used in the new design. 
These consideration and agreements achieved during the 
discussions of the Internet evolution can be summarized as 
follows:  
 
There is a need for evolution as a gradually 
developing process, like for any large-scale system. 
This evolution of the system is particularly 
important considering the evolution of society due 
to the impact of the system itself. In order to 
understand the suitability of the system to evolve, 
we need to understand the dynamics forcing the 
changes and devise an architecture that is suited for 
these dynamics to commence in runtime. These 
dynamics will need to define the required steps and 
their size in evolution that is being necessary and 
therefore the changes in the underlying architecture 
that are being required. 
 
The scope of the dynamics affecting change of the 
Internet is widening. The Internet has become more 
than a technical artefact – it has transformed from a 
network for geeks to a crucial infrastructure used in 
society and business. Its impact on these areas is 
obvious, from e-commerce to e-government, the 
change in the perception of privacy to many other 
societal changes since its introduction. The virtual 
and the real world abide to similar rules regarding 
human rights and respect for personal space as 
guiding principles. Hence, the question of evolving 
the Internet is not a mere technical one anymore. 
 
Evolution speed is increasing with the advances of 
technology. For instance, memory is becoming so 
cheap, in particular compared to the formative 
years of the Internet, that solutions for caching vast 
amounts of content locally is likely to transform the 
way users and customers deal with content.  
 
In that context another problem needs immediate 
attention: consumption of energy related to 
increase of used memory and processing power. 
Internet is become another area for energy saving 
and 
low 
energy 
consumption 
devices 
on 
infrastructure and on application level. 
Coping with the changes and the research agenda 
preparation is the issue discussed and worked within the 
think-tank meetings. It was obvious that the old models of 
the development mostly based on engineering approach are 
no more sufficient. The complexity of the system and the 
interrelation with the society needs scientific methods based 
on facts and measurement to understand and react to the 
global picture and the expected evolution in search of 
solutions. 
The root of the problem lies deep in the processes that 
are used to design architectures and solutions. Much 
emphasis is placed on the design phase of the architecture, 
with requirements phases and use case definitions, 
accompanied 
by 
processes 
of 
standardization. 
This 
inevitably leads to an emphasis of the concerns that are 
important to the players who are deeply involved in this 
phase while often neglecting the concerns of the actors 
entering the scene after the solution has been fixed. This 
Newtonian-Descartian concept of system design, relying on 
such requirements and use case definition phases, assumes 
the ability to capture all relevant concerns and therefore 
resolve the most probable run-time tussles at design time. 
The widening scope of the Internet beyond mere technology 
and the observed increase of ad-hoc solutions to concerns of 
actors after the design of the original architecture bring this 
design process and the applied research methods into 
question. 
197
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
POSSIBLE RESEARCH METHODS  
The basis of scientific research lies in the ability to 
formulate and test falsifiable hypotheses. The role of 
engineering is to create, evolve and maintain operational 
systems according to a particular design brief. The Internet 
provides an environment that is rich in possibilities for 
research that is experimental and analytical, which at the 
same time, must be set in the context of engineering; 
likewise, Internet engineering must respect the need to use 
the engineered system as an experimental platform and as a 
platform for innovation, both of which might cause the 
underlying design brief to change. 
The Future Internet is, consequently, more about process 
than product. Although it is likely that a Future Internet will 
result from agreement by committees representing industry 
players and governments, it is crucial for individuals 
(including researchers) to understand how to influence the 
key decision makers to eventually adopt the ‗right‘ 
solutions. The present Internet design is taking part within 
organizations that have historically focussed more on 
engineering than innovative vision and social interactions. 
Some believe the future Internet will come about through 
the same institutions that fostered the current Internet; the 
networking 
research 
community 
and 
the 
Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF), but this is unlikely to be 
realistic, simply because the importance of the Internet has 
changed with time and the list of stakeholders with an 
interest in design outcomes has grown. As things stand, it is 
undoubtedly the case that many proposals will be 
standardised in a variety of committees belonging to several 
associations. Those proposals that are most worthy and 
manage to attract support of the key stakeholders will be 
deployed, and those that survive the rigours of the 
marketplace will become the Future Internet. 
In the same time it is obvious that even very successful 
network architectures should change over time and this fact 
should be present in the overall considerations of the future 
of the Internet. All new systems start small. Once 
successful, they grow larger. The growth brings the system 
to a new environment that the original designers may not 
have envisioned, together with new requirements that must 
be met. For example the security threats facing the Internet 
in recent years should not be blamed upon the inadequate 
design of the original architecture. Rather, it is due to poor 
understanding of its limitations and the missing adoption 
from the users. Continued success requires continued 
scientific research on networking practice, to identify new 
problems and evolve the architecture to meet the new 
demands.  
Another aspect that needs to be addressed is full 
understanding of the driving forces behind the Internet's 
success. The Internet would not have succeeded so greatly 
without Moore's Law. Computing technologies are moving 
forward with accelerated speed. The Internet architecture 
facilitated the technology advances. The rapidly advancing 
technologies in turn drive new application developments and 
user population growth on the Internet.  
Technology advances and Internet growth have created 
the new demands on the architecture. The need for security, 
manageability, and scalability showed up over time. Today 
they are more pressing than ever, as they were not promptly 
identified and fixed ahead of the crisis. This requires 
continuously identification and address of the new demands. 
One unfortunate fact to be claimed is that there has been a 
big gap between reality and how the research community 
understands it. Since the Internet commercialization in mid 
90's, the networking research community gradually lost 
touch with the frontier of the Internet, lost the opportunity to 
observe real problems. The community by and large 
retreated back to work on isolated or point problems, and 
used simulations or small, isolated test beds for design 
evaluations. The research community‘s lack of attention 
does not mean real problems do not occur, but only that the 
problems are solved by others frequently on ad-hoc basis. 
Designing a technical system creates an economic one, 
while the latter is enabled by a variety of technical systems. 
In reality however, the process of (technical) system design 
is mostly disjoint from the process of designing business 
models and strategies for sustaining them over a period of 
time. Combining these two processes is difficult, largely 
because of the communities that are required to interact. The 
challenges are in the sustainability of the systems, which 
cannot be assured without a joint design process. A solution 
to this problem will not only have an impact on the design 
of systems but also, for instance, on the way the educational 
system shape the talents in their understanding of these 
fields, as has been recognized during the debate of the 
EIFFEL think-tank [3]. For this to happen, however the 
differences of research styles that exist between research 
fields, like economics, engineering and social science should 
be accommodated and make usable in the engineering 
design. 
V. 
INTERNET SOCIETY -ISOC SCENARIOS  
The Internet Society (ISOC) [17] contributed to the 
EIFFEL think-tank discussions with an illustration of the 
possible evolvement based on the »Internet Futures 
Scenarios" exercise done in 2009. This exercise produced 
four visions of possible future in cases when stakeholders‘ 
interests could achieve dominance in the practices 
development. The scenarios are presented on Fig.1. The 
scenarios illustrate possible futures designed around two 
axes that point to different outcomes: whether the future 
Internet will remain true to the old open Internet model 
(generative, rather than reductive) or whether it will become 
distributed and decentralized. Other alternative is the 
Internet to become a subject to command and control of 
regimes. These axes represent two key areas of external 
world 
tussles 
(social, 
economic) 
between 
Internet 
stakeholders, impacting the deployed Internet reality. 
198
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Together, they form four quadrants, each of which can be 
described as an illustrative scenario. 
 
FIGURE 1: ISOC FUTURE INTERNET SCENARIOS 
The quadrants between the two axes reflect the effects of 
misalignments in the incentives of the Future Internet 
between stakeholders. The main incentives and what drives 
the stakeholder‘s actions are presented on Table 1. The 
columns provide categorization of the major stakeholders in 
regards to their fears of and what they are greedy about. 
TABLE 1.INTERNET STAKEHOLDERS INCENTIVES 
 
The scenarios consideration has shown that among the 
four quadrants the Common Pool quadrant is most positive 
regarding 
the 
"generative" 
and 
"distributed 
and 
decentralized" properties of the Future Internet. All 
resources that are part of the future Internet are made 
available in the "Common Pool" scenarios to the overall 
community. This scenario can be considered as the ideal, for 
which Internet development and deployment has always 
striven, though never achieved in perfection. This scenario 
tends to provide maximum flexibility and deployment, 
innovation 
and 
opportunities 
to 
all 
stakeholders. 
Technologies are planned to be built out "horizontally", 
rather than in full service verticals. This quadrant is named 
as a Common Pool in order to reflect the notion that it 
represents for the future where (information service and 
application) gardens will not be completely walled, but still 
somewhat restricted to particular channels. 
The Porous Garden scenario is designed around the 
stakeholder‘s incentive for increased control over business 
and revenue. In this quadrant the application and service 
provider stakeholders are leading the evolvement with 
architectures that feature increased command and control in 
the "vertical" services. In this vision of the Future Internet, 
the networks remain global but access to content and 
services are tied to the use of specific networks and 
associated information appliances. Financial incentives for 
content producers and software developers would result in 
continued innovation within the appliance-based model, but 
network operators will be constrained to evolve their 
services to support appliances and not the general Internet 
services. Consumers would have to purchase multiple 
appliances and associated subscriptions to avail themselves 
of the full range of innovation on the network. This scenario 
reflects the general mis-alignment between the incentives of 
the content producers and those of end users, as well as 
(ultimately) the network operators. 
The Boutique Networks quadrant present a scenario 
where applications are not expected to be the dominant 
driver of the future but contrary to that allows the networks 
to be. This quadrant reflects the possibility of network 
specialization to become dominant. In that case Internet is 
not expected to be a single, general network, but rather 
individually constrained and composed from purposed 
networks that provide "boutique" services. It envisions a 
future in which political, regional, and large enterprise 
interests fail to optimize on the social and economic 
potential of a shared, global set of richly connected 
networks (the today Internet), but instead reflects the 
outcome of parties intended to optimize control in small 
sectors (political and otherwise). While these balkanized 
networks continue to leverage the benefits of existing 
Internet standards, they do not collectively provide the basis 
for generalized application and service development and 
deployment. In that regard, this quadrant represents the 
converse of the Porous Garden quadrant, in that it is network 
development interests that are expected to dominated. 
The Moats and Drawbridge quadrant reflects a future 
where stakeholders are seeking tighter command and control 
and more reductive, constrained network environments are 
expected to prevail. The increased (perceived) need to 
provide security and consistent environments through 
"command and control" operation and closed development 
practices, this scenario is drawing an Internet that is heavily 
centralized, dominated by a small number of big players 
who create their own rules in a few ―big-boys‖ clubs. In this 
scenario it can be expected strong regulation as governments 
will seek to impose some public interest obligations on the 
industry, as the user interests and incentives will not be 
natively supported. Control could extend to limiting 
equipment that could connect to the network, content could 
199
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

be proprietary and protected by strong intellectual property 
rights. This quadrant shows the highest barrier for entry of 
new applications, networks, services and end users.  
The description of the above scenarios allows a selection 
of the best vision based on the consideration discussed at 
EIFFEL think-tank meetings. From an economic point of 
view (the most democratic at least), the perfect scenario 
would be the one that exists in a perfect market; the one for 
which the following statements are true [18]: Perfect market 
information, No participant with market power to set prices, 
No barriers to entry or exit and Equal access to production 
technology. 
An immediate result of the perfect market information 
should also be the existence of perfect pricing mechanisms. 
Doubtlessly, the Common Pool scenario is the one that 
mostly resembles to the perfect one and is close to the 
current ―ideal‖. The significant question here is if it is 
possible to influence the design of the Future Internet so that 
it can naturally stabilize itself to this quadrant (or towards to 
a perfect market)? The answer is probably ―yes‖ and the 
way to achieve it is via a design for change. In that context a 
special attention has to be paid to the information part, 
which in a network based system translates to network 
measurements and monitoring  
VI. 
BUSINESS AND SOCIAL DEMANDS  
The particular (technical) approach to the Internet has 
created business structures that evolved around it, such as 
expressed in transit and peering relationships of autonomous 
systems. Any evolution of technologies but in particular any 
fundamental approach to change the current Internet will 
undoubtedly have an impact on these existing business 
structures. Too radical a change will cause problems in 
adopting the change – and the lack of understanding the 
proper impact can delay the advancement. Hence, technical 
and economic migration strategies from here to there are 
crucial when targeting a wide adoption of proposed changes. 
For this reason it is a must the grand challenges in 
economics to be addressed as well. This needs to start with 
gathering the right audience for this work and it needs to be 
driven by a clear emphasis on the concrete problems and the 
quest for some answers to these.  
Regarding social interaction it is common fact that 
Internet in its early days was a vehicle for both enabling 
email based communication (reasonably immediate, but not 
requiring real-time end-to-end connectivity) and for simply 
improving the information flow between parties, which 
would have otherwise exchanged the information, but more 
slowly or in lesser quantities. In addition, along with this 
beneficial relationship with social structures, it brought as 
well antisocial opportunities and mis-use. The demands of 
improving social communication and reflecting social 
structure are growing but in the same time increasingly 
issues of privacy and safety in a completely connected world 
are being addressed. This may follow many possible 
alternative paths of development. Birth/death records, 
medical records, banking records and so forth were kept 
long before there was an Internet, but the Internet not only 
made them aggregately, but also made it simpler for 
malefactors to get at them, even attacking the infrastructure 
itself. It was only as the infrastructure became increasingly 
integrated into, and critical to, our society transformed now 
in digital society that attacking it also became increasingly 
worthwhile. 
In that context it is important to be understood that 
Internet is a reflection of society, but this reflection is 
always a partial. As such, it will evolve to provide 
increasing aspects of social infrastructure requirements, but 
it is unlikely the prediction where the next step will be to be 
accurate. In fact, some of the innovation comes from other 
quarters. Who would have thought that carrying around 
small wireless cell phones with tiny keyboards would turn 
into instant messaging and from there make the leap to the 
Internet and soon into all the different modes of social 
networking with the user designed Web 2.0 tools? Hence, 
innovation will always have an element of surprise for some 
stakeholders in society. 
One of the interesting social challenges the user 
community is facing to is the information overload. There is 
too much information. There are too many services that 
want to claim the user trust. There are too many options and 
too many individuals who want an attention. A challenge 
will be to evolve approaches that reflect the human and 
social approaches to dealing with overload. This is already 
happening in what are probably simple ways in social 
networking contexts. Users group the friends; create 
channels for topics, create wikis, follow the friends via 
twitters and so forth. The world is being actually clustered, 
but this can be understood as the early stage of the social 
change induced by the Internet. Newspapers were a 
mechanism for filtering, organizing and limiting information 
that otherwise would overwhelm the reading audience. With 
the demise of newspapers, what elements of the almost 
infinite flow of bits will bring order that is reflective of the 
human mind and human social structure? In the longer run, 
will that also allow each of the humans to retain a somewhat 
personal view in large social structures? How will the 
individuality and privacy be retained? 
Next question to be answered is the impact of the 
governance on the Internet or vice versa: what is the impact 
of Internet on the governance. It is clear that the low-cost 
and pervasive availability of a uniform communications 
substrate has had an immeasurable impact on the global 
society that is becoming digital society. Historically 
explorers circled the world and laid claim on behalf of their 
home countries to other lands, thus beginning the political 
and economic connectedness around the globe. The 
presence of the Internet has qualitatively changed the nature 
and degree of that connectedness. In the current economic 
and political situation, no country can make decisions that 
will have only a local effect. There is no more isolation. 
Given that, the relationship between the Internet and 
200
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

governance is becoming even more important. Perhaps even 
more importantly is the possibility Internet to change 
forever governance of, by or for a people. Blogging and cell 
phone cameras that can transmit photos are having profound 
effects on the capability of individuals to constrain their 
governments at times when the governments may not want 
that. This is likely to have an impact on, e.g., regulation 
when considering a growing role of end users in the 
participation of the Internet, i.e., end users potentially grow 
into an essential part of the Future Internet, moving away 
from their current pre-dominant role of a mere consumer. 
How this will affect ways to regulate certain parts of the 
Internet will be important to understand. 
VII. 
NEXT STEPS FORWARD 
The most important observation of the EIFFEL Think 
Tank is that the future architecture to should not be a 
balance at design-time towards the wanted world, instead 
minimum substrate should be designed that allows the 
Internet flexibility to behave in different ways at different 
times and in different places depending on the outcome of 
market selection and social regulation mechanisms [19], 
[20] whilst retaining levels of performance that render it fit 
for purpose. Hence the research should move from a largely 
design time to a largely runtime model for resolving 
potential tussles. Some of them as identified by the EIFFEL 
Think Tank [3] can be: 
 
Resilience, failure tracking & management: The 
Internet‘s distributed design is popularly renowned 
for its robustness to failure. Indeed failures often do 
heal automatically, but not quickly. The result is an 
increasingly unreliable service. Also many failures 
are not amenable to automatic solution, being due 
to human errors in configuration and so forth. It is 
generally believed that the Internet as of today does 
not have effective solutions these problems.  
 
Availability & robustness to attack: The Internet 
is continually being used as the means for malware 
to 
attack 
both 
services 
and 
the 
Internet 
infrastructure itself. Solutions to these problems 
often block innovative legitimate uses of the 
Internet as well as illegitimate ones, effectively 
slowing down the Internet‘s evolvability. Proper 
architectural support to address the root means of 
these attacks is needed, but there is no consensus 
between the contending partial solutions.  
 
Information security scalability: The state of the 
art in information security techniques is sufficiently 
robust to assure any form of security, except that 
the techniques do not scale to global proportions in 
non-hierarchical 
groups. 
Another 
aspect 
of 
information security is that of information 
accountability. While the Internet can cause 
information to be shared or not, once it has been 
shared at all, any control is essentially lost of any 
further sharing and exposure and are dependent on 
some vague sense of trust in those with whom we 
have shared. 
 
Resource accountability: The Internet architecture 
allows everyone to use any resource anywhere on 
the Internet to the extent that they want. However, 
at present, network operators are deploying boxes 
to limit or block communication with certain users 
or by certain applications. Even if the Internet 
networks were trying to share the capacity without 
making judgements about content, the architecture 
does not reveal the information they need to make 
other networks and their users accountable when 
they are over-using stressed resources. The 
consequent inability to properly limit free riding (or 
to deliberately allow it) leads to uncertainty over 
whether capacity investments can be recouped, 
which in turn negatively affects the whole value 
chain of the Internet. 
 
Network-application coordination: Over the 
years, the application programming interfaces 
(APIs) at the top of the TCP/IP protocol suite have 
become ossified and stale, but more importantly 
they have become almost impenetrable. In the 
downward direction, middle boxes (e.g., firewalls 
and network address translators) only recognise 
those protocols that existed when they were 
deployed. So they block out all attempts by 
applications to use new APIs to new lower layer 
protocols and services. In the upward direction, 
applications cannot find out about the network or 
their paths through the network in order to create 
richer services themselves—services that could 
exploit knowledge of network topology, network 
failures or traffic characteristics.  
 
Scaling for more extreme dynamics: The 
dynamic range of the Internet architecture is hitting 
its limits. For instance, increasingly the inter-
domain routing system cannot converge quickly 
enough following a change, leaving longer periods 
of disconnection. More sites are connecting to the 
Internet through multiple links to improve 
resilience, but the inter-domain routing system is 
designed so it then has to treat these sites as distinct 
networks rather than as stubs off a single-provider 
network. This makes the routing system appear 
much larger without the Internet growing at all. 
Also the Internet‘s congestion control mechanisms 
have hit the end of their dynamic range since 
higher bit-rates require higher accelerations to 
reach them. 
By trying to see into the future through debates such 
those taking place on the Fipedia site a value judgement 
with respect to the current identified and potential (possibly 
unidentified) tussles could be the best approach for choosing 
a particular evolution path for perhaps technical, moral, 
ethical, legal, or business reasons. The nature and impact of 
201
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

this choice, however, need to be made explicit as well as 
understood. Since such choices are inherently constraining, 
the establishment of an orthodoxy that results from making a 
constricting decision must be balanced by inviting challenge 
and weighing evidence. For this, it is most important to pay 
attention in addition to the identified tussles to the 
evolutionary mechanisms of the Internet—the aspects that 
determine how evolution progresses and if it progresses at 
all. Decisions made at this point must remain relevant and 
fresh for at least as long as the current Internet has proved 
valuable, in a world, in which Moore‘s law continues to 
apply. Investment of time and effort in widespread changes 
to the whole system will not occur unless such changes both 
deliver in the timescales needed for cost recovery and 
continue to give returns over many decades in a constantly 
evolving technological, economic and societal environment. 
Along this line, the EIFFEL think-tank has still intention to 
stimulate, even provoke discussion on the major points of 
why and how the world will be going about the Future 
Internet.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is a result of the work of the think-tank of EU 
funded FP7 project EIFFEL. Contributions of all members 
and caretakers of the project are appreciated. 
REFERENCES 
[1]. B. Jerman-Blažič. The future of the Internet: tussles and 
challenges in the evolution pat as identified by EIFFEL 
think tank V: BERNTZEN, Lasse (ur.). The Fourth 
International Conferencon Digital Society 2010, 10-16 
February 2010 St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles. ICDS 
2010. [S. l.IEEE Computer Society: = Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers, 2010, pp. 25-30. 
[2]. Draft Report of the Task Force Interdisciplinar 
Research Activities applicable to the Future Internet, version 
4.1. http://forum.future.internet.eu, 13.7.2009 
[3]. EU FP7 Project EIFFEL, www.fp7-eiffel.eu, 6.1.2011. 
[4]. www.fipedia.org 12.12.2009. 
[5]. D. Trossen (ed), ―Starting the Discussion‖, whitepaper 
of the EIFFEL think tank, July 2009, at http://www.eiffel-
thinktank.eu, 12.12.2009 
[6]. FIND (Future Internet Design). www.nets-find.net, 
8.9.2009. 
[7]. Network Science and Engineering Council, ―Network 
Science and Engineering (NetSE) Researc Agenda‖, at 
http://www.cra.org/ccc/docs/NetSE-Research-Agenda.pdf, 
2009, 8.9.2009. 
[8]. GENI, www.geni.net, 10.12.2009. 
[9]. FIRE Future Internet, www.future-internet.eu, 
10.1.2.2009. 
[10]. Future Internet Enterprise System (FInES) Cluster,   
Position Paper Version1, 15.5.2009, www.cordis.eu. 
[11]. The Future of the Internet Economy OECD Ministerial   
Meeting Report, www.oeced.org/futureinternet. 
[12]. ITU Technology Watch Report 10. April 2009            
www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu/oth/.../T230100000A0001PDFE.p
df. 
[13]. Forum (IGF) - The First Two Years' Report, 
www.intgovforum.org/ 5.12.2009 
[14]. D. Trossen (ed), ―The Core-Edge Story‖, whitepaper 
of the Core-Edge Dynamics working group at the 
Communications Futures Program, MIT, 2005 
[15]. C. Dovrolis, "What would Darwin think about clean-
slate architectures?" In: ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review 38 (1) pp. 29--34 (2008) 
[16]. R. Hollingsworth and K. Müller, "Transforming socio-
economics with a new epistemology," Socio-Economic 
Review, vol. 6, pp. 395–426, 2008 
[17]. Internet Society, www.isoc.org, 6.1.2011 
[18].Wikipedia,URL: 
www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_marketing, 6.1.2011 
[19]. D. Clark, K. Sollins, J. Wroclawski and R. Braden, 
"Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's Internet," In: 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 13 (3) pp. 462--
475 (June, 2005). 
[20]. D. Clark and M. Blumenthal, ―The End-to-End 
Argument 
and 
Application 
Design: 
The 
Role 
Trust,‖Conference on Communication, Information, and 
Internet Policy (TPRC), 2007. 
202
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

