A Peer-Teaching Support System for Online Exercises: 
Prototype and its Evolution  
 
Shiryu SEKIGUCHI  
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
ma21078@shibaura-it.ac.jp 
Tsuyoshi NAKAJIMA 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
tsnaka@shibaura-it.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—Online exercises that deal with hardware, such as 
Internet of Things prototyping, have few convenient tools for 
students to share visual information on physical artifacts for 
peer-teaching. We proposed a peer-teaching support system 
“ShareHandy,” which allows students to share videos of 
artifacts under development and point out areas of interest in 
real time using smartphones and PCs. We developed a prototype 
and applied it to an online Internet of Things prototyping 
exercise and verified its effectiveness for peer-teaching. As a 
result, the students could understand each other's problems and 
give appropriate advice efficiently and accurately. This proves 
that the system is effective for peer-teaching and improving the 
overall efficiency of the exercise. However, we found that it has 
little effect on promoting peer-teaching itself. Based on the 
findings, we defined the requirements for improved system 
necessary to promote peer-teaching in the exercises. This paper 
describes and evaluates the first protype of ShareHandy and 
provides the requirements for its evolution.  
Keywords-online education; peer-teaching; IoT exercise. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Peer-teaching is a learning method for students to teach 
each other, gaining attention as a way to increase the 
effectiveness of student learning [2]. Recently, the COVID-19 
pandemic has increased the number of online classes and 
exercises. However, such an online situation makes peer-
teaching difficult because of the limited interactions between 
students [4]. One of the main reasons for this is that it is 
difficult for students to share the information on their physical 
artifacts under development visually. For example, in an 
online exercise where students learn to assemble the same 
electric 
circuit, 
they 
lose 
important 
peer-teaching 
opportunities, such as sharing one student’s work with the 
teacher and other students, pointing out and giving advice to 
each other interactively, and reviewing the advised points 
after that. 
To solve this problem, Dorneich et al. [5] provide several 
best practices to promote effective online team collaboration. 
Kitagami et al. [6] propose an exercise method of using a 
virtual camera to share camera images as well as documents, 
on one screen in a Web conference system, in which students 
watch the screen image transmitted by the teacher as they 
proceed with the exercises. However, this method does not 
allow students to see other students’ artifacts while receiving 
teachers’ transmission. Hamblen et al. [7] proposed a method 
for peer-teaching of hardware assembly in an asynchronous 
environment using a wiki. Students can interact with each 
other using the wiki, but only in a non-real-time manner. 
We propose a peer-teaching support system “ShareHandy” 
to solve the problems mentioned above to ease online peer-
teaching in a group of students. In the previous work [1], we 
developed a prototype of the system, which has several 
functions to share students’ physical artifacts visually with 
each student’s smartphone or Web camera: pointing at and 
drawing on the shared videos, saving the snapshot of the 
videos with the drawings.  
This paper fleshes out the contents of the previous paper 
to provide detailed discussion, presenting the requirements for 
the 
peer-teaching 
support 
system, 
its 
design 
and 
implementation corresponding to the requirements, the 
evaluation of its usefulness by applying it to a group exercise 
of Internet of Things (IoT) prototyping held online, and the 
proposal of additional functions to promote peer-teaching like 
progress sharing and document pointer. 
In this paper, Section 2 presents the details of our proposal 
system, Section 3 describes the experimental evaluation, 
results and discussion, Section 4 presents the requirements for 
its evolution, and Section 5 concludes this paper.  
II. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
To support peer-teaching in IoT prototyping exercises, it 
is necessary to have a support system for the students (and the 
teacher) to share the students’ physical artifacts visually. The 
proposed system provides stream live videos of students’ 
artifacts using their own smartphone or Web cameras, which 
they can point at and draw additional information on. 
The following subsections describe usage scenarios of the 
proposal system, its functions, and how the functions can be 
utilized in the scenarios. 
A. 
Usage Scenarios 
The target exercise assumes a situation in which each 
student work individually on the same assignment and several 
small groups of students are organized for peer-teaching. The 
students can use the proposed system to discuss and teach each 
other in the group. In this situation, students may frequently 
switch their role between tutors (teaching) and learners (being 
taught). 
13
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The proposed system is supposed to be used with the Web 
conferencing system, which handles document sharing and 
voice communication. The system helps the group members 
share video of their artifacts under development. 
We assume the following usage scenarios of the system: 
• 
Students who have successfully completed the 
assignment and those who have not finished yet, 
compare each other’s artifacts to find out what to do 
for solving the problems the no-completed students 
have. 
• 
A student asks the teacher of his questions, and a 
session is held to answer them. Some other students 
interested in the questions participate in the session, 
and the session proceeds on a question-and-answer 
basis. 
B. 
Designed functions and how to use in the scenarios 
We listed the designed functions and how it will work for 
above scenarios below. 
1) 
Setting up rooms for group sharing 
The system allows users to set up multiple rooms at a time 
so that users can easily have a space to discuss some topic, 
which other users can participate in freely when they are 
interested in the topic. 
2) 
Real-time video streaming 
Images of multiple students’ work-in-progress artifacts are 
streamed in real-time by using smartphones or Web cameras 
attached to laptops. The system can display multiple videos 
simultaneously so that the students can see and compare each 
other’s artifacts. This allows the tutors to convey, what 
changes are supposed to occur in each of the correct steps and 
allows the learners to explain what situation they are in and 
what their problems are. In addition, the system helps the users 
recognize the artifacts in 3D, which is not possible with 
documents or still images. 
3) 
Pausing video and broadcasting still images 
The video streaming can be paused to share as a still image. 
This allows the tutors to have enough time for detailed 
explanation at the key points and allows the learners to stop at 
their problematic points to ask for advises. 
4) 
Pointing by participants 
Each user has a cursor with a personal identifier, which 
can be placed at a specific position on the video image to 
indicate his or her point of interest. This allows the teaching 
student to clarify the focus points, explain the problems, and 
give instructions accurately. It also allows the person being 
taught to show the points to ask. 
5) 
Writing and drawing by users 
Users can write texts and draw figures on the streaming 
videos (including still images) using pointing devices. This 
allows the tutors to label related locations (e.g., initials and 
numbers) or to indicate directions by drawing arrows. In 
addition, the learners can leave notes to be shared. 
6) 
Saving video captures and drawings as still images 
Still images of videos with drawing can be stored on the 
user’s device. This allows the learners to review the session 
afterward. 
 e     S  
Send and  eceive 
Images,  rawing  
 ointing  oordinates
H    Ser er
Images 
 oordinates
 ther Students  
and Teachers  
  s   Smartphones
 eb  pplication
Student s 
   or Smartphone
Images 
 oordinates
 eb  pplication
Figure 1. System Structure of ShareHandy 
 
Figure 2. User Interface of ShareHandy and Demonstration 
     
     
         
          
14
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. 
Implementation of the Proposal System 
The proposed system has been implemented as a prototype 
first. The system structure of the prototype is shown in Figure 
1. 
The prototype is built as a Web application [8], which runs 
on a Web browser and has the advantage to support multiple 
operating systems with a single code. This allows it to work 
on devices like PCs and smartphones, in which users only are 
required to access a web page to use the application. Moreover, 
there is no need to install additional applications on the device. 
As shown in Figure 1, we use WebRTC (Web Real-Time 
Communication), which is a platform to enable real-time 
communication of video, audio, and general data via a Web 
browser [9]. WebRTC communication allows the users to 
send and receive videos and images, coordinates of drawings 
and pointers, and other control signals in real-time. 
Figure 2 shows an example of using the prototype in real. 
Three users participate in the session, and two members share 
videos showing their artifacts. On the left screen, the pointers 
of the users (shown with a “ ” mark) and drawing data are 
displayed (shown with the text of “NG”). In this situation, the 
student shown green needs help, and yellow and red members 
help him. The drawing color and pointing color are the same 
as the nametag shown at the bottom of the videos, and students 
choose their color at the beginning of a session. 
To draw and point with some members simultaneously in 
real-time is difficult with one canvas, so we provide the 
drawable sections by overlaying multiple canvases on a video, 
which are the same number as the group members. This 
implemented as Layered Canvas Function, which keeps 
drawings and images independently and overlay them to 
display and save as an image, as shown in Figure 3. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
To evaluate the proposed system in Section 2, we 
conducted experiments by using online exercises. 
A. 
Purpose of the Experiment 
The following two research questions are set concerning 
the effects when students use the prototype in online exercises. 
[RQ1]  Does this system allow the tutors to convey correct 
steps quickly and accurately to be done on the artifact 
to the students taught? 
[RQ2] Does this system enable group communication to be 
carried out smoothly, and as a result, it can promote 
peer-teaching? 
 
We conducted experiments to investigate these research 
questions. 
B. 
Method of the experiments 
We conducted the experiments with following method. 
1) 
Exercises to be applied 
The prototype system is applied to the following two real 
online exercises, individual exercise and group project-based 
exercise. Individual exercise is the one following a sample 
procedure, where every student belongs to some group whose 
members will communicate within it. Group exercise is 
Project-based learning style one, in which each group 
develops a prototype to solve their problem. 
2) 
Subjects’ attributes and experimental procedure 
We held the experiments with ten undergraduate students 
and four graduate school students. All subjects were students 
at Shibaura Institute of Technology and majored in computer 
science and engineering. We formed the subjects to small 
groups of three to four people, and we asked the groups to use 
the prototype freely during the exercises. We did not instruct 
where and how to use it. 
3) 
Evaluation method 
The subjects are asked to answer to several questions on a 
questionnaire after finishing the exercises. Their answers are 
analyzed to evaluate the results of the experiments. The 
questions in the questionnaire are shown in Table 2. In 
addition to this, the subjects are directly interviewed after the 
exercises. 
C. 
Result of the Experiment 
We received 14 answers from all the subjects. The results 
of the questionnaire are shown in Figure 4. 
• 
Concerning the answers to Q3-1, 86% of the subjects 
answered positively to the question, “ as it easy to 
see the other person’s hand?” In addition, all the 
subjects felt positive about Q3-2, “The other person 
quickly understood my situation,” and Q3-4, “It was 
 
 
Figure 3. Layered Canvas Function 
Circuit image
Place the streamed image of 
the circuit on the bottom layer.
Drawing canvas
One canvas per user to support 
simultaneous drawing.
Pointing icon
Display each user's icon in the 
point where the user is pointing.
Table I. 
QUESTIONS ON THE QUESTIONNAIRE ADMINISTERED AT 
THE END OF THE EXPERIMENT 
No. 
Questions and Options 
Q1 
What is your position? 
Q2 
In what situations did you use the system? 
 
Teaching each other in the group 
 
Creating something with the group member 
 
Teaching each other with one-on-one 
Q3 
Please answer the following questions in four 
choices: 
Agree, Almost Agree, Almost Disagree, or Disagree 
Q3-1 
It was easy to see the other person's hand. 
Q3-2 
Groupmates understood my situation right away. 
Q3-3 
I was able to work efficiently. 
Q3-4 
It was easy to communicate by pointing at the hand. 
Q3-5 
It lowered the barrier for teaching each other. 
Q3-6 
I would use this system again. 
Q4 
Any other comment (Free text) 
 
15
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

easy to communicate by pointing with my hand.” 
Furthermore, 86% of the subjects answered positively 
to Q3-3, “I was able to work efficiently.” From these 
results, we can confirm that the system works as 
expected and allows the subjects to convey 
instructions on artifacts efficiently and accurately. 
• 
To Q3-5 of “It lowered the barrier for teaching each 
other,” all the subjects answered affirmatively. 
In addition, 92% of the students answered the question 
affirmatively if they would like to use this system again, 
suggesting that using this system is helpful. 
From the interviews with the students after the experiment, 
we obtain the following points of their impressions and 
dissatisfaction. 
Positive comments include: 
• 
It is easy to understand how the artifacts are built 
because they can be easily seen, and their assembling 
steps can be understood well. (Answered from many 
subjects). 
• 
Because group members can share their artifacts 
visually, it is easy to explain them. Some members 
used it to check if the correct sensor has been selected. 
The second comment suggests that we can apply the 
proposed system to much broader things than we initially 
expected. 
However, we have some negative comments: 
• 
The screen of the smartphone is too small to see the 
screens of other participants. 
• 
The camera does not focus well, and it is difficult to 
see small letters. 
These comments suggest a need for improvement in both the 
prototype itself and how to use it (Issue 1). 
 
D. 
Discussion of the result of the experiments 
We found that the proposed system effectively achieves 
the effects that we targeted in the design of the system from 
the answers of Q3-1 to Q3-4. Therefore, the system allows all 
the subjects (including teachers and students) to share multiple 
hardware visually in real-time and help them communicate 
(RQ1). Moreover, based on the answers to Q3-5, it can be 
directly found that the system lowers the barrier for peer-
teaching (RQ2). 
The overall results from the answers to the questionnaire 
show the level of satisfaction in using this system is high. This 
is mainly because there is no other way for students to see 
others’ artifacts and pointing at them in real-time other than 
the system.  
However, the system has not been used often during the 
exercises, i.e., the frequency to use was lower than expected. 
Some student commented about it: 
• 
The system is easy to use, but we did not have so 
many opportunities to use it. 
• 
We did not have so many problems relating to 
hardware in IoT prototyping. 
The main reason for it is that the IoT prototyping used in 
the experiments does not have so many complicated tasks 
relating to hardware to require someone’s help.  
In addition, we found from some interview results that 
online exercises tend to create an emotional distance between 
 
Figure 4. Questionnaire Items & Result of Answers 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Q3-1. It was easy to see the other person's hand.
Q3-2. Groupmates understood my situation right away.
Q3-3. I was able to work efficiently.
Q3-4. It was easy to communicate by pointing at the hand.
Q3-5. It lowered the barrier for teaching each other.
Q3-6. I would use this system again.
Q3. Please answer the following questions in four choices
Agree
Almost Agree
Almost Disagree
Disagree
86%
92%
100%
100%
100%
86%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Q2. In what situations did you use the system?
Teaching each other in the group
Creating something with the group member
Teaching each other with one-on-one
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Q1. What is your position?
Undergraduate Student
Graduate Student
16
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

students because it does not provide the opportunities to know 
what the other students have done and are doing now (Issue 
2). For this reason, many students are hesitant to ask questions 
of the other group members and instead possibly chose to 
solve the problems for themselves.  
We concluded through the experiment that further system 
improvements are needed to reduce students’ hesitancy to 
communicate online in order to close the distance between 
minds. 
IV. 
IMPROVEMENTS OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
Through the experiments of the system, we obtained the 
results and identified the problems of the proposed system 
from the questionnaire and the interview. Among them, we 
focused on the following strategies to activate peer-teaching 
from the issues showed Section 4. 
S1. Reduce emotional distance between members for 
peer-teaching. 
S2. Improve usability [10] when using the system. 
A. 
Approach to improving the proposed system 
To settle the issues mentioned above, we are planning to 
develop "Integrated ShareHandy" that comprehensively 
supports peer-teaching in online exercises. This improvement 
aims to increase the frequency of use of the system by groups 
of students by reducing emotional barriers to communication. 
For this goal, we set the following additional use case: 
• 
Students who have completed the exercise and 
students who are stuck on some problems use the 
system. They go through the exercise to follow the 
tutors’ steps to check each other's work done step by 
step. 
B. 
New functions to reduce the emotional distance 
This subsection describes three functions to be required 
for Integrated ShareHandy. 
 
1) 
Sharing exercise documents  
Function: All users share referenced documents, which 
they can compare it with the video of their artifacts, drawing 
on and pointing at the documents. 
This function is expected to enhance the effectiveness of 
peer-teaching by allowing all the users being taught 
simultaneously to see the same document to compare it with 
their artifacts to find out the problems. This also aims to 
improve the understanding of those being taught. 
2) 
Sharing the progress 
Function: The system collects and displays students’ 
progresses. 
This function helps students notice some others’ delay in 
progress in the group early, providing them for the 
opportunities for peer-teaching. The students to be supported 
can recognize who can help, asking them for support. They 
can also recognize who has the same level of progress, calling 
for teaching each other to solve the same problems. In addition, 
students to provide support can recognize students who 
probably need help, actively giving offer support to them (S1 
in Section 4). We believe that this will increase the frequency 
to use the system for peer-teaching. 
As the other effect of this function, it enables teachers to 
check students’ progress to provide appropriate support.  
3) 
Authentication for students 
Function:  Users can link their multiple logins under their 
own account IDs to participates in a meeting. 
This is convenient when one user logins with multiple 
devices to participate in a meeting, such as a smartphone for 
                 
         
                 
               
Figure 5. Image of the prototype of Integrated ShareHandy 
17
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

camera functionality only and a PC for viewing and pointing 
out documents and images (S2 in Section 4). 
We will add these three functions in Integrated 
ShareHandy. Figure 5 shows a prototype image of the 
Integrated ShareHandy. In the part of 1), users can share 
exercise documents. In the part of 2), each student’s progress 
is displayed with a donut board over his/her icon as well as 
numerical value of percentage. This part also shows the name 
of the document his/her being viewed when the exercise uses 
multiple documents. In the part of 3) of Section B, the name 
of the user is displayed, which Authentication Server enables 
it.  
C. 
Implementation of added functions 
By implementing these additional functions, we made a 
few changes to the system configuration, shown in Figure 6.  
Firebase was selected to authenticate users and share 
progress for additional functionality. Firebase are used as not 
only an Authentication Server but also a Realtime Database 
server, which stores data that is not handled in a real-time 
manner like user profiles and progress.  
A web application through which students can access 
documents referred has been implemented.  
A computer special for logging will connect to each room, 
which analyzes audio, video, point locations, and progresses 
to record users’ status and operations when using ShareHandy. 
The logging system is designed as an independent program 
from ShareHandy. This is because WebRTC is basically used 
with Peer-to-Peer network not allowing a host server which 
can summarize the data for logging. These logs will be used 
to evaluate the effects and problems of the system on peer-
teaching.  
D. 
Evaluation methods for system  and peer-teaching 
We plan to evaluate Integrated ShareHandy in two steps. 
The first step is to measure the System Usability Scale 
(SUS) score. SUS is a tool that is widely used for the 
evaluation of both hardware and software consideration and 
its scale measures ten questions, which answer with a five-
point Likert scale. Through a questionnaire survey to assess 
whether the system is sufficient enough to conduct peer 
teaching, where the SUS score of the system must be more 
than seventy when the system is considered easy-to-use [11].  
After confirming that the system clears the criteria, 
experiments will be conducted to apply this system to real 
exercises as the second step. In the step, how to evaluate the 
activation of peer teaching is important. We believe that it is 
necessary to compare cases where the improved system is 
used, where the previous system used and those where it is not 
used, and thereby to analyze how and how much peer-
teaching has been promoted under a quantitative index to 
investigate the effectiveness of the system for peer-teaching. 
To do so, we will use the system record, such as: 
- audio and video, 
- history of drawings and points, 
- students' progresses, and 
- the number and the time of teaching sessions 
to analyze how peer-teaching took place and how the system 
effect on it. Also, conversation time other than peer-teaching 
 
 
Figure 6. System configuration of integrated ShareHandy 
Images 
 oordinates
 eb  pplication 
 ocuments
 uthenticate 
 rofile   
 rogress
 
H    Ser er
System  ata,  ocuments
 e     S  
Send and  eceive Images,  rawing  
 ointing  oordinates
   hen ica i n Ser er
 uthenticate   Stock profiles
          
Images 
 oordinates
 eb  pplication 
 ocuments
 uthenticate 
 rofile   
 rogress
Student s 
   or 
Smartphone
 ther Students 
and Teachers  
  s   
Smartphones
Images  oordinates (from  eb T  S  )
 rogress  ata (from  uthentication Server)
    in  Ser er
 ecord data from each room
     
18
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

can be an indicator to check the effect of reducing the 
emotional barriers. 
E. 
Compare functions between some major systems 
We compare main functions to use for exercise between 
major online meeting systems. Most of major systems like 
zoom and Microsoft Teams cannot point and draw to video 
without using screen-sharing, and no way to see the point 
where members are reading of document. One weakness of 
the proposed system is that teacher must upload documents to 
server, and it takes much work than to distribute documents 
by other system.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We proposed a peer-teaching support system for online 
exercises, ShareHandy, which can be used in the context of 
IoT prototyping where hardware assembly is handled. The 
system allows students to share videos of artifacts under 
development and point out areas of interest in real time using 
smartphones and PCs. Experiments to evaluate its usefulness 
in improving peer-teaching in online exercises had positive 
results, suggesting that the system is effective enough to 
support group work and peer-teaching. However, the 
frequency to use the system is lower than expected, and it is 
found that the system is not effective enough in promoting 
peer-teaching.  
Based on the analysis, we planned to develop "Integrated 
ShareHandy" that comprehensively supports peer-teaching in 
online exercises, which supports sharing not only their 
physical artifacts visually but also referenced documents and 
students’ progresses, enabling them to know who can help and 
work together to activate peer-teaching.  
The future work includes to find an effective way to use 
the system in online exercises and to improve its usability not 
discouraging its use in pee-teaching. In addition, we will apply 
the system to more types and number of online exercises and 
will improve the system for effective peer-teaching. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Sekiguchi and T. Nakajima, “ShareHandy: Peer Teaching 
Support System for Online Exercises of IoT Prototyping,” 
CORETA 2021 - Advances on Core Technologies and 
Applications, Athens (Greece), November 14 - 18, 2021. 
[2] S. Ramaswamy, I. Harris and U. Tschirner, “Student Peer 
Teaching: An Innovative Approach to Instruction in Science 
and Engineering Education,” Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 165-171, 2001. 
[3] B. Goldschmid and M. L. Goldschmid, “Peer teaching in 
higher education: A review,” Higher Education,vol. 5, pp. 9-
33, 1976. 
[4]  S. Baddeley, “ nline teaching: a reflection,” The Journal of 
Classics Teaching, vol. 22, no. 44, pp. 109-116, 2021. 
[5] M. C. Dorneich, B. O'Dwyer, A. R. Dolowitz, J. L. Styron and 
J. Grogan, “ pplication exercise design for team-based 
learning in online courses,” New  irections for Teaching and 
Learning, vol. 2021, no. 165, pp. 41-52, 2021. 
[6] S. Kitagami, K. Hasegawa, H. Koizumi and M. Inoue, “ nline 
Training Environment for IoT  rototype  evelopment”, 
Proceedings of the Symposium on Information Education, pp. 
240-243, 2020. 
[7] J. O. Hamblen and G. M. E. V. Bekkum, “An Embedded 
Systems Laboratory to Support Rapid Prototyping of Robotics 
and the Internet of Things,” IEEE Transaction on Education, 
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 121-128, 2012. 
[8] N. R. Dissanayake and K. A. Dias, “Web-based Applications: 
Extending the General Perspective of the Service of Web,” 
10th International Research Conference of KDU (KDU-IRC 
2017) on Changing Dynamics in the Global Environment: 
Challenges and Opportunities, Aug. 2017. 
[9] B. Sredojev, D. Samardzija and D. Posarac, “WebRTC 
technology overview and signaling solution design and 
implementation,” 2015 38th International Convention on 
Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and 
Microelectronics (MIPRO), pp. 1006-1009, 2015. 
[10] ISO 9241-11: Ergonomics of human-system interaction, -Part 
11: Usability: Definitions and concepts, 2018. 
[11] A. Bangor, P. T. Kortum and J. T. Miller, “An Empirical 
Evaluation of the System Usability Scale,” In International 
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 
574- 594, 2008. 
19
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

