60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Management-aware Inter-Domain Routing for End-to-End Quality of Service
Mark Yampolskiy1,2,4, Wolfgang Hommel2,4, Vitalian A. Danciu3,4, Martin G. Metzker3,4, Matthias K. Hamm4
1 German Research Network (DFN), Alexanderplatz 1, 10170 Berlin, Germany
2 Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ), Boltzmannstr. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
3 Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at Munich (LMU), Oettingenstr. 67, 80538 Munich, Germany
4 Munich Network Management (MNM) Team, Oettingenstr. 67, 80538 Munich, Germany
myy@dfn.de, hommel@lrz.de, danciu@nm.iﬁ.lmu.de, metzker@nm.iﬁ.lmu.de, hamm@mnm-team.org
Abstract—Services sensitive to network quality converge
onto general-purpose data networks which, in contrast to
special-purpose (e.g., public telephony) networks, lack built-
in quality control functions needed by many applications,
like Internet telephony or video conferencing. High-volume,
high-performance applications such as those in Grid and
Cloud computing may be too important for customers to
rely on mere promises of network quality, while at the
same time requiring connections traversing multiple network
operators’ domains. Thus, in addition to end-to-end QoS
assurances, customers of these applications demand man-
agement functionality for those connections made available
to them. Traditional routing procedures are insufﬁcient to
select paths according to these requirements, as they rely
on evaluation of only one parameter (e.g., hop count), while
QoS parameters alone will account for multiple independent
metrics.
We present a solution that addresses these issues by
combining a routing procedure, a common set of QoS
operations, and an information model for the representation
of connection properties within and across administrative
domains.
Keywords-end-to-end; quality of service (QoS); inter-
domain routing; network management
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s convergent or converged networks are intended
to support a growing number of major services with
highly varying requirements on the transport system. Such
services include end-user facing services, such as voice
and video telephony and their conferencing counterparts,
but also high-capacity interconnects between the scientiﬁc
sites of grid installations or the provisioning of cloud
services, co-provided in different administrative domains,
as well as connections between parts of virtual private
networks (VPN links).
The inter-networking layer (i.e., the Internet protocols)
does not support quality management inherently. Instead,
many different Quality of Service (QoS) schemes have
been implemented by different network operators. They do
assure a stated quality of the transport, but typically omit
customer-facing management capabilities. At the same
time, the scope of network management is limited to single
administrative domains.
Nevertheless, customers of important and expensive
applications require network management facilities as part
of the service being provided. Their capabilities range
from read-only inspection functions (e.g., performance
monitoring) to functions that alter the state of the network
(e.g., adjustments of communication channel parameters).
Such capabilities are readily provided within single
domains, but inter-domain communication channels (i.e.,
connections spanning multiple autonomous administrative
domains) will require the co-operation of all domains in
order to achieve end-to-end quality guarantees as well
as an aggregate management function presented to the
customer as part of the service. Such communication
channels, provided as a service to a (paying) customer,
we call concatenated services (CS).
A. Concatenated services
Combining the outlined demand and focus, our work
specializes on the development of a solution for concate-
nated services, which are probably the most challenging
type of point-to-point connections with respect to planning
and operation. The following properties are characteristic
for CS [24]:
• User perspective: a guarantee for the E2E quality of
the connection and its management is required;
• Service composition: the E2E service is composed
of horizontally (i.e., at the same network layer) con-
catenated connection segments, which are realized by
different SPs;
• Organizational relationships: all SPs involved in the
service’s provisioning are independent organizations
and are considered equal partners.
Due to high complexity of such connections, some
scenarios exhibit unacceptable connection planning and
establishment delays, especially when preparing a connec-
tion with non-trivial QoS requirements. In some cases, the
planning phase, i.e., the identiﬁcation of path segments
that adhere to such requirements, may take up to several
weeks (e.g., [36]). This is due to the lack of standardisation
and automation of a planning process spanning multiple
administrative domains. Each leg of the route must be
negotiated with the owner/operator, including the accessi-
bility of a suitable next hop and the QoS and management
requirements for the connection. While this concerns long-
term connections (i.e., of longer duration than the planning
phase), it is obvious that such planning times cannot be
always tolerated.
The algorithms underlying common routing protocols
(link state, distance vector) are not applicable, as they rely
on fulﬁlment of the optimality criterion. In contrast, the set

61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of routing metrics dictated by QoS parameter thresholds
not necessarily holds this criterion, leading to undecidable
choices. For example, assuming the requirements for a
connection were minimum bandwidth b and maximum
delay d with (b, d) = (1Mbit, 100ms), the choice between
two alternatives (1Mbit, 50ms) and (2Mbit, 75ms) can-
not be made by “shortest” path semantics alone: the ﬁrst
alternative is better in terms of delay, while the second
one is better in terms of bandwidth.
A standardisation solution may equally prove unfea-
sible: Allowing the requester of the connection (user,
customer) to specify the kinds and values of the QoS
parameters obviates the use of a linear projection function
that might calculate “best” values from values of known,
i.e., pre-deﬁned, QoS parameters.
In addition, several connection topologies are conceiv-
able. Even though the necessity for QoS assurance exists
for different connection types, in the presented work we
focus speciﬁcally on dedicated point-to-point connections.
A discussion of application areas and aspects of different
connection types, e.g., point-to-multipoint, is explicitly
omitted. Furthermore, from the customer point of view
as well as from the perspective of services built on top
of network connections, the quality of the connection is
important, but not the technology used for its realiza-
tion. As the bridging between different network layers
and technologies is very well understood and is broadly
applied, e.g., in the Internet, we assume in our work that
network connections are realized on the same ISO/OSI
reference model network layer, and consider in our further
discussion only the quality of connections and connection
segments.
Finally, when devising a routing procedure for use
across multiple independent carriers, acceptance of the
procedure is crucial for its success: providers may reside
in different legal domains, they may have different levels
of interest in providing such services (depending on their
business model, the state and load of their network, their
management capabilities, etc.), and they may have differ-
ent views on sharing the network management information
required by the service (i.e., the managed connection) that
is to be provided.
Consider the example sketched in Figure 1. SP1’s
customer requires an end-to-end link between a start end-
point within SP1’s domain and another end-point (target)
within the domain of a different service provider SP3,
which is not a neighbour of SP1. The customer speciﬁes
certain properties with regard to the quality of the transport
(minimum bandwidth, maximum delay) as well as require-
ments on the management of the link during its operation
phase (monitoring, constraints on maintenance windows).
Via an agreed-upon customer service management (CSM)
interface the customer formulates a request to SP1 to
aggregate and to deliver such an end-to-end link.
The customer’s knowledge of the topology shown in
the upper part of the ﬁgure is limited to the end-points in
the domains of SP1 and SP3, respectively. Each service
providers’ knowledge is limited to its own domain, and
Customer 
CSM 
SP-Domain 
SP1 
SP-Domain 
SP2 
SP-Domain 
SP3 
SP-Domain 
SP4 
SP-Domain 
SP5 
Provider View 
Customer View 
E2E-Requirements: 
•
Bandwidth: 1Gbps 
•
Delay: max. 40 ms 
•
Maintenance  
•
Window: 600 – 1000 GMT 
•
Duration: max. 1 hr. 
•
Monitoring 
Figure 1.
Example request for a concatenated service with QoS and
management requirements
the identity of their neighbour SPs. Starting with only this
information, the service provider SP1 needs to ﬁnd a route
to the target end-point in SP3’s domain, such that the
aggregate link adheres to the speciﬁcation of bandwidth
and delay and at the same time fulﬁls the management
requirements speciﬁed by the customer. Thus, to deliver
the link according to speciﬁcation, SP1 needs the co-
operation of the other SPs in order to select the parts of
the route (hops) to the remote end-point and to ascertain
the quality and management properties of each part of
the link. It is understood that during operation/use of the
link each SP will be responsible for the parts of the link
that pertains to its own domain. The monitoring has to
reﬂect information from all participating domains in order
to provide an end-to-end view to SP1’s customer, and all
participating domains need to comply with the customer’s
requirement on maintenance windows.
In this work, we address the setup of such multi-part
connections that involve multiple services providers, each
of which is responsible only for parts of the overall
network connection. In particular, we focus on the provi-
sioning of high-quality, managed communication channels
across multiple autonomous administrative domains; we
speciﬁcally include operations support in our QoS con-
siderations. The idea underlying this work is to establish
transport quality and management properties at the time
of routing.
B. Line switching
Experience gained with circuit and packet switched
networks has provided deep insights into details about
which technical and organizational measures are needed
for quality assurance, and about which real-world chal-
lenges have to be overcome.
Circuit-switching technology, which is used, e.g., in
Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN), has proven
2

62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Information Model 
• Objects 
• Properties 
Operations 
• Aggregation 
• Comparison 
Routing 
Procedure 
• Routing Algorithm 
• Communication Model 
Figure 2.
Three inter-operating conceptual building blocks
to be a viable solution for quality assurance, but at
the same time it is not truly optimal regarding resource
utilization. Packet-switched networks on the contrary have
turned out to utilize the available resources much better,
but at the same time the parallel communication ﬂows
can interfere with each other and consequently affect the
quality of each other, for example due to overload packet
drops.
Experience gathered in both types of networks types
shows that the quality assurance ﬁrst and foremost requires
a thorough planning of the resources needed to meet the
quality goals. Furthermore, the desired quality can only be
achieved if the necessary amount of resources is allocated
to each connection instance. Finally, resource reservation
alone does not necessarily guarantee that the goals are
met during the service instance operation. Regarding this
aspect, current best practices suggest the establishment of
management procedures for all life cycle phases of the
service instances.
Based on this experience, we focus on concatenated
services realized via line switching concepts, because this
technique has proven to be a viable solution for quality
assurance. As line switching can be emulated in a packet
switched network, e.g., applying a combination of MPLS
and RSVP in IP networks, our choice of the switching
paradigm imposes no practical limitation regarding its ap-
plication to the infrastructure used by real-world network
operators.
C. Contribution
In this article, we explain the inter-operation of three
conceptual building blocks that address the problem at
hand, as sketched in Figure 2: a procedure relying on a
management-aware inter-domain routing algorithm, which
has been presented in [1], a dedicated information model
(IM) for network connections and their QoS-speciﬁc
properties. This IM, ﬁrst described in [3], deﬁnes the
structure and semantics of the information necessary to the
routing algorithm. The last building block is a generic QoS
function scheme, i.e., a collection of operations which is
needed during the routing in order to operate on customer-
and user-speciﬁc QoS parameters (cf. [2]). During the de-
ﬁned routing procedure, the connection parts are selected
and the required quality of all parts is deﬁned. Further,
during routing the management functionality from all
involved domains can be integrated into the management
functionality of a service instance. As the later aspect of
routing as well as the interplay of all solution building
blocks has not been published so far, we discuss it in
more detail.
We summarise the requirements on such an approach
in the Section II and proceed to outline our approach
in Section III. Thereafter, we describe each of the three
building blocks in Sections V, VI, and VII, respectively.
Subsequently, in Section VIII, we illustrate the inter-
operation of the building blocks by an example before
discussing the properties and limitations of the approach in
Section IX. We conclude the article with ideas for further
investigations in Section X.
II. REQUIREMENTS
The challenges which have to be overcome in order to
realize CS are manyfold. Partially they are caused by CS
characteristic properties.
A. Fundamental assumptions
The case described in the Introduction implies that our
approach is supported by a set of assumptions, as follows:
a) SPs
are
independent
organisations;
they
are
not
obliged to participate in the provisioning of a ser-
vice/connection.
b) A service instance (connection) cannot be realised by
one SP alone.
c) Information about the network topology within an SP’s
domain is not available.
d) Reliable information about an SP’s network capabilities
is not available.
e) Management functions and management information
are not offered by SPs without prior agreement.
f) Multiple independent QoS parameters will be speci-
ﬁed for a connection according to the user/customer
demands.
g) There is no ﬁxed set of QoS parameters that will
be requested by customers; and there is no ﬁxed
combination of parameters.
h) There is no ﬁxed set of management operations that
will be requested by customers.
i) Requirements on an existing service instance may
change during its life-time.
An important challenge for our approach was to avoid a
violation of any one of these assumptions. For this reason,
the approach must fulﬁl the requirements formulated in the
following.
B. Collection of requirements
The foremost requirements are those pertaining to the
aim of our work:
3

63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) The approach shall determine a path across multiple
autonomous SPs’ domains.
2) The approach shall ensure that QoS parameter thresh-
olds are respected for the end-to-end service.
3) The approach shall ensure that management capabil-
ities are provided for the end-to-end service.
4) Where necessary, management information shall be
aggregated in a manner opaque to the customer.
5) Multiple independent QoS parameters shall be speci-
ﬁable for a service instance.
6) Multiple independent management functions shall be
speciﬁable for a service instance.
In addition, several requirements originate from the
settings of concatenated services.
Participation of multiple SPs: Globalization of busi-
ness and research collaborations has the consequence
that the communication partners, which are using the
same network connection, can be spread over the entire
world. Due to economic and often also legal reasons, such
connections usually cannot be realized by only a single
Service Provider (SP). Similar to services in the Internet
and in PSTN areas, multiple SPs have to be involved in
the realization of a single network connection, leading to
the following requirements:
7) No requirements shall be imposed on items within
SPs’ domains.
8) The approach shall not be dependent on the number
of SPs that co-provide the service.
9) The approach shall not be dependent on global up-
to-date information or on a central instance.
Customer-speciﬁc QoS-combinations: The quality of
the customer-faced services in general depends on the
different quality parameters of the underlying connections.
Furthermore, in general it does not only depend on a
single QoS parameter, but rather on the service-speciﬁc
combination of multiple independent QoS parameters. For
example, a video streaming service might be insensitive to
delay and jitter as long as the connection bandwidth en-
ables the pre-buffering of content that is not yet displayed
to the user. However, for an internet-telephony service, the
delay and jitter of the underlying connection might lead to
a negative user experience. During video-telephony and -
conferencing, also the synchronization between video and
audio signals becomes important. In summary:
10) The customer shall have only one point of contact,
her original SP.
11) The customer shall be given means for managing the
service, once established.
12) The customer shall be allowed to specify QoS pa-
rameters and management capabilities.
Highly dynamic environment: The rapid development
of new services as well as the very high dynamics of
changes is characteristic for modern IT services. As the
quality requirements on the underlying network connec-
tions might differ between services, also the high adaptiv-
ity and extensibility of solutions becomes a critical success
factor. Especially the extensibility of support for new QoS
parameters is needed, which have not been considered
before:
13) The approach shall be extensible regarding the QoS
parameters supported.
14) The approach shall be extensible regarding the man-
agement capabilities provided to customers.
15) Service planning shall be automatable.
III. APPROACH OUTLINE
We argue that user- and customer-tailored requirements
for connection services can be only truly fulﬁlled, when
already considered during the ordering process. Our ap-
proach is a routing process, consisting of three conceptual
parts: a routing procedure, a generic function scheme and
an information model (see section I-C). A routing proce-
dure satisfying the requirements we laid out in Section II
takes into account all known existing connections with
their properties and end-to-end requirements when ﬁnding
a path between two end-points.
By employing line switching to realize concatenated
services, our algorithm may regard the path through an
SP’s domain as an atomic link, deﬁned by its ingress and
egress points. Based on this decision, our algorithm does
not require knowledge of every SP’s network topology.
This reduces the problem-space and leaves it entirely to
the SP to realize the link. As a result, our information
model may describe links, properties and functions in a
technology agnostic way. Abstracting from components
and technologies, it is easier to model inter-domain links,
where the end-points are in domains of different SPs.
Connection requirements directly affect the tasks of the
routing procedure, which in the case of line switching are:
the selection of the path between the two end-points, the
designation of all connection segments and interconnect-
ing all points along the chosen path [35]. QoS routing (also
referred to as QoS-aware routing) extends this deﬁnition
by taking into account end-to-end user requirements. QoS
requirements are deﬁned for all connection parts and have
to be guaranteed by all SPs, in order to meet the given
end-to-end goals.
As discussed in the requirements section, for true qual-
ity assurance the management of service instances by the
customer has to be considered. Therefore in our work
we introduce management-aware routing as a QoS-aware
routing with additional tasks, namely:
• the deﬁnition of management functionality, which
have to be provided for each involved connection
segment and
• the integration of speciﬁed functionalities into multi-
domain management functionality of the whole ser-
vice instance.
As management processes are speciﬁed as an interaction
between roles with speciﬁc responsibilities, the assignment
of roles to the involved SPs must be considered as an
integral part of the overall management-aware routing
procedure. The mentioned routing types and their tasks
are depicted in Figure 3.
4

64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Management-aware Routing 
QoS-aware Routing 
*  
 
 
Routing (line switching) 
•Finding a path between endpoints 
•Defining all segments along the path 
•Defining all connection points of segments 
 
•Defining QoS requirements for all segments 
•Considering E2E requirements 
•Considering relevant QoS parameters 
 
•Defining required management functionality for all segments 
•Integration management functionality into multi-domain processes 
•Definition of roles and responsibilities of involved SPs 
Figure 3.
Routing types and corresponding tasks
In our approach the algorithm is designed to split
the planning and evaluation of (sub-)paths into multiple
smaller tasks, which we see as the key to having a
generic set of functions. By breaking down these two
problems into smaller parts, our algorithm can be seen
as a framework where each metric may provide its own
functions and rule sets. Our goal is to describe this generic
approach, not to provide an explicit formulation of QoS-
requirements and metrics. An example of how our concept
may be instantiated will be given in Section VIII.
A. Routing procedure
The routing procedure consists of a routing algorithm,
which is broadly seen as the very core of every routing
approach, and communication patterns in the form of a
communication model. The purpose of a routing algorithm
is to choose between different available connection seg-
ments and select those, which will form a path between
two endpoints. The details of our algorithm can be found
in [1]. In this paper our focus lies on the interaction
between components of proposed solution.
Our routing procedure is dedicated to ﬁnd and establish
a path in advance, with an explicit planning phase, before
user data can be sent.
As our approach shall not require SPs to share their
entire topology knowledge with each other, there needs
to be interaction between SPs so that viable paths can be
found, requested and managed. Communication patterns
describe how routing instances interact with each other
and when information is to be requested from another SP,
as we aim to keep information exchange to a minimum.
Communication relationships also describes how manage-
ment functions of involved connection segments will be
connected and consolidated in order to be offered to the
customer.
Basically, we distinguish between source routing and
routing by delegation. While source routing in its extreme
form means that the entire routing is performed by the
customer’s service provider, routing by delegation allows
an SP to ask another SP to ﬁnd a (sub-) path for the
remaining part of the route. Through the combination of
these two techniques the routing procedure can adapt to
policy constraints, concerning the information exchange
of SPs.
B. Operations on properties
A generic function scheme is required to specify and
evaluate boundaries and optimality criteria for different
kinds of quality requirements. The example in Section I-A
includes bandwidth and maintenance window as quality
requirements on the requested connection. Bandwidth is
limited by the capacities of involved physical links. The
link with the lowest capacity determines the maximum
bandwidth achievable on a path. Requirements on main-
tenance windows are less straight forward than on band-
width. In the case of maintenance windows upper and
lower boundaries for maintenance planning as well as the
duration of maintenance work are speciﬁed. Clearly, an
algorithm needs a different set of operations to reason
on maintenance windows in contrast to bandwidth. The
generic function scheme provides a common interface,
so that specialized operations for each parameter may be
accessed by the algorithm in a uniﬁed manner.
Thus the main goal of our function scheme is to
enable the algorithm to take all possible kinds of metrics
into account. The most important part of this task is
deﬁning the semantics of our proposed generic functions
to ensure compatibility of metrics and interoperability
between communication partners. Another part of this task
is providing a method for representing QoS-requirements
in our information model.
C. Information model
Existing information models (IM) often neglect the
importance of inter-domain connections. Even though
inter-domain connections are comparatively small parts
of the overall path, their quality is indispensable for the
computation of the overall end-to-end quality. Due to very
restrictive SP policies, each SP usually has access only to
its end of an inter-domain connections. There are cases in
which it is possible to derive the properties of inter-domain
links from two partial views onto the same physical link,
like available resources on that link. For such cases our
IM provides the possibility to describe partial views of
different SPs and means to correlate these views.
We designed our information model to describe link
properties similarly to connection requirements, which
allows us to use the same data model for both. This eases
interaction between peer entities as a conversion from
requirements to resources is not required, thus leaving less
room for misunderstandings and different interpretations.
Also, to uniform information exchange, our information
model includes management functions so that they can
be treated like any other QoS-parameter in the routing
procedure.
IV. RELATED WORK
Our presented work covers many aspects in order
to provide end-to-end links with user-deﬁned quality-
requirements and management-functions. Even though
most of the problems outlined in Section II have been
5

65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
addressed in previous work, none of them covers the topic
in a full extend.
Originally, physical line switching technologies were
used in PSTN networks. In ATM, logical line switch-
ing in combination with resource reservation has been
implemented. As these technologies were tailored to ﬁt
the needs of the voice-only telephony, they do not offer
the required ﬂexibility of novel services provided over,
for example, the Internet. In this area of (virtual) circuit
switching, the Dynamic Circuit Network (DCN) coopera-
tion is probably the most advanced research project. The
main focus of this project is on the dynamic provision-
ing of dedicated paths, literally guaranteeing bandwidth
to customers [4], [5]. Among others, projects like OS-
CARS [6], DRAGON [7], Phosphorus [8], and the G´eant-
developed AutoBAHN [9] are involved in this cooperation
and several successful demonstrations have been presented
to the research community [10]. Another approach to
on-demand circuit provisioning is the DICE (DANTE–
Internet2–CANARIE–ESnet) [11] collaboration of Euro-
pean and North American research networks, where an
architectural concept, based on the experience gained in
previous projects has already been elaborated and pub-
lished [12].
The mentioned projects and collaborations are focused
primarily on two aspects:
1) various techniques and technologies for dynamic
circuit switching and resource reservation within a single
administrative domain and
2) interoperability between the developed management
systems as well as between networking technologies used
in these domains in order to automatically switch multi-
domain network connections.
Plans for the consideration of QoS parameters are
limited to sole connection propert – its bandwidth. Man-
agement aspects in dynamically provisioned circuits are
limited to circuit monitoring, mostly reusing praxis ap-
proved concepts of the G´eant E2E Link Monitoring Sys-
tem (E2Emon) [13]. DICE plans to extend this monitoring
concept with a combination of measurements at different
network layers and with different monitoring techniques.
An advanced example of network connections with
customer-tailored properties is the G´eant E2E Links ser-
vice (also referred to as G´eant Lambda) [16], [17]. Among
other scenarios, G´eant E2E Links have been used to real-
ize challenging connections for the international research
project Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [14] and for the Grid
cooperation DEISA [15]. These links were established
considering multiple QoS parameters as well as manage-
ment aspects, like inter-domain trouble-shooting proce-
dures or the coordination of maintenance windows among
multiple SPs. The biggest drawback of this approach is
very long connection establishment time, as these links
are planned and set up manually. As planning of G´eant
E2E Links might consider potential possible connections
for which infrastructure still have to be procured, installed,
and conﬁgured, estimating the time necessary to ﬁnd and
set up a path between two endpoints is very difﬁcult. In
the case of G´eant E2E Links, the time between circuit
ordering and service production start – inﬂuenced by
different factors – can vary between a few weeks and
several months [36].
Management of end-to-end multi-domain network con-
nections is mostly limited to monitoring in the form of
technology speciﬁc solutions, e.g., the well-established
monitoring in SDH networks [21]. Another, still emerging
technique is OAM (Operations, Administration, and Man-
agement) for Ethernet [22], which aims at a wider scope
than merely end-to-end monitoring. For example, failure
signaling has already become part of OAM for Ethernet,
which allows for quicker detection of and reaction to
component failures along the entire path. The more generic
multi-domain solutions, like the E2E Monitoring System
(E2Emon) for G´eant E2E Links, are currently limited to a
project-speciﬁc combination of technology-agnostic QoS
parameters [13].
The routing is mostly covered in the graph theory. In a
graph that models a network as vertices and edges, QoS-
parameters on path segments are usually represented as
edge-weights. Established routing algorithms are based on
Bellman’s optimality principle and ﬁnd paths between two
vertices. Bellman’s optimality principle is valid for the
class of functional equations of ﬁnding the maximum, the
minimum or the k-th element [25]. As this class requires
(at least) a partial ordering of the domain, these algorithms
are not applicable for multi-dimensional search-spaces and
especially multi-weighted graphs. The different weights
on a single edge cannot always be merged to a single
one. The example in Section I-A includes requirements
on bandwidth and maintenance windows. As bandwidth
requirements cannot be converted to maintenance window
requirements and vice versa, a partial ordering over both
weights cannot be found and Bellman’s optimality princi-
ple cannot be applied here.
Proposed algorithms that are capable of searching high-
dimensional spaces, e.g., SAMCRA [27] or H MCOP
[28], require full information about network topology, link
properties and connection properties. This make them in-
applicable for multi-domain routing, as it collides with the
restrictive information policies of most SPs and maximises
search-space.
Routing algorithms operate on information about avail-
able connections or connectivity possibilities. One of the
biggest problems of information models (IM) for network
description is data-hiding. For instance, the Common
Information Model (CIM) [31] focuses on the description
of relations between services and underlying network
technologies. While the CIM is a very good basis for man-
aging single networks it cannot be used for our purposes.
Modelling a connection segment with QoS-parameters
requires modelling of the entire network the segment
resides in. In order to comply with the strict information
policies in multi-domain environments, networks need
to be modelled abstractly with hardly any information.
This cannot be accomplished using the CIM and other
information models.
6

66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, almost none of the IMs used for network
descriptions associates multiple abstract properties with
connections. One noticeable exception is the ITU-T rec-
ommendation G.805 for the description of optical transport
networks [30], where multiple technical connection prop-
erties can be associated with a single connection. In the
recommendation these are only technical parameters that
are needed to interconnect the segments, e.g., multiplex-
ing of different channels. Especially this recommendation
does not consider connection’s quality and management
functionality properties.
V. INTER-DOMAIN MANAGEMENT-AWARE ROUTING
The main task of routing is always path selection. As
mentioned at the beginning of this paper, in order to
guarantee end-to-end requirements, the required properties
of all segments have to be planned. This includes con-
sidering the management functionality needed in further
phases of the service instance’s life cycle. Our proposal
for routing and deﬁning of quality targets for the chosen
segments is presented in Section V-A. As has already been
pointed out, an integral part of management-aware routing
is the integration of management functionality provided
by involved domains into integrated overall management
functionality for the whole service instance. We analyse
these integration aspects in Section V-B.
A. Connection planning
As the routing procedure operates on knowledge about
available potential connection segments, we introduce our
information representation to the extent we deem needed
to understand our routing proposal. An elaborated discus-
sion of our information model and an elaboration of our
decisions will be given in Section VII.
The routing procedure we propose operates on semi-
global knowledge about available connections. All this
information is represented at the abstraction level of an
SP’s organizational domain. This means that we look
only at connections between network equipment installed
at administrative edges of provider networks. In general,
all connections which can be realized either within a
single SP’s domain or interconnecting two neighboring
SPs are potential connection segments of an end-to-end
connection. As from an SP’s point of view every realized
connection segment is a provided service, we refer to an
endpoint of a segment as Service Connection Point (SCP).
We choose this abstraction in order to be independent of
network technologies and of application areas in which our
routing concept can be applied. A SCP can be mapped
to various “edge-components”, from a logical UNI/NNI
interface when looking at paths through the Internet,
to a Point of Presence (POP) when planning backbone
connections.
Semi-global knowledge means that for routing we need
information over multiple, but not necessarily all, SP-
domains. This knowledge can be extended on demand, by
requesting additional information from other SPs. Con-
sequently, during routing we distinguish between already
Service Provider (SP) boundary
Known Service Connection Point (SCP)
Unknown Service Connection Point (SCP)
Known connection segment, part of route 
Known realizable connection segment
Unknown realizable connection segment
1,3
1,1
1,2
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
3,1
3,2
3,3
5,1
4,2
SP1
SP4
SP2
SP3
SP5
4,1
Figure 4.
Semi-global knowledge about available connection segments
at the beginning of routing [1]
known connection segments and existing but not (yet)
known connection segments. The same applies to SCPs
of those segments. Further, some of the known connection
segments can be considered by the routing algorithm as a
part of the planned route.
Corresponding to the example presented at the begin
of this paper, Figure 4 presents a possible initial semi-
global knowledge of SP1. In this ﬁgure, SCPs are labeled
with IDs. These IDs consist of two numbers, where the
ﬁrst number identiﬁes the SP to which a SCP belongs
and the second number is a sequential numbering of SCPs
within an SP. Please note that we have chosen this ID
representation only for the sake of better readability and
reference in this paper.
Due to various factors, e.g., steady ordering of new
and decommissioning of existing end-to-end connections,
the resources available to possible end-to-end connections
changes constantly. The consequence is that an SP cannot
expect to have up-to-date knowledge about all available
connection segments. At the same time every SP always
has exact knowledge about its own network equipment and
available capacities. We further assume that every SP can
obtain information about capacities available to intercon-
nections with neighboring SPs. We see this as a common
situation for most SPs, as such information is required
for proper management of the own network infrastructure.
Further, we assume that every SP can determine the quality
properties that can be guaranteed over all available own
links.
For instance, in Figure 4 SP1 is in charge of routing
between SCPs with IDs ”1,3” and ”3,2”, it can choose
which connection segments should be considered as a part
of the path. When selecting these segments SP1 relies on
knowledge about available capacities and own preferences
regarding which neighbouring SP to use. At the same time
SP1 has to consider customer requirements, i.e., for all
considered paths the realizable connection properties must
7

67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be computed and compared with the user-provided end-
to-end requirements. If, at least, one of the end-to-end
requirements cannot be fulﬁlled, another (for the SP lesser
preferable) alternative must be considered in the same way.
In the case when SP1 selects the way through SCPs
”1,1” and ”2,1”, it also implies that the next segment
is realized by SP2. In [1] we discuss advantages and
drawbacks of different routing strategies. Based on this
discussion, we recommend the source routing strategy as
long as possible. This means that, in this particular case,
despite the fact that the next segment is realized by SP2,
the selection of this segment for the end-to-end connection
should be done by SP1. This in turn means that SP1
has to obtain actual information from SP2, containing
the “remote” SCPs through which SP2 is willing to
realize connection segments and which properties can be
guaranteed for these segments.
We see two main advantages in using source routing
strategies: 1) avoiding (or reduction of) nested communi-
cation relationships speeds up the overall communication
processes and decision propagation, and 2) retrieved in-
formation about available connection segments and their
properties can be reused, if alternatives have to be exam-
ined. Nevertheless, employing source routing requires high
trust relationships between communicating SPs. Especially
in big open provider collaborations, e.g., the Internet or the
PSTN-network, this is not always the case. To meet this
problem we propose on-demand delegation of the routing
task for the remaining part of a path. This is based on the
praxis approved theory, that SPs are more likely to trust
topologically closer SPs and especially all neighbouring
SPs.
Similar to a CSM interface (see Section I), which
is commonly referred to as the management interface
between provider and customer, we introduce the Domain
Service Management (DSM) interface as a means for
communication between independent SPs interested in
a collaborative realization of end-to-end network con-
nections. Communication between SPs should always be
performed through the DSM interface.
As mentioned in Section III, obtaining information
about SPs’ available capacities, as well as making de-
cisions about segments from outside an SP will most
probably violate domain policies. In order to avoid or at
least minimize violations of these policies, we propose
to specify always strict boundaries for requests. When
requesting a segment, the requesting SP provides informa-
tion about the remaining part of the end-to-end path, i.e.,
the two determining SCPs between which the path still has
to be established, and about the connection properties the
end-to-end path has to comply to. Such procedures allow
queried SPs to provide only few alternatives matching
the speciﬁed restrictions, as opposed to providing full
and unreﬂected information about an SPs infrastructure.
Furthermore, we propose that the queried SPs provide
these alternatives in the most-to-least preferable order.
Even though misuse cannot be fully avoided, we propose
that the SP responsible for routing (in the example SP1)
1,3
3,2
E2E-QoS
DSM
SP-Domain
SP1
REQUEST SERVICE ROUTING
SP-Domain
SP2
DSM
1,3
SP1
SP-Domain
SP3
DSM
Topology:
•From (SCP): 3,1
•To (SCP)….: 3,2
E2E-Requirements:
•Bandwidth: 1Gbps
•Delay: 40 ms
•…
Intermediate :
•Bandwidth: 1Gbps
•Delay: 35 ms
•…
Figure 5.
On-demand delegation of the routing task [1]
tries the alternatives in the speciﬁed order.
In our example, if SP3 refuses to provide information
about available connection segments, SP1 can delegate the
routing task to SP2 (see Figure 5). In this case topology
restrictions, customer speciﬁc end-to-end requirements as
well as properties realizable by the found partial path are
passed to SP2. Advantages and disadvantages of routing-
by-delegation are opposite to those of source routing:
information about SPs’ available capacities are hidden and
the selection of the most preferable route is guaranteed.
On the other hand, communication becomes to be nested
and information about previously checked alternate routes
cannot be re-used, which might lead to redundant checks.
Our proposed routing procedure incorporates not only
the principles for the selection of the next connection
segment, but also communication between SPs needed
for information requests and delegation of the routing
task. These advanced considerations make it impossible
to describe our procedure as a pure pseudo code alone.
Instead we deﬁne a state-machine (see Figure 6), showing
planning-phases as states and outcomes as transitions.
Beginning with an intermediate SCP that is at the end of
the path considered so far, the next connection segment is
determined. If required information is missing, a planner
enters an information-retrieval phase (A2) where the miss-
ing information is requested from a SP. After calculating
the properties of the entire path, including the new next
segment, these properties are evaluated against end-to-end
requirements. If at least one of speciﬁed requirements is
violated, an alternative segment has to be considered. If
requirements are fulﬁlled, the distant SCP of the new
segment is considered as a new intermediate SCP and
the planner returns to the starting state (A1). We need to
support the case that an information request is rejected. In
this case, the routing task is delegated by a FINDROUTE-
request to the last SP in the considered path (A5). Our
procedure terminates, i.e., reaches an accepted end-state,
either when the desired endpoint is reached or no more
alternative connection segments are available.
As it is very common for the description of an algorithm
to discuss its runtime analysis, please note that the main
8

68
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6.
Routing processes
purpose of any algorithm is to achieve its goals. Therefore
the quality of an algorithm should not only be evaluated
through the performance of an implementation, but primar-
ily through the quality and the properties of the yielded
result. In order to provide such an evaluation of our pro-
posal, we point at the order in which connection segments
are considered for a new route. Regardless whether source
routing or routing by delegation is used, consideration of
available segments is identical to the Depth First Search
procedure. In this procedure, alternatives are considered
in an SP-speciﬁc order of preference. A criterion for
considering an alternative is not fulﬁllment of at least
one speciﬁed end-to-end requirement. Consequently, the
proposed procedure is nothing else but an inter-domain
policy-based routing procedure considering end-to-end re-
quirements.
B. Tying management functionality together
Experience shows that quality guarantees are only pos-
sible to hold if the planned quality targets are leveraged
by management procedures. The management of a service
instance is in turn only possible if the management of all
its integral parts is possible. Therefore two of the central
purposes of management-aware routing are the deﬁnition
of management functionality of each involved connection
segment and its integration into the overall management
of new multi-domain service instances.
In a multi-domain environment, direct access to the
network infrastructure of any SP is in general not possible,
as this is very likely to violate provider policies. There-
fore the integration of management functionality means
negotiation of communication interfaces and responsibility
areas as well as communication relationships with all
involved SPs. The possibility to negotiate communication
relationships and responsibility areas for each connection
should inﬂuence the acceptance of our approach positively,
as we give SPs a framework through which they can con-
trol information- and command-ﬂows. Negotiating DSM
interfaces is an essential part of integrating management
functionality and should be performed during the negoti-
ation of other relevant connection segment properties like
QoS parameters and management functionality.
Very important for tying together management func-
tionality is the possibility to specify one or more DSM
addresses by information requests. Representation of infor-
mation by inter-domain communication will be discussed
in Section VII. DSM address is presented in class COM-
MUNICATIONDSM (see Figure 11). This enables SPs to
specify multiple communication interfaces for different
purposes, e.g., regular information requests, monitoring or
event-triggered notiﬁcations. Concerning the conﬁrmation
of requests, SPs providing connection segments should
also specify communication interfaces for their manage-
ment functionalities. Furthermore, this will guarantee ﬂex-
ibility to SPs to separate interfaces for service instance
negotiation and operation, as well as to specify different
interfaces for different customers and/or service instances.
Every SP providing a connection segment as a part of
overall end-to-end service, is responsible to ensure the
agreed quality targets are met and to provide management
functionality through the negotiated interfaces. For the
integration of management functionality we deﬁne that
each SP is in charge, i.e., responsible, for the area for
which it has performed the routing task. To illustrate this
we refer to the example in Figure 4, outlined before. In the
example the ﬁnal path is going through the SCPs with IDs
”1,3”, ”1,1”, ”2,1”, ”2,2”, ”3,1”, and ”3,2”. Since routing
has been delegated to SP2, the example has multiple
responsibility areas, depicted in Figure 7.
We propose to distinguish between two types of re-
sponsibility delegation. Following the ﬁrst option, which
we call FullProxy, in our example SP2 would build an
abstraction layer, hiding the entire remaining part of the
path from SP1. This means that both, build-up and tying of
management functionality, is hidden by the proxy-SP and
SP1 has no direct control over them. The main advantage
9

69
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SP-Domain 
SP1 
SP-Domain 
SP2 
SP-Domain 
SP3 
Responsibility: SP1 
Responsibility: SP2 
Figure 7.
Responsibilities for function integration in example
SCP1,3 – SCP1,1 
SCP1,1 – SCP2,1 
SCP2,1 – SCP2,2 
SCP2,2 – SCP3,1 
SCP3,1 – SCP3,2 
SP-Domains 
Integrating  
Management 
Functionality 
SP-Domain 
SP1 
SP-Domain 
SP1 
Proxy-SP 
SP2 
SP-Domain 
SP2 
SP-Domain 
SP3 
SP-Domains 
Providing 
Management 
Functionality 
Connection 
Segments 
Figure 8.
Communication relationships by FullProxy option
of this option is the best possible compliance with re-
strictive SP policies. Therefore we see this option (similar
to the applicability of the routing-by-delegation) as an
always feasible one. The disadvantages of this option are
illustrated in Figure 8. The most apparent disadvantage of
this option is the increase of communication hops between
SPs, due to nested communication relationships, which
will lead to increased reaction times. Another signiﬁcant
disadvantage is the increase of intermediate processing by
proxy-SPs. Finally we want to point out the inevitable
deviation of reaction time by connection parts with direct
connection of management functionality, e.g., negotiated
using source routing, and connection parts with nested
integration of management functionality, e.g., negotiated
using routing-by-delegation with FullProxy option. Such
deviation not only decreases the overall end-to-end per-
formance, but also might require special treatment with
respect to the realization of such a solution.
Therefore we see the necessity to introduce a second
delegation option, which we call TransparentProxy. Using
this option it is possible to signal the proxy-SP that the
communication interfaces for management functionality
speciﬁed by the requester should be re-used during reser-
vation and ordering of the delegated part of the path.
The biggest advantage of this option is the possibility
to keep communication relationships as ﬂat as possible.
As SP-policies might restrict acceptable communication
relationships, e.g., only to neighboring SPs, this option
may not always be feasible. Therefore, we see the Full-
Proxy option as a fallback solution, similar to routing-by-
delegation being a fall-back solution for the case when
source routing is not applicable.
VI. GENERIC QOS-OPERATIONS
During the routing two operations are needed: 1) the
values of connection segments considered as a part of the
route should be aggregated; and 2) the aggregated value
should be compared with the E2E requirements. All these
operations have to be performed on the properties (and
property combinations), which are relevant for the partic-
ular customer request. In Section VII we will show, how
various connection properties (and their combinations) can
be described in a similar fashioned way. Unfortunately,
the similar fashioned description alone is not enough for
the similar fashioned operations on those properties. The
reason is the various semantics of the values related to
various connection properties. For example, operations
needed for aggregation and comparison of delay values
are not applicable for other very important QoS parameter
– bandwidth. The same can be said about operations on
other properties, e.g., on maintenance window.
In order to deal with this problem, in [2] we have
deﬁned a generic function schema, which enables treat-
ment of various connection properties and their combina-
tions in a similar fashioned way. The basic idea is that
all parameters are distinguished bases on global unique
IDs. Further, all IDs for every supported qualitative and
quantitative QoS parameter as well as for management
functionality and its property should be deﬁned in a
registration tree. This opens possibilities to specify for
every property ID a set of functions needed for operations
on it (see Figure 9). The functions
AGGREGATE LINKS
and
ORDER COMPARE are used to aggregate and com-
pare values of a single property. These functions operate
on properties of connection segments, and are therefore
relevant for the routing procedure described in Section V.
The reasons for the remaining three functions are slightly
more complex. Due to restrictive SP policies, access to the
network equipment is generally impossible from outside
of one’s own SP. Function
AGGREGATE LINKPARTS
is needed for computation of properties by segments
interconnecting two neighbor SPs (so called Inter-Domain
Links). This function is needed because in general no
direct access to the network infrastructure of the neighbor
SP is possible, and consequently both SPs have only own
(partial) knowledge about properties, which can be guar-
anteed by a particular Inter-Domain Link. The remaining
two functions ( SELECT BEST and
SELECT WORST)
are needed for operation on value ranges, which can be
speciﬁed by SP as realizable connection property. Value
ranges can be used instead of specifying multiple connec-
tion segments between same two SCPs with associated
ﬁxed values. For a more elaborated discussion about the
needs and application areas of these functions please see
[2] and [3].
The association of these functions with property IDs
enables the similar fashioned operations on various prop-
erties. This means that during the routing for every relevant
property the corresponding functions can be obtained
based on property ID. Subsequently, these functions can
be used to operate on the values of the properties, which
10

70
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
have been speciﬁed for connection segments.
Associated Functions
_Order_Compare
_Select_Best
_Select_Worst
_Aggregate_Links
_Aggregate_LinkParts
Figure 9.
Association of functions with a property ID in the registration
tree [2]
The described functions are always associated with
a single property. In order to operate on the customer
speciﬁc property combinations, we derive operations on
multiple properties based on single-property operations.
The aggregation of multiple properties is straight forward
and is deﬁned as a combination of per-property aggre-
gations. The comparisons of property combinations is,
however, more complicated. The reason is the possibility
that by comparison of two value-combinations some of
the properties in the ﬁrst and some other of the second
combination are better. This situation is reﬂected in the
deﬁnition for comparison of value combinations (see Fig-
ure 10). The ”≺” symbol is used here to denote which
value is better.
ts during the path
also necessary to
order to choose
sically treated in
tter” might vary
ing the examples
er value can be
y a smaller value
nection property
arison have to be
ices are evolving
f operations with
g and upcoming
a globally unique
ensure the global
registration tree.
operties, using a
nt advantage. As
h each supported
n of the functions
ty-ID (see Figure
tity of functions
d Functions
e
ple
le properties
ntroduce an ap-
operties with the
h theory, it is a
describe multiple
path in general.
, the weight can
In this deﬁnition,
Dj. The order of
itrary, as long as
among all weight
eing enumerated
index i will be
) ∈ Rm.
In order to calculate the weight vector −→
P of the path
consisting of n edges with weights −→
W 1, . . . , −→
W n, we ﬁrst
introduce an aggregation function for two weight vectors as
follows:
−−→
Aggr

71
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
available capacity. We further assume that every SP can
obtain information about capacity available for intercon-
nection with the neighboring SPs. We see this as a very
realistically assumption for most SPs, as such information
– among other – is required for proper management of
the own network infrastructure. Further we assume that
every SP can determine the quality properties which can
be guaranteed over available own connections.
The description of information is signiﬁcantly more
complex then information request, as it also should de-
scribe various topological properties (see Figure 12). As
has been discussed at the beginning of this article, an
expectation that SPs will share the information needed
for management of the own infrastructure (i.e., detailed
network topology representation as well as capacity and
usage of particular physical network connections) can be
seen as a very unrealistic one. One of the most critical
aspects in a multi-domain environment is very restrictive
information policies. The omission of the collision with
those policies is the main reason, why the proposed routing
procedure operates on information at the abstraction level
of an SP’s organizational domain. Such a representation
hides most realization aspects, like network topology,
which strongly complies with the mentioned information
policies.
For the description of available connections three
classes are used: COMPOUNDLINK, COMPONENTLINK,
and COMPONENTLINKPART. The class COMPOUNDLINK
is used as a wrapper for multiple alternative connection
segments connecting the same two SCPs. Such a situa-
tion can occur, for instance, due to alternative physical
connections available between these SCPs. Even though
such details are hidden from SP’s outsiders, they can result
in connection segments with different properties. The
class COMPONENTLINK, which represents the connection
segments, is associated with the class LINKPROPERTIES,
which specify segment’s properties. The structuring of
connection segment properties is identical to the one of
information request (see Figure 11). Finally, the class
COMPONENTLINKPART represents the SP’s view at an
Inter-Domain Link. As discussed in Section VI, every SP
has only information about quality guarantees realizable
at the SP-facing side of an inter-domain connection.
Therefore, the whole quality of such connections has to
be calculated from two views on it of involved SPs. For
this purpose function
AGGREGATE LINKPARTS has to
be associated with connection properties (see Section VI).
Every of these three connection classes interconnect
two SCPs, which contain their globally-unique IDs needed
for segment stitching as described above. Further, every
SCP is associated with a SP Domain in which it is
located. The reason is the necessity of SP responsible for
routing to communicate with those SPs, which can provide
connection segments. During the routing, considering a
new connection segment as a part of the route implies
that the next connection segment should be adjacent to
the distant SCP of the considered route. Information about
such an adjacent segment can only be obtained from an
SP owning the mentioned SCP. In close collaborations
of very limited amount of SPs it can be assumed that
every SP knows the interface to communicate with every
other SP. In open and/or highly dynamic collaborations
this is not the case. We however assume that every SP
can maintain up-to-date information about communication
interfaces of all its neighbors. Therefore by specifying
the domain owning the SCP, a communication interface
DSM ADDR of this SP should always be provided.
Domain
+  Domain_ID
+  DSM_Addr
SCP
+  SCP_ID
CompoundLink
ComponentLink
+  ComponentLink_ID
+  ComponentLinkType_ID
QuantitativeQoS
+  QoS_ID
QualitativeQoS
+  QoS_ID
ManagementFunctionality
+  Functionality_ID
TimePeriod
+  Begin
+  End
AllowedValues
+  AllowedValuesType_ID
Property
+  Property_ID
LinkProperties
+  Service_ID
+  UncertaintyType_ID
ComponentLinkPart
+  ComponentLink_ID
MultiDomainManagementFunctionality
1..*
*
2
1
*
2
*
1..*
1
1
0, 2
*
1
1,2
*
2
define
*
*
Connected with
*
*
*
0..1
*
1..*
1
Figure 12.
IM for available connections and properties of a single SP
[3]
Finally,
the
MULTIDOMAINMANAGEMENTFUNC-
TIONALITY class has to be mentioned. This class is
derived
from
MANAGEMENTFUNCTIONALITY,
which
enables the speciﬁcation of multi-domain management
functionality in a similar fashioned way as it is done by
the management functionality of connection segments.
This description is needed by the delegation of multi-
domain management functionality, as it will be described
in Section IX-A.
The inter-domain routing procedure, which we have
described in Section V, operates on a semi-global knowl-
edge, i.e., the knowledge spanning over multiple – but
not necessarily all – SP domains. At the same time, each
SP is only able to provide information about connection
segments in which realization it is involved. This raises
the question, how such single-domain views of different
SPs can be combined to semi-global multi-domain view?
If every SP can provide its view at the connection
12

72
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
segments it is involved in, deriving a multi-domain view
from a multiple single-domain views can be realized rel-
atively easily. We propose that every SP, when specifying
segments, always provides the IDs of two SCPs at its
ends. It is necessary that these IDs are globally unique.
Only then the SP responsible for routing can ”stitch” these
segments at the SCPs with identical IDs together (see
Figure 13).
IdA1 
IdA2 
IdB2 
IdB1 
IdB3 
Domain A 
Domain B 
IdA1 
IdA2 
IdB2 
IdB1 
IdB3 
Domain A 
Domain B 
IdA2 
IdB2 
IdB2 
IdA1 
IdA2 
IdB2 
IdB1 
IdB3 
IdA2 
IdB2 
IdB2 
(a) Single-Domain View 
(b) Matching SCP-IDs 
(c) Aggregated Multi-Domain View 
Figure 13.
Deriving a multi-domain view from single-domain views
[3]
A more elaborated discussion about details of infor-
mation model as well as about reasons for the selected
representation can be found in [3].
VIII. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
In in Sections V, VI, and VII we have described the
three building blocks of our proposal. In order to illustrate
how elaborated concepts can be applied, we reuse the
example outlined at the beginning of this article. We recall
that in the example the customer has contacted SP1 and
has requested a connection between SCPs with IDs ”1,3”
and ”3,2” with following properties:
• Bandwidth: 1 Gbps
• Delay: max 40 ms
• Maintenance
– Window: 600 – 1000 GMT
– Duration: max 1 hr.
• Monitoring
From the customer’s point of view, SP1 is the sole
provider of the E2E connection with the mentioned prop-
erties. For the planning of a corresponding multi-domain
path SP1 needs routing functionality. Furthermore, in
order to comply with the outlined parameters also multi-
domain Monitoring functionality is needed. As SP1 can
provide both functionalities, it can start the process of
ﬁnding the route fulﬁlling all end-to-end customer require-
ments.
DSM 
DSM 
SP5 
2,1 
CSM 
SP-Domain 
SP1 
SP-Domain 
SP2 
3,2 
SP2 
SP4 
SP1 
1,1 
1,2 
4,1 
2,5 
SP3 
1,3 
Figure 14.
Global view at the available services
Figure 14 presents the situation after SP1 chose the
path through its own network. It still has to ﬁnd the
route between SCPs ”2,1” and ”3,2”, but has no up-
to-date knowledge about connections available in SP2.
Consequently a request for information should be send
to SP2. As proposed in Section V-A, this information
request should be accompanied by the topology- and
property-restriction. We recall that the main motivation
of restricting requested information was the necessity
to comply with very restrictive information policies. An
additional positive effect is the signiﬁcant reduction of
connection segments, which have to be considered for the
route. This in turn speeds up the overall routing process.
1
D:\Papers\IntTech11 (IARIA Journal)\inttech11‐git\pictures\unused\RequestInfoXML.xml
<RequestedProperties Service_ID="CS" UncertainityType_ID="Guaranteed">
  <TimePeriod Begin="Now" End="OpenEnd"/>
  <QuantitativeQoS QoS_ID="Bandwidth">
    <AssociatedValue ValueType_ID="SingleValue" Value="1" Metric="Gbps"/>
  </QuantitativeQoS>
  <QuantitativeQoS QoS_ID="Delay">
    <AssociatedValue ValueType_ID="SingleValue" Value="140" Metric="ms"/>
  </QuantitativeQoS>
  <ManagementFunctionality Funcitonality_ID="Maintenance">
    <Property Property_ID="Window">
      <AssociatedValue ValueType_ID="ValueRange" Min="0300" Max="0700" Metric="GMT"/>
    </Property>
    <Property Property_ID="Duration">
      <AssociatedValue ValueType_ID="SingleValue" Value="1" Metric="hr"/>
    </Property>
  </ManagementFunctionality>
  <ManagementFunctionality Funcitonality_ID="Monitoring">
    <Property Property_ID="CommunicationDSM">
      <CommunicationDSM DSM_Addr="dsm.domainSP1.com/mon/instance932/"/>
    </Property>
  </ManagementFunctionality>
</RequestedProperties>
Figure 15.
Specifying needed properties in information requests
In Section VII we have presented how requested proper-
ties can be structured (see Figure 11). For communication
between SPs, this structure has to be encoded. Currently,
application-layer protocols are often built on top of SOAP
communication. As the information in such communica-
tion is encoded in a human-readable XML format, this
suits very well for illustration of concepts. Figure 15
presents how the example speciﬁc information restrictions
can be represented in XML according to the proposed
structure. Please note that the proposed property structure
can be encoded differently.
13

73
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SP5 
SP1 
1,3 
1,1 
1,2 
4,1 
3,2 
SP2 
2,1 
2,5 
2,2 
2,3 
SP4 
SP3 
Figure 16.
Global view at the available services
The structuring of the requested information has been
described in Section VII (see especially Figure 13). By
information request SP1 also specify its DSM address
for monitoring functionality. This is a crucial aspect in
order to tie functionality together, as it has been described
in Section V-B. The representation in XML format can
be done similarly to the presented request. Please note
that regarding the answer, SP2 should provide own DSM-
address(es) through which the monitoring functionality
of available connection segments can be reached during
instance operation. These addresses might vary between
defferent service instances due to various SP-internal
reasons.
From 
To 
Route-Part? 
Property 
Value 
SCP1,3 
SCP1,1 
  
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
19 ms 
Maintenance Window 
06:00-10:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
SCP1,3 
SCP1,2 
- 
 
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
15 ms 
Maintenance Window 
06:00-10:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
SCP1,1 
SCP2,1 
  
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
4 ms 
Maintenance Window 
06:00-10:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
SCP1,2 
SCP2,5 
- 
 
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
3 ms 
Maintenance Window 
07:00-09:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
SCP1,2 
SCP4,1 
- 
 
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
6 ms 
Maintenance Window 
06:00-07:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
SCP2,1 
SCP2,3 
- 
 
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
20 ms 
Maintenance Window 
06:00-08:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
40 min 
SCP2,1 
SCP2,2 
- 
 
Bandwidth 
1 Gbps 
Delay 
10 ms 
Maintenance Window 
07:00-09:00 GMT 
Maintenance Duration 
1 hr 
 
 
Table I
KNOWLEDGE TABLE OF SP1
According to the routing process speciﬁed in Figure
6, up to now we have selected SCP ”2,1” as the next
intermediate SCP (action A1), have recognized that some
information is missing, and therefore requested this infor-
mation (action A2). Now we have to determine, which
connection segment should be considered as next section
in the path (action A3). Figure 16 depicts graphically the
knowledge of SP1 after SP2 has provided the requested
information. Please note that the information about irrel-
evant connection segments has not been provided at all.
In order to illustrate the follow-up actions of the deﬁned
routing procedure, in Table I we present the knowledge
base available to SP1 at this point of procedure. It contains
imaginary values associated with properties of available
segments as well as the ﬂag whether the particular segment
is considered as a part of the route or not. Please note that
for SP2 there is no need to provide information which is
not fulﬁlling the restriction.
According to the information provided by SP2, two
connection segments are available. The most preferable
one is the connection between SCPs ”2,1” and ”2,3”.
According to the deﬁned routing procedure, the SP re-
sponsible for routing has to consider available connection
possibilities in the most-to-less preferable order of the
SP providing them. Therefore SP1 has ﬁrst to consider
this connection possibility and therefore calculate the
aggregated value of the partial route (action A4 in Figure
6).
In order to calculate the path properties, aggregation
functions for the relevant properties have to be accessed
ﬁrst. As described in Section VI, these functions are
associated with the property IDs. These functions can be
used for semantic-aware operations on the values of par-
ticular connection properties. This means that aggregation
function is:
• min for the Bandwidth
• addition for Delay
• intersection for Maintenance window
• max for Maintenance duration
• Logical AND for availability of Monitoring
Using these functions and values from the knowledge
table we can calculate the properties of the intermediate
path going through SCPs ”1,3”, ”1,1”, ”2,1”, and ”2,3”
(Action A4 in Figure 6). Now we have to compare the cal-
culated multi-property value with the end-to-end customer
requirements. This is done again based on the functions
deﬁned for the particular properties (see Section V). The
result of the comparison will be ̸=, as the all properties
except delay are better than the requirements, but the
requirement for delay cannot be fulﬁlled by this path.
Consequently, the next alternative connection segment,
e.g., between SCPs ”2,1” and ”2,2” has to be considered
according. As the path going through SCPs ”1,3”, ”1,1”,
”2,1”, and ”2,2” hold the requirements, its last SCP ”2,2”
is chosen as next intermediate SCP (action A1) and the
outlined procedure can be repeated.
Let us assume that with the above outline procedure
the path fulﬁlling all end-to-end requirements and going
through SCPs ”1,3”, ”1,1”, ”2,1”, ”2,2”, and ”3,1” have
been found (see Figure 17). This means that the following
segment(s) can be only provided by SP3. As the infor-
mation about available connection segments is missing,
SP1 has to request this information from SP3 (action A2
in Figure 6). Let us further assume that SP3 rejects this
information request due to some internal reasons. For this
case our proposal foresees a delegation (action A5) of a
14

74
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
routing task to the last SP in the already found path, i.e.,
in this case to SP2. Graphically this situation is depicted
in the Figure 5.
DSM 
DSM 
SP5 
SP1 
1,3 
1,1 
1,2 
4,1 
SP2 
2,1 
2,2 
2,3 
2,5 
CSM 
DSM 
3,1 
SP-Domain 
SP1 
SP-Domain 
SP2 
SP-Domain 
SP3 
SP3 
SP4 
3,2 
Figure 17.
Global view at the available services
If SP2 accepts the request for routing delegation, it
takes over the routing for the remaining part. It receives
information about end-to-end requirements, values which
can be guaranteed by the intermediate route and two SCPs
between which it has to perform routing. SP2 choses SCP
”3,1” as its intermediate SCP (action A1) and proceeds as
outlined before. If the end point is reached, SP2 reports
the properties of the whole found path to the requester of
the routing task.
Please note that in order to tie management functionality
together, SP2 has to specify to SP3 the communication
DSM (see Section V-B). In the case of FULLPROXY
delegation, SP2 speciﬁes its own address. In this case,
if the route could be found, it also has to report its own
DSM to SP1. The provider SP2 should further aggregate
monitoring information of all following segments in its
own responsibility area. By this delegation option, SP2
provides SP1 exactly with the aggregated view.
Regarding the delegation by using the TRANSPARENT-
PROXY option, during the routing in its own responsibility
area, SP2 should specify for monitoring purposes the
DSM address of SP1. Also, concerning the acceptance
of SP3 to provide the last segment, SP2 should report the
DSM of SP3’s monitoring instance to SP1. In this case
SP1 is only responsible for routing but not for aggregation
of monitoring information.
IX. DISCUSSION
In this section we will outline our thoughts about
aspects going beyond the scope of the presented paper, but
highly related to the presented solution. At ﬁrst we will
discuss the delegation of management tasks to the trusted
third party SPs. Then in Section IX-B we will present
our thoughts about reservation and ordering of planned
route. Section IX-C is dedicated to outline our view at the
acceptance of the presented solution by SPs. Finally, in
Section IX-D we will present positioning of our solution
among other existing alternatives.
A. Delegating Multi-Domain Management Tasks
The discussion up to now has implicitly presumed that
every SP-domain approached by the customer as well as
every proxy-SP can take over the whole functionality, like
routing and integration of needed management functional-
ity. The practicability of such solution depends on different
factors. Most important are the complexity and costs for
the development and maintenance of such solution by
every SP. To a large extent this might be inﬂuenced by
the utilization of the multi-domain functionality through
requests for new and operation of established E2E con-
nections.
In practice, two concepts have been often successfully
combined in order to cope with high complexity and
costs: specialization and sharing. A per se example is the
DNS service, which is realized by specialized SPs and
shared among SPs specializing on, e.g., content provi-
sioning. Therefore we propose to support the delegation
of multi-domain management tasks. As most common
multi-domain management tasks, the following should
be mentioned: routing, monitoring, accounting, or outage
localization. Figure 18 depicts the delegation of the routing
task. Instead of performing routing by themselves, as
this was deﬁned in our original proposal, provider SP1
can delegate this task to SPR which should follow the
management-aware routing procedure. Please note that
even if the trustworthiness of such specialized multi-
domain management service providers might be very high,
especially in large collaborations it does not necessary
eliminate the necessity of task-delegation to proxy-SPs.
SP-Domain Providing  
Multi-Domain Service 
SPR 
Multi-Domain 
Routing 
SP-Domain 
Requesting Service 
SP-Domain  
Providing Service 
SP-Domain  
Providing Service 
Customer 
CSM 
DSM 
DSM 
DSM 
SP1 
SP2 
SP3 
Figure 18.
Delegating multi-domain functionality to a third party
B. Route Reservation and Ordering
In packet switching, like in IP-networks, the routing
is an all-including procedure, as it is combined with the
packet forwarding to the next hop which will be then in
charge for further routing and forwarding. In line switch-
ing, the situation is more complex and routing can be seen
as a general plan which still has to be implemented. If the
plan is not sufﬁcient, than even perfect implementations of
it will not lead to the desired result; but even if the plan is
perfect, it can be undermined by its bad implementation.
Therefore we see the described management-aware routing
as the most critical – but not sole – prerequisite for pro-
visioning of multi-domain network connections compliant
with user-speciﬁc E2E requirements.
As we consider a multi-domain environment, the in-
formation which is used during the routing is not only
15

75
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
semi-global, but also can be considered as not 100% up-to-
date. This is mainly caused by concurrent requests, which
can come from (in general various) SPs responsible for
routing of different connections. On the one hand, various
connection segments considered for these connections
might be realized upon the same physical infrastructure.
On the other hand, as a means for reduction of capital
expenditure for infrastructure, every SP is interested in
maximizing resource usage. Consequently, in the time
between the information request and the actual ordering
of the selected connection segments, the needed physical
resources might be assigned to other service instances. In
other words, we face the multi-domain concurrency for
the same limited resources.
Various elaborated techniques are available for dealing
with the concurrency issue. The most common way to
avoid conﬂicts and/or minimize deadlocks is the reserva-
tion of the resources before their ordering. This technique
can be also applied to concatenated services at the SP
abstraction layer (see Figure 19). Every node in Figure 19
represents the state of one service part, e.g., a connection
segment, from the perspective of SPs responsible for the
provisioning of service instance. As the communication
between different SPs can only be performed via some
communication protocol, the transitions arrows between
states are described with different kinds of requests. Please
note that these names only reﬂect the semantics of requests
and do not imply any suggestions for protocol implemen-
tation.
Available
Reserved
InService
CHANGE
RESERVEDSERVICE
SERVICE
RESERVATION
DECOMISSIONING
CANCELRESERVATION
INFORMATION
MGMTFKT
Figure 19.
State transition at multi-domain abstraction level
Even though the state transition by itself is quite
common, two additional aspects have to be speciﬁed:
1) behavior of SPs regarding requests for state transition
of a single service part; and 2) the way to apply such
requests to multiple service parts.
Concerning the deﬁnition of SP’s behavior we propose
to reuse elements of bilateral and trilateral negotiation
models, as they are described in [34]. More precisely, if
SPRS (RS for ”Requesting Service”) requests from SPP S
(PS for ”Providing Service”) the reservation of connection
segment with a certain quality, SPP S should be able to
conﬁrm the reservation with equal or smaller quality as
requested. This should cover the case if SPP S in the
time between information- and reservation-requests has
already reserved some needed resources for a different
service instance. After the reservation is conﬁrmed, for
each reserved service part, SPRS should be able to request
its ordering. In this case, however, SPP S should be either
able to provide the quality equal or better than the one
conﬁrmed by reservation, or report the failure of ordering.
The outcome of the management-aware routing pro-
cedure is a combination of connection segments along
the route associated with the apparently feasible QoS
thresholds. As all SPs providing those segments are also
known, simultaneous communication with all those SPs
would be possible. Concerning the reservation of service
segments we however argue against the simultaneous
communication with all SPs. In this case, reduced quality
by reservation of a sole segment would automatically
lead to a violation of the E2E user requirements. In-
stead, we propose to reserve segments sequential one-
by-one from one endpoint to another one. In the case
that SPP S conﬁrms reduced qualities, SPRS can try to
balance the performance degradation in one segment by
increasing the planned thresholds of remaining segments.
For this purpose information obtained during the routing
by information requests can be reused. If the balancing
is not possible, a re-routing for the remaining part of the
path can be performed. If even this fails, SPRS should
cancel reservations of all connection segments which have
been already successfully reserved. In order to minimize
reservation time, messages about cancelling reservation
can be sent simultaneously to all relevant SPs.
If reservation of all segments has been successful and
E2E requirements are met, requests for ordering of these
segments can be sent to corresponding SPs. As – corre-
sponding to the proposed behavior – SPs may only pro-
vide better quality than the conﬁrmed by the reservation,
requests for ordering can be sent simultaneously to all SPs.
If at least one of SPs cannot fulﬁll its commitment, it will
report failure to SPRS. In this case SPRS has to cancel
reservations of all remaining segments immediately.
Leveraging the proposed procedure for reservation and
ordering of connection segments along the found route
we score two goals: 1) ﬁrst of all the fulﬁllment of
E2E requirements; and 2) minimizing the time needed
for resource reservation before a new service instance can
become operational.
C. Examine SP-Acceptance for Elaborated Solution
As discussed in Sections I and II, the most critical
requirement for an inter-domain routing approach is its
acceptance by SPs. In our proposal, this real world re-
quirement has been reﬂected by considering SP interests
and restrictions.
As a proof of concept we refer to our experience
within the context of the Information Sharing across
Heterogeneous Administrative Regions (I-SHARe) activ-
ity [32]. This activity has been established in G´eant in
order to foster information exchange during the manual
planning and operation of E2E Links. During the ﬁrst
phase of this activity, requirements and constraints for
the (back then) upcoming tool had to be captured and
categorized. This has provided us with a deep insight into
demands and concerns of network service providers.
First of all the sharing of detailed network information
16

76
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(such as network topology or overall available capacity)
is commonly seen as unacceptable. At the same time
it is acceptable for SPs to exchange information about
connection segments at SP abstraction level, which are
possible for a particular planned E2E Link. Also exchange
of more detailed information with neighboring SPs is very
common by connection planning. The information model
described in Section VII directly reﬂect these aspects.
As our proposal strives for automatic route planning, we
expect that multiple alternative service parts should be
speciﬁed in the order of the SPs’ preferences. Primarily, it
should simplify information management and also reduce
the necessary number of communication steps. Several
interviews with operators involved in the planning of
G´eant E2E Links have shown the acceptance of SPs to
provide information about multiple service parts during
the routing process, even it is not used in the established
manual processes.
By gathering of established in G´eant manual route
planning processes one further very important constraint
has been identiﬁed. The only true concern that has been
repeatedly mentioned by operations of different SPs is the
compliance of the service part choice to the SP prefer-
ences. The enforcement of this aspect has been reﬂected
in both routing modes outlined in Section V.
As our proposal can provide routing planning under
consideration of SP constraints, we are conﬁdent that
our solution can be broadly accepted by SPs. As it also
considers the customer-speciﬁc E2E requirements and
management functionality, our solution opens for SPs
possibility for delivering of high-quality network services
to the customers.
D. Application areas and possible adaptations
Compared to the established connectivity-oriented rout-
ing approaches, the proposed solution requires signiﬁ-
cantly more information, computations, and – which is the
most time-consuming part – inter-domain communication.
This statement is applicable not only to routing, but also to
the subsequent reservation and ordering processes. There-
fore, it cannot be considered as a routing procedure for a
mass service, as it is the case by IP routing in Internet.
Instead we suppose the application area of the developed
algorithm to be in the middle-scale niche between mass
services, which are focused on a pure connectivity with
best-effort quality, and carrier-grade connections, which
are mainly manually planned very-long-term connections
with dedicated quality speciﬁed in contracts (see Figure
20).
The proposed solution can provide near-real-time plan-
ning and ordering of a route with customer-tailored E2E
connection properties. This solution is applicable to sce-
narios like video-on-demand, video-conferencing, on de-
mand connectivity for Grid or cloud collaborations, and
other areas in which customers demand (and often are
willing to pay) not only for the pure connectivity but also
for the connection quality. Especially this is applicable
for scenarios like video-conferencing, where bad quality
2 
Required 
Time 
Proposed  
Solution 
[seconds / 
minutes]  
Figure 20.
Positioning of proposed solution
of one parameter (e.g., jitter) cannot be covered by another
one (e.g., bandwidth).
Depending on the offered service and/or the speciﬁcs
of the SP cooperation, the proposed algorithm can be
modiﬁed in order to improve its scalability. Particularly,
we would like to outline the following two cases:
• If the connection service is only offered with QoS
parameters that do not require E2E consideration of
all involved parts, e.g., bandwidth or data encryption,
a routing-by-delegation approach can generally be
used. Especially in combination with the simulta-
neous resource reservation, it can prove to be very
scalable. A very good example for this strategy can be
seen in telephone connections, which offer constant
bit rate and low jitter.
• In the case of a small and especially very tight SP
cooperation, the routing instance can be centralized.
In this case only this instance performs the whole
E2E routing for all new connection requests, which
neglects the concurrence between simultaneously or-
dered service instances. Consequently, the service
part reservation can be omitted or performed simul-
taneously. A similar strategy with a two-level routing
instances is used, e.g., in the DCN cooperation. This
approach corresponds to the source routing approach
(see Section V), in which the routing task is always
delegated to a central instance. The applicability of
this approach, however, depends directly on the will-
ingness of SPs to provide complete information about
all available service parts to the routing instance and
to accept its inter-domain manager role.
A further simpliﬁcation can be applied for operations
on supported properties. If only few properties have to be
supported and no extension of support is planned for the
future, the usage of a registration tree for the deﬁnition
of operations on properties can be omitted. This should
signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the implemented
solution. On the other hand, support of not yet considered
properties becomes an issue again.
As a conclusion, the proposed solution is applicable in
the most challenging case of an open SP collaboration as
well as with a variety of customer-speciﬁc QoS parame-
ters.
17

77
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
X. FUTURE WORK
As a mean to quality assurance for Concatenated Ser-
vices, we have elaborated a novel conceptual solution con-
sisting of three technology-independent building blocks.
As the next logical step we see the evaluation of exist-
ing technologies, whether and how they can be used to
implement the proposed solution. The desired outcome of
this evaluation is a proposal for implementation of the
presented solution and its building blocks. In the case if
not all concepts can be implemented, the missing func-
tionality can be seen as requirements for future technology
development.
The proposed solution covers only the connection plan-
ning aspect during the ordering phase of service instance
life cycle. In order to support SP collaboration during
further phases, we plan to elaborate a proposal for inter-
domain management processes. For instance, the method-
ologies for E2E monitoring have to be deﬁned, which is
needed for both monitoring of commitments’ fulﬁllment
and for problem localization. We see such processes as an
essential part of the overall solution for CSs.
As the occurrence of outages cannot be fully excluded,
strategies for handling them have to be elaborated. There-
fore we plan to investigate the applicability of self-
adaptation techniques as a strategy for the multi-domain
compensation of a single-domain quality reduction or
outages of service parts.
An additional aspect, which should not be neglected,
is the consideration of security in multi-domain environ-
ments. Therefore the integration of federated identity and
trust management into the management of CSs will be a
part of our future research.
As stated at the beginning of this article, our work has
focused on dedicated point-to-point connections. For the
future, we also plan to evaluate the applicability of the
developed solutions to the establishment and management
of point-to-multipoint as well as multipoint-to-multipoint
network connections with quality assurance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the members of the Munich
Network Management Team (MNM Team) for helpful
discussions and valuable comments on previous versions
of this paper. The MNM Team directed by Prof. Dr.
Dieter Kranzlm¨uller and Prof. Dr. Heinz-Gerd Hegering is
a group of researchers at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at
M¨unchen, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, the University
of the Federal Armed Forces and the Leibniz Supercom-
puting Centre of the Bavarian Academy of Science. See
http://www.mnm-team.org.
REFERENCES
[1] Yampolskiy, M., Hommel, W., Lichtinger, B., Fritz, W.,
Hamm, M.K. Multi-Domain End-to-End (E2E) Routing with
multiple QoS Parameters. Considering Real World User Re-
quirements and Service Provider Constraints. In Proceedings
The Second International Conference on Evolving Internet,
2010. INTERNET 2010, Valencia, 2010.
[2] Yampolskiy, M., Hommel, W., Schmitz, D., Hamm, M.K.
Generic Function Schema for Operation on multiple Net-
work QoS-Parameters. Submitted to The Second Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Service Computing, 2010.
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010, Lisbon, 2010.
[3] Yampolskiy, M., Hommel, W., Marcu, P., Hamm, M.K. An
information model for the provisioning of network connec-
tions enabling customer-speciﬁc End-to-End QoS guaran-
tees. In Proceedings 7th IFIP/IEEE International Conference
on Services Computing, 2010. SCC 2010, Miami, 2010.
[4] Dynamic Circuit Network, Publications.
http://www.internet2.edu/network/dc/publications.html
[10
May 2010].
[5] Internet2 How to Connect: Internet2’s Dynamic Circuit Net-
work. http://www.internet2.edu/pubs/DCN-howto.pdf White
paper 2008.
[6] ESnet On-demand Secure Circuits and Advance Reservation
System (OSCARS), Publications.
http://www.es.net/OSCARS/ [10 May 2010].
[7] Dynamic Resource Allocation via GMPLS optical Networks
(DRAGON), Publications.
http://dragon.maxgigapop.net/twiki/bin/view/DRAGON/Publi-
cations [10 May 2010].
[8] Phosphorus, Publications.
http://www.ist-phosphorus.eu/publications.php
[10
May
2010].
[9] Automated Bandwidth Allocation across Heterogeneous
Networks (AutoBAHN), Bandwidth on Demand Deliver-
ables.
http://www.geant2.net/server/show/nav.1914 [10 May 2010].
[10] Joint Techs Winter 2009 TAMU DCN Demo.
https://spaces.internet2.edu/display/DCN/Joint+Techs+Winter+
2009++TAMU+DCN+Demo [28 May 2010].
[11] DICE
(DANTE-Internet2-CANARIE-ESnet)
Collaboration.
http://www.geant2.net/server/show/conWebDoc.1308
[28
May 2010].
[12] Proposed architecture for inter-domain circuit monitoring.
http://code.google.com/p/perfsonar-
ps/wiki/CircuitMonitoring [28 May 2010].
[13] Yampolskiy, M., Hamm, M.K. Management of Multido-
main End-to-End Links; A Federated Approach for the Pan-
European Research Network G´eant 2. In Proceedings 10th
IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management, 2007. IM’07, Munich, 2007; 189-198.
[14] LHC - The Large Hadron Collider Homepage.
http://lhc.web.cern.ch/lhc/ [10 May 2010].
[15] DEISA - Distributed European Infrastructure for Super-
computing Applications Homepage.
http://www.deisa.eu/ [10 May 2010].
[16] Aptet, E., Chevers, J, Garcia Vidondo, M., Tyley, S. G´eant
Deliverable DS2.0.3,3: Report on G ´EANT2 Ad-vanced Ser-
vices - Lambdas and Switched Optical G´eant2 technical
paper 2009.
18

78
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[17] Schauerhammer,
K.,
Ullmann,
K.
Operational
Model
for
E2E
links
in
the
NREN/G´EANT2
and
NREN/Cross-Border-Fibre
supplied
optical
platform.
www.geant2.net/upload/pdf/GN2-06-119-OPConcept.pdf
G´eant2 technical paper 2006.
[18] Ofﬁce of Governance Commerce (OGC) IT Infrastructure
Library (ITIL). London, 2007.
[19] TeleManagement Forum (TMF) New Generation Opera-
tions Systems and Software (NGOSS). 2004.
[20] Hamm, M.K. Eine Methode zur Speziﬁkation der IT-
Service-Managementprozesse Verketteter Dienste 2009;
[21] Khurram, K. (Editor) Optical Networking Stan-dards: A
Comprehensive Guide for Professionals (1st edn). 2006;
[22] Brockners, F. Ethernet OAM Overview: Making Ethernet
Manageable. In Proceedings 1. DFN Forum Kommunikation-
stechnologien, M¨uller P, Neumair B, Dreo Rodesek G (eds).
Kaiserslautern, 2008; 35-44.
[23] Ziegelmann, M. Constrained shortest paths and related
problems 2004;
[24] Hamm, M. K., Yampolskiy, M. IT Service Management
verketteter Dienste in Multi-Domain Umgebungen. Model-
lierung und Teilaspekte. PIK Praxis der Informationsverar-
beitung und Kommunikation 2008; 31(2):82-89.
[25] Bellman, R. The theory of dynamic programming. In Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 1952; 716-719.
[26] Jaffe, J.M. Algorithms for ﬁnding paths with multiple
constraints. Networks 1984; 14(1):95-116.
[27] Kuipers, F.A. Quality of service routing in the internet:
Theory, complexity and algorithms 2004;
[28] Feng, G. A multi-constrained multicast QoS routing algo-
rithm. Computer Communications 2006; 29(10):1811-1822.
[29] Castineyra, I. and Chiappa, N. and Steenstrup, M. The
Nimrod routing architecture. RFC-1992 [1996].
[30] ITU-T Generic functional architecture of transport net-
works. ITU-T: G.805 [2000].
[31] TeleManagement Forum (TMF) Common Information
Model (CIM). [2009].
[32] Hamm, M. K., Yampolskiy, M., Hanemann, A. I-SHARe.
DFN Mitteilungen 2008; 74:39-41.
[33] De Marinis, E. and Hamm, M. and Hanemann, A. and
Vuagnin, G. and Yampolskiy, M. and Cesaroni, G. and
Thomas, S.-M. Deliverable DS3.16.1: Use Cases and Re-
quirements Analysis for I-SHARe G´eant2 technical paper
2008.
[34] Steinmetz, R. Multimedia-Technologie. Grundlagen, Kom-
ponenten und Systeme 2000;
[35] M. Yampolskiy.
Maßnahmen zur Sicherung von E2E–
QoS bei Verketteten Diensten.
Ph.D. Thesis, Ludwig–
Maximilians–Universit¨at M¨unchen, December 2009.
[36] G´eant SA2-T1 working group Static Dedicated Wavelength
Service: Joint Infrastructure and Operational Level Agree-
ment G´eant2 technical paper, Draft 2010.
19

