Acceptance and Value of Mobile Payment Service Designs in Complex Ecosystems 
 
Elisabeth Pergler 
CAMPUS 02 University of Applied 
Sciences, Information Technologies & 
Business Informatics, 
Graz, Austria  
e-mail: 
elisabeth.pergler@campus02.at 
Daniela Glatz,  
Christian Adelsberger 
evolaris next level GmbH, 
Graz, Austria  
e-mail: daniela.glatz@evolaris.net; 
christian.adelsberger@evolaris.net 
Rainer Schamberger 
PSA Payment Services Austria GmbH 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: rainer.schamberger@psa.at 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the results of an acceptance 
analysis of existing mobile payment services (MPS) and MPS 
concepts. The analysis was conducted by means of technical 
documentation on features and functionalities, usage tests and 
interviews with experts from the MPS ecosystem. The results 
indicate high acceptance of wallet MPS that support additional 
functionalities such as loyalty card inclusion. In addition, card-
based MPS obtain high values for ease of use, and thus, might 
serve as transitional solution until technical standards are 
implemented in the ecosystem. Subsequent to a short 
introduction and presentation of the state of the art, the 
development of the evaluation framework of this study will be 
presented, on which the analysis of the MPS at hand is based. 
The results of the analysis are further transferred into the 
context of value and a research model is elaborated. The paper 
concludes with the design of a field study that will evaluate the 
acceptance of the suggested MPS and the corresponding value-
based research model in a real-life context.  
Keywords-mobile payment service; technology acceptance; 
external factors; complex ecosystem 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is based on our contribution to ICDS 2014 - 
The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society [1]. 
Recent market research indicates a growing importance of 
mobile payment. At the beginning of 2013, Gartner [2] 
predicted that the value of the mobile payment transactions 
will increase by 44 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, to an 
estimated $235.4 billion worldwide by the end of the year. 
In some regions, such as Japan and the US, mobile 
payment is already part of people’s everyday lives. The 
development on the European markets, on the other hand, is 
still behind prior expectations. There exists high insecurity 
among many potential stakeholders within the complex 
ecosystem of mobile payment. The insecurity refers to 
technology standards as well as service designs and business 
models.  
What makes the ecosystem of different MPS "complex" 
is the fact that different pre-conditions and circumstances are 
relevant for each solution. Some examples include relevant 
partners in the value creation/delivery and supply chain 
process, a variety of contract forms, agreements, legal 
aspects, and responsibilities. For the user of a single MPS, 
this complex ecosystem means that they might not be able to 
use the chosen MPS for the payment at a certain retailer, 
because the involved parties and companies are not in a 
contractual relationship that is necessary for a successful 
transaction at the point of sale.  
Acceptance of mobile payment is an issue that has been 
addressed in various empirical studies. These resulted in 
interesting causal models of mobile payment acceptance with 
high explanatory power, e.g., [3], [4], and [5]. Acceptance by 
itself, defined as the decision to adopt or not adopt a MPS, is 
not sufficient to predict the market success of a particular 
payment service as their success is highly dependent on the 
ecosystem, in which they operate and their actual design. 
Thus, there is a need to connect theoretical foundations from 
acceptance research to practical design issues of actual 
mobile payment services and to context factors that arise 
from the complex ecosystem, in which mobile payment 
services operate.  
The main objective of the present research project is 
therefore a systematic analysis of generic mobile payment 
services (MPS) within a novel acceptance evaluation 
framework that is derived from validated causal models of 
mobile payment acceptance. In a first step, it is necessary to 
develop the evaluation framework based on an extensive 
literature review. Mobile payment services are classified 
based on a market analysis and representative services are 
selected for each generic service. These are then analysed 
within the acceptance evaluation framework. Data for the 
analysis is obtained from service features and mobile 
payment service usage tests and expert interviews with 
service providers, banking and payment experts. The 
comparison of acceptance factors for each service results in a 
systematic assessment and enables conclusions regarding 
acceptance of the analysed mobile payment services.  
The results are then enriched by the concept of Mobile 
Value Core (MVC) [6], which defines the realized value of 
mobile services and products from two different foci, the 
provider-oriented focus and the user-oriented focus. In a next 
step, the different concepts of value in the context of MPS 
are transferred into the scheme provided by MVC. In the 
following section a preliminary value-based research model 
is outlined in accordance with MVC.  
The paper concludes with an outlook on a subsequent 
field study. The research design of the field study is based on 
the major findings of the presented project and is necessary 
183
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to evaluate the results of this research project in a real world 
context. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the 
state of the art. In Section III, we describe how the 
evaluation framework was developed, which is the basis for 
the analysis of different payment services (Section IV). 
Section V elaborates the concept of value in the context of 
mobile payment services. The draft research model is 
outlined in Section VI. The paper concludes in Section VII, 
with an outlook to our future work and study design. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART IN MOBILE PAYMENT RESEARCH 
Analysis of the state of the art will start with Section A, 
in which the technological implementations of mobile 
payment services will be presented, followed by Section B, 
which will provide an introduction to the acceptance factors 
of mobile payment services. 
 
A. Technological implementations of mobile payment 
services 
Mobile payment services can be classified according to 
technological designs and features that influence the 
payment process. The following classification is based on [7] 
and [8]: 
 
carrier medium, 
 
payment method, 
 
technology, 
 
type of payment system, 
 
payment process, and 
 
storage of sensitive customer data. 
Mobile payment services are differentiated according to 
the carrier medium that is used. In this study, smart phones 
and Near Field Communication (NFC)-cards are considered 
as media types. The second criterion is payment method. 
Possible types are debit as well as credit cards, pre-paid 
mechanisms and direct debit processes. Debit card payment 
either initiates account debiting immediately after the 
transaction at the point of sale or a couple of days later. 
Credit card payment does not initiate immediate debiting of 
the account, but enables a loan without interest for the rest of 
the month. The amounts of several transactions are 
accumulated and account debiting takes place at the end of 
each month. Pre-paid payment requires money to be 
deposited on a card or smart phone in advance. The payment 
method is accepted at the point of sale as long as the account 
balance is positive. 
An important issue is the technology that is used to 
communicate with the payment terminal at the point of sale. 
Common technologies are NFC, 2D-codes and bar codes. 
Payment systems operate either in form of so called open-
loop systems or closed-loop systems. In an open-loop system 
a third party is involved that handles transactions on behalf 
of several banks. This party can be independent or can be the 
result of the collaboration of several banks. Closed-loop 
systems involve one single bank that processes the 
transactions whereas open-loop systems involve several 
banks in the transaction process. Payment processes are 
either offline or online. Online payment processes require 
input of a PIN by the user at the terminal. This is necessary 
for identification of the card holder. The card is checked 
online and the transaction will be completed only after 
successful verification. Offline payment, on the other hand, 
does not include verification of the available payment limit 
at the bank in charge of the account. There is no 
identification and card verification at the point of sale and 
communication takes place only between smart phone or 
card and the terminal. There exist five main types of 
sensitive customer data storage. The construction-wise 
inclusion of the secure element embedded in the smart phone 
is one technical option. A major disadvantage of this type is 
the connection of the secure element and its data to a 
particular phone that cannot be transferred to another device. 
Another option is usage of micro-SD cards that are equipped 
with a secure element. These can be put in the micro-SD slot 
of the smart phone and transferred in case of device changes. 
The secure element can also be stored on the SIM card. As 
these are bound to a certain mobile network operator this 
might hamper changes of the mobile network operator. The 
fourth option is storage of sensitive customer data on a card 
that is equipped with an NFC chip. The fifth option is a  
centralized, server-based solution that does not necessarily 
need to store sensitive customer data in the mobile payment 
system. 
 
B. Acceptance factors of mobile payment services 
Many acceptance research studies of mobile payment 
acceptance are based on technology acceptance model 
(TAM) [9], and thus, incorporate perceived usefulness (PU) 
and perceived ease of use (PEOU) as main factors 
influencing behavioral intention (BI) to use, e.g., [10], [11], 
[12], etc. A comparative study in different cultural settings 
[10] included technology readiness as a personality trait in 
the original TAM. Results of this study indicate a significant 
positive effect of technology readiness on PEOU and PU as 
well as BI in most cultural settings. Individual mobility as a 
personal requirement regarding technology characteristics 
and perceived security resulted in positive effects on BI or 
attitude 
towards 
mobile 
payment 
in 
[5]. 
Personal 
innovativeness is another personality factor that has been 
tested with significant positive effects within the TAM 
framework [12]. This study also included technology 
characteristics such as convenience and reachability that 
showed positive effects on either PEOU or PU.  
Security is one of the most often tested technology 
characteristics. In most cases, it is operationalized as a 
perception of security [5]. It has also been empirically tested 
in the particular setting of mobile payment acceptance in 
tourism [13]. In some studies, security issues are regarded as 
aspects of perceived risk and operationalized within this 
construct [11] and [14].  
Trust is a construct that obtained particular interest within 
mobile payment acceptance research. Trust has been tested 
as an antecedent of PEOU and PU [4] and it has been found 
that it is affected by characteristics of the mobile technology 
itself and characteristics of the service provider, such as 
184
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reputation. An examination of trust within the valence 
framework indicated highly dynamic effects of trust in 
internet payment and initial trust in mobile payment on 
negative valences (perceived cost and risk) and positive 
valence (relative advantage) that is affecting BI [3]. 
Other studies are based on unified theory of acceptance 
and use of technology (UTAUT) [15] and include social 
influence and other constructs in addition to PU and PEOU 
to explain BI. In [16], UTAUT was extended by the mobile 
payment specific factors trust and perceived security. Both 
factors resulted in significant effects on intention to use 
mobile wallets in the research model.  
Contextual issues have been included in various studies 
in different forms. We apply the multidisciplinary context 
model from [17] in order to classify these constructs and 
variables in a systematic way.  
 
Social context refers to people around the subject, 
their relationships to the subject, and interactions 
with the subject. Social context includes, for 
example, subjective norm [5], reference group 
evaluation [14], friends’ evaluation [14], etc. 
 
Task context considers the particular objective of the 
present usage situation. It is interpreted [18] as a 
breadth of mobile payment use situations [14] or 
circumstances in use situations. 
 
Physical context includes all objects that are 
surrounding the subject and their current status and 
direction. Examples for the inclusion are the 
construct individual mobility [5] and compatibility 
[19], [3]. 
 
Temporal context is what gives the current usage 
situation a meaning like, e.g., past mobile payment 
use [14]. 
 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF EVALUATION FRAMEWORK 
In this section, the evaluation framework will be 
described. First, an overview to the Evaluation Process 
(Section A) will be provided, followed by the selection of 
acceptance factors in Section B. These factors will be 
operationalized in Section C. 
 
A. Evaluation process 
The evaluation is illustrated in Figure 1 (Sequence 
Diagram Evaluation Process). It shows that the process was 
based on the identification of relevant acceptance factors 
through literature review. These factors were operationalized 
and applied to all selected MPS by the means of usage tests 
and expert interviews. MPS were selected based on a 
thorough desk research, in which all information and data 
available were collected. Further and deeper information was 
gathered through usage tests and expert interviews. As a 
result, for each MPS and each of the relevant acceptance 
factors, a classification was suggested, whether the potential 
of acceptance of the MPS at hand is to be considered high, 
medium, or low. The evaluation process was carried out 
from February to August 2013.  
 
 
This classification was based on a discussion process 
within the project team and double-checked by external MPS 
experts. Usability tests were not part of the analysis, as it can 
be assumed that this aspect will be covered in time before 
market launch of the MPS.  
 
Figure 1.  Sequence Diagram Evaluation Process 
 
B. Selecting acceptance factors 
Acceptance factors for the evaluation framework are 
derived from the literature review. PEOU and PU are the 
most widely used constructs to explain acceptance of mobile 
payment. Their concepts are provided in Table I. 
 
TABLE I.  
PERCEIVED EASE OF USE / PERCEIVED USEFULNESS 
Acceptance 
Factor 
Construct 
Definition 
Perceived 
Ease of 
Use 
PEOU [11], 
[13], 
[12], 
[10], [16] 
The original definition from [9] “the extent 
to which using a new system is expected to 
be free of efforts” 
PEOU [5] 
“Important aspects related to mobile 
payment services ease of use include, for 
example, clear symbols and function keys, 
few and simple payment process steps, 
graphic display, and help functions […]” 
Perceived 
Usefulnes 
PU 
[11], 
[13], 
[12], 
[10], [16] 
The original definition from [9] “the degree 
to which a prospective adopter believes that 
by using a particular system would improve 
his or her job performance” 
Attitude [14] 
“This construct can be taken to reflect an 
individual’s attitude towards a MPS, 
ranging from a very positive to a very 
negative assessment of the system’s utility.” 
PU [5] 
“[…] users are only willing to accept 
innovations if those innovations provide a 
unique advantage compared to existing 
solutions […]” 
Convenience 
[12] 
“Convenience is nothing but a combination 
of time and place utilities, which are clearly 
principal characteristics of m-payment.” 
 
Trust, perceived risks and (perceived) security were also 
included in many studies. Table II lists the various tested 
concepts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
185
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II.  
SECURITY-RELATED FACTORS 
Construct 
Definition 
Perceived risk 
[3] 
“[…] extent to which prospective users expect mobile 
payment services to be uncertain or risky.” 
Initial mobile 
payment trust 
[3] 
“Trust is a subjective belief that a party will fulfill his or 
her obligations according to the expectations of the 
trusting party.” 
Perceived risk 
[11] 
“[…] the expectation of losses related to purchase […]” 
Perceived 
security [13] 
“[…] a threat which creates circumstance, condition or 
event with the potential to cause economic hardship 
[…]” 
MPS risk [14] 
“The MPS risk construct refers to the possible harmful 
consequences an individual expects from MPS use […]” 
Consumer 
trust [4] 
“[…] in the context of m-payments, the two dimensions 
of consumer trust are trust in mobile service provider 
and trust in technology facilitated by mobile service 
provider characteristics and mobile technology 
characteristics respectively.” 
Perceived 
environmental 
risk [4] 
“[…] is the risk associated with the underlying 
technological infrastructure […]” 
Perceived 
structural 
assurance [4] 
“[…] the consumer’s perception about the institutional 
environment […] 
Perceived 
security [5] 
“In the context of electronic services, security risk, 
conceptualized as the likelihood of privacy invasion, has 
been found to be a particularly critical concern […]” 
Perceived 
security [16] 
“[…] the degree to which a customer believes that using 
a particular mobile payment procedure will be secure.” 
Trust [16] 
“[…] the belief that vendors will perform some activity 
in accordance with customers’ expectations.” 
 
External factors, such as necessary hardware or software 
adaptations, are included in the analysis due to their 
influence on provider decisions whereas other factors, such 
as availability and provider characteristics, are excluded 
from this analysis as these are highly influenced by time and 
location of assessment, e.g., Google wallet is currently not 
available in Austria but might be in future. Personal 
character traits and social influence are also excluded for this 
analysis as they are strictly individual but will be included in 
a future field study. The same is true for the different 
concepts of value, which will be in the focus of the field 
study. 
 
C. Operationalization of acceptance factors 
In a next step, the four major constructs were 
operationalized in order to obtain measures for mobile 
payment service usage tests and issues for the expert 
interviews. These methods were necessary, as detailed desk 
research on the technical features and functionalities was 
only partly able to cover the complexity of the topic at hand 
and usage tests were only possible for existing MPS. Details 
and functionalities regarding conceptualized MPS were 
obtained from interviews. 
The process of operationalization focused on mobile 
payment procedures and features of different services. 
Ease of use is analyzed considering the steps a user needs 
to take before using the mobile payment service and the 
process of each transaction. Moreover, some additional 
processes are considered such as PIN changes and payment 
history or analysis features. 
Usefulness is analyzed with regard to transaction speed, 
i.e., average time that is required per transaction, considering 
quicker transactions as more useful. Also, additional 
functionalities are examined, such as integration of loyalty 
cards or shop finder.  
Security is analyzed considering storage of sensitive 
customer data and risks that occur in operation. 
External factors that affect the ecosystem are considered 
in terms of required adaptations at the bank and point of sale 
in order to enable the MPS to operate. 
 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF MOBILE PAYMENT SYSTEMS 
Ten different existing mobile payment services and 
feasible mobile payment concepts were included in the 
analysis. They cover different combinations of technical 
implementations and designs. As a limitation, it has to be 
stated that the selection of MPS is based on desk research, 
experimenting with existing solutions, and the project team’s 
understanding of the most possible combinations of 
technology and designs, no study or literature exists in this 
regard to suggest a different mode of selection. The 
limitations are acceptable as this is only the first part of the 
analysis that will be followed by an extensive field study in 
the course of which actual users will test MPS and their 
acceptance will be analyzed: 
1. NFC debit card in an open-loop system enabling online 
and offline payments (e.g., PSA Payment Services 
Austria GmbH with all Austrian banks) 
2. NFC pre-paid card in a closed-loop system enabling 
offline payments (e.g., Quick by PayLife) 
3. NFC credit card in an open-loop system enabling online 
and offline payments (e.g., Mastercard PayPass and 
Visa PayWave) 
4. Debit/credit application for iPhones with additional 
NFC hardware in an open-loop system enabling online 
and offline payments (e.g., CardMobile) – exclusive 
iOS solution 
5. Barcode debit application for smart phones in an open-
loop system enabling online payments (e.g., Secure 
Payment Technologies GmbH - pilot test) 
6. Account-based 2D-code application for smart phone in 
an open-loop system enabling online and offline 
payments (e.g., CellumPay) 
7. NFC debit/credit wallet application for smart phone in 
an open-loop system enabling online payments (e.g., 
Google Wallet) 
8. NFC credit wallet application for smart phone in an 
open-loop system enabling online payments (e.g., 
myWallet by Deutsche Telekom) 
9. 2D-code debit/credit application for smart phone in a 
closed-loop system enabling online payments (e.g., 
Starbucks and Square) 
10. NFC debit application for smart phone in an open-loop 
system enabling online and offline payments (concept 
only) 
 
186
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table III provides an overview on relevant factors for 
assessing ease of use, taking into account aspects before 
usage, the process of transaction and additional aspects.  
With regard to the required effort of users before usage 
and during each transaction, card-based MPS are most easy 
to use. Wallet applications are also easy to use and in most 
cases offer additional functionalities like in-application PIN 
changes that increase ease of use. Barcode-based MPS are 
least easy to use as they require additional activities in the 
course of each transaction process. 
TABLE III.  
ANALYSIS OF EASE OF USE 
MPS 
before usage 
transactions 
other aspects 
1 
Existing card is 
replaced by 
NFC enabled 
card; no 
registration 
required 
Amount appears on terminal 
display; card is put close to 
display; visual or audio signal; 
NFC chip information is read 
by terminal; card is removed; 
successful transaction indicated 
by visual or audio signal; 
random PIN requests 
PIN is changed 
at the bank; no 
history or 
analysis 
available 
2 
Existing card is 
replaced by 
NFC enabled 
card; no 
registration 
required; top up 
money 
Amount appears on terminal 
display; card is put close to 
display; visual or audio signal; 
NFC chip information is read 
by terminal; card is removed; 
successful transaction indicated 
by visual or audio signal; 
amount is debited immediately 
from prepaid account 
No PIN; 
application for 
smart phone that 
reads NFC chip 
and provides 
transaction 
history and 
account balance 
3 
Existing card is 
replaced by 
NFC enabled 
card; no 
registration 
required; one 
contact 
payment 
required 
Amount appears on terminal 
display; card is put close to 
display; visual or audio signal; 
NFC chip information is read 
by terminal; card is removed; 
successful transaction indicated 
by visual or audio signal; 
random PIN requests 
No history or 
analysis 
available 
4 
Download iOS 
5.0 or higher 
and 
application; 
additional 
hardware for 
iPhone; 
registration of 
card; top up 
money 
Application is launched; smart 
phone is put close to display; 
visual or audio signal; amount 
is displayed; amounts from 20 
Euro require individual 
passcode; transaction is 
confirmed 
PIN can be 
changed via 
application; 
transaction 
history for 30 
days and 
account balance, 
for iOS only 
5 
Online banking 
activation; 
application 
download; 
application and 
account 
activation via 
transaction 
number and 
activation 
number;  
Application is launched; PIN 
authorization; payment code is 
provided; barcode on smart 
phone display is scanned at the 
terminal; transaction is verified 
online 
PIN can be 
changed 
anytime 
6 
Application 
download; 
registration of 
application via 
text message; 
creation of 
mobile PIN; 
Phone number and payment ID 
are provided to cashier; cashier 
selects payment method; 
customer receives confirmation 
request; card is selected; PIN is 
entered; confirmation is sent as 
push notification; cashier 
PIN can be 
changed via 
application; 
transaction 
history 
available; 
MPS 
before usage 
transactions 
other aspects 
registr. credit 
card; activation 
of credit card 
receives confirmation 
7 
Application 
download; 
account 
registration; 
activation of 
credit card; test 
transaction 
Application is launched; smart 
phone is put close to display; 
payment information is 
transferred automatically; 
transaction is confirmed by 
customer 
PIN can be 
changed via 
application; 
transaction 
history and 
payment 
analysis via 
Google account 
8 
Application 
download; 
replace existing 
SIM card by 
myWallet NFC 
SIM card; 
registration 
Application is launched; login 
information is entered; 
customer selects card; smart 
phone is put close to display; 
transaction is initiated; amounts 
from 25 Euro require PIN 
PIN can be 
changed 
anytime; 
transaction 
history available 
9 
Application 
download; card 
registration 
Pay by square: Application is 
launched; card is selected and 
QR code appears; cashier scans 
QR code; invoice is sent via 
email 
Pay by face: application is 
launched; name and photo are 
assigned using GPS 
information; cashier confirms 
matching face and photo 
PIN can be 
changed via 
application; 
transaction 
history and 
analysis 
available 
10 
no details 
available 
no details available 
no details 
available 
 
Usefulness (see Table IV) ought to be highest for wallet 
solutions as they include additional functionalities. The same 
is true for code-based MPS, but there is no information 
available regarding transaction speed of these services. Card-
based MPS are considered to be very fast considering 
transaction speed, and thus, increase user perceptions of 
usefulness but do not enable any additional functionalities. 
TABLE IV.  
ANALYSIS OF USEFULNESS 
MPS 
transaction speed 
additional functionalities 
1 
offline payment (up to 25 Euros) 
approximately 350 milliseconds; 
online payment takes longer as it 
requires a PIN 
none 
2 
200 – 300 milliseconds at POS 
terminal; 500 milliseconds at ATM 
none 
3 
approximately 1 second without 
PIN;  
none 
4 
online payment approximately 1 
second; offline payment less than 1 
second 
none 
5 
no details available 
none 
6 
online approximately 4 to 7 
seconds 
loyalty card inclusion; 
sweepstakes; prepaid card 
handling; mobile ticketing; 
mobile commerce inclusion 
7 
depends on payment situation 
personalization features; 
Google offers inclusion 
8 
no details available 
individual daily transaction 
limits; loyalty card inclusion 
9 
no details available 
shop finder; invoice via email 
10 
no details available 
no details available 
187
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Security issues, which are analyzed in Table V, are rather 
balanced among MPS except for stored value technologies. 
These might cause actual loss of money for the customer. 
Storage of sensitive customer data can influence ease of use 
as mobile phone and mobile network operator respectively 
are not easy to change in case of embedded secure elements 
or SIM-based secure elements. Transaction limits increase 
security, but may also harm ease of use and, in some cases, 
even usefulness, e.g., when transactions are made 
impossible. A similar effect is caused by PIN requirements. 
They increase security of the MPS but decrease ease of use 
and transaction speed. 
TABLE V.  
ANALYSIS OF SECURITY 
MPS 
storage of sensitive data 
countermeasures against risks in 
operation 
1 
on NFC chip on the card 
random PIN requests (after five 
transactions the latest) for low value 
transactions; PIN required for 
transactions from € 25s 
2 
on NFC chip on the card 
stored value technology is a risk 
considering theft as money is stored on 
the card with no further authorization 
required 
3 
on NFC chip on the card 
random PIN requests (after four 
transactions the latest) for low value 
transactions; PIN or signature required 
for transactions from 25 Euros 
4 
secure element on 
MicroSD 
only service provider can access secure 
element; additional app login possible; 
stored value is limited to € 50  
5 
none 
barcodes are valid only once and only 
for 4 minutes; limit of 10 transactions 
per day; limit of € 100 per day; limit of 
4 payments per hour 
6 
data is split between smart 
phone and remote server 
mobile PIN for each transaction; 
remote deactivation of application 
available 
7 
embedded secure element 
and Google Cloud 
remote deactivation available; 
transaction limit of $1.000 per day for 
one device and $10.000 for more than 
one device 
8 
SIM-based secure element 
(or NFC sticker) 
data encryption on NFC-SIM; card and 
smart phone can be locked; individual 
daily limits 
9 
not applicable 
online deactivation of application 
available; pay by face: face 
authentication 
10 
SIM-based secure element 
certificates to avoid fraud 
 
Table VI provides an overview of the relevant external 
factors for MPS analysis. Considering the point of sale, most 
MPS require adaptations with regard to terminals and 
software. Some are based on cash desk software adaptations 
as well. The most intrusive MPS design (number 6) even 
requires a connection between the point of sale and the 
remote server of the MPS provider. Effects on participating 
banks are minor to those on participating retailers. Those that 
require adaptations of the bank-wise core system are less 
likely to succeed unless initiated by the bank. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI.  
ANALYSIS OF EXTERNAL FACTORS 
MPS 
bank 
point of sale 
1 
adaptations in 
backend system 
required 
NFC terminals and software required; no 
changes with regard to business processes and 
interchange fee model 
2 
none 
NFC terminals and software required; no 
changes with regard to business processes and 
interchange fee model 
3 
none 
NFC terminals required; no changes with 
regard to software, business processes and 
interchange fee model 
4 
none 
NFC terminals required; particular module for 
low value transactions required; no changes 
with regard to business processes and 
interchange fee model;  
5 
adaptation of core 
system required 
particular barcode scanner required (smart 
phone display scan enabled); cash desk 
software required; no interchange fee 
6 
none 
connection of point of sale system to backend 
system and remote server; QR code printer or 
display required; no interchange fee 
7 
none 
NFC terminals required 
8 
none 
NFC terminals required; no changes with 
regard to business processes and interchange 
fee model; 
9 
none 
QR code reader required; display required; 
adaptation of network, terminal and software 
infrastructure; acceleration of business 
processes (order, payment); no interchange fee 
10 
mobile issuing 
infrastructure 
including mobile 
network operators 
and banks required  
NFC terminals required; no changes with 
regard to business processes and interchange 
fee model 
 
V. 
VALUE IN THE CONTEXT OF MOBILE PAYMENT 
SYSTEMS 
 
In this section, the concepts of mobile value core and 
Expectation Confirmation Theory will be described in order 
to introduce the topic of value to the study at hand (Section 
A). In Section B, common concepts of “value” in m-payment 
and m-commerce research will be presented and an overview 
will be provided. 
 
A. Mobile value core and “Expectation-Confirmation-
Theory” 
Value in terms of realized value is the central factor 
within the mobile value core concept [6]. The mobile value 
core (MVC) defines the realized value as the intersection 
between 
provider 
expectations/offer 
and 
user 
expectations/value. The Expectation Confirmation Theory 
(ECT) [20] builds the theoretical foundation, i.e., both, 
provider and user, have expectations regarding the value of a 
mobile product or service prior to its usage, which are either 
confirmed or disconfirmed.  
188
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ECT has already been successfully used to explain 
continued technology usage [21]. According to ECT 
confirmation results in satisfaction, and thus, continued 
usage. These relationships are being utilized to elaborate a 
provider-oriented focus as well as a user-oriented focus 
within the three layer model of the MVC concept. The three 
layers refer to different modes of user involvement that cause 
different expectations and also different experiences with the 
technological artifact, e.g., the third layer requires co-
creation of the artifact in the actual later usage context to 
enable contextual expectations and will thus result in 
optimized expectation-experience fit. The provider-oriented 
focus is on market information (target groups, user segments, 
and 
technology 
penetration 
ratios), 
the 
artifact 
(functionalities and design), business model aspects (value 
proposition and pricing scheme) and additionalities (e.g., 
customer support and brand image). On the other hand, the 
user-oriented focus is on motivation (needs, current tasks, 
and 
alternative 
technologies), 
the 
artifact 
(expected 
functionalities and design perceptions), business model 
aspects (value for money perceptions) and additionalities 
(e.g., service quality, information quality, brand image).  
MVC further emphasizes that the co-creation of mobile 
products and services will increase the realized value of 
these services and products. Furthermore, co-creation in real-
life settings will moreover optimize the realized value. The 
following section puts emphasis on both, the analysis of the 
provider-oriented focus, and the expectations of users and 
their acceptance of MPS. 
 
B. Value in m-payment & m-commerce research 
Value is a somewhat neglected factor in empirical 
research on m-payment and m-commerce acceptance, 
although it is not only important in the context of user 
acceptance, but also in the bigger context of the eco-system. 
Sanayei and Ansari [22] included cost for the bank server 
and security as technology quality in an analytic hierarchy 
process. Both factors turned out to be of great importance 
within the context of technological mobile payment 
decisions [22]. 
The concept of value as means for user acceptance 
research will be analyzed based on a literature review as an 
essential perception in connection to the usage of an m-
payment or m-commerce technology. This means that 
concepts of value that are not directly related to the use of a 
technology (like for example in [23] – value as the “value of 
the customer for the organization”) are not part of the review 
at hand, whereas concepts that consider the value of the use 
of a technology for a company’s business model would be 
included. 
With regards to m-payment research, the concept of 
"value" so far has been included in a few studies, although its 
definition is varying on a rather broad spectrum, ranging 
from "value" as a clearly pre-defined construct within a 
research model, and "value" as an equivalent of specific 
factors, like for example in [5], where Schierz et al. 
developed a conceptual model for mobile payment, based on 
TAM. The model was tested in an online-survey with 
persons who use apps on their smartphones, and provided 
significant results regarding the influence of the independent 
constructs on attitude towards using - "the degree to which 
using a technology is positively or negatively valued by an 
individual." [5]. 
Finance-related risks, such as perceived costs, did not 
show significant effects on BI in an empirical study on 
acceptance of a card-based payment service [11]. A study on 
consumers’ willingness to pay for mobile payment services 
indicated that consumers are either not willing to pay any fee 
for using mobile payment, or the fee varies between different 
purchased goods [18].  
Amoroso et al. [24] on the other hand use "perceived 
value" as a behavioral construct as part of their mobile-wallet 
research model (based on UTAUT) that was developed 
based on a Japanese m-payment solution. In their scientific 
work, perceived value "is defined as the trade-off between 
what customers receive, such as quality, benefits, and 
utilities, and what they sacrifice, such as price, opportunity 
cost, transaction cost, time, and efforts" [24]. 
Utilitarian definitions can also be found in m-commerce 
research, e.g., in [25]: Ko et al. also use the concept of 
“perceived value” in their research model that is based on 
TAM and was tested in an online-survey in Korea with users 
of mobile fashion shopping services. In this model, 
"perceived value" is the dependent variable, comparable to 
[24], "attitude towards using", both constructs are being 
defined similarly as "the trade-off between costs and 
benefits" [25].  
Lu et al. [26] explain perceived value similarly as "the 
seller’s overall assessment of an auction website service 
utility based on perceptions of what is received (benefits) 
compared to what is given (costs)" [26]. In their study, a 
similar model, compared to [25] is used, based on TAM. The 
results of the survey of online auction sellers in Taiwan, 
which was conducted using a web-based questionnaire, show 
a significant influence of perceived network externalities on 
perceived costs and perceived benefits of the online auction 
service, both influencing the perceived value significantly, 
which furthermore is influencing the behavioral intention to 
use the auction service. 
Kim et al. [27] conducted a similar study with users of 
mobile internet at a Singapore university, using a similar 
model (based on TAM), defining perceived value "as a 
consumer's overall perception of M-Internet based on the 
considerations of its benefits and sacrifices needed to acquire 
and/or use it" [27]. 
Other m-commerce studies also include the concept of 
value, but as independent variable, like for example in [28]. 
"Contextual perceived value" (CPV) is used as an 
independent construct within a TAM-based research model 
that is aiming to identify the effects of the contextual 
perceived value of marketing offers on the behavioral 
intention to use m-commerce. The survey was conducted 
with users and non-users of m-commerce, by carrying out 
personal on-site interviews in offices and a university in 
Seoul, and it showed a significant influence of CPV on the 
behavioral intention to use m-commerce. CPV is defined as 
"MC-specific additional benefits to understand consumer 
189
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

acceptance of mobile commerce" [28]. The influence of CPV 
of marketing offers was higher for non-users of m-
commerce. 
Table VII below provides an overview of existing value 
concepts in mobile payment and mobile commerce 
acceptance literature from both foci of the MVC. The table 
includes information on the general perspective of value 
(provider or user focus) that is addressed in the study, but 
also on the actual value object (market information/ 
motivation, artifact, business model aspects, additionalities). 
Moreover, the different positions of value in the research 
model (dependent variable, independent variable, moderator 
variable, mediator variable) are considered. 
TABLE VII.  
RESULTS ANALYSIS 
reference 
general 
perspective 
value object 
position of value 
[5] 
user 
motivation 
moderating variable 
"attitude towards use" 
on intention to use 
[24] 
user 
motivation 
moderating variable on 
"attitude towards using" 
and "behavioral 
intention to use" 
[25] 
user 
motivation 
moderating variable 
between independent 
variables and intention 
to use/behavioral 
intention to 
use/adoption intention 
[26] 
user 
motivation, 
artifact, business 
model aspects 
moderating variable 
between perceived 
costs/benefits and 
intention to pay 
[28] 
user 
motivation, 
business model 
aspects, 
additionalities 
independent variable, 
influencing behavioral 
intention to use m-
commerce 
 
Based on Table VII, two observations are rather obvious. 
First of all, the dominant general perspective of the 
analyzed research is the perspective of the user ([5], [24], 
[26], [28]) and his/her perception of acceptance, based on a 
certain value that is associated with the technology at hand. 
Focusing on the user perspective means at the same time that 
adding “value” to a research model does not necessarily 
mean to include value for all actors of the ecosystem, but 
mainly for the user, which might lead to an important effect 
on the interpretation of study results from the providers’ or 
decision makers’ points of view. 
The second issue, which is closely related to the first one 
(general perspective: user), is the value object “motivation” 
([5], [24], [26], [28]) of the user to actually use the 
technology. This concept is mostly included into research 
models as a moderating factor between independent 
variables and the behavioral intention ([5], [24], [25], [26]). 
Empirical tests of “value” as a part of technology research 
models proof a very high explanatory power of this concept 
in 
order 
to 
understand 
technology 
acceptance 
of 
technological mobile payment and mobile commerce 
solutions ([5], [26], [28]). 
A general conclusion based on the literature review is the 
observation of a bias with regard to value involvement. Most 
studies and research models treat value as a simple concept 
in a uniform way. Even though there is diversity among 
definitions of value and questionnaire items used for model 
tests, the concepts themselves are rather similar with regard 
to perspective and object of value. 
 
VI. 
PRELIMINARY RESEARCH MODEL 
The research model (see Figure 2) is based on ECT [20] 
and drafted in alignment with MVC [6]. The detailed value 
concepts are derived from the analysis in the previous 
sections.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Preliminary research model based on ECT and MVC 
According to ECT the main relationships included in the 
research model are: 
 
Expected value influences experienced value. 
 
The difference between expected value and 
experienced value defines confirmation or 
disconfirmation. 
 
Confirmation results in satisfaction, whereas 
disconfirmation harms satisfaction. 
 
The higher the satisfaction, the more likely is 
actual usage. 
As the artifacts are (partly) co-created in a mobile Living 
Lab, there are some implications from MVC: 
 
Confirmed value should have positive effects on 
actual 
usage 
(in 
contrast 
to 
behavioral 
intention). 
 
Expectations and experiences of value should be 
close to equal regarding the parts that were co-
created with users. 
Further development of the model will be conducted 
based on the results of the presented research. Value will be 
deconstructed according to the findings from additional 
literature review and analysis. Preliminary result of the 
literature analysis indicates a preference of several different 
concepts of value, e.g., financial value, social value, and 
personal value instead of a single holistic value concept. The 
factors “expected value” and “experienced value” will be 
split in accordance with this differentiation. Thus, the final 
research model will consist of additional factors. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK ON FUTURE WORK 
(FIELD STUDY DESIGN) 
Table VIII presents the results of the analysis that 
indicate high potential of acceptance for NFC-based wallet 
MPS (numbers 7 and 8) and NFC card-based MPS (numbers 
Expected 
value 
Satisfaction 
Use 
Experienced 
value 
(Dis-) Con-
firmation 
190
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1, 2 and 10). Face verification obtained optimistic results in 
the analysis, but requires very intrusive external adaptations, 
e.g., additional hardware at cash desk to enable photo-face 
comparison by staff and additional mobile phone recognition 
equipment within stores, and, moreover, does not support 
open-loop payment systems. Whereas high ease of use and 
high usefulness are positive indicators of overall acceptance, 
the effects of security on ease of use and usefulness can be 
either positive or negative. 
 
TABLE VIII.  RESULTS ANALYSIS 
MPS 
ease of 
use 
usefulness 
security 
security 
 EOU 
security 
 U 
1 
high 
medium 
medium 
negative 
negative 
2 
high 
medium 
low 
positive 
positive 
3 
high 
medium 
medium 
negative 
negative 
4 
medium 
medium 
low 
none 
none 
5 
medium 
? 
medium 
negative 
negative 
6 
low 
medium 
high 
negative 
none 
7 
high 
high 
high 
none 
none 
8 
medium 
high 
medium 
negative 
none 
9 
Pay 
by 
face 
high 
high 
high 
positive 
none 
Pay 
by 
square 
medium 
high 
medium 
none 
none 
10 
? 
? 
medium 
negative 
none 
 
In the field study design, card-based solutions will be 
tested against wallet MPS according to the obtained analysis 
results, taking the complex eco-system of mobile payment 
solutions into consideration. Therefore, a central aim of the 
field study will be the identification of those factors that add 
specific value to mobile payment and how these factors 
could be implemented successfully. “Success” will not only 
be measured by the extent of technology acceptance, but also 
by the extent to which the solutions are suitable for different 
personalities, use situations, social constellations etc., hence, 
taking a variety of context factors into account. The research 
model will be tested by means of partial least squares 
analysis (PLS). In addition to testing the hypothesis of the 
value-based research model, the main research questions are:  
 What kind of differences with regard to acceptance can 
be identified between card-based solutions and MPS?  
 Are there acceptance differences between transaction 
types (debit vs. credit)?  
 Differences could be stated regarding relative benefits, 
perception of value, perceived complexity, security, 
trustworthiness, and consequences of PIN requirements 
and the like. 
 Which MPS is believed to be most successful (wisdom 
of crowds)? 
 How is the concept of “wallet” perceived and rated and 
what are customers’ associations and demands in this 
regard? 
 Are there any influences/changes on daily routines 
expected? What kind of influences/changes are there? 
Are they the same for all MPS? 
In order to tackle this huge variety of research questions 
and also taking the complex eco-system of MPS into 
account, the field study will consist of three parts, each 
applying different methods. In a field trial, 70 respondents 
will use two card-based solutions (debit, credit) and two 
mobile-phone-based MPS (debit, credit) over a period of two 
to three months complementing their common payment 
methods and provide feedback continually via standardized 
questionnaires, before, during, and after the survey period. In 
addition in situ feedback will be provided via mobile 
questionnaire after each purchase. In total, each participant 
will be using MPS between eight and ten times at least, using 
each solution at least once. 
After the trial, a small number of participants will be 
invited to take part in a co-creation session in order to further 
optimize the identified most promising MPS and also in 
order to explore possible consequences for their daily lives. 
Besides the users’ point-of-view, the experiences and 
perspectives of the major stakeholders in the MPS eco-
system providing the test-setting (financial institute, 
acquirers, issuers, and retailers) will be thoroughly analysed 
by means of expert interviews. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project is funded within COMET 
(Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies) program. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Pergler, A. Adelsberger, D. Glatz, R. Schamberger, 
"Acceptance of mobile payment service designs in complex 
ecosystems," Proceedings of The Eighth International 
Conference on Digital Society, March 23rd-27th 2014, 
Barcelona, Spain, pp. 135-142. 
[2] S. Shen, “Forecast: Mobile Payment, Worldwide, 2013 
Update,” 2013. 
[3] Y. Lu, S. Yang, P. Y. K. Chau, Y. Cao, “Dynamics between 
the trust transfer process and intention to use mobile payment 
services: a cross-environment perspective,“ Information & 
Management, vol. 48, 2011, pp. 393-403. 
[4] S. Chandra, S. C. Sristava, and Y.-L. Theng, “Evaluating the 
role of trust in consumer adoption of mobile payment systems: 
an empirical analysis,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 27, 2010, Article 29, pp. 561-588. 
[5] P. G. Schierz, O. Schilke, and B. W. Wirtz, “Understanding 
consumer acceptance of mobile payment services, an empirical 
analysis,“ Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 
vol. 9, 2010, pp. 209-216. 
[6] E. Pergler, A. Tarkus, “Reframing co-creation for mobile 
living labs: the mobile value core,” Proceedings of the 26th 
Bled eConference, June 9-13 2013; Bled, Slovenia, pp. 314-32. 
[7] C. Neger, “Types of cashles payment in Austria. Plastic 
money,” (=Varianten des bargeldlosen Zahlungsverkehrs in 
Österreich. Plastikgeld), 2010, VDM, Saarbrücken. 
191
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] M. Verdier, “Retail payment systems: what can we learn from 
two-sided markets?,” Communication & Strategies, vol. 61, 
2006, pp. 37-56.  
[9] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and 
user acceptance of information technology,“ MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 13, 1998, pp. 319-339. 
[10] N. Guhr, T. Loi, R. Wiegard, and M. H. Breitner, “Technology 
readiness in customers’ perception and acceptance of m(obile)-
payment: an empirical study in Finnland, Germany, the USA 
and Japan,” Proceedings of the 11th International Conference 
on Wirtschaftsinformatik, 27th February – 1st March 2013, 
Leipzig, Germany, pp. 119-133. 
[11] G. W.-H. Tan, K.-B. Ooi, S.-C. Chong, and T.S. Hew, “NFC 
mobile credit card: the next frontier of mobile payment?,” 
Telematics and Informatics, vol. 31, 2014, pp. 292-307. 
[12] C. Kim, M. Mirusmonov, and I. Lee, “An empirical 
examination of factors influencing the intention to use mobile 
payment,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 
310-322.  
[13] R. Peng, L. Xiong, and Z. Yang, “Exploring tourist adoption of 
tourism mobile payment: an empirical analysis,” Journal of 
Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 
7, 2012, pp. 21-33.  
[14] T. J. Gerpott and K. Kornmeier, “Determinants of customer 
acceptance of mobile payment systems,” International Journal 
of Electronic Finance, vol. 3, 2009, pp. 1-30. 
[15] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
“User acceptance of information technology: toward a unified 
view,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, 2003, pp. 425-478.  
[16] D.-H. Shin, “Towards an understanding of the consumer 
acceptance of mobile wallet,” Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol. 25, 2009, pp. 1343-1354. 
[17] N. A. Bradley and M. D. Dunlop, “Toward a multidisciplinary 
model of context to support context-aware computing,” 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 20, 2005, pp. 403-446. 
[18] D. Viehland and R. S. Y. Leong, „Consumer willingness to use 
and pay for mobile payment services,” International Journal of 
Prionciples and Applications of Information Science and 
Technology, vol. 3, 2010, pp. 35-46. 
[19] C. Li and M. Zhang, “Research on the factors affecting 
consumers’ willingness to the use of mobile payment,” in 
Advances in D. Zheng (Ed.): Computer Science and 
Engineering, ASIC 141, pp. 575-580. 
[20] R. L. Oliver, “A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and 
Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions,” JMR, Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol. 17, no. 3, 1980, pp. 460-469. 
[21] A. Bhattacherjee, G. Prekumar, “Understanding changes in 
belief and attitude toward information technology usage: A 
theoretical model and longitudinal test,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 
28, no. 2, 2004, pp. 229-254. 
[22] A. Sanayei and A. Ansari, “Selection of the appropriate mobile 
payment technology in mobile banking, “ International Journal 
of Information Science and Management, Special Issue 2, 
2010, pp. 13-26. 
[23] S. San Martín, B. López-Catalán, M.A. Ramón-Jerónimo, 
"Factors determining firms' perceived performance of mobile 
commerce,” Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 112, 
no. 6, 2012, pp. 946-963. 
[24] D. L. Amoroso and R. Magnier-Watanabe, “Building a 
research model for mobile wallet consumer adoption: the case 
of Mobile Suica in Japan,” Journal of Theoretical and Applied 
Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 7, 2012, pp. 94-110. 
[25] E. Ko, E.Y. Kim, E.K. Lee, “Modeling Consumer Adoption of 
Mobile Shopping for Fashion Products in Korea,” Psychology 
& Marketing, vol. 26, no. 7, 2009, pp. 669-687. 
[26] H.-P. Lu, K.-Y. Lin, “Factors influencing online auction 
sellers' intention to pay: An empirical study integrating 
network externalities with perceived value,” Journal of 
electronic commerce research, vol. 13, no. 3, 2012, pp. 238-
254  
[27] H.-W. Kim, H.C. Chan, S. Gupta, “Value-based Adoption of 
Mobile Internet: An empirical investigation,” Decision Support 
Systems, vol. 43, 2007, pp. 111-126. 
[28] T. Lee, J. Jun, “The role of contextual marketing offer in 
Mobile Commerce acceptance: comparison between Mobile 
Commerce 
users 
and 
nonusers,” 
Int. 
J. 
Mobile 
Communications, vol. 5, no. 3, 2007, pp. 339-356. 
 
 
192
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

