52
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 Evaluation and Behavioral Analysis of Place-Oriented Radio 
by the Measurement of Cross-Cultural Understandings 
 
Ayaka Ito 
Graduate School of Media and Governance 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Japan 
e-mail: ayk@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
Katsuhiko Ogawa 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Japan 
e-mail: ogw@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— The number of foreigners who visit Japan is 
increasing and thus it is important to build mutual 
understanding with people of different cultural backgrounds. 
In order to enhance foreign visitors’ further understanding of 
Japan, we propose a place-oriented Internet radio called 
Cross-Cultural Radio (CCR). Consequently, we proposed a 
new measurement, the Cross-Cultural Understanding Scale 
(CCUS), to validate the effectiveness of CCR, and conducted a 
set of evaluation experiments in Tokyo. Our experimental 
results illustrate that CCR can be effective in certain aspects of 
cross-cultural understanding. This paper aims to explore 
foreign visitors’ concrete process of understanding by 
analyzing the behaviors of participants during the experiment. 
Additionally, the type of place-oriented contents that are 
suitable for enhancing cultural awareness will be discussed. 
 
Keywords— place orientation; Internet radio; cross-cultural 
understanding; measurement; evaluation experiment. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the great diversity in the modern world and its 
continuous change, defining the term “culture” is an 
extremely difficult activity. However, many scholars have 
attempted to conceptualize their understanding of culture. 
Nonetheless, as we claimed in our previous work [1], 
several aspects of culture, such as goods, feelings, actions, 
and words can be very specific to a particular region. They 
are difficult to grasp from guidebooks or simply by 
browsing the Internet, because in many cases these contents 
are provided based on visible (and generally superficial) 
information. It is quite easy to acquire stereotypical ideas 
about Japan in front of the laptop but there will never be a 
better experience than direct interaction with local people. 
This is because they provide foreigners with real cultural 
ideas, and thus, having a channel to boost such 
communication is highly important.  
For instance, a keyword that seems distinctive to 
Japanese culture is “Kodawari,” which is difficult to 
translate literally into English, yet “to be particular about a 
manner” would be the closest. Its meaning is not just to be 
particular, but to have a strong belief, or an excessive target 
on the action. Many craftspeople in Japan have “Kodawari” 
regarding what they create or how they become involved in 
the industry, and having strong pride in what they do and 
never compromising their work is regarded as a virtue. 
Another example of a keyword is “Omotenashi,” which 
became slightly famous after Japan’s presentation to host 
the Olympics in 2020. “Omotenashi” means to treat 
everyone sincerely and warmheartedly, whether or not that 
person is a customer, a guest, a family member, or an 
acquaintance. The core of this concept is to express 
consideration and respect to others. This act would also 
require the person to understand the atmosphere, feel the 
mood and invisible energy, which is wrapped around the 
occasion or person. Ultimately, it does not mean 
entertaining the person or achieving any kind of self-
satisfaction, but to quickly perceive the person’s needs, 
desires, and overall mood, and entertain the person 
accordingly with a warm heart. 
Damasio [2] claimed, “culture is a regulator of human life 
and identity.” As people’s mobility has increased, so has the 
number of foreigners who visit Japan [3], and recognizing 
diversity to build cross-cultural understanding is becoming a 
matter of great interest in the country. We must be aware 
that all foreigners are unique individuals, and we should not 
generalize them by nationality, ethnic group, or religion. 
Foreigners are visiting Japan for various purposes, such as 
sightseeing, studying abroad, or working. Likewise, 
depending on the length of their stay in Japan or their 
cultural background, the problems they encounter vary 
greatly, and there will never be a solution that is applicable 
to everyone. In particular, these problems faced by foreign 
visitors are derived from not knowing the Japanese cultural 
keywords previously exemplified (and there are countless 
others besides “Kodawari” and “Omotenashi”), or occur 
when the meaning of keywords conflicts with their cultural 
beliefs in various communicative settings. To propose a way 
to solve their problems individually, thus creating new 
media to provide foreigners with opportunities to 
understand Japanese culture at a deeper level, is meaningful 
from a cross-cultural perspective. In other words, foreign 
visitors’ further understanding of Japanese culture will be 
achieved when they listen to local people’s stories in a 
particular place, or the opinions of other foreigners who 
have visited a given place. 

53
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Previous literature (Yoon [4] and Bramwell [5]) has 
demonstrated that the effect of motivation and satisfaction is 
prominent in the decision of tourists to re-visit places. 
Alegre [6] and Ekinci et al. [7] also pointed out the 
eagerness of tourists to visit based on the characteristics of a 
place. In terms of information systems, Masuda [8] and 
Takagi [9] proposed a recommender system for tourists, 
which provides customized tour information depending on 
users’ needs, including the use of smartphone applications. 
However, there is almost no research on using Internet radio 
specifically 
as 
a 
tool 
for 
building 
cross-cultural 
understanding in Japan.  
In this paper, we propose a place-oriented Internet radio 
called CCR, which helps foreigners to recognize Japan from 
a cross-cultural perspective by providing place-oriented 
content. In addition, we created some original criteria 
named CCUS and conducted an evaluation experiment in 
Tokyo to measure the actual effectiveness of the content and 
CCR itself. 
The paper is structured as follows: First, Section II 
describes the design phase of CCR, including its concept 
and system configuration. Secondly, a detailed explanation 
of CCUS measurement is offered in Section III, including 
background research. Section IV describes a complete set of 
evaluation experiments conducted in Tokyo, and Section V 
examines the result in a further behavioral analysis. Lastly, 
the conclusion and future works are mentioned in Section 
VI. 
II. 
DESIGN OF CROSS-CULTURAL RADIO 
A. Concept 
The above-mentioned previous research, particularly 
Masuda and Takagi’s recommender system for tourists, is 
designed for usage in a specific place. However, the 
information they provide to listeners only focuses on 
tourists’ preferences and does not include the cultural 
perspective of the host country, which promotes cross-
cultural understanding amongst international listeners.  
Regarding the type of information available, visual 
material, such as detailed information on smartphones, 
contributes to a certain extent to obtaining a general idea 
about a place. Nevertheless, aural information is far superior 
to visual information in terms of listener flexibility, by 
allowing listeners to stretch their imagination regarding 
what they have heard. Furthermore, aural information can 
provide direct interaction with the place, including local 
people’s stories or comments from other tourists. This may 
also be a trigger to increase international listeners’ 
understanding of Japanese culture. 
For these reasons, this paper proposes a place-oriented 
Internet radio called CCR as a new sound-focused media, by 
providing international listeners with several types of 
content. The detailed concept is shown in Figure 1.  
CCR works in three steps. The first step consists in 
content design for different listeners. The second step is the 
listening process, which various listeners engage in, such as 
international tourists, study-abroad students, and employees 
of multinational corporations who are not yet familiar with 
Japanese culture. The third step is obtaining feedback from 
listeners, plus revision of the content. To maximize the 
influence of content, the preferred target of CCR is 
international visitors who are staying in Japan for a 
relatively long period of time, from a few months to years, 
rather than just for a couple of days, because, in general, 
understanding a certain culture takes time and the 
experience in a host country is enriched by daily life 
communicative settings. 
 
Figure 1.  Concept of Cross-Cultural Radio “CCR”  
 
 
(This paper only deals with Guidebook and Locals content) 
Three types of content are available for international 
visitors: the Guidebook (audio clips from famous 
guidebooks such as Lonely Planet), the Locals (stories or 
tips from local people), and Visitors (feedback from 
listeners to be shared with other listeners). As a first step of 
the cycle, this paper deals explicitly with the content of the 
Guidebook and the Locals.  
B. System 
Previous research [10]-[13] has shown that an acceptable 
duration of content should be approximately 1 to 1 and a half 
minutes. Several companies produce audio guide players, 
supporting the delivery of such content as described above. 
 
1) Selecting the Location 
As CCR is designed for international visitors to Japan, the 
selection of a place where content is mapped is also 
important. In this research, Asakusa, one of the most famous 
and popular tourist spots in Tokyo, was selected because it 
has a rich cultural heritage, including Japanese traditional 
temples and shrines, as well as dining venues and souvenir 
shops that attract many international tourists. In addition, 
Asakusa is located at the heart of Tokyo and has great 
accessibility, which enables us to conduct fieldwork 
effortlessly. 

54
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) “Guidebook” Content 
For 
the 
guidebook 
content, 
several 
tips 
about 
accommodation, introduction to restaurants, and explanation 
of famous architecture were selected from Lonely Planet 
Tokyo [14] and recorded using voice synthesis software 
(Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of Guidebook content 
3)  “Locals” Content 
For the locals content, several interviews with locals 
were conducted in Japanese and stories related to their daily 
lives in Asakusa were selected. Each story was translated 
into English and supplementary explanation of cultural 
activities was added if necessary (Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of Locals content 
4) Mapping content into CCR 
 
Figure 4.  CCR can be accessed via a QR code 
The audio clips are stored on the website, and linked to 
icons using JavaScript code. When the user clicks on an icon, 
the associated audio clip is played. The website can be 
accessed by URL [15] or by using the QR code shown in 
Figure 4. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT CCUS 
To validate the credibility of CCR, an evaluation process 
with appropriate criteria is essential. Since CCR has a 
unique concept, inventing a new and suitable measurement 
tool is more realistic than using conventional criteria 
without localization. Related literature about measurement 
design and cross-cultural adjustment has been demonstrated 
by Cui & Awa [16], and Yellen [17]. Ten dimensions of 
cross-cultural understanding have been determined, which 
are: 
A. Mobility 
According to Benson [18], an individual’s ability to find 
his/her way around in a foreign place is one of the most 
important dimensions of cross-cultural understanding. 
Knowing the local geography and usage of public 
transportation systems are two potential items for this 
dimension. It also includes the ability to ask for directions 
when one is uncertain, as well as the usage of appropriate 
tools, such as map applications on a smartphone. 
B. Food/Diet 
Although food allergies are not addressed here, this 
dimension involves being open-minded about trying new 
foods. Accepting foreign food and culinary manners cannot 
be omitted when understanding a certain culture, and for 
many people eating food is a major aspect of cultural 
exchange [19]. 
C. Flexibility 
As Hofstede defined “uncertainty avoidance” in his 
prominent work [20], people from any cultural background 
may face culture shock to a certain extent, and may attempt 
to escape from that anxiety. Being flexible, patient, and 
tolerant of such uncertain activity or unexpected cultural 
norms is one dimension. 
D. Knowledge 
Whether one accepts it or not, acknowledgment of the 
host culture is an essential aspect of cross-cultural 
understanding. In terms of socially appropriate behaviors, 
host country nationals have certain expectations as to how 
foreigners in their country should behave, and this includes 
avoiding offensive actions. Webb et al.’s unobtrusive 
measure [21] could be useful in this regard. 
E. Language Skills 
This dimension appears consistently in the literature as a 
core criterion of mutual understanding [22]-[24]. However, 
we should be aware that when cultural adaptation or 
acculturation occurs, an adapted individual will learn the 
 “Asakusa Engei-hall” 
Have you ever seen standup comedy in your country? If 
you want to experience Japanese traditional comedy 
performance, here is the place. This is called Asakusa 
Engei-hall, and provides humorous speech by classic 
rakugo speakers. The audience also enjoys stage arts 
unique to the theater, including the paper cutout and 
funny music played using a carpenter’s tool. 
 
 “Future of Asakusa” 
Before World War 2, Asakusa was one of the most 
energetic, cutting edge cities in Japan. But unfortunately 
nowadays it has been overtaken by other big cities like 
Roppongi or Shinjuku. She feels that to revitalize 
Asakusa as a vivid city, collaboration with the local 
community is important, not just bringing lots of tourists 
from outside. Using social networking services can be 
one way; so the young generation helps older shop 
owners to introduce these up-to-date technologies into 
traditional Japanese shops. 
 

55
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
language, but an individual who learns the language may or 
may not adapt. 
F. Interaction 
The nature and frequency of interactions with host 
country individuals is an indication of an individual’s level 
of cross-cultural understanding [25]. This involves one’s 
ability to initiate interaction, as well as the extent of one’s 
eagerness to communicate with Japanese people, regardless 
of language ability. 
G. Awareness of Cultural differnce 
A question such as “to what extent are you aware that 
Japanese culture/society is different from yours?” is asked 
in this dimension. Recognition of cultural difference from 
one’s own culture is a starting point to build mutual 
understanding in any circumstances [26]. 
H. Nonverbal Communication 
In addition to language, there are a variety of ways to 
communicate nonverbally. Understanding visible gestures 
and appreciating personal space are some of them [27]. Also, 
having a reasonable repertoire of “communicative currency” 
may be useful as a criterion dimension. 
I. Respect 
Being interested in the host country citizens and casual 
friendliness towards them should be part of cross-cultural 
understanding [28]. For instance, willingness to participate 
in activities distinctive to the host country will increase 
fundamental respect for others and might lead to an 
appreciation of one’s current state. 
J. Relationship 
The inclination to establish and maintain relationships 
regardless of skills is one crucial dimension. Although this 
can be influenced by an individual’s personal character, 
such as extroversion or introversion, we should be aware 
that every individual has his/her own pace for building 
relationships [29]. For instance, not all introverts are weaker 
at relationship building than extroverts; they often establish 
deeper and more stable relationships with others. 
 
After the relevant literature was reviewed and the 
dimensions mentioned above were rationalized, these new 
criteria were named CCUS. In the evaluation phase, we 
measured users’ scores on each dimension from 1 to 10 
(Figure 5), using the self-evaluation method.  
Figure 5.  Scoring system of CCUS 
This evaluation was conducted twice, before and after 
any related experiments such as fieldwork or interviews. 
Afterwards, the two score results were compared and 
discussed. 
IV. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 
A. Method 
Fieldwork was conducted with 12 international visitors as 
CCR listeners, using the same scheme to explore how the 
cycle of CCR works as an evaluation experiment. In order to 
observe various cultural exchanges, we tried to select 
tourists from diverse cultural backgrounds, as well as their 
length of stay in Japan. Fieldwork details and participants’ 
attributes are shown below (Table 1).  
TABLE I.  
FIELDWORK DETAILS AND PARTICIPANTS’ ATTRIBUTES 
Nationality / 
Code (xx) 
Participants’ Attributes 
Age 
Sex 
Date / Time 
China 
(CH1) 
28 
F 
October 31st, 2015 / 11:00 – 13:00 
Malaysia 
(ML) 
23 
F 
October 31st, 2015 / 14:00 – 16:00 
Taiwan 
(TW) 
20 
F 
November 1st, 2015 / 11:00 – 13:00 
Japan/Korea 
(JP) 
22 
F 
November 1st, 2015 / 14:00 – 16:00 
England 
(UK) 
22 
M 
November 1st, 2015 / 14:00 – 16:00 
Korea 
(KR) 
18 
F 
November 7th, 2015 / 11:15 – 13:00 
India 
(IN) 
19 
M 
November 7th, 2015 / 15:00 – 16:30 
Uzbekistan 
(UZ) 
22 
M 
November 16th, 2015 / 11:00 – 13:00 
China 
(CH2) 
24 
F 
November 18th, 2015 / 10:00 – 12:00 
China 
(CH3) 
25 
F 
November 18th, 2015 / 10:00 – 12:00 
Vietnam 
(VN) 
24 
F 
November 18th, 2015 / 15:30 – 17:30 
Russia 
(RU) 
28 
M 
November 28th, 2015 / 15:00 – 16:30 
 
B. Fieldwork Route 
In the experiment, two fieldwork routes were prepared 
for participants and they were allowed to choose whichever 
they preferred. The routes were determined by the reference 
of Asakusa’s rickshaw company Jidaiya [30], because their 
tours are recognized as a popular activity in Asakusa and in 
general they are successful at suggesting appropriate 
sightseeing routes. Route 1 (Figure 6) goes through 
Asakusa’s most touristy district, a major temple called 
Senso-ji in the green area on top. As illustrated in the blue 
line, walking along the main street named Nakamise-dori is 
the so-called golden route of Asakusa sightseeing.  
|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------| 
 
1       2       3      4       5       6       7       8       9     10 
 
Low  -----------------------------------------------à  High 

56
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 6.  Fieldwork route 1 
On the other hand, route 2 (Figure 7) is set in a rather 
local district, including the place for community daily life. 
Compared to route 1, route 2 is less crowded with tourists 
and may be similar to other towns, but still holds the flavor 
of historic Tokyo downtown. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Fieldwork route 2 
C. Contents 
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate how each route has 10 mapped 
contents, shown as numbered speech bubble icons. We 
attempted to select random contents from several sources 
such as guidebooks and original conversation extracted from 
interviews with local people, and placed them as equal a 
distance apart as possible on the map. Content a) mapped on 
route 1 is specified as “C1a” for instance, and brief 
explanations of all contents are as follows: 
 
1) Route 1 
a) People who visit Senso-ji temple (C1a) 
This is “Locals” content. The local fabric shop owner 
(henceforth Mr. M) talks about the people who visit Senso-ji 
temple for various reasons, such as sightseeing, religious 
visits, and souvenir hunting. After he talks, the English 
translation follows. 
 
b) Kaminari-mon of Senso-ji temple (C1b) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Kaminari-mon (Thunder 
gate), the entrance of Senso-ji and one of the most famous 
gates in Japan at the approach to a temple, is explained.  
 
c) Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in 2011 (C1c) 
This is “Locals” content. Mr. M discusses what his and 
other shops in the arcade were like on the day following the 
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. He also talks about his 
experience of electricity power-saving related to the 
Fukushima Daiichi Power Plant Nuclear Disaster [31]. 
 
d) Asakusa visitors about a half century ago (C1d) 
This is “Locals” content. Mr. M talks about his shop 
customers from all over the world. During the previous 
Tokyo Olympics in 1964, he remembers how many 
international visitors from Eastern Europe and the Soviet 
Union came to try Japanese handmade fabric, and says they 
were widely accepted. 
 
e) Daikoku-ya restaurant (C1e) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Daikoku-ya, the famous 
tempura place is recommended for its menu. 
 
f) Senso-ji Kindergarten (C1f) 
This is “Locals” content. Mr. M explains that there is a 
kindergarten in Senso-ji premises, and as an alumnus 
approximately 60 years ago he recalls his experience of the 
Japanese cultural event “mamemaki (bean throwing)” [32]. 
 
g) Demboin and its garden (C1g) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Demboin, the residence of 
the head priest of Senso-ji for generations is described. 
 
h) Fortune slip of Senso-ji (C1h) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Senso-ji’s Omikuji, a kind 
of fortune-telling using a small piece of paper on which 
one’s fortune is written, is explained.  
 
i) Asakusa shrine (C1i) 
This is “Guidebook” content. At the very next premises to 
Senso-ji, there is a relatively large shrine called Asakusa 
Jinja. It is explained that the coexistence of two different 
religions, Buddhism and Shintoism, in the same district 
reflects Japanese animistic religious belief, and something 
that some international visitors do not fully comprehend 
depending on their religious or cultural beliefs.  
 
j) Subsidy for Asakusa residents (C1j) 
This is “Locals” content. As a resident who was born and 
raised in Asakusa, Mr. M tells of the recent subsidy policy 
of Asakusa city to promote the younger generation 
including newlyweds to settle down in the city. 

57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0.0 
2.0 
4.0 
6.0 
8.0 
10.0 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
Before 
After 
2) Route 2 
a) Asakusa Engei-hall (Figure 2, C2a) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Asakusa Engei-hall, a 
Japanese comedy theatre playing traditional Rakugo and 
Yose performances, is explained. 
 
b) Don Quixote (C2b) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Don Quixote, or Donki for 
short, is a popular discount store franchise throughout Japan. 
Asakusa store’s localized Japanese souvenir collection for 
international visitors is explained. 
 
c) Asakusa Rockza (C2c) 
This is “Locals” content. Asakusa Rockza is one of the 
oldest and most famous striptease theatres in Japan, 
established in the 1940s. A professional Mikoshi, which is a 
divine palanquin or “portable Shinto shrine” carrier 
(henceforth Mr. T) tells its history and how the building and 
performance has remained, and is accepted as the cultural 
heritage of Asakusa. 
 
d) Sukerokuno-yado Sadachiyo hotel (C2d) 
This is “Guidebook” content. This hotel is of the historical 
Edo period’s ryokan type and intrigues many international 
tourists as well as Japanese guests. Their Japanese style hot 
spring service is also explained. 
 
e) Japanese traditional craft museum (C2e) 
This is “Guidebook” content. Gallery Takumi is a free 
admission Japanese handicraft museum, which contains 
many types of craftsmanship and in which their elaborate 
works are introduced.  
 
f) Hanayashiki theme park (Figure 3, C2f) 
This is “Locals” content about Hanayashiki, one of the 
oldest theme parks, which began its history as a botanical 
garden. The theme park’s PR manager (henceforth Ms. H) 
talks about its current target users and its marketing strategy 
focused on local families and kids, as well as international 
visitors by providing interactive activities such as the “Ninja 
experience.” 
 
g) Future of Asakusa (C2g) 
This is “Locals” content as already mentioned in Figure 3. 
Ms. H gives her opinion about Asakusa in comparison with 
other famous Tokyo cities and suggests what the local 
community can contribute to revitalizing the city. 
 
h) Awashimado-hall in Senso-ji (C2h) 
This is “Guidebook” content about Awashimado-hall, a 
small segregated garden in Senso-ji premises. A unique 
ritual ceremony showing animistic belief called “needle 
funeral” happens in this garden, which is a memorial service 
for broken needles to show gratitude for bringing about 
outstanding fabric and clothes through their works. 
 
i) Asakusa shrine (C2i) 
This is “Guidebook” contents and is shared with route 1 
during the experiment. 
 
j) Subsidy for Asakusa residents (C2j) 
This is “Locals” contents and is also shared with route 1 
during the experiment. 
 
D. Instruction 
In the first phase of the fieldwork, a sheet of paper 
giving the experiment instructions was distributed to the 
participants. The fieldwork route was printed and the 
participants were asked to walk and listen to the contents 
mapped on the route in numerical order. Before they began 
walking, they filled in the CCUS form. We observed and 
took pictures of participants while they were walking 
(Figure 16), and asked participants questions on each 
content, such as “what did you think about the place or 
object, which is explained in the content?” or “do you have 
any implications or comments compared to your home 
culture?” 
The fieldwork was conducted in either English or 
Japanese, depending on the participant’s language ability. 
The conversation was recorded and, after they had listened 
to all the content, they completed the CCUS form again. 
E. Result 
Figure 8 shows the average scores for each dimension. 
The blue line shows the results prior to the fieldwork; the red 
line shows the results after the fieldwork was finished and 
participants had listened to the “Guidebook” and “Locals” 
content.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  12 participants’ average CCUS score 
According to the results, most dimensions improved 
slightly after the fieldwork. Specifically, “Flexibility” 
(+1.4pt), “Knowledge” (+1.0pt), and “Interaction” (+1.0pt) 
improved more than other dimensions, while “Language 

58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
skills” declined slightly (-0.2pt). However, these scores are 
based on only 12 international visitors’ experiment results 
and are therefore highly dependent on participants’ 
individual characteristics, such as cultural backgrounds, 
attitudes, and personalities. We believe it is rather important 
to conduct further behavioral analysis for individual 
participants in the next section. 
V. 
BEHAVIORAL ANALYSIS OF PARTICIPANTS 
As shown in the section V findings, CCR has enriched 
most aspects of the dimensions. We will have a closer look 
at specific participants’ scores based on arbitrary choices, 
which recorded notable differences for “Flexibility,” 
“Knowledge,” “Interaction,” and “Language skills,” as well 
as those who formed a distinct shape of the 10 dimensions. 
A. Participant CH2 (Figure 9)  
CH2 is a close friend of CH3 and they participated in the 
evaluation experiment together. As she has never been in 
Asakusa before, she was a beginner tourist in a way.  
 
Figure 9.  Participant CH2’s CCUS score 
Particularly after listening to “Guidebook” content about 
small museum shows and offering of Japanese traditional 
handcrafts (refer to C2e), she seemed interested in the place 
mentioned and took a number of pictures in front of it. She 
had a conversation with CH3 in Chinese and invited CH3 to 
go into the museum. CH2 told us they were talking about 
the elaborate work of Japanese craftspeople and its 
comparison with Chinese merchandise, including price. 
They mentioned that the handcrafts sold in the museum 
were very expensive and unfortunately they were unable to 
purchase any; nevertheless, they were surprised by their 
high quality.  
Talking with a peer participant in her native language 
raised her satisfaction levels with “Flexibility” and 
“Nonverbal 
communication,” 
which 
represents 
the 
acculturation process [33]–[35] including elimination of 
uncertainty about Japanese culture. It is assumed that CH2 
encountered the “Kodawari” of Japanese craftspeople 
through their works at the museum as a tangible experience, 
and the content acted as a trigger for this cultural encounter. 
B. Participant UZ (Figure 10) 
UZ is a university student who has been studying 
Japanese for two years, and shows a great enthusiasm for 
understanding local cultures. He was particularly interested 
in the concept of CCR and was cooperative about 
participating in the evaluation experiment. He walked to the 
main street of Asakusa called Nakamise-dori, and after 
listening to content in which a local person discussed the 
future of Asakusa (refer to C2f or Fig. 3), he mentioned his 
hometown Samarkand. He said he genuinely loved his 
hometown but, for financial reasons, many residents are 
leaving the city and flowing into Toshkent, the capital of 
Uzbekistan; he feels sad about this. He wishes the people in 
Samarkand would love their city just as Asakusa locals do. 
Obviously, he felt some kinship with the Japanese people 
and had cultivated an affinity toward Japanese culture.  
 
 
Figure 10.  Participant UZ’s CCUS score 
He commented, “it was fun and I learned some 
internal/external factors of Japan, especially Asakusa city’s 
culture and society.” What he implies to be internal and 
external factors regard the context of both content, the 
Guidebook, and the Locals. Internal factors are invisible 
cultural aspects such as Asakusa locals’ attitudes or value 
for the place, in relation to his radical improvement of 
“Awareness of cultural difference.” In contrast, external 
factors are attainable by information input, corresponding to 
“Knowledge.” The synthesis of these noticeable two 
dimensions 
has 
appeared 
as 
the 
improvement 
of 
“Flexibility.”  
C. Participant JP (Figure 11) 
JP is a friend of UK and they participated in the 
experiment together. Although born in Japan and a Japanese 
citizen, she has an international background. She is half 
Korean and was raised in Hawaii. After listening to “Locals” 
content about the founding story of Nakamise-dori and a 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 

59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
kindergarten nearby (refer C1f), she remembered learning 
phonetics during her childhood in Hawaii. 
 
Figure 11.  Participant JP’s CCUS score 
As she looks Asian, some of her peers automatically 
assumed that she did not understand any English; hence, she 
had a difficult time building close friendships with them. 
Now, English is her native language and a similar 
circumstance occurs when she encounters Japanese people 
who think she will understand Japanese perfectly whilst, in 
fact, she does not. JP admits “that awkward and annoying 
moment” frequently occurs whenever she recognizes 
disappointment on their faces. JP’s biggest decline in 
“Language skills” is not unrelated with her story. On the 
other hand, she improved in “Mobility,” as explained in her 
comment “now I feel more confident walking in Asakusa 
without GoogleMaps.” 
D. Participant UK (Figure 12) 
The fieldwork for JP and UK was conducted in English 
since we wanted to encourage casual conversation between 
two peers, which enabled us to observe frequent cultural 
exchange.  
 
Figure 12.  Participant UK’s CCUS score 
UK arrived in Japan approximately two months before 
the fieldwork, and had just started learning Japanese 
language and culture. According to his feedback, “Locals” 
content was more enjoyable than “Guidebook” although he 
had never visited Asakusa before. JP and UK were taking 
the same university courses in their study abroad and had 
already established a good rapport. UK is researching 
theories of traditional Japanese music for his master’s 
degree, so it is reasonable to assume that he is more 
interested in Japanese culture than most other international 
visitors. 
After listening to “Locals” content about subsidy policy 
to promote the movement of newlyweds into Asakusa city 
due to the population decline, particularly of the young 
generation (refer C1j), he commented, “Here is very packed 
and I didn’t even know that (the population drop) was an 
issue. As for in Britain, honestly I really don’t know (about 
the government policy).” He may have felt sympathy with 
the local people talking about the city’s problem and a 
possible solution, which might have influenced his 
improvement in “Relationship,” “Awareness of cultural 
difference,” and “Interaction.” The listening experience 
gave him recognition of Japanese culture to a certain extent. 
E. Participant IN (Figure 13)  
IN is a university freshman and quite new in Japan, as he 
arrived in Tokyo approximately two months before the 
fieldwork. His family has been working in Japan for a while, 
and he came to live with them and to pursue his academic 
career. He had never been in Asakusa before, and since his 
Japanese is still at beginner level, his fieldwork was 
conducted in English.  
 
Figure 13.  Participant IN’s CCUS score 
After listening to the content about Asakusa Engei-hall 
(refer C2a), he was asked if he would be interested in 
watching such a Japanese traditional comedy performance if 
they were available in a more understandable language (not 
only in Japanese, but with an English audio guide for 
instance). He answered, “Honestly, I’m not interested, I 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 

60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
never wanted to. Because I wouldn’t even understand, as it’s 
connected to the very localized humor. That’s why I never 
really had the motivation (to go to a Japanese comedy 
performance).”  
When we meet international visitors to Japan, they 
normally have some type of positive motivation, such as 
interest in Japanese language or culture, and many are open 
to knowing new things. IN’s straightforward remark is 
noteworthy, because what differentiates him from other 
internationals is that he is very truthful in his attitude toward 
Japanese culture. His initial motivation for visiting Japan, 
which is that he simply followed his family, may be relevant. 
This gives us the insight that CCR might not contribute to 
those who already have a fixed impression of Japanese 
culture, and the contents will not be sufficiently strong to 
change their attitudes. IN’s decrease in certain dimensions, 
particularly his 3pt drop in “Awareness of cultural 
difference” seems to prove this hypothesis. 
F. Participant ML (Figure 14) 
ML is a senior university student who has been in Japan 
for a few years. Although she speaks fluent Japanese, she 
preferred to conduct the fieldwork in English, as it is still a 
better language of communication for her.  
 
Figure 14.  Participant ML’s CCUS score 
After listening to the content about when the Tohoku 
earthquake hit Japan in March 2011 (refer to C1c), she 
related her experience of university enrollment four years 
ago. As the Japanese university semester starts in April, she 
had a family discussion to persuade her mother, who was 
worried about radioactive contamination after the quake. 
Luckily, she was passionate enough to have a new endeavor 
in Japan and her father was very supportive. She 
commented, “You have to overcome the scare, or you just 
never learn anything,” and admitted that her mindset helped 
her to decide to study abroad in Japan. 
Looking at her CCUS score result, she has improved in 
terms of “Awareness of cultural difference.” Presumably, 
listening to the contents and having a conversation reminded 
her of her initial motivation to study in Japan. It is also 
notable that similar to JP, who is an advanced Japanese 
speaker, ML has also dropped in terms of “Language skill.” 
G. Summary 
As shown in the previous result, it is reasonable to say 
that CCR has contributed to the enhancement of some 
aspects of cultural understanding. In particular, some 
dimensions, such as “Flexibility,” “Awareness of cultural 
difference,” “Knowledge,” “Interaction,” and “Language 
skills,” recorded dominant changes (both positive and 
negative). 
 
1) Flexibility/Awareness of cultural difference 
Most participants have improved in these dimensions. The 
biggest difference was made by CH2, but other participants, 
such as TW, CH3, and RU, also had a similar CCUS score 
distribution. 
 
2) Knowledge 
UZ and ML are the tractors of this dimension’s increase, 
whereas some participants have not improved at all. These 
two participants had both been in Japan for a few years, and 
their Japanese was at an advanced level. Their listening 
experience, particularly of “Locals” contents, might have 
worked as a lecture to boost their knowledge of Japanese 
culture. VN also improved in this dimension. 
 
3) Language Skills 
Most participants did not change in this dimension at all, 
while some, who were relatively fluent in Japanese such as 
JP and ML, decreased in this dimension (JP dropped 3pts), 
which caused an average overall decrease. JP and ML’s 
score drop will be revisited further in the next section. 
 
4) Interaction 
More than half of the participants improved in this 
dimension by approximately 1pt, which also reflects the 
average 1pt increase. CCR has an interactive characteristic 
to promote international listeners’ “cultural exchange” by 
allowing them to discuss freely while walking, during and 
after they listened to each content. 
VI. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
According to the overall result of the evaluation 
experiment conducted in Tokyo for 12 participants, it is 
reasonable to assume that CCR has contributed to the 
enhancement of several aspects, such as “Flexibility,” 
“Awareness of cultural difference,” and “Interaction,” 
which are cultivated by listening to locals’ stories, and 
“Knowledge” in relation to the information provided by the 
guidebook. 
 
1) CCUS dimensions categorized into 4 types  
From each participants’ episodes found in behavioral 
analysis, it is reasonable to assume that CCR contributes to 
international listeners’ awareness of some aspects of culture. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 

61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, based on the episodes, it is possible to relate 
the 10 dimensions of CCUS into four categories of 
contribution (Figure 15). Hence observing CCUS score 
distribution enables us to roughly categorize each 
participant’s mode of cultural understanding for these four 
types. This time, we observed 12 participants, and adding 
more participants will validate the effectiveness of this 
categorization. 
 
Figure 15.  CCR contribution to international listeners 
 Through the contents listening experience, some 
participants realized the difference between their own 
culture and Japanese culture. For instance, CH2 pointed out 
the elaborateness of Japanese craftsmanship compared to 
Chinese merchandize.  
Others may recognize themselves through self-reflection 
and conversation with peers as a next step. UZ recalled his 
own Usbek culture after listening to the “Locals” content. JP 
and ML were made more aware of their Japanese language 
skills by listening to interviews with local people. The 
discussion after the fieldwork became a trigger for ML to 
remember her initial motivation for studying abroad in 
Japan.  
To a certain participant, CCR directly approaches 
recognition of Japanese culture or knowledge itself. UK, 
who was already fond of Japan, gained information about 
Japan’s social policy after listening to a local’s story. 
On the other hand, the evaluation experiment has 
revealed that, for some participants, CCR may not 
contribute greatly to enhancing their cultural understanding. 
For example, IN clarified his lack of motivation to attend 
Japanese comedy performances through his honest feedback. 
Their personality, attitudes, and experiences will greatly 
influence the result. 
Regarding Japanese culture itself, although more or less 
all participants showed recognition of it, it is assumed that 
“Visitors” contents will make a greater contribution in this 
regard. 
 
2) “Locals” versus “Guidebook” Contents 
In terms of the effectiveness of place-oriented contents, 
for each participant’s approximately two-hour fieldwork, 
one outstanding episode was taken and discussed in the 
paper. Amongst the six participants individually analyzed in 
the paper, five were “Locals” content and 1 was 
“Guidebook” content. In addition, feedbacks elicited in the 
follow-up questionnaire after the fieldwork showed that 
“Locals” contents were more enjoyable for participants to 
listen to. More consultation is required for the result; 
however, we may rationalize that “Locals” content is more 
effective 
than 
“Guidebook” 
content 
for 
cultural 
understanding in this setting specifically. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDIES 
In this paper, a place-oriented Internet radio called CCR 
was proposed by providing three types of content, 
“Guidebook,” “Locals,” and “Visitors,” which give an idea 
of real cultural aspects of Japan, represented as “cultural 
keywords.” The paper explicitly deals with the “Guidebook” 
and “Locals” content. To validate the effectiveness of these 
unique media, we also proposed CCUS as a new criteria set 
to measure the level of cross-cultural understanding. The 
evaluation experiment and subsequent behavioral analysis of 
individual participants illustrated that CCR can be effective 
for certain international visitors’ cultural understanding. 
Furthermore, place-oriented contents, including locals’ real 
voices, focused on their attitudes or values, are found to be 
more enjoyable to listen to. 
For future work, we will develop a variety of place-
oriented content and add more participants to the evaluation 
experiment so that CCUS will be more reliable. Additionally, 
the introduction of “Visitors” content to encourage listeners’ 
self/mutual reflection with other listeners is required, to 
compare with conventional “Locals” and “Guidebook” 
content. This time, we chose Asakusa for a fieldwork 
location as one of Tokyo’s most touristy cities; however, we 
may need to investigate if the same scheme can be applied 
not only in Asakusa but also in different cities, or if it 
significantly varies depending on the characteristics of the 
place. In addition, one possibility of the evaluation 
experiment is to employ Japanese tourists as participants for 
comparative research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ito and K, Ogawa, “Design and evaluation of place 
oriented internet radio by the measurement of cross-cultural 
understandings,” IARIA ICDS 2016 conference proceedings, 
2015, pp. 49-55. 
[2] R. Damasio, “Self comes to mind: Constructing the concious 
mind,” New York, Pantheon, 2010. 
[3] Japanese Ministry of Justice. Retrieved on March 12th 2016 
from: http://www.moj.go.jp/ENGLISH/index.html 
[4] Y. Yoon and M. Uysal, “An examination of the effects of 
motivation and satisfaction on destination loyalty - a 
structural model,” Tourism Management, 2005, vol. 26(1), pp. 
45-56. 

62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[5] B. Bramwell, “User satisfaction and product development in 
urban tourism,” Tourism Management, 1998, vol. 19(1), pp.  
35-47. 
[6] J. Alegre and M. Cladera, “Repeat visitation in mature sun 
and sand holiday destinations,” Journal of Travel Research, 
2006, vol. 44(3), pp. 288-297. 
[7] Y. Ekinci, M. Riley, and J. Chen, “A review of comparisons 
used in service quality and customer satisfaction studies: 
Emerging issues for hospitality and tourism research,” 
Tourism Analysis, 2001, vol. 5(2) pp. 197-202. 
[8] M. Masuda, T. Izumi, and Y. Nakatani, “A system that 
promotes repeat tourists by making sightseeing unfinished,” 
Human Interface Society, 2012, vol. 14(3), pp. 259-270. 
[9] S. Takagi, M. Masuda, and Y. Nakatani, “Tour navigation 
system using landmarks customized by personal preferences,” 
Information Processing Society of Japan, 2012, vol. 3, pp. 
305-306. 
[10] M. Hatala and R. Wakkary, “Ontology-based user modeling 
in an augumented audio reality system for museums,” User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 2005, vol. 15(3), pp. 
339-380. 
[11] S. Bodker, “Through the interface: a human activity approach 
to user interface design,” Malwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc, 1990. 
[12] D. Dean, “Museum exhibition: theory and practice,” London, 
Routledge, 1994. 
[13] C. Hummels and A. Helm, “ISH and the search for resonant 
tangible interaction,” Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 2004, 
vol. 8(5), pp. 385–388. 
[14] T. Hornyak and R. Milner, “Lonely Planet Tokyo (Travel 
Guide) 9th Edition,” NY: Lonely Planet, 2012. 
[15] Cross-Cultural Radio. Retrieved on March 12th 2016 from: 
http://web.sfc.keio.ac.jp/~ayk/reradio/map.php 
[16] G. Cui and N. Awa, “Measuring intercultural effectiveness: 
an integrative approach,” International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations, 1992, vol. 16, pp. 311–328.  
[17] T. 
Yellen, 
“The 
cross-cultural 
interaction 
inventory: 
development of overseas criterion measures and items that 
differentiate between successful and unsuccessful adjusters,” 
National Technical Information Service, 1975, vol. 3, pp. 1-
19. 
[18] P. Benson, “Measuring cross-cultural adjustment: the problem 
of criteria” International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 
1978, vol. 2(1), pp. 21–37. 
[19] J. Chrzan and J. Brett, eds., “Food culture: anthropology, 
linguistics and food studies,” NY: Berghahn Books, 2016. 
[20] G. Hofstede, “Cultures and organization: software of the 
mind,” NY: McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
[21] E. Webb, D. Campbell, R. Schwartz, and L. Sechrest, 
“Unobtrusive measures – nonreactive research in the social 
sciences,” IL: Rand McNally and Co, 1966. 
[22] C. Kinginger, “Student mobility and identity-related language 
learning,” Intercultural Education, 2015, vol. 26, pp.6-15. 
[23] W. Chan, S. Bhatt, M. Nagami, and I. Walker, “Culture and 
foreign language education: Insights from research and 
implications for the practice,” Berlin, Walter de Gruyter 
GmbH & Co, 2015. 
[24] C. Yao and G. Zuckermann, “Language vitality and language 
identity – which one is more important?” Language Problems 
and Language Planning,  2016, vol. 40(2), pp. 163-186. 
[25] K. Hwang, “Culture-inclusive theories of self and social 
interaction: the approach of multiple philosophical paradigms,” 
Journal for the theory of social behaviour, 2014, vol. 45(1), pp. 
40-63. 
[26] D. Caganova, M. Cambal, and S. Luptakova, “Intercultural 
management – trend of contemporary globalized world,” 
Elektronika ir Elektrotechnika, 2015, vol. 102(6), pp. 51-54. 
[27] M. Remland, “Nonverbal communication in everyday life,” 
NY: Sage Publications,  2016. 
[28] J. Banks, “Cultural diversity and education,” London, 
Routledge, 2015. 
[29] K. Matzler, A. Strobl, N. Sauer, A. Bobovnicky, and F. Bauer,  
“Brand personality and culture: The role of cultural 
differences on the impact of brand personality perceptions on 
tourists' visit intentions,” Tourism Management, 2016, vol. 52, 
pp. 507-520. 
[30] Asakusa Jidaiya. Retrieved on August 23rd 2016 from: 
http://www.jidaiya.biz/kanko-j-eng.html 
[31] BBC news press release. “Reactor breach worsens prospects”. 
Retrieved on August 23rd 2016 from:  
http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-12745186 
[32] Setsubun – Bean throwing festival in Japan. Retrieved on 
August 23rd 2016 from: 
http://gojapan.about.com/cs/japanesefestivals/a/setsubun.htm 
[33] J. Berry, “Acculturation: living successfully in two cultures,” 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 2005, vol. 
29(6), pp. 697-712. 
[34] T. Graves, “Psychological acculturation in a tri-ethnic 
community,” South-Western Journal of Anthropology, 1968, 
vol. 23, pp. 337-350. 
[35] A. Ryder and L. Alden, “Is acculturation uni-dimensional or 
bi-dimensional?” 
Journal 
of 
Personality 
and 
Social 
Psychology, 2000, vol. 79, pp. 49-65. 
 
 
Figure 16.  Participants engaging in the evaluation experiment in Asakusa 

