 
 
The Impacts of the Digital Divide on Citizens’ Intentions to Use Internet 
Voting 
 
France Bélanger 
Accounting and Information Systems 
Virginia Tech 
3007 Pamplin Hall 
Blacksburg, USA 
belanger@vt.edu 
Lemuria Carter 
School of Business and Economics  
North Carolina A & T State University 
1601 East Market Street  
Greensboro, North Carolina 27411, USA 
ldcarte2@ncat.edu 
 
 
Abstract – Internet voting is increasingly used by governments 
and corporations as a means for individuals to cast their 
votes. However, not everyone has access to and is comfortable 
with the use of technology. This digital divide is composed of 
the access divide and the skills divide.  This study explores the 
impact of the digital divide on Internet voting (I-voting).  We 
propose a model of the effects of the digital divide on I-voting, 
which suggests that age, income, education and frequency of 
Internet use have an impact on I-voting utilization.  Online 
and paper-based surveys were administered to a large sample 
of citizens of varied backgrounds to test the model. The 
results of multiple linear regressions indicate that age, 
income, and Internet use (representing the access and skills 
divide) have a significant impact on Internet voting.  
Education was not found to be significant. These findings 
indicate that, like other e-government services, I-voting is 
subject to the barriers associated with the digital divide, and 
this digital divide introduces several challenges to government 
agencies.  
Keywords: Internet voting, digital divide, technology 
adoption, e-services, access divide, skills divide 
I.       INTRODUCTION 
This paper explores the impact of the digital divide on 
Internet voting [1]. Voting is an important democratic 
right, and voter turnout is vital to the health of all 
democracies. A key element of a democracy is the 
continuing responsiveness of the government to the 
preferences of its citizens. Turnout rates in U.S. 
presidential elections (which are the most popular in that 
country) vary between 50 and 60 percent, with winners 
never receiving more than 60 percent of the turnout.  
Hence, presidents are selected by the votes of 25 to 30 
percent of the electorate [2].  In fact, the United States 
ranks at the bottom, or just above last place, in voter 
involvement when compared to other democratic nations 
[3]. Research suggests Internet voting could increase voter 
participation [4].  Internet voting, or I-voting, is defined as 
“an election system that uses encryption to allow a voter to 
transmit his or her secure and secret ballot over the Internet 
[5, p. 2].”  Researchers suggest that I-voting has the 
potential  to increase “turnout” among individuals between 
the ages of 18-25 since they have experience in surfing the 
Internet and like the idea of using the latest technology [6].  
Morris [7] agrees that the Internet has the potential to 
mobilize the otherwise disenfranchised voters under the 
age of thirty-five.   
I-voting would be an ideal option for many citizens. 
Done [4] argues that one of the most important social 
impacts of Internet voting is the effect it could have on 
voter participation.  A survey conducted at the University 
of Arizona suggests that 62 percent of the unregistered 
voting age population would register to vote on the 
Internet.  The survey results also suggest that Internet 
voting would increase voter participation by about 42 
percent while conserving costly resources.  These increases 
would be realized across all sex, age, ethnicity, and 
education groups [4].   
Many countries have conducted research on or 
experimented with Internet voting [8].  In the Netherlands, 
62% of the people with access to the Internet would prefer 
to vote online [9].  In New Zealand, a taskforce concluded 
that Internet technology might boost the number of voters, 
speed the count, and reduce costs. In Japan, the Center for 
Political Public Relations experimented with poll site 
Internet voting in the 2001 gubernatorial election in 
Hiroshima. In 2005, Estonia was the first country to offer 
Internet-voting as an option nationwide for mayors and city 
councilors [10].  
In the United States, the 2000 Arizona Democratic 
primary offered the first binding Internet election for 
public office [4, 11, 12].  In 2008, Okaloosa County in 
Florida allowed hundreds of military personnel in 
Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom to cast their 
votes in the presidential election [13].  Despite the gradual 
implementation of I-voting and its potential to increase 
participation, some citizens may not benefit from this 
innovation due to the digital divide. 
The paper explores the relationship between the digital 
divide and I-voting. Whereas one can argue that I-voting 
offers simply another electronic service, voting is a 
fundamental right in democratic societies, available to all 
203
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
citizens, irrespective of their income, education or social 
status (within legal limits).  
The paper is organized as follows. First, we discuss the 
issues of the digital divide to provide background for the 
development of the research model and the hypotheses. 
The methodology section describes the research conducted. 
The next section presents the results and their implications 
for research and practice.  
II. 
THE ISSUE OF THE DIGITAL DIVIDE 
As governments worldwide begin to implement more 
technology-based voting systems, in particular Internet 
voting, concerns about the potential impacts of the digital 
divide continue to grow.  The digital divide refers to the 
distinction between the information haves and have-nots; 
the gap between the computer literate and the computer 
illiterate. Researchers have been interested in the digital 
divide from a variety of perspectives, including a 
demographic view [14-16], a global view divide [17], an 
urban view [18, 19], and a psychosocial view of the digital 
divide [20].  
 The digital divide is composed of two major barriers: 
access to technology and comfort with technology [21].  
Both of these barriers may play a role in limiting the use 
and convenience of Internet voting.  Not surprisingly, 
researchers have found that demographically, citizens who 
use the Internet for political purposes differ from the rest of 
the population, particularly in terms of income and 
education [22].  It could be because education and income 
increase the likelihood of openness toward Internet voting 
[4]; it could also be due to the digital divide barriers of 
access and skills. We discuss each of these digital divide 
barriers before presenting the research model in the 
remainder of this section.   
A. The Access Divide 
The access divide refers to factors that may limit an 
individual’s access to technology that can be used, in this 
case for Internet voting.  Prior research has identified 
ethnicity, income, age and education as significant 
predictors of access to technology  [23, 24].  A more recent 
study finds that income, education and age significantly 
impact who is willing to use e-government services such as 
electronic tax filing or license renewals [21].  This is not 
surprising since other researchers have found that 
approximately 78 percent of households with income 
between $50,000 and $75,000 had Internet access 
compared to only 40 percent of those with household 
incomes between $20,000 and $25,000.  Others find that 
young citizens (18-24) and their parents (45-54) report the 
highest levels of home Internet access, reaching better than 
61 percent[25].  Research also shows that more younger 
Americans have an Internet connection than older 
Americans [6].  Thomas and Streib [24] suggest that 
among Internet users, ethnicity and education are important 
predictors of government Web sites utilization, with white 
and better educated users more likely to be uses such sites 
[24].  Interestingly, gender differences in access and use of 
computers has narrowed over the years, with recent 
research suggesting that it does not impact use of e-
government services [21].  This is consistent with findings 
from the Pew Internet Project report, which suggests that 
although men and women have different attitudes toward 
technology, the surge in the number of women online has 
eliminated some of the disparity in access between genders 
[26]. 
B. The Skills Divide 
In addition to Internet access, comfort with Internet 
technology is also a major element of the digital divide. 
The skills divide refers to a disparity in skills necessary to 
effectively interact with online systems [23]. Other 
researchers call this the second order digital divide [27]. 
Mossenburg, Tolbert, and Stansbury [23] identify two 
components of this skill divide: technical competence and 
information literacy [23].  Technical competencies are “the 
skills needed to operate hardware and software, such as 
typing, using a mouse, and giving instructions to the 
computer to sort records a certain way”.  Information 
literacy is “the ability to recognize when information can 
solve a problem or fill a need and to effectively employ 
information resources.”   Researchers have found that the 
old, less-educated, poor and minority individuals (African 
Americans and Latinos) were more likely to need computer 
assistance (such as help using the mouse and keyboard, 
using e-mail, or using word processing and spreadsheet 
programs), although recent studies show some of the 
differences disappearing after a year or two of use [28].  It 
is also possible that as new user interfaces such as multi-
touch screens and touch screens become more popular, 
skills require to use the computers will become less of an 
issue. Nevertheless, comprehension of the navigation, 
applications, and resulting information will still be required 
for completing digital tasks. 
In this study, we use frequency of Internet use in 
general as a proxy measure of technical competence and 
information literacy. The use of this proxy is consistent 
with Belanger and Carter [29].  Citizens who use the 
Internet frequently should possess a level of technical and 
information literacy.  
C. The Research Model 
In summary, differentials in age, income, education, 
and Internet usage, seem to create a digital divide that 
should affect which individuals will choose to use Internet 
voting as a means of performing their constitutional right.  
Figure 1 summarizes the access and skills divide factors 
that are expected to affect one’s intention to use I-voting.    
 
204
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1. I-Voting Digital Divide Factors 
 
As depicted in the model, there are four hypothesized 
relationships:   
 
H1: Age will have a negative impact on intention to use 
Internet Voting. 
 
As discussed before, a larger number of younger adults 
tend to have Internet access than older citizens. Since 
Internet access is a condition for I-voting, it can therefore 
be expected that there is negative relationship between age 
and I-voting intentions. Furthermore, since younger adults 
also tend to have more computer skills than older adults 
do, it further reinforces the negative relationship between 
age and I-voting intentions.  
 
H2: Education will have a positive impact on intention 
to use Internet Voting. 
 
Education is closely linked in two ways to the 
relationship between the digital divide and I-voting 
intentions. First, individuals with higher education tend to 
have more computer and Internet skills, as previously 
discussed. As a result, it is expected that education has a 
positive relationship with I-voting intentions. Of note, 
education can also impact I-voting intentions through the 
higher income that highly educated individuals tend to 
have. For the sake of parsimony and simplicity, our model 
does not test the potential mediating effect of income 
between education and I-voting intentions. Nevertheless, 
this potential relationship would also involve a positive 
link between education and I-voting intentions. 
 
H3: Income will have a positive impact on intention to 
use Internet Voting. 
 
As prior research suggests, individuals with higher 
income tend to have more access to the Internet (and other  
technologies). They also tend to have more education, and 
potentially computer skills. As a result, it is expected that 
income is positively related to I-voting intentions. 
 
H4: Experience using the Internet will have a positive 
impact on intention to use Internet Voting. 
 
Because individuals who have used the Internet for a 
longer period of time are expected to be familiar with the 
terminology, tools, and features of the Internet, it is 
expected that their skills will easily translate to the use of 
the Internet for voting. As a result, we expect that Internet 
experience is positively related to I-voting intentions. We 
discuss in the next section the methodology used to test the 
research model and hypotheses.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Overview 
To identify the salient I-voting divide factors, we 
surveyed a diverse pool of citizens.  Both online and paper-
based 
versions 
of 
the 
resulting 
instrument 
were 
administered to participants.  There were various sources 
of data collection for each version.  The paper version of 
the survey was administered to members of a church choir, 
students in a religious seminary class, attendees of a 
symphony concert, and employees in a county agency.  
The online version was posted on a local website, 
disseminated through a graduate student listserv at a 
university, and sent to the listserv of a community fitness 
group.  372 surveys were used for data analysis: 133 paper 
responses and 239 online responses.   
An independent samples t-test was used to identify any 
differences between online and paper responses.  Since the 
two groups did not exhibit differences for the dependent 
variable - intention to use an I-voting system - a combined 
sample was used in the data analyses.    
B. Instrument Items  
Each I-voting divide factor was measured using 
categorical data on the survey instrument, except for age, 
which was measured by respondent writing their actual 
age.  Five age categories were then used to classify the 
data: 18-24 years, 25-29 years, 30-44 years, 45-54 years, 
and 55 years and older. Education was measured using four 
categories (Grade school/some high school, High-school 
Diploma (or equivalence), Some college: no degree, and 
College degree/post graduate). Income was measured using 
seven categories (Less than US$20,000, US$20,000 - 
US$34,999, US$35,000 – US$49,999, US$50,000 - 
US$74,999, US$75,000 - US$99,999, US$100,000 - 
US$149,999, and US$150,000 and above). Internet usage 
was measured using four categories representing the 
number of years a citizen has been using the Internet (0-3 
years; 3-6 years; 6-9 years; 10 years or more). Finally 
intentions to use I-voting (USE) was measured using four 
items adapted from a study of e-government [29], which 
205
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
used a seven-point Likert-type scale (from strongly 
disagree to strongly agree).  
C. Sample Demographics 
Regarding sample demographics, the age range of 
participants is 18 to 75 years with an average of 33 years 
(see Table 1).  Most participants (78%) have a college 
degree, and the reported income range is well distributed. 
Forty-four (44) percent of the sample makes US$50,000 or 
more a year.   
 
TABLE 1.  AGE DISTRIBUTION 
 
Age Category 
Frequency 
Percent 
Cumulative % 
18-24 years 
92 
24.7 
24.7 
25-29 years 
71 
19.1 
43.8 
30-44 years 
104 
28.0 
71.8 
45-54 years 
57 
15.3 
87.1 
55 years and older 
48 
12.9 
100 
 
In addition to the demographics mentioned above, 
general information about the participants was collected. 
The sample was 63% female. A majority of the subjects 
were Caucasian (64%).  African-Americans accounted for 
26% of the sample and Hispanic, Asian and Native 
Americans accounted for seven percent of the sample. The 
remaining three percent of the subjects did not report 
ethnicity.  In terms of access to and experience with the 
Internet, most participants reported high levels, with the 
exception of having used e-government services, where 
only 70% of respondents indicated having done so, as can 
be seen in Table 2.    
TABLE 2.  INTERNET AND WEB EXPERIENCE.  PERCENTAGE OF 
RESPONDENTS WHO… 
…have access to the Web at home 
91% 
…used the Web to make a purchase  
90% 
…had used the Web to complete a government 
transaction. 
70%   
…voted in the 2004 presidential election  
82% 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Multiple regression analysis was used for hypothesis 
testing. Prior to testing the hypotheses, assumptions of 
multivariate normal distribution, independence of errors, 
and equality of variance were tested.  The USE variable 
was slightly skewed with a mean of 4.78.  Pearson 
correlation coefficients revealed low correlations among 
variables, except for age and income with a correlation of 
0.48. Variance inflation factors (VIF) confirmed that 
multicollinearity was not a concern with this data set (VIF 
range from 1.11 to 1.29). Outlier influential observations 
were identified with leverage and studentized residuals. 
This analysis indicated that thirteen data points were 
considered outliers. They were removed for data analysis. 
There were no violations of the other assumptions. 
A. Model Testing 
The regression analysis results in a model with an F-
value of 9.344, resulting in a p-value of p< 0.0001, which 
indicates that at least one of the coefficients corresponding 
to an independent variable is not equal to zero. The r-
square value was 9.5 %, indicating that digital divide 
factors identified in this research account for nine and a 
half percent of the variance in intentions to use I-voting. 
This is important because this is the variance explained on 
top of what typical adoption factors from theories such as 
the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) or the Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) 
should account for.  
B. Hypothesis Testing 
Since the model is significant, the individual beta 
coefficient t-tests can be used to identify which digital 
divide factors are significant. Table 3 shows the results of 
the hypothesis testing analyses.  
TABLE 3.  HYPOTHESIS TESTING RESULTS 
Hypothesis 
Beta 
P-value 
Support? 
H1: Age  I-voting Intentions 
-0.271 
< 0.0001 
Yes 
H2: Education  I-voting 
Intentions 
0.056 
0.301 
No 
H3: Income  I-voting Intentions 
0.211 
<0.001 
Yes 
H4: Internet Usage  I-voting 
Intentions 
0.142 
0.008 
Yes 
 
Results from Table 3 indicate that age, income, and 
Internet usage are significant predictors of I-voting 
intentions. Figure 2 shows the significant results, which are 
further describes and discussed in the next section. 
 
 
Figure 2. I-Voting Significant Factors 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This study explored how the digital divide impacts 
citizens’ intentions to use Internet voting. The overall 
result of the study is that there is indeed an impact of the 
digital divide. More specifically, the levels of income, the 
age of citizens, and their level of Internet use impact their 
intentions to use I-voting.  
206
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Before we discuss the results and their implications in 
this section, we need to acknowledge some limitations to 
the study. One of the primary limitations was the sample’s 
lack of variance in education.  The participants in this 
study are highly educated.  Seventy-eight percent have a 
college degree.  Future studies should test a sample with 
more variance in education. Lyons and Alexander [30] 
found that education beyond high-school increases the 
likelihood of voting by almost 15%.  Alvarez and Hall [6] 
found that individuals who have attended college are 
approximately two times more likely to vote than 
individuals without a high school education. These 
findings illustrate the importance of obtaining responses 
from people with diverse educational backgrounds.  The 
demographic characteristics of this sample may account for 
education not having a significant impact in this study.  
Future studies should seek to collect data from individuals 
with diverse educational backgrounds; an ideal sample 
could include those who have a high school diploma and 
those who do not. 
An additional limitation of the sample is the lack of 
variance in ethnicity with only a few Asian, native 
American, or Hispanic respondents. As such, the sample is 
not truly representative of the American population in 
general. However, to avoid any potential lack of 
representativeness issues, we did not include or test 
ethnicity as a digital divide factor.    
A. Significant Results: Age, Income, and Internet Use 
The results of the regression analysis indicate that age, 
income, and Internet usage are significant elements of the 
I-voting divide. Younger citizens, individuals with higher 
income levels, and individuals with more experience using 
the Internet are more likely to use Internet voting.  These 
findings indicate that, like other e-government services, I-
voting is also subject to the barriers associated with the 
digital divide.  In other words, both the access divide 
(impacted by income and age) and the skills divide 
(impacted by age and Internet usage) affect I-voting 
intentions.   
As hypothesized, age has a negative relationship with I-
voting intentions. In general, this means that younger 
individuals are more likely to vote using the Internet.  
There are several potential reasons for this. First, they may 
have more readily access to the Internet via school, their 
parents’ computers and networks, or even friends’ 
networks. Older citizens are not only less likely to have 
access to the Internet, but also less likely to posses the 
computer skills necessary to take advantage of Internet 
voting.  In a post hoc analysis, we show the means of I-
voting intentions across age categories in Table 4. To 
eliminate potential bias, we only used observations from 
registered voters for this analysis.  As can be seen from the 
table, there is a steady decline in I-voting intentions means 
as age increases.  
TABLE 4.  I-VOTING INTENTIONS BY AGE FOR REGISTERED 
VOTERS 
Age Category 
n 
I-voting 
means 
I-voting St. 
Dev. 
18-24 years 
80 
5.22 
1.65 
25-29 years 
55 
5.16 
1.78 
30-44 years 
98 
5.11 
1.68 
45-54 years 
57 
4.38 
1.96 
55 years and older 
47 
4.29 
2.20 
 
325 
4.90 
1.85 
 
Since one of the arguments often heard is that I-voting 
could increase voter participation among younger adults, 
we identified registered voters who voted on the 2004 
United States Presidential election by age category in 
Table 5.  
TABLE 5. LAST PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION VOTING BEHAVIOR 
BY AGE FOR REGISTERED VOTERS 
Age Category 
n 
Voted 
Did not 
vote 
% Did 
not vote 
18-24 years 
80 
65 
15 
18.8 % 
25-29 years 
52 
48 
4 
7.7 % 
30-44 years 
91 
88 
3 
3.3% 
45-54 years 
56 
55 
3 
5.4% 
55 years and older 
46 
45 
1 
0.1% 
 
325 
299 
26 
8.0% 
 
As can be seen, the results are extremely revealing in 
that the younger adults are by far less likely to have voted 
in the last election. Even taking out a portion of the 
respondents who were not old enough to vote in the last 
election, there remains a large portion of these younger 
adults who did not vote. Yet, these same younger adults 
state they would use the Internet to vote. It is possible, 
therefore, that I-voting would indeed increase voter 
participation among younger adults. 
Income is positively related to intentions to use I-
voting. Citizens with higher income levels are more likely 
to have access to the technology necessary to take 
advantage of Internet voting.  While the regression analysis 
identifies a general relationship between these constructs, a 
closer look at the distribution of I-voting use intentions per 
income category, presented in Table 6, reveals a more 
complex situation.  
TABLE 6.  I-VOTING INTENTIONS BY INCOME LEVELS 
Income Category 
n 
I-voting 
means 
I-voting St. 
Dev. 
Less than US$20,000 
89 
4.91 
1.79 
US$20,000 - US$34,999 
63 
4.55 
1.97 
US$35,000 – US$49,999 
53 
4.51 
1.88 
US$50,000 - US$74,999 
62 
5.25 
1.86 
US$75,000 - US$99,999 
51 
5.35 
1.62 
US$100,000 - US$149,999 
31 
5.05 
1.89 
US$150,000 and above 
10 
4.95 
1.26 
 
359 
4.92 
1.84 
 
207
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
As can be seen from the data in the table, it is true that 
lower income individuals show fewer intentions to vote 
using the Internet than higher income levels, except that 
the relationship does not seem to be linearly constant 
across categories of income. There are several possible 
explanations. First, our income categories are probably too 
granular, with the effects of the digital divide finding its 
way into lower than US$ 50,000 versus higher than 
US$50,000. There also appears to be a lower intention to 
vote using the Internet when income levels are in the very 
high (greater than US$150,000) category. It is possible that 
there is a bell shape (curvilinear) relationship between 
income and I-voting intentions. It is also possible that these 
results are simply due to the unequal distribution of 
responses in our sample. Future research should further 
explore these possibilities.   
Finally, experience using the Internet has a positive  
impact on intentions to use I-voting.  Regular use of the 
Internet translates into an affinity towards Internet voting.  
These findings support prior suggestions that I-voting will 
be more appealing to citizens who use the Internet 
regularly [31]. In the literature review, we discussed how 
experience using the Internet is one factor that may reduce 
the skills divide. However, since voting is such an 
important civil act, we believe that prior e-government 
usage might also be an important predictor of intentions to 
use I-voting. This would be consistent with prior findings 
in e-commerce where Schaupp and Carter [32] found that 
prior use of an e-commerce or e-government service is 
positively related to intention to use an I-voting system. To 
verify this possibility, we ran a post hoc analysis on the 
effects of e-government usage, of which two measures 
were available in our dataset, on intentions to use I-voting. 
One of these variables is whether individuals have used a 
government website to collect information (EgovInfo), and 
the other is whether an individual has used a government 
website to conduct a transaction (EgovTrans). While the 
EgovInfo variable proved to be non significant, the prior 
use of a government website to conduct a transaction 
(EgovTrans) was highly significant with a p value of 
0.003. In this study, 70 percent of the sample has 
completed a government transaction online and 90% has 
purchased a product or service online. Participants in this 
study have adopted e-service initiatives in both the public 
and private sector. As suggested by the literature, citizens 
who have adopted other e-services are more likely to adopt 
I-voting. 
Even with these results, it is possible that online voting 
will introduce unique concerns, even among frequent 
Internet users.  Future studies should explore the impact of 
concepts such as Internet trust and Internet self-efficacy on 
I-voting acceptance.  Future studies should also explore the 
impact of technology adoption variables on intention to use 
Internet voting. Perhaps, constructs such as compatibility 
and social influence would have a significant impact on I-
voting intentions. 
B. Factors Not Affecting I-voting Use Intentions 
Interestingly, education did not have a significant 
impact on one’s intention to use an Internet voting system.   
This finding could be a result of our sample, which did not 
have a large variance in education. Seventy eight percent 
of our survey respondents have a college degree.  This 
percentage is far greater than the population at large.  
Future studies should continue to explore the effects of 
education on the digital divide.   
C. Implications for I-voting Diffusion   
As municipalities begin to make I-voting a viable 
option for civic participation it is imperative that whole 
sectors of the population are not “left behind.”  This digital 
divide introduces several challenges to government 
agencies: 1) the sectors in danger of exclusion are already 
disenfranchised and 2) as long as there is a divide, the 
government will need to maintain traditional voting 
methods in addition to Internet options. Older, lower 
income citizens will need an advocate to ensure that they 
are not disregarded as I-voting initiatives become more 
commonplace.  The existence of this divide means that I-
voting should be used as an accompaniment to, not a 
replacement of, existing voting procedures. 
Government agencies need to discover ways to make 
online services more appealing to older citizens.  The 
results of this study indicate that younger voters are more 
inclined to use Internet voting than older citizens. Perhaps 
government agencies could work with community and/or 
non-profit organizations designed to help senior citizens, 
such as the American Association for Retired Persons 
(AARP) (www.aarp.org), to increase adoption among older 
users. As senior citizens often become increasingly less 
mobile, having an easy way to cast their vote could 
improve the level of participation of this group of citizens 
in the democratic process.   
As I-voting becomes more popular, municipalities also 
need to make I-voting options available to low-income 
citizens that may not have Internet access at home.  For 
instance, the government may be able to make voting kiosk 
available in public places such as libraries, supermarkets 
and post offices to increase citizens’ access to this 
innovation.  
Can I-voting lead to more individuals actually voting? 
It is unclear that I-voting alone can achieve this, but a post 
hoc analysis of our data shows at least a potential for this 
to happen. We compared the individuals who voted in the 
2004 presidential elections with those who did not on their 
intentions to use I-voting if this technology was available 
to them. Surprisingly, non-voters (59 individuals) exhibited 
a higher mean for I-voting intentions (5.31) than voters 
(300 individuals; 4.85). An independent samples t-test 
reveals that this difference is significant only at the 0.10 
level (p = 0.06). While this not a highly significant test, it 
does suggest that future research should explore more in-
depth the perspectives of non-voters. A potential avenue to 
208
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
do this would be through interviews of non-voters on the 
topic. 
Alternatively, 
researchers 
could 
conduct 
experimental studies where non-voters would be presented 
with an Internet voting option. 
D. Social Impact of Increased Voter Participation 
The impact of I-voting on political participation cannot 
be fully ascertained until Internet voting actually becomes 
a common option for voting in major elections.  Recent 
studies suggest that its diffusion is steadily approaching. 
Researchers at the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) 
predict that kiosk I-voting will be available at post offices, 
malls, and automated teller machines.  By 2012, they 
predict that some states, especially Oregon, which only 
uses mail-in ballots, will be the first to adopt Internet 
voting [33].  In light of the potential for Internet voting to 
increase voter participation, it is important to consider the 
potential impact of increased voter turnout on the nation’s 
political system. 
Given the current disparities in Internet access and 
literacy, agencies should be aware  of the potential 
emergence of a democratic digital divide [23].  A 
democratic digital divide occurs when advancements in 
technology increase political inequality.  This inequality 
results from the unequal distribution of political power 
among population groups.  Future studies should explore 
the existence and implications of a democratic digital 
divide.  Will certain groups reap the benefits of Internet 
voting at the expense of others?  As technology transforms 
the voting process, will socio-economic status persist as a 
discriminating factor, or will other factors such as political 
motivation become more salient?   
E. Personal Impact on the Act of Voting 
In this study, participants were receptive to Internet 
voting; the mean of intention to use was 4.79 on a seven 
point scale (for all 359 valid responses), where seven 
represents the highest level of acceptance for I-voting. In 
light of this notable adoption potential, it is important to 
consider the impact of Internet voting on the voting 
experience.   
Some opponents are critical of Internet voting because 
it deviates from traditional voting methods.  Critics of I-
voting argue that it will contaminate and eventually replace 
the most fundamental form of citizen participation in the 
democratic process. It may result in the loss of an 
important civic ritual: citizens going to the polls. Coleman 
[34] writes “reducing a vote to a mere key stroke of a 
personal computer may diminish, not heighten, the 
significance of the act. At a minimum, voters who bother 
to actually go to the polls tend to be people who are 
motivated enough to learn about issues. The solution to a 
lack of commitment of voters is not to reduce the necessary 
commitment needed to vote (p. 2).”   
Some critics even argue that I-voting would make 
elections less of a community event, which might create a 
gap between citizens and government, thereby decreasing 
participation.  In light of the diverse predictions regarding 
the impact of Internet voting on the democratic process it 
will be interesting to explore is actual implications as this 
innovation is diffused throughout society. 
F. Personal Impact on the Act of Voting 
In addition to societal and personal implications, there 
are also technical implications affiliated with the use of 
Internet technology to cast a vote.  In addition to increasing 
voter participation, I-voting can also potentially increase 
the accuracy with which votes are cast.  I-voting may 
increase both the number of ballots that are submitted, and 
it may also increase the accuracy of the ballots submitted. 
Tomz and Van Houwelling [35] conclude that the use of 
appropriate voting technologies can greatly decrease the 
number of invalid ballots.  Internet voting could be one 
such technology.   
G.  Additional Research 
One important digital divide factor mentioned in prior 
literature that may impact intentions to use I-voting is 
ethnicity. As explained before, we did not include ethnicity 
in our model because we could not obtain sufficient 
variance in ethnicity levels to conduct proper analyses. 
However, we provide in Tables 7 and 8 descriptive data on 
I-voting intentions and voting behaviors per ethnic 
category for registered voters.  
 
TABLE 7.  I-VOTING INTENTIONS BY ETHNICITY FOR 
REGISTERED VOTERS 
Ethnicity Category 
n 
I-voting 
means 
I-voting St. 
Dev. 
Caucasian  
218 
4.92 
1.85 
African-Americans  
98 
4.72 
1.88 
Hispanic 
6 
5.29 
1.56 
Asian  
4 
6.63 
0.75 
Native Americans 
3 
6.08 
1.59 
Other/ Not reported 
8 
5.00 
1.62 
 
325 
4.90 
1.85 
TABLE 8. LAST PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION VOTING BEHAVIOR 
BY ETHNICITY FOR REGISTERED VOTERS 
Ethnicity Category 
n 
Voted 
Did not 
vote 
Caucasian  
210 
192 
18 
African-Americans  
96 
93 
3 
Hispanic 
6 
5 
1 
Asian  
4 
1 
3 
Native Americans 
3 
2 
1 
Not reported/Other 
6 
6 
0 
 
325 
299 
26 
 
As can be seen from the tables, there might be some 
important impact of ethnicity on I-voting intentions. As 
such, we believe that future research should seek samples 
with a wider variety of ethnicities to conduct statistical 
analyses on the impact of ethnicity on I-voting intentions. 
209
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Future studies should also explore the impact of concepts 
such as Internet trust and Internet self-efficacy on I-voting 
acceptance. Conversely, future studies of adoption of 
technologies should include relevant digital divide 
variables that may have an effect in technology acceptance.  
An additional avenue for future research is to expand 
the digital divide model by exploring additional factors that 
can impact the intentions to use I-voting. While we 
included the digital divide factors that are most often found 
to impact use in electronic services contexts, it is possible 
that additional factors could be of importance. 
Finally, as previously stated, future research would 
benefit from finding a sample of respondents that is more 
representative of the current population of the United 
States of America in order to have conclusions that are 
more representative [36]. 
 
VI. 
     CONCLUSION  
The combination of I-voting and the digital divide 
provides a solid foundation for research on the new areas 
of e-democracy, civic mindedness and civil society. This 
paper enhances the Internet adoption literature and 
emphasizes its relevance to the developing research on e-
participation. This study identifies prominent demographic 
predictors of I-voting intention.  Using only digital divide 
factors (demographics), the proposed model explains 9.5% 
of the variance in intention. Considering their significance, 
these variables should be used to enhance the explanatory 
power of future e-services models that explore technology 
adoption using established theories such as diffusion of 
innovation [37] and technology acceptance [38]. The 
factors identified here can serve as a foundation for future 
studies of the digital divide and I-voting adoption 
As local, state, and national governments begin to 
experiment with Internet voting, now is the time to identify 
the characteristics that distinguish potential I-voters from 
non-I-voters. This study identifies digital divide factors 
that affect one’s intention to use an I-voting system.  
Governments should find ways to reduce the digital divide 
issues related to income (by providing more inexpensive 
access) and Internet experience (by providing community 
training and access to technology), and find ways to 
minimize the effects of the age-based digital divide.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A prior and shorter version of this work was presented 
at the 2010 Cyberlaw Conference in St-Marteens, 
Netherlands, February 11-14, 2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Bélanger and L. Carter, “Digital Divide and Internet Voting 
Acceptance,” in The Fourth International Conference on 
Digital Society (ICDS 2010), St. Maarten, Netherlands 
Antilles, 2010, pp. 307-310. 
[2] 
J. Petrocik and D. Shaw, Nonvoting in America: Attitudes in 
Context, New York: Greenwood Press, 1991. 
[3] 
R. E. Wolfinger and S. J. Rosenston, Who Votes?, New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1980. 
[4] 
R. S. Done, Internet Voting: Bringing Elections to the 
Desktop, The PricewaterhouseCoopers Endowment for the 
Business of Government Report, 2002. 
[5] 
A.-M. Oostveen and P. V. D. Besselaar, “Internet Voting 
Technologies and Civic Participation: The Users' Perspective,” 
The Public, vol. 11, 2004, pp. 1-18. 
[6] 
M. R. Alverez and T. E. Hall, Point , Click, and Vote: The 
future of Internet Voting, Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution Press, 2004. 
[7] 
D. Morris, Vote.com, Los Angeles: Renaissance Books, 1999. 
[8] 
C. Eliasson and A. Zuquete, “An electronic voting system 
supporting vote weights,” Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 5, 
2006, pp. 507-518. 
[9] 
W. Pieters, M. J. Becker, P. Brey et al., "Ethics of e-voting: 
An essay on requirements and values in Internet elections," 
Proceedings of the sixth International Conference of Computer 
Ethics, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2005, pp. 301-318. 
[10] 
Anonymous, Report of the National Workshop on Internet 
Voting, Internet Policy Institute, 2001. 
[11] 
M. R. Alverez and J. Nagler, “Internet Voting and Political 
Representation,” Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review vol. 34, 
2001, pp. 1115-1152. 
[12] 
F. I. Soloop, “Digital Democracy Comes of Age: Internet 
Voting and the 2000 Arizona Primary Election,” Political 
Science and Politics, vol. 34, no. 2, 2001, pp. 289-293. 
[13] 
E. Sofge, "Internet Voting in Florida Raises Security 
Concerns: Geek the Vote," Popular Mechanics Online, 
October 
1, 
2009, 
http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/industry/42883
27.html, Accessed January 15, 2011. 
[14] 
E. P. Bucy, “Social access to the Internet,” Harvard 
International Journal of Press/Politics, vol. 5, no. 1, 2000, pp. 
50-61. 
[15] 
T. Teo, “Demographic and motivation variables associated 
with Internet usage activies,” Internet Research: Electronic 
Networking Applications and Policy, vol. 11, no. 2, 2001, pp. 
125-137  
[16] 
W. E. Loges and J.-Y. Jung, “Exploring the digital divide: 
Internet connectedness and age,” Communication Research, 
vol. 28, no. 4, 2001, pp. 536-562. 
[17] 
W. Chen and B. Wellman, “The global digital divide-Within 
and between countries,” Information & Society, vol. 1, no. 7, 
2004, pp. 39-45. 
[18] 
D. B. Hindman, “The rulral-urban digital divide,” Journalism 
and Mass Communication Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 3, 2000, pp. 
549-560. 
[19] 
B. Mills and B. Whitacre, “Understanding the non-
metropolitan-metropolitan 
digital 
divide,” 
Growth 
and 
Change, vol. 34, no. 2, 2003, pp. 219-243. 
[20] 
L. Stanley, “Beyond acess: Psychosocial barriers to computer 
literacy,” Information & Society, vol. 19, no. 5, 2003, pp. 407-
416. 
[21] 
F. Belanger and L. Carter, “The Impact of the Digital Divide 
on E-government Use,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, 
no. 4, 2009, pp. 132-135. 
[22] 
B. Bimber, “Information and Political Engagement in 
America: The Search for the Effects of Information 
Technology at the Individual Level,” Political Research 
Quarterly, vol. 54, no. 1, 2001, pp. 53-67. 
[23] 
K. Mossenburg, C. Tolbert, and M. Stansbury, Virtual 
Inequality: Beyond the Digital Divide, George Washington 
University Press, Washington, D.C., 2003. 
[24] 
J. C. Thomas and G. Streib, “The new face of government:  
Citizen-initiated contacts in the era of E-government,” Journal 
of Public Administration Research and Theory, vol. 13, no. 1, 
January, 2003, pp. 83-102. 
210
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[25] 
P. G. Harwood and W. V. McIntosh, Virtual Distance and 
America's Changing Sense of Community, New York, NY: 
Routledge, 2004. 
[26] 
Pew Internet Project, "Tracking Online Life: How Women Use 
the Internet to Cultivate Family and Friends,"Pew Internet 
Project 
Report, 
Accessed 
June 
1, 
2005; 
www.pewinternet.org/reports. 
[27] 
G. Peng, “Critical Mass, Diffusion Channels, And Digital 
Divide,” The Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 
50, no. 3, 2010, pp. 63-71. 
[28] 
L. A. Jackson, A. v. Eye, G. Barbatsis et al., “The impact of 
Internet use on the other side of the digital divide ” 
Communication of the ACM vol. 47 no. 7, 2004 pp. 43-47  
[29] 
F. Bélanger and L. Carter, “Trust and Risk in eGovernment 
Adoption,” Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 17, 
no. 2, 2008, pp. 165-176. 
[30] 
W. Lyons and R. Alexander, “A Tale of Two Electorates: 
Generational Replacement and the Decline of Voting in 
Presidential Elections,” Journal of Politics, vol. 62, no. 4, 
2000, pp. 1014-1034. 
[31] 
S. Henry, “Can remote Internet voting increase turnout?,” 
Aslib Proceedings, vol. 55, no. 4, 2003, pp. 193-202. 
[32] 
C. L. Schaupp and L. Carter, “E-voting: From Apathy to 
Adoption ” Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 
vol. 18, no. 5, 2005, pp. 586-601. 
[33] 
J. Sanders, "The Future of Voting: Researchers Explore the 
Social and Technical Issues of Voting Via the Internet,” 
Georgia 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
Report, 
www.gtresearchnews.gatech.edu/newsrelease/VOTING.html, 
Accessed March 12, 2006. 
[34] 
K. Coleman, Internet Voting,  Order Code RS20639, CRS 
Report for Congress, 2003. 
[35] 
M. Tomz and R. P. Van Houwelling, “How Does Voting 
Equipment Affect the Racial Gap in Voided Ballots?,” 
American Journal of Political Science, vol. 47, no. 1, 2003, pp. 
46-60. 
[36] 
B. Al-Rababah and E. Abu-Shanab, “E-Government And 
Gender Digital Divide: The Case Of Jordan,” International 
Journal of Electronic Business Management, vol. 8, no. 1, 
2010, pp. 1-8. 
[37] 
E. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovation, New York: The Free 
Press, 2003. 
[38] 
V. Venkatesch, M. Morris, G. Davis et al., “User Acceptance 
of Information Technology: Toward a Unified View,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, 2003, pp. 425-478. 
 
 
 
211
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

