78
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Digital Inclusion - The Vision, the Challenges and the Way Forward 
 
Leela Damodaran, Teresa Gilbertson, Wendy Olphert 
Loughborough University 
Loughborough, UK 
L.Damodaran@lboro.ac.uk, t.gilbertson@dtsi.org.uk, 
C.W.Olphert@lboro.ac.uk 
Jatinder Sandhu 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nottingham, UK 
jatinder.sandhu@ntu.ac.uk
Mary Craig 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, UK 
m.craig@ed.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper considers the vision and aspiration of 
digital inclusion, and then examines the current reality. It 
looks beyond the rhetoric to provide an analysis of the status 
quo, a consideration of some facilitators and challenges to 
progress and some suggestions for moving forward with 
renewed energy and commitment. The far-reaching benefits of 
digital inclusion and the crucial role it plays in enabling full 
participation in our digital society are considered. At the heart 
of the vision of universal digital inclusion is the deceptively 
simple goal to ensure that everyone is able to access and 
experience the wide-ranging benefits and transformational 
opportunities and impacts it offers. The reality is a long way 
from the vision: inequality of access still exists despite many 
national campaigns and initiatives to reduce it. The benefits 
and beneficiaries of a digital society are not just the individual 
but all stakeholders in the wider society [1]. Research evidence 
has shown that the critical success factors for successful digital 
participation are (i) appropriate design and (ii) readily 
available and on-going ICT (Information and Communication 
Technology) support in the community. Challenges and proven 
solutions are presented. The proposition of community hubs in 
local venues to provide user-centred ICT support and learning 
for older and disabled people is presented. While the 
challenges to achieve digital inclusion are very considerable, 
the knowledge of how to achieve it and the technologies which 
enable it already exist. Harnessing of political will is necessary 
to make digital inclusion a reality rather than a vision. With 
the 
cooperation 
and 
commitment 
of 
all 
stakeholders 
actualisation of the vision of a digitally inclusive society, while 
challenging, can be achieved and will yield opportunities 
and rewards that eclipse the cost of implementation.  
Keywords-Digital society; digital inclusion; accessibility; 
participation. 
I. DIGITAL INCLUSION: FRAMING THE VISION 
The raison d'être of this paper is to provide an evidence-
based roadmap to achieve the vision of digital inclusion 
embedded in the ‘Declaration of Principles’ presented at the 
World Summit on the Information Society, Geneva, 10-12 
December 2003. This vision of digital inclusion is that 
everyone in the world will have equal access to the 
knowledge and information they require to enable them to 
live their lives to their full potential. The inspirational and 
aspirational [2] declaration states the following: 
"We, the representatives of the peoples of the world 
…declare our common desire and commitment to build a 
people-centred, 
inclusive 
and 
development-oriented 
Information Society, where everyone can create, access, 
utilise and share information and knowledge, enabling 
individuals, community and peoples to achieve their full 
potential in promoting their sustainable development and 
improving their quality of life….”  
While the Declaration sets crucially important and 
ambitious goals for our Information Society, relating to 
equality of opportunity in the digital world, clearly the goals 
will not be realised without equally ambitious development 
and implementation strategies to achieve an inclusive digital 
society which has been defined as one in which all members 
of a community are able to access, use, and understand 
digital technologies [3]. Building on the Declaration of 
Principles which underpins the vision of universal digital 
inclusion, the aspirations and principles of such a society 
would be characterised by global access to ICT (Information 
and Communications Technology) to make a significant 
contribution to improving health, wellbeing and quality of 
life for all [4][5].  
This paper provides a clear basis for plans and strategies 
to progress towards the vision of an inclusive digital society.  
A. Approach and methodology 
This paper first considers the vision and aspiration of 
digital inclusion and its major and fast-growing importance, 
informed by published reports and case study examples of 
the transformative power of digital technologies. Section II 
gives an analysis of the status quo regarding the current 
reality of digital inclusion based upon an extensive array of 
published studies and supplemented by empirical data 
collected on the RCUK (Research Council UK) funded 
NDA (New Dynamics of Ageing) Programme, through the 
Sus-IT (Sustaining IT use by older people to promote 

79
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
autonomy and independence) project. From this detailed 
examination, some of the key challenges to digital inclusion 
are identified and examined in Section III. Section IV then 
presents evidence-based recommendations on how to meet 
these challenges in order to close the gap between the vision 
and the reality. Finally, in Section V, new solutions are 
brought together with established good practice in an 
integrated strategy for achieving digital inclusion. This 
offers a holistic sociotechnical approach, and includes 
recommendations for design, for meeting ICT support needs 
in the community and for addressing ethical concerns.  
The methodology applied included literature reviews, 
empirical research studies using a wide array of mixed 
research methods which includes surveys, interviews, focus 
groups and case studies. In addition to reporting well-
established barriers to inclusion, the paper provides the basis 
for significant innovation by providing new insight into a 
key and fundamentally important critical success factor for 
effective and sustained digital participation, namely the 
provision of community-based ICT support.  
In summary, the paper looks beyond the rhetoric on 
digital inclusion to provide an analysis of the status quo, a 
consideration of some important facilitators and inhibitors 
to progress and some carefully considered evidence-based 
suggestions for moving forward with renewed energy and 
commitment. 
B. Why is Digital Inclusion Important? 
Digital literacy is fast becoming a fundamental 
requirement for full participation in society. In our emerging 
e-society, ICTs are an important aspect of daily life. 
Primarily through the medium of the Internet, an ever-
expanding 
range 
of 
information, 
goods, 
services, 
entertainment/leisure, educational and social networking 
opportunities are available. Digital technologies make 
possible transformations which enhance quality of life for 
individuals, increase life chances, prolong independence and 
autonomy and improve social connectedness [6][7]. Such 
transformations offer great potential to improve society and 
boost the economy [5][8]. 
Digital inclusion is essential for the realisation of many 
health benefits of technology. These are already being 
leveraged in the management of chronic conditions in ways 
that require a level of digital literacy. For example, for 
management of diabetes requiring insulin injections, people 
with this condition can already use insulin pumps, which 
slowly inject insulin into the body. While the pumps are 
mechanical, they utilise device management software [9]. 
Although there are other ways of managing insulin-
dependent diabetes, for an individual to have the fullest 
range of choices, digital literacy is becoming a requirement. 
Personal assistants and reminder systems may also play a 
role in helping people maintain their independence. Indeed, 
many of the technologies under development that will 
enable people to live independently for longer have digital 
literacy implications for the person living independently, or 
for their family or their care assistants. In combination these 
technological capabilities offer the potential to lessen 
demands on other (both formal and informal) support 
systems for older people; improving the quality of life of 
older and disabled people while also reducing costs of care. 
By enabling rehabilitation, remote assessment, diagnosis 
and treatment delivery, the need for residential care could be 
delayed, or for some, avoided by supporting policies of 
early intervention.  
Digital inclusion is also a prerequisite for capitalising on 
the social opportunities afforded by connectivity which can 
help to reduce social isolation and loneliness. Increasing 
digital participation allows people to stay connected with 
friends and family, their local community and the wider 
world in a variety of ways. For people who are 
geographically removed from their family or friends, 
services such as Skype are not merely cost-effective and 
convenient; they can become a component in maintaining 
social connectivity and cohesion in a way that telephones 
cannot. An example showing the power of the Internet to 
reduce social isolation is the experience reported by 80 year 
old Lucy: "With my computer I was there in the house with 
them when he opened his Christmas presents, my grandson 
came and kissed the computer screen. It stops you feeling 
alone" [4]. 
The role of digital inclusion in enabling social contact is 
highly significant and important in helping to maintain good 
mental health by reducing the depression, stress and anxiety 
associated with social isolation and loneliness. Numerous 
published articles by governments, academics, practitioners 
and others seek to show that being part of the digital world 
can improve life in a number of ways, means and forms 
[2][3][10]. The emphasis of such publications is often on the 
financial savings for the state and for individuals. While 
monetary gains are important, it is the transformations for 
individuals 
that 
are 
vastly 
more 
far-reaching 
and 
fundamentally important for our digital society and 
economy. This transformational capability of digital 
technologies is perhaps best illustrated by case studies 
which serve to convey the scale and scope of the power and 
significance of digital connection. For example, one case 
study reported on the website of Digital Unite describes the 
experiences of a woman who had lost her sight six years 
previously and now had to rely on her husband to read the 
post, write letters and other tasks that required reading such 
as checking recipes. When she discovered the magnification 
tool on her computer as well as text to speech software, her 
life was transformed. Through having access to the software 
and hardware of sophisticated assistive technologies (ATs), 
which could magnify the screen, read aloud both website 
content and scanned letters, she was able to regain her 
independence 
[11]. 
Many 
examples 
(e.g., 
from 
Leicestershire 
CareOnLine) 
show 
transformations 
of 
comparable magnitude and significance [12]. Their 
importance for the individuals concerned and for their carers 
and wider family cannot be over-stated.  

80
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It will be evident that the importance of digital inclusion 
extends way beyond an individual's social group. Digital 
technologies enable greater civic engagement, participation 
and influence in wider society. For example, through online 
voting, access to information about what is going on in your 
community – even for those who are housebound and 
opportunities for people (who may otherwise be heard) to 
have a voice on the issues that affect them. This not only 
connects them to their local community but also increases 
their visibility to those who are already digitally connected. 
Enabling social networks thus create digital opportunities 
for having fun and increasing and maintaining social 
contacts. Similarly, social media is fast becoming a means 
of disseminating local news. In the UK, for example, The 
West Bridgford Wire Facebook page [13], Loughborough 
Echo Facebook page [14], police alerts and appeals (e.g., 
Nottinghamshire 
Police 
Facebook 
page 
[15]) 
give 
information and warnings that affect people on a local level. 
It is also the case that social media can be an alternative and 
very visible means of influencing corporate behavior by 
publicising 
poor 
service, 
mistakes 
made 
and 
the 
consequences experienced (e.g., the viral Facebook post of a 
Virgin media bill posted by a man whose dead father-in-law 
had been charged a £10 late charge to his account, despite 
the company having been notified of his death) [16]. The 
account was subsequently closed. The post has been shared 
on Facebook a total of 97,677 times. This suggests that 
public Facebook/Twitter exposure is now mightier than the 
pen.  
It will be evident from the extensive ramifications of 
digital connection considered here that the advantages of 
being part of the digital world are vast and increasing all the 
time – as are the ‘dis-benefits’ of being digitally excluded. 
The authors have sought to show that beyond the increased 
ease of use, enhanced communication, reduced costs and so 
on enabled by the internet and use of ICTs in everyday life, 
it is their transformational capability that makes the quest 
for universal digital inclusion truly important and 
significant.  
II. 
DIGITAL INCLUSION: THE REALITY 
A. Global Internet Usage 
Statistics show that access to the Internet is currently 
unevenly distributed amongst the global population, and 
older people in most countries are less likely to be Internet 
users 
than 
younger 
people 
[17][18]. 
ITU 
World 
Telecommunications predicted that in 2010 approximately 
70% of the world’s population (6.9 billion) were not using 
the Internet [19]. In 2014, the figure for non-users had 
dropped to 60% [19]. World-wide, large numbers of older 
adults are reported to be non-users of technology [20]. In 
2011, approximately 45% of the world’s Internet users were 
below the age of 25 [19]. Statistics from 2013 show that 
while 99% of people in the UK aged between 16 and 34 
were Internet users, this drops to 88% for people aged 
between 55-64, 71% of people aged between 65-74 and a 
very low 37% for people aged over 74 years [21].  
B. The Digital Divide 
The gap between those who do and who do not enjoy the 
benefits of access to the Internet has been termed the ‘digital 
divide’. The term "digital divide" was adopted by the 
Clinton/Gore administration in the US in the late 1990s. 
Many studies have sought to explore the factors that 
underlie this phenomenon. These have shown that the digital 
divide is not a simple binary division between the ‘haves’ 
and ‘have-nots’ [10] but that digital divides arise from three 
main sources of inequality which occur both between 
nations and within them. These are differences in (i) 
connectivity (i.e., access to appropriate infrastructure, 
hardware, software, and services including fast and reliable 
Internet access), (ii) capability (i.e., appropriate education, 
tailoring for ability/disability, digital literacy and skills) and 
(iii) content (i.e., the availability of accessible, meaningful, 
relevant material which, combined with the ‘pull’ of 
compelling functionality provides powerful motivation to 
become digitally ‘engaged’ [5].  
The digital divide persists despite the attention it has 
attracted in society from academics, politicians, social 
activists and many others for almost two decades. The 
causes and factors associated with the phenomenon have 
been considered extensively and it appears that multiple 
factors are involved and these are considered in the section 
below. The large digital divide between older and younger 
people is explained partly because older people may not 
have the financial means to pay for equipment and services, 
partly because they may not have acquired the necessary 
skills either through education or in the workplace and 
partly because they may not have any motivation or interest 
to use these new technologies. Chronological age however, 
is clearly not a factor in itself, since many older people do 
use, and enjoy using, computers and the Internet [22]. It has 
been suggested that this so-called ‘grey digital divide’ [23] 
will eventually close, as people who are established 
computer users move into retirement, or as a consequence of 
the many initiatives and programmes designed specifically 
to encourage and teach older people to use computers and 
the Internet, or perhaps as a consequence of improvements 
in the ease of use and accessibility of the technology. 
However, there are counter arguments: in 1998 President 
Clinton’s commencement speech at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology asserted that: “...the digital divide 
has begun to narrow, but it will not disappear of its own 
accord. History teaches us that even as new technologies 
create growth and new opportunity, they can also heighten 
economic inequalities and sharpen social divisions” [24]. 
Further, recent research suggests that a fourth digital divide 
exists, namely that caused by digital disengagement [25].  
The salient point is that, irrespective of age or any other 
defining characteristic, the reality for those who are, or who 
become, digitally disengaged, is a range of adverse social 

81
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and economic consequences associated with reduced access 
to on-line government and commercial services, to health 
information and social support as well as to researching and 
purchasing goods using such services as price comparison 
and review websites.  
C. Factors Associated with the Digital Divide  
In addition to the digital divide which exists between the 
old and the young, there are other digital divides based upon 
education [26], gender [27], social class [28], ethnicity [6] 
and disability [29].  
Access to technology and the acquisition of the basic 
skills to use it were initially seen as the key to bridging the 
digital divide. However, as access to computers has 
increased across all industrialised societies, it has become 
clear that the digital divide is not just about access and the 
acquisition of basic skills and knowledge, but also about the 
ability and the confidence of individuals to utilise digital 
technologies effectively. Numerous studies have identified 
barriers to uptake of the Internet, and this has led to the 
proposition that non-users of the Internet can be transformed 
into users (the ‘digitally engaged’) by an additive model 
which addresses each of the three barriers – connectivity, 
content and capability). Consequently, governments and 
other bodies in many countries are investing significant 
resources into providing technical infrastructure, awareness 
and training initiatives, and the development of digital 
content and digitally-delivered services, with the aim of 
increasing access to the Internet and promoting digital 
engagement. Despite many widely publicised initiatives and 
programmes, the number of people not using the Internet 
has reduced only slightly, and the overall figure remains 
fairly stable (73% in 2009 and 72% in 2015 of people 
sampled by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
reported using the Internet daily (or almost every day for 
2015) [30][31]. 
D. Beneficiaries  
The beneficiaries of a digitally inclusive society are 
numerous and include key stakeholders in the following 
categories: government – national and local, service 
providers, retailers of on-line services and products, 
designers and developers of ICT products and services, AT 
providers, voluntary organisations and social movements, 
individuals and society.  
1) National and Local Government 
National governments benefit from widespread digital 
inclusion as a result of an increasing proportion of the 
populations being competent and confident to access 
centralised government services online. By reducing the 
burden on traditional services in this way, national and local 
governments are direct beneficiaries of a digitally-engaged 
populace with access to the health and wellbeing benefits 
enabled by technology. The ability for all members of 
society, especially older people, who are the heaviest users 
of many services, to utilise these online, would allow for 
cost-savings arising from greater individual self-care, care 
delivery and societal participation. Local government could 
expect see a lessening on the burden on some local services 
as a result of the benefits of digital inclusion that enable 
independent living, greater well-being and the reduction of 
social isolation.  
2) Service Providers 
In the case of the public sector, the increased levels of 
confidence and capability of older people in digital 
participation should increase the uptake of on-line services 
(e.g., Universal Credit in the UK) and this will be of great 
value to local government bodies attempting to ‘achieve 
more with less’. Whether delivered by a nationalised or 
privatised service or a mix of the two, service providers 
stand to benefit from the increased inclusion enabled 
through use of accessible technologies. As an ageing 
society, chronic diseases and their management is 
increasingly important and needs to be cost-effective to 
maintain pace with the growing proportion of people living 
into old age. Health care is likely to see mobile technology 
becoming increasingly used as a management tool for such 
conditions [32]. In terms of proportion of spending, 
globally, the treatment of chronic diseases currently counts 
for 60% of healthcare spending [32]. Healthcare providers 
have an opportunity to reduce their costs and ameliorate the 
effects of the growing ratio of older people to members of 
the workforce in society by ensuring that they make use of 
the wealth of information available about how to make their 
current and emerging products more inclusive. It will 
become increasingly important that new technologies are 
accessible to the non-technologist, whether that is the 
community nurse, or the carer or the person with the health 
condition.  
3) Retailers of On-line Products and Services  
A major market exists in the 50+ age group which offers 
significant, largely untapped, commercial opportunities to 
many 
retailers 
and 
other 
commercial 
companies. 
Understanding and being able to ‘segment’ the older market 
appropriately to achieve better tailoring of products and 
services offers competitive advantage to business. For 
businesses such as banks and retailers that provide online 
services, participation in community schemes to provide 
ICT help and support would provide a venue for retailers 
and service providers to demonstrate their online services 
(without applying sales pressure), provide information and 
support, build capacity in the older population, encourage 
customer loyalty and develop customer engagement in an 
environment that is comfortable to their potential customers 
[33]. The benefit of customer engagement could also extend 
to online stores which allow people with mobility or 
transport issues, to comparison shop and buy online with 
greater ease. By participating in community venues, retailers 
have the opportunity to work in partnership with customers, 
allowing them to identify products that best meet the needs 
of their customers, highlight where changes would enhance 
the user experience as well as provide them with testing 

82
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
opportunities for new products and services with a 
demographic of people with whom they might not otherwise 
engage. This reciprocal relationship would not only confer 
benefits to both parties, but would create the environment 
for good products to become great products that are 
inclusive as well as appealing to the mainstream. 
4) Designers and Developers of ICT Products and 
Services 
Meeting the design needs identified represents a 
commercial opportunity for ICT designers as well as 
offering an exciting intellectual challenge. Instead of 
designing for a typical user, (i.e., someone like the designer; 
young and, typically, male) designing for inclusion will take 
into account the variability of user characteristics, as well as 
the changes to individual capabilities over both the short and 
long term [34]. Such inclusive techniques not only benefit 
novice users, as well as people with disabilities, but also 
experienced users [35]. Indeed, the argument has been made 
that barriers that affect novice users such as indecipherable 
error messages, unexpected crashes, confusing menus, and 
site disorganisation, also present problems to experienced 
users [35]. By designing for inclusion, more people can use 
the service and the whole user-base benefits from a better 
product. 
5) Assistive Technology Providers 
Many ATs for people with recognised disabilities can 
help everyone in demanding or extreme usage situations. 
Innovative application of accessibility principles offers the 
promise of increased profitability. Successful examples of 
ATs that have wider appeal include such applications as text 
to speech; shorthand for text messaging; image stabilisation 
and closed captions in video games. Such accessibility 
technologies open up new market opportunities in every 
sphere of life, including healthcare, homecare, commerce, 
education and recreation.  
6) Voluntary Organisations and Social Movements 
The internet has also provided a much needed voice for 
people to take part in social movements and voluntary 
campaigns. Web-based activism organisations such as 
Avaaz [36], 38 Degrees [37], SumOfUs [38] have not only 
given people a voice with online petitions, but have also 
provided a platform for individuals to stage their own 
petitions. 38 Degrees also allows for grass-roots interactions 
through regular polling of members about the direction of 
campaigns as well as polling members on preferred 
campaigning strategies. In order for these organisations to 
allow all people to exercise their democratic rights, digitally 
inclusive strategies to give each citizen a voice in online 
activism are imperative.  
7) Individuals 
Individuals will benefit from inclusion in numerous 
ways elaborated in earlier parts of the paper. In addition to 
the generic advantages of digital inclusion described above, 
there are specialised developments which will be of 
particular benefit to older and disabled users. For example, 
creating adaptable interfaces could be particularly important 
for older users who want to use what everyone else is using 
rather an AT, either because of the steep learning curve 
involved in learning to use some ATs, or because of a 
personal preference to use what everyone else is using [39]. 
The experience of built-in personal customisation is of 
benefit to all. Similarly, adaptivity features that aid in 
automatic customisations can reduce or eliminate the 
learning involved in making such changes, thereby 
removing a number of access barriers. By ensuring stable, 
intuitive, usable and adaptive design, individuals will 
benefit in terms of not only accessing goods and services 
but also engaging in personal pursuits and living 
independently.  
8) Society 
The breadth of individual economic, health and 
wellbeing and social benefits combined with the reach of 
benefits across the private and public sectors also benefits 
society as a whole. Moreover, the interaction between all of 
these advantages creates a synergy such that the total benefit 
to society is potentially far greater than the sum of the 
individual benefits. A genuinely digitally inclusive society 
offers transformations which range, for example, from the 
empowerment that results from an individual who learns a 
specific skill on YouTube being able to solve a particular 
problem/meet a need, to becoming economically active 
through online courses and social support, to being enabled 
to participate fully in civil society.  
III. 
SOME KEY CHALLENGES TO DIGITAL INCLUSION 
The challenges to achieving digital inclusion are 
extensive and include: getting online; staying online; design 
barriers; inadequacy of support; a culture of disinterest; and 
emerging ethical considerations. Each of these is described 
below.  
A. Getting Online 
There are significant challenges involved in getting 
online – especially those faced by many older and disabled 
people. In one study which examined the barriers to learning 
to use ICTs, the older people who participated reported that 
the process of learning to use a computer required 
significant effort, time and patience and demanded 
considerable help and support [40]. Novice users described 
feeling ‘not in control’ and sometimes feeling overwhelmed 
by the complexity of learning to use a computer [40]. For 
example the processes required to turn a computer off, or to 
connect to the Wi-Fi network, or to upload software to 
connect a printer to the computer were not felt to be 
intuitive and were found to be ‘too confusing’ and 
complicated. The struggle of learning to use a computer was 
exacerbated by sudden, unexpected and unwanted ‘pop-ups’ 
which were described as, ‘confusing’, ‘annoying’ and 
‘distracting’ [40]. Fear of using a computer was also a 
barrier, not only for novice users but for established users 
who feared doing something wrong or ‘breaking’ the device. 
For instance, learners were left uncertain regarding what 

83
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
remedial action to take in response to error messages and in 
some cases the distressing experience deterred them from 
continuing their efforts to gain digital literacy skills [40]. 
Additionally, getting online was found to be a challenging 
process since learning to use ICTs is not a one-off exercise 
but an on-going process necessary in order to cope with the 
complexity and rapidly changing nature of technology. For 
instance, updates to operating systems meant that learners 
had to re-learn how to do tasks they had previously 
comfortably done at ease [40]. The cost of training/learning 
support sessions/classes is a further challenge to getting 
online, especially for novice users who often require 
sustained support over a period of time to consolidate their 
learning, accommodate the implications of their disabilities 
and memory issues and to develop confidence in operating 
in a digital world which is often unfamiliar to them. Another 
challenge experienced by novice ICT users included making 
the transition from using devices in the training environment 
to those they had in their own homes [40]. Their comments 
included: “the buttons are in different places” and “I can’t 
find things that were obvious before”. The lack of 
appropriate and readily available ICT learning support 
(discussed further below in D) was also found to be a major 
challenge associated with getting online [40][41].  
B. Staying Online 
Once the initial learning challenges have been overcome 
sufficiently to permit the novice user to participate in the 
digital world, further challenges arise in the face of 
capability and other changes. It is well established that older 
adults are vulnerable to capability changes associated with 
cognitive and physical changes in later life. Changes in 
psychological and cognitive aspects will impact on the 
capability to remember sequential processes and on 
confidence levels in using ICTs. Changes in physical 
aspects, such as changes in vision make it difficult to see 
what is on the screen, and dexterity issues will create 
problems for controlling the mouse. Social changes, such as 
family members moving away, also impact on the support 
available to older ICT users. Further, older adults encounter 
some or a range of the following barriers in learning to use 
and sustain use of ICTs: confidence and fear of using ICTs; 
problems with understanding technical jargon and dealing 
with pop-ups and spam; problems with updates, drivers, and 
software; dealing with the rate of change of technology and 
coping with poorly designed software and hardware [41]. 
In recognition of the issues facing older ICT users, 
which may lead to people giving up use of computers and 
other digital technologies, the 2004 UK Digital Inclusion 
Panel Report [5] stated that “there is a real risk that in the 
medium to long term, significantly more citizens will 
migrate from being digitally engaged to being unengaged 
than the other way round, as their capabilities change." It is 
a common myth that ‘once people are online, they stay 
online’. There is evidence to show that some people who 
have used the Internet at some point, and for some period of 
time, have subsequently stopped doing so [5][17][29]. This 
phenomenon is a potential, but largely unrecognised, ‘fourth 
digital divide’ [25], i.e., it cannot be explained by a simple 
interpretation of lack of access, lack of skills or lack of 
interest or motivation, because the people in this category 
have formerly been users. One in ten people are reported to 
have given up on using computers and it has been found that 
the older generation are more likely to be the ones that ‘give 
up’ [26]. 
C. Design Barriers 
The design of ICTs continues to pose many problems for 
older and disabled people – particularly relating to the speed 
of change and unnecessary complexity of software and 
products. Despite the existence of inclusive design concepts 
and general usability guidelines and heuristics for ICT 
developed since the 1980s [42], design barriers still present 
barriers to digital inclusion. Although there has been 
extensive work on accessibility, it is still the case that users 
who most need operating system-based accessibility tools 
are often unaware of their existence [43], arguably this is a 
design failing rather than a failure of the AT. Typically 
accessibility features enable the user to adjust for decline in 
eyesight and dexterity enabling them to change font 
characteristics, contrast settings, text colour and size, mouse 
speed etc. Additionally, even when ATs such as screen 
readers are selected and purchased by a user, such 
technology must then be checked for compatibility with the 
computer as well as for any unintended side-effects [43]. 
For example, magnification software will create the need for 
increased use of the mouse or touchscreen, and the need for 
more scrolling is likely to pose problems for a user with 
motor difficulties [44]. Compatibility issues can have 
implications for usability, for example, not all AT software 
will work with all operating systems, and sometimes the 
user will be expected to install updates and patches in order 
to make such software run. For people with basic digital 
literacy, it's the ICT equivalent of asking them to service 
their car, i.e., beyond the capabilities of many people. 
There is also a lack of ATs that help people with minor 
to moderate decline in working memory. This lack is a 
significant barrier to the ageing population [45]. Technical 
jargon and generic manuals are also barriers to the 
successful use of ICTs in the ageing population [45]. The 
paper also identified a number of additional barriers that are 
exacerbated by age, which include:  
a. 
keyboard characteristics (e.g., "too cramped" to 
accommodate motor function decline caused by 
osteo-arthritis and other age-related conditions ) 
b. software updates (difficulty understanding license 
agreements and their implications) 
c. 
"invisibility" of accessibility features [45]. 
It is clear that no one solution will solve all problems. 
For some older people, direct interaction devices such as 
tablets and smartphones may indeed provide an easier 
means of interaction than a laptop, however, others may 

84
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
have problems using such direct interfaces due to parallax 
and the crudity of the finger as an input device [46]. 
Additionally, while direct interaction may work for some, 
the practicalities of access will need to be addressed to 
ensure that this technology is available to all who wish it. 
For example, while smartphone and tablet use is increasing 
among the over 65s in the UK, accessing the internet away 
from home via portable devices, i.e., use of laptops or 
tablets is still only 22% and an even lower 16% for 
smartphones [31]. When compared to 54% and 87% of 35-
44 year olds who use laptops/tablets and smartphones 
respectively to access the internet away from home [31], it 
is clear that this disparity of use and the reasons for such 
disparity need to be addressed as a part of the solution. 
Smart TVs with voice control and other input modalities 
may also serve a useful role in keeping some older people 
online. However, this may not be appropriate for all users 
for any number of access reasons including the fact that 
speaking can be very tiring for some older people; and 
personal choice and budget are relevant deterrents for 
others. Smart TV ownership in the UK is 29% as of January 
2015 [47], making it a potential tool in the digital inclusion 
toolbox, but not a panacea, even in consumer-driven 
developed nations. 
In 2001, Shneiderman argued that designing for 
diversity not only benefits all people by promoting quality 
but also that usability and design are key to success [35]. 
Crucially, Shneiderman points out that designers, "rarely 
see the pain they inflict on novice and even expert users" 
[35]. Unfortunately, 14 years later, this is often still the case.  
D. Inadequacy of Support  
Findings from a survey of older ICT users conducted as 
part of the Sus-IT project, make clear the importance of ICT 
support with 56% of older people saying they regarded 
support as the most important factor in sustaining their 
digital participation. Respondents reported heavy reliance 
on support from family members or friends both to learn 
and to solve problems. Approximately one quarter of 
respondents said that human support and encouragement 
was the most important thing to help them use technology 
successfully [45]. Yet results from another study on the Sus-
IT project showed that the opportunities for ICT learning 
and on-going support are extremely inadequate [41].  
The poor ICT support for older users in the community 
contrasts sharply with that available in the work place. For 
ICT users in the workforce, the majority of workplaces will 
have a dedicated member of staff tasked with ICT support 
i.e., setting up and maintaining the infrastructure, selecting 
which technology platform is used, installing updates etc. 
The ICTs are installed and maintained for all those in the 
workplace although most are likely to be the able bodied, 
and reasonably technologically au-fait members of society. 
What exists beyond the workplace for the many without 
such institutional support is very different. In contrast to the 
situation in many workplaces, many ICT users who are at 
home, unemployed, retired, living with disabilities, living 
on a reduced income, living with a reduced social circle and 
possibly living with reduced health find themselves having 
to cope with all these demands themselves. 
Organisations such as charities for older people and 
public libraries do offer limited help, but typically this is 
piecemeal and variable, and as such, is perceived by older 
users as inadequate and unsatisfactory [41]. While 
instruction in digital skills was offered typically through 
structured classes, many older participants expressed their 
discomfort with formal classes and some articulated their 
negative associations with their school days [40]. The 
majority of ICT courses and campaigns offered in the UK to 
promote IT use focus on the acquisition of basic skills to go 
online rather than on promoting confident participation in 
the digital world and on sustained usage. The consequence 
of this narrow provision is that once initial training is over, 
older people can feel alone, anxious and frustrated when 
experiencing problems with on-going ICT use [40]. 
Ongoing support for many outside of work currently means 
having to rely on whatever support they can find from 
friends and family or in the community and, typically, 
experiencing the frustration associated with using these 
forms of support is the norm for those outside of work.  
The poor quality of available support is also a challenge 
to sustaining digital inclusion. It is a common complaint that 
when support is offered from children, they are too fast or 
resolve the issue for the user without explanation [40]. 
Further, studies have identified teaching styles that tend to 
undermine learners’ attempts to learn in formal settings. 
Some tutors fail to project their voice adequately [48] while 
some proceed too quickly. The speed at which people learn 
and process information tends to decline with age [49]; 
consequently, mixed age classes may fail to meet the needs 
of all. A fast pace of learning may leave some learners 
behind while a slow pace may cause more able learners to 
lose interest [50]. Furthermore, the use of jargon often 
confounds ICT novices [48].  
Another gap in adequate support is dealing with anxiety 
caused by the threat of cyber-crime and bullying. While is is 
possible to counter some of the threats of viruses and cyber-
crime through technical solutions such as firewalls and anti-
virus software, the need to address the real fear that can 
arise as a result of the possibility of cyber-bullying and 
cyber-crime (e.g., phishing, viruses etc.) requires actual 
human support to ensure confident use of ICTs.  
E. Culture of Disinterest 
The culture in many commercial companies that develop 
ICT software and products fosters the belief that ATs do not 
create a significant return on investment [43] that the related 
lack of interest in the hidden nature and, in some cases, 
paucity of accessibility features often remains unchanged 
and unchallenged. It has been observed that developers 
experience difficulty convincing both clients and their 
management of the importance of accessibility [51]. While 

85
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
many web developers view accessibility as important and 
consider it at the early stages of projects, there are a 
considerable number of people in project management roles 
who do not see ageing as an accessibility issue [52]. This 
lack of interest and awareness of age-related capability 
change impacting on the use of technology does not create a 
climate conducive to the development and visibility of 
accessibility features to assist those with declining working 
memory, dexterity, contrast vision and other age-related 
changes. The prevailing culture in many countries is often 
one in which compliance with established standards on 
accessibility is resisted. For example, a study of the 
webmaster attitudes to the implementation of Section 508, 
(Amendment to the Rehabilitation Act 1973 in the United 
States that mandates that government electronic content be 
accessible) on American e-government sites found that most 
sites did not conform to Section 508 [53]. If websites that 
have a legislated requirement to conform to published 
standards fail to meet this requirement, it is clear that simple 
legislation is not a cure-all for accessibility and inclusion 
and that a culture change is needed. Since research has 
shown managerial attitude to Section 508 compliance to be 
very important in determining whether attempts to make 
sites accessible were actually made [53], this finding is 
concerning and attitude change at all levels is urgently 
needed. It is clearly very difficult to persuade organisations 
of the importance of accessibility tools if there is 
widespread disregard of existing standards. The challenge of 
getting ICT professionals, particularly at management 
levels, to embrace digital inclusion (and usable and 
discoverable accessibility features) is a continuing barrier, 
despite the passion and commitment of many designers and 
developers to the development of inclusive products and 
services. 
F.  Emerging Ethical Dilemmas 
There are very many ethical issues associated with 
different aspects of digital inclusion, e.g., as posited by 
Eccles et al. [54], and it is clearly beyond the scope of this 
paper to deal with these comprehensively. The focus of this 
section is on the exponential growth of automated collection 
of data about users, and its potential use and abuse as 
another threat to digital inclusion. Of particular concern are 
the ethical issues associated with the modern web and 
emerging smart technologies such as digital assistants and 
smart televisions. These technologies rely on information 
about the user to make suggestions and process interactions 
which pose risks to the privacy of their users. Information 
about the user is an important part of the functionality of the 
web. Browser-based tracking enabled by the use of cookies 
can be benign, for example, allowing a user to logon to a 
website for e-commerce, social media or similar purposes. 
However, third-party tracking cookies, which can be used to 
track people and to monitor their web behaviour in to order 
to tailor in-page advertising to them and to draw a picture of 
their browsing habits, are also prevalent, but not crucial to 
the workings of a webpage. For an individual struggling 
with only rudimentary capabilities in digital literacy, it is 
very difficult to distinguish between the benign and the 
invasive. While it is now a requirement in the EU for 
websites to give people the option to reject the saving of 
cookies on their browser in a clear and concise manner, lack 
of user understanding of cookies may prevent informed 
consent. When the consultation in the UK regarding changes 
to the law was held, it was found that 37% of people 
consulted did not know how to manage cookies [55]. This 
number is likely to be substantially higher in the general 
population due to the disproportionate number of "Internet-
savvy" users taking part in the consultation [55].  
The data collection that takes place at the level of the 
operating system also raises related ethical questions 
regarding privacy. Do people understand the privacy 
implications of certain operating system features? For 
example, the express installation settings for Windows 10 
(i.e., when a user chooses to use the default settings for 
installation that only require clicking the "next" button 
rather than choosing to go through each setting before they 
are installed), allows for the collection of personal data 
including location, calendar and contact list details in order 
to tailor advertising and other features by default. For those 
with just basic digital literacy (and 21% of people in the UK 
do not have even basic online skills [56]) it is clearly not 
appropriate 
to 
assume 
understanding 
about 
what 
information their IT devices are collecting, why such 
information is needed, who sees this information and how 
they can control it. Important ethical questions about 
automated data collection are clearly a major challenge to 
digital inclusion. Possible safeguards must be considered, 
e.g., should default installations expressly state which data 
is collected and under what circumstances this happens? 
Should there be a master opt-out for all data collection? 
Data collection is required for personalisation features 
for 
adaptive 
technologies. 
For 
example, 
Cortana, 
Microsoft's personal assistant software, (which can set and 
manage your calendar and even remind you of errands based 
on your location), relies on data collection to work. Taking 
into account the assistive capabilities of personal assistant 
technologies such as Microsoft’s Cortana and Apple's Siri as 
well as the emerging capabilities of some smart televisions, 
which can allow you to control your television using your 
voice for people with disabilities, it is vital that both the 
assistive capabilities of such technology as well as the 
privacy implications of using such technology are known 
and transparent. As the situation currently stands, people 
who use these services for the accessibility capabilities they 
provide are faced with a very serious dilemma about how 
they manage their own data. Assuming that people using 
these products for their assistive features are aware of the 
privacy implications of collection of their data, such people 
may not have a choice in foregoing the technology for the 
sake of greater management of their privacy. This lack of 
choice between access and privacy for people who need the 

86
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
assistive capabilities of a product is a considerable barrier to 
overcome. 
Excessive complexity and confusing wording, as well as 
the volume of text in terms and conditions and end user 
license agreements (EULAs) pose major challenges for very 
many users – not only the old and disabled. In light of the 
complexity presented by such agreements, the prospective 
user is presented with another considerable dilemma, 
namely to use technology and risk their data being used in 
unknown ways, or to abandon use of the technology and 
maintain their privacy. Many older people opt for the latter 
[26]. One such example of the complexity of privacy 
policies is that of the Samsung smart television. Following 
the launch of Samsung's smart television with voice 
command features and the publication of Samsung's smart 
television's privacy policy for televisions with this feature, 
questions arose highlighting the concern about the 
implications of privacy for users of the voice recognition 
feature. Questions surrounded the privacy policy of the 
Samsung smart television was first highlighted by the Daily 
Beast [57], an online magazine, in 2015. The policy, as 
originally published, implies that users are being monitored 
by their televisions, "Please be aware that if your spoken 
words include personal or other sensitive information, that 
information will be among the data captured and 
transmitted to a third party through your use of Voice 
Recognition.” [58]. Wording like this fosters fear of ‘Big 
Brother’ in your television threatening your privacy and can 
leave people with a number of questions about just how safe 
it is to use their technology. For example, is it safe to have a 
conversation in front of your television? Who has access to 
this information? Can this information be hacked? Although 
in response to the press attention and concern of privacy 
experts, the Samsung privacy statement has since been 
reworded to better explain the process of converting the 
speech to text as well as how to disable this functionality 
[58], questions still remain. How comprehensible is the 
privacy policy to the average end user? Who actually reads 
the terms of service?  
From the brief analysis of some of the issues presented 
in this section, it will be evident that the challenges to 
digital inclusion are immense. Ways of addressing these are 
considered in Section IV. 
IV. 
HOW TO MEET THE CHALLENGES?  
To meet the many significant challenges identified in the 
previous section associated with getting and staying online, 
design barriers, inadequate support, the prevailing culture of 
disinterest in inclusion and accessibility and emerging 
ethical dilemmas will demand a raft of integrated solutions. 
There is no ‘silver bullet’ to meet the complex array of 
challenges and many contributions will be needed, 
including, for example, from businesses; government (both 
national and local); the third sector; policy-makers; 
educationalists and research and design communities.  
The solutions which evolve will need to be implemented 
by 
policy 
makers, 
manufacturers, 
retailers, 
service 
providers, designers, education providers and others. 
Relevant stakeholders will need to be identified, empowered 
and engaged to work together to influence policy makers, 
manufacturers and service providers to convince them of the 
vast significance and value of achieving the vision of digital 
inclusion. Crucial to success is the necessity for relevant 
stakeholders to work together to increase access and 
develop widespread capability in the population and also to 
make understood the benefits to individuals. 
To narrow the many digital divides identified in Section 
II will require not only the necessary telecommunications 
infrastructure to enable connection, but also the equipment 
to utilise the technological capabilities and the human 
capability to capitalise on both of these components. 
Evidence from Sus-IT indicates that two key determinants 
of sustained digital engagement of older people – and 
therefore of their digital inclusion in the long term – are (i) 
the appropriateness of design and (ii) the adequacy of ICT 
support available to them.  
A. How to meet the design challenges  
To meet the design challenges identified in Section III 
requires processes which enable older people to participate 
in shaping the design of products; increased investment in 
‘elder friendly design’; and greater awareness and education 
in accessibility. Experience on the Sus-IT project offers 
lessons/good practice in engaging older people in shaping 
design decisions showing that co-design ‘sandpits’ can be 
used successfully to involve older people in the research and 
design of digital products rather than as passive research 
'subjects'. The outcome of these sandpits included custom 
computers for older people, products to support memory and 
identity in later life, products to combat isolation and iPad 
apps designed specifically for older people [59]. Further 
good practice relevant to tailoring design to the needs of 
users experiencing capability change and often unaware of 
the accessibility features available, or with cognitive 
difficulties with adjusting font size, the development and 
testing was carried out of an adaptive software framework 
which explored how to how to connect existing operating 
system accessibility solutions to the people who needed 
them, at the time they needed them [60]. The framework 
developed monitored moment by moment interactions of the 
user with their ICT, balancing the pros and cons of any 
changes and suggesting improvements such as zooming text 
size and changing mouse speed in a manner that would aid 
their interactions as a way of meeting design challenges and 
potentially prevent disengagement with their ICT.  
To promote greater awareness and education in 
accessibility a number of proven methods are available. For 
example, embedding accessibility education throughout the 
undergraduate level [61], encouraging students to evaluate 
their own projects using ATs [62] and exposure to issues 
pertaining to diversity and inclusion [61] all raise awareness 

87
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of the diverse needs of Internet users. Similarly, engagement 
with students and designers through interactive video such 
as the UTOPIA Project (Usable Technology for Older 
People: Inclusive and Appropriate) [63] proved successful 
in changing the attitudes towards older people's use of 
technologies of both undergraduates, and Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI) professionals [64]. Another established 
method for promoting awareness and changing attitudes is 
the use of interactive theatre: in an evaluation study of a 
pilot, over 85% of respondents agreed with the importance 
of highlighting accessibility issues and the use of the theatre 
format [65]. By ensuring that the diversity of needs is 
known to, and understood by, students and professionals, 
content designers and developers are encouraged to follow 
user-centred design principles in an inclusive and 
participative approach to the design of their products, 
systems and services which then becomes embedded in the 
culture. Interactive theatre also allows older people to 
contribute to the shaping of design.  
Goals for designing to achieve universal inclusion were 
first presented by Shneiderman in 2000. These are:  
• 
increased availability of low cost ICT with better 
quality of service  
• 
the reduction of system complexity and user 
frustration 
• 
ensuring older technology and slower networks can 
participate fully 
• 
ensuring that services for low-income and poorly 
educated users are understandable and usable, 
while allowing expert users to use more novel 
strategies 
• 
ensuring accessibility for people needing support 
for visual, auditory, physical and other disabilities 
• 
enabling designs to work in multi-lingual and 
device diverse environments [35]. 
These points are as germane today as they were in 2000 in 
the reduction or elimination of design barriers.  
With regards to ethical issues, there needs to be a clear 
and possibly legislated procedure on getting informed 
consent from people with regard to when their data could be 
collected, how it is to be used, who sees such data and how 
long it is stored across smart technologies. There is a very 
strong argument for the service provider to ensure that 
privacy data is understood and clearly stated at the time of 
first use of the software, with step by step configuration of 
each setting with explicit information on the consequences 
of agreeing or disagreeing to the collection of personal 
details. This also holds true for operating systems. Rather 
than configuring privacy at the time of installation, where 
the gathering of data is not linked to the operating system 
itself but to bundled software, such settings should be off by 
default and configured upon the first launch of the software 
in question. 
There will clearly not be one generic solution to 
overcoming design barriers. Device availability, device 
capability, cost, interaction modality and personal choice 
will all play a role in solving interaction problems 
experienced by diverse individuals. Regardless of the device 
used, what is key is that the person using the device is able 
to carry out the tasks they wish to perform.  
B. How to meet the challenge of inadequate support 
The evidence described in Section III that document the 
challenges, makes clear that support has to address the 
needs of getting online, staying online and dealing with a 
vast array of problems that arise on an on-going basis. The 
research findings cited have shown that getting online is 
only one of the challenges. Once the initial excitement of 
connection has passed, older users’ new found-confidence 
can be eroded very rapidly by the early challenges of coping 
with technology at home. We have seen that if older people 
are to become confident participants and contributors in the 
digital world, they need ongoing, friendly and reliable 
support that meets their needs. The challenge of inadequate 
support for ICT users has been identified and explained.  
The pressing requirement is to fill the ICT support void 
beyond the workplace. There are two components involved 
in this: (i) enabling non-users to become users and, (ii) 
supporting existing users in sustaining their learning and use 
of fast-changing technologies. 
Informed by participative research with over a thousand 
older people across the UK, a co-design process developed a 
user-specification of the users’ support needs. This had the 
following characteristics:  
• 
readily available, trusted and sustained 
• 
delivered in familiar, welcoming and local venues 
• 
embedded in social activities / personal interests 
• 
free of time pressure and assessments 
• 
inclusive of problem solving / troubleshooting  
• 
offering impartial advice and ‘try before you buy’. 
Informed by this user-led specification, a co-design 
process followed, with older people and other stakeholders 
to deliberate and develop solutions to the challenges of 
inadequate support [33]. Consensus emerged that a socially 
embedded model of provision was required. From an 
extensive consultation and validation process, a detailed 
proposition for provision of ICT support in the community 
evolved. In this model (aspects of which already exist in 
limited ways), socially-embedded community-hubs provide 
flexible and adaptable learning to match people’s range of 
needs, learning speeds and styles. They use existing 
community venues and are locally run, providing ad-hoc 
trouble-shooting assistance as problems arise. The social 
nature of the hubs allows people to share tips and support 
each other, all within a relaxed, social atmosphere allowing 
for intergenerational exchange and access to professional 
expertise. The value of venues/hubs is in their capability to:  
• 
Support and sustain on-going ICT use  
• 
Empower and inspire people in use of ICTs 
• 
Promote adventurous use of ICTs 

88
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
Make online participation enjoyable, rewarding 
and ‘angst –free’. 
There was also consensus that in order to be effective in 
the long-term, ICT hubs should: 
• 
be widely available across the UK  
• 
available on an on-going and consistent basis 
• 
user-driven and locally run and make use of local 
venues  
• 
have access to appropriate training resources and 
professional expertise  
• 
be sustainable by securing multiple revenue 
streams – which will differ according to local 
circumstances and assets. 
The proposition has a strong evidence base. It has been 
developed through a programme of roundtable discussions 
with multiple stakeholders, culminating in an intensive 
multi-stakeholder consultation.  
The advantages that community-based ICT support hubs 
will provide users can also be expected to benefit the 
beneficiaries identified in Section II. For instance, the public 
sector could expect to achieve greater uptake of online 
government services, e.g., Universal Credit in the UK. For 
companies, hubs will give them access to older people who 
will be enthusiastic testers of new products and services as 
well as providing a venue to conduct research on user needs. 
Similarly online retailers can enjoy increased customer 
engagement and loyalty as well as the opportunity to 
demonstrate and allow people to try new products in an 
environment where people will not feel pressured. 
Additionally, 
five 
single-sector 
roundtables 
were 
convened with the following stakeholder groups: 
1. Businesses developing or delivering accessible 
solutions  
2. Designers and developers of ICT products 
3. Retailers of ICT products or assistive technologies 
for older people  
4. Government departments, the Public sector and 
Local Government  
5. Older Peoples' Groups, e.g. 50 + forums, Age UK 
and U3A.  
The roundtables refined the proposals for community-
based ICT support and these were subsequently the focus of 
a consultation entitled ‘Falling off the bandwagon’ at St. 
George's House (SGH). The proposition was considered and 
validated further over the 24 hour consultation with experts 
representing a variety of stakeholders at SGH, Windsor 
Castle, 
where the 
feasibility of implementing the 
proposition as proposed was extensively deliberated, 
including how it might be funded and managed [66]. 
The extensive process to find and develop a solution to 
address effectively the challenge of inadequate support 
culminated in the publication entitled 'Promoting Digital 
Participation. The proposition: Community hubs, Meeting 
older people's technology support needs; developing social 
communities and reducing isolation' under a creative 
commons license [67] requiring only acknowledgement of 
the source to use the material freely.  
This proposition is now informing digital literacy plans 
of some local councils in the UK and the major joint 
initiative of Barclays and BT to introduce pop-up 
community hubs in public libraries and other local venues.  
Therefore, community hubs in highly varied forms 
tailored to local circumstances and needs can be seen to 
offer a powerful generic way of addressing the challenge of 
inadequate support. The wide-ranging outcomes include: 
• 
friendly informal help for beginners and 
advanced technology clinics for troubleshooting 
problems, e.g., computers, cameras, online 
shopping, smartphones, bill paying 
• 
readily available, trusted advice in simple 
language 
• 
opportunities to try before you buy, e.g., 
smartphones, tables, laptops etc. 
• 
help with choosing software that meets 
individual needs 
• 
hobby-based support, e.g., family tree, digital 
photography 
• 
opportunities to swap knowledge and tips 
• 
reducing social isolation and loneliness through 
social gatherings. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have presented the vision of universal 
connectivity and inclusion. The authors regard digital 
inclusion as fundamental to a flourishing democracy and to 
the full participation of people in society. At the individual 
level, digital inclusion is crucial to sustaining and enhancing 
independence and autonomy. However, the transformative 
potential of such inclusion transcends the individual and has 
wide-reaching benefits for the whole of society and the 
economy. To achieve the vision will require coordinated 
policies, strategies and practices led or endorsed by national 
governments and coordinated and implemented by local 
government, service providers, businesses and third sector 
organisations. Encapsulating the essence of the 2003 
Declaration of Principles allows the vision of an inclusive 
society and economy to be articulated as “the enhancement 
of the quality of life for all, extending autonomy and 
independence through the use of digital technologies. This 
vision would be characterised by: 
• 
Empowered people experiencing the benefits of 
digital inclusion 
• 
Widespread participation in society and the 
economy 
• 
Readily available support in the community for 
engaging with and managing all aspects of the 
“digital world”.  
To create the digitally inclusive society encapsulated in the 
vision described above requires structural, political, and 

89
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
social change on a vast scale - which perhaps helps to 
explain the slow progress to date.  
The process of achieving such change needs itself to be 
inclusive of all stakeholders across society. This means that 
to succeed, the co-creation of an inclusive society is 
required. This will require collaboration on a grand scale to 
address the challenges through innovating, creating and 
evolving a digitally inclusive society that harnesses the 
power of ICT for the benefit of all. The knowledge to meet 
the challenges already exists. 
The barriers to achievement of a digitally inclusive 
society are well understood and, while commitment and 
effort to overcome them will be required, solutions are 
available and the return on investment in implementing 
these will be extensive. With leadership and commitment, 
sustained digital connectivity for everyone is achievable. In 
particular, leadership is needed to promulgate the vision and 
to encourage the development of strategic alliances and 
partnerships within a framework of appropriate policies and 
strategies, involving all relevant stakeholders – especially 
older people and disadvantaged groups in society. 
Engagement 
at 
grass-roots 
is 
urgently 
needed 
to 
complement the 'top-down' digital inclusion campaigns 
currently in operation in some countries.  
Ethical implications with regard to data collection must 
be clearly stated and visible to software users, in order for 
uptake of digital technologies to have the potential to reach 
all members of society.  
Meeting the wide range of challenges of digital inclusion 
requires development and implementation of a strategy with 
the following components: 
• 
A shared and compelling vision of what digital 
inclusion offers to the economy, to society and to 
individuals and communities 
• 
Policies and strategies for implementing steps 
towards the vision  
• 
Strategic alliances, partnerships and collaborations 
• 
Leadership  
Public events and workshops offer a compelling way of 
promoting awareness and excitement of digital inclusion 
and the resultant digitally inclusive society. Implementing 
the following steps may stimulate awareness and mobilise 
widespread support for digital inclusion: 
• 
Showcase a realisable vision of an inclusive 
digital society and economy to inspire investment 
by all stakeholders in building ICT capability and 
confidence of all. 
• 
Demonstrate ‘proof of concept’ by modelling best 
practice in government policies and strategies, i.e., 
‘Do as we do’ to promote digital inclusion.  
• 
Quality of Life strategies in the community: 
creative 
holistic 
strategies 
for 
achieving 
technology-enabled autonomy and independence of 
all. 
• 
Establish 
intergenerational 
problem-solving 
forums to engage diverse sections of the 
community to scope problems, exchange ideas and 
co-create solutions.  
• 
Enable the above by use of innovative techniques 
and methods (e.g., drama/interactive theatre, 
‘sandpits’, story-telling etc). 
There will inevitably be different perspectives and 
priorities among individuals, communities, businesses and 
government regarding what a digitally inclusive society 
looks like. However, the transformational outcomes 
envisioned by the Declaration of Principles help to inspire a 
shared vision and perspectives and encourage commitment 
to follow the roadmap to achieving this. The sharing of 
perspectives between all stakeholders, especially those in 
positions of authority such as national and local government 
and those in business developing and selling ICTs are 
crucial to success in creating and sustaining a digitally 
inclusive society. Inter- and intra- stakeholder co-operation, 
ongoing negotiation for the mutual benefit of varied 
stakeholders 
and 
respecting 
the 
voices 
of 
less 
influential/authoritative stakeholders is also key to this 
journey. 
To provide a roadmap towards the vision of an inclusive 
digital society, the following steps are essential: 
• 
Promote widespread awareness of the benefits –
individual, societal and economic – of digital 
inclusion  
• 
Engage and gain the ‘buy-in’ of key stakeholders 
to the vision of digital inclusion 
• 
Encourage and reward adoption of inclusive design 
principles and promote them as the industry ‘norm’ 
for designers, developers and manufacturers of ICT 
systems, services and products 
• 
Create expectations of and demand for inclusive 
design/digital inclusion amongst buyers and users 
of ICT  
• 
Promote awareness that current ICT learning and 
support provision in the community is variable in 
quality and availability and not tailored to the 
requirements of users 
• 
Recognise that sustaining people online is an even 
greater challenge than getting them online in the 
short term – and invest in community provision 
indicated above. 
• 
Create a framework for ubiquitous provision of 
ICT support in the community, e.g., in public 
libraries  
• 
Document and co-ordinate the various local 
initiatives that exist, e.g., some general medical 
practitioners (GPs) are now “social prescribing” 
(e.g., recommending patients make an appointment 
at a local library to obtain digital skills training). 
• 
Utilise local resources to meet local needs 
• 
Harness the political will to push this vision  

90
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
Recognise and celebrate what we can all achieve 
given the right access to ICTs.  
• 
Promote the adoption of socio-technical systems as 
the industry norm 
These steps offer a roadmap to a digitally inclusive society.  
To summarise:  
• We have the vision of universal connectivity and 
inclusion 
• The potential economic and social rewards are vast 
• The challenges are immense – but we have the 
know-how to meet them 
• The opportunities for innovation and change in 
business and in society are even greater than the 
challenges  
• With leadership and commitment we can tackle 
social inclusion through digital inclusion. 
In conclusion, the path to achieving the Vision of Digital 
Inclusion is well-developed and waiting to be travelled. The 
rewards are significant and achieving the vision of digital 
inclusion presents opportunities for innovation and change 
in business and society that are even greater than the 
challenges.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Sus-IT ('Sustaining IT use by older people to promote 
autonomy and independence') is a New Dynamics of Ageing 
project, funded by the 5 UK Research Councils – AHRC, 
BBSRC, EPSRC, ESRC and MRC (grant No. RES-353-25-
0008). Funding from the EPSRC for KT-EQUAL (Grant 
Number EP/G030898/2). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Damodaran, C. W. Olphert, T. Gilbertson, J. Sandhu, J. 
and M. Craig, “Digital Inclusion - The Vision and the 
Reality,” in ICDS 2015. The Ninth International 
Conference on Digital Society, pp.22 -28. 2015. 
[2] 
WSIS, 
“Declaration 
of 
Principles: 
Building 
the 
Information Society: a global challenge in the new 
Millennium,” in World Summit on the Information 
Society, 2003. 
[3] 
Information Policy and Access Centre, “Public Libraries 
and Digital Inclusion. Digital Inclusion Survey 2013,” 
2013. 
[4] 
Race Online 2012, “Manifesto for a Networked Nation,” 
2010. 
[5] 
UK Cabinet Office, “Enabling a digitally United 
Kingdom,” 2004. 
[6] 
K. Mossberger, C. Tolbert, and R. S. McNeal, “Digital 
Citizenship: The Internet, Society, and Participation,” J. 
Inf. Technol. Polit., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 262–264, Aug. 2008. 
[7] 
Department for Business Innovation and Skill, “Digital 
Britain,” 2009. 
[8] 
Business Innovation and Skills Committee, “Broadband 
Digital Exclusion,” 2010. 
[9] 
American 
Diabetes 
Association, 
“Insulin 
Pumps.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://main.diabetes.org/dforg/pdfs/2015/2015-cg-insulin-
pumps.pdf. [Accessed: 17-Aug-2015]. 
[10] 
P. Norris, Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information 
Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide, vol. 21. Cambridge 
University Press, 2001. 
[11] 
Digital Unite, “Reclaim your independence by getting 
online!” 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://digitalunite.com/blog/reclaim-your-independence-
getting-online. [Accessed: 22-Dec-2014]. 
[12] 
Leicestershire CareOnLine, “Your Story.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.leicscareonline.org.uk/careonline_people. 
[Accessed: 26-Aug-2015]. 
[13] 
West Bridgford Wire Newspaper, “West Bridgford Wire 
Facebook 
page,” 
Facebook. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.facebook.com/WestBridgfordWire?fref=ts. 
[Accessed: 17-Aug-2015]. 
[14] 
The 
Loughborough 
Echo 
Newspaper, 
“The 
Loughborough 
Echo 
Facebook 
page,” 
Facebook. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.facebook.com/loughboroughecho. 
[Accessed: 17-Aug-2015]. 
[15] 
Nottinghamshire Police, “Notts Police Facebook page.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.facebook.com/nottspolice?fref=ts. 
[Accessed: 17-Aug-2015]. 
[16] 
J. Boyden, “Virgin Media Bill viral Facebook post,” 
Facebook, 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10152797001
415192&set=p.10152797001415192&type=1&theater. 
[Accessed: 17-Aug-2015]. 
[17] 
W. H. Dutton, G. Blank, “Next Generation Users, The 
Internet in Britain: Oxford Internet Survey 2011,” Oxford, 
2011. 
[18] 
W. H. Dutton, E. J.. Helsper, and M. M. Gerber, “Oxford 
Internet Survey 2009,” Oxford, 2009. 
[19] 
ITU World Telecommunications, “ICT Facts and Figures 
2005-2014.” 
[20] 
S. Gorard and N. Selwyn, “Towards a le@rning society? 
the impact of technology on patterns of participation in 
lifelong learning,” Br. J. Sociol. Educ., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 
71–89, Jan. 2005. 
[21] 
Office for National Statistics, “Statistical Bulletin Internet 
Access Quarterly Update, Q1 2013,” Stat. Bull., no. 
February, 2013. 
[22] 
C. W. Olphert, L. Damodaran, and A. May, “Towards 
digital inclusion–engaging older people in the ‘digital 
world,’” in Design in the Digital World, 2005, p. 7. 
[23] 
P. Millward, “Perception, exclusion and barriers of access 
to the Internet for older people,” First Monday, vol. 8, no. 
7. Ghosh, Rishab Aiyer, 07-Jul-2003. 
[24] 
B. Clinton, “Remarks by the President at Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology 1998.” Boston, 1998. 
[25] 
C. W. Olphert and L. Damodaran, “Older people and 
digital 
disengagement: 
A 
fourth digital 
divide?,” 
Gerontology, vol. 59, no. 6. pp. 564–570, 2013. 
[26] 
W. H. Dutton, G. Blank with D. Groselj, “Cultures of the 
Internet: Oxford Internet Survey 2013,” Oxford, 2013. 
[27] 
J. Cooper, “The digital divide: the special case of gender,” 
J. Comput. Assist. Learn., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 320–334, 
Sep. 2006. 
[28] 
P. F. Cleary, G. Pierce, and E. M. Trauth, “Closing the 
digital divide: understanding racial, ethnic, social class, 
gender and geographic disparities in Internet use among 

91
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
school age children in the United States,” Universal 
Access in the Information Society, vol. 4, no. 4. pp. 354–
373, 2006. 
[29] 
W. Young, J. Clarke, G. Klima, V. Gadag, L. Gien, and I. 
Hardill, 
“The 
Technology 
Collection
 » 
Sustaining 
Information and Communication Technology use among 
Canadians with at Least One Activity Limitation,” Int. J. 
Technol. Knowl. Soc., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2012. 
[30] 
Office 
for 
National 
Statistics, 
“Internet 
Access 
Households 
and 
Individuals,” 
Office 
of 
National 
Statistics, 2009. 
[31] 
Office for National Statistics, “Internet Access - 
Households and Individuals, 2015,” 2015. 
[32] 
D. Lewin, S. Adshead, B. Glennon, B. Williamson, T. 
Moore, L. Damodaran and P. Hansell, “Assisted living 
technologies for older and disabled people in 2030.” 
[33] 
KT Equal, “Taming the Dragon; making technology work 
for us,” 2010. 
[34] 
P. Gregor, A. F. Newell, and M. Zajicek, “Designing for 
dynamic diversity: interfaces for older people,” in 
Diversity, 2002, vol. Edinburgh, no. May, pp. 151–156. 
[35] 
B. Shneiderman, “Design: CUU: bridging the digital 
divide with universal usability,” interactions, vol. 8, no. 2. 
pp. 11–15, 2001. 
[36] 
Avaaz.org, “Avaaaz.org The World in Action,” 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://avaaz.org/en/about.php. 
[Accessed: 11-Nov-2015]. 
[37] 
38 Degrees, “38 Degrees: people. power. change,” 2015. 
[Online]. Available: https://home.38degrees.org.uk/. 
[38] 
SumOfUs, “SumOfUs: Fighting for people over profits,” 
2015. [Online]. Available: http://sumofus.org/. 
[39] 
S. Sayago and J. Blat, “About the relevance of 
accessibility barriers in the everyday interactions of older 
people with the web,” in Proceedings of the 2009 
International Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web 
Accessibililty (W4A) - W4A ’09, 2009, p. 104. 
[40] 
J. Sandhu, L. Damodaran, and L. Ramondt, “ICT Skills 
Acquisition by Older People: Motivations for learning and 
barriers to progression,” Int. J. Educ. Ageing, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2013. 
[41] 
L. Ramondt, J. Sandhu and L. Damodaran, “Staying 
digitally connected – a study of learning and support 
provision for older people in seven cities in the UK and 
the implications for policy and practice,” Int J Educ 
Ageing, vol. 3, pp. 95–114, 2013. 
[42] 
A. F. Newell, “Interfaces for the ordinary and beyond,” 
IEEE Softw., vol. 10, no. 5, 1993. 
[43] 
M. T. Atkinson, M. Bell, and C. Machin, “Towards 
ubiquitous accessibility: capability-based profiles and 
adaptations, delivered via the semantic web,” … Conf. 
Web Access., pp. 2–5, 2012. 
[44] 
M. T. Atkinson, “Collaborative Adaptive Accessibility 
and Human Capabilities,” Loughborough University, 
2012. 
[45] 
L. Damodaran, C. W. Olphert, and J. Sandhu, “Falling off 
the bandwagon? Exploring the challenges to sustained 
digital engagement by older people,” Gerontology, vol. 
60, no. 2, pp. 163–173, 2014. 
[46] 
A. M. Piper, R. Campbell, and J. D. Hollan, “Exploring 
the accessibility and appeal of surface computing for older 
adult health care support,” Proc. CHI ’10, pp. 907–916, 
2010. 
[47] 
YouGov, “TV may be the key for device connectivity and 
content 
sharing,” 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/03/05/tv-may-be-key-
device-connectivity-and-content-shar/. 
[48] 
A. Dickinson, R. Eisma, P. Gregor, A. Syme, and S. 
Milne, “Strategies for teaching older people to use the 
world wide web,” Univers. Access Inf. Soc., vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 3–15, 2005. 
[49] 
T. A. Salthouse, “The processing-speed theory of adult 
age differences in cognition.,” Psychol. Rev., vol. 103, no. 
3, pp. 403–428, 1996. 
[50] 
M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The psychology of optimal 
performance. 1990. 
[51] 
J. Lazar, A. Dudley-Sponaugle, and K. D. Greenidge, 
“Improving web accessibility: A study of webmaster 
perceptions,” Comput. Human Behav., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 
269–288, 2004. 
[52] 
T. Gilbertson, “Attitudes and behaviours towards web 
accessibility and ageing: Results of an industry survey,” 
Gerontechnology, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 337–344, Dec. 2014. 
[53] 
P. T. Jaeger and M. Matteson, “e-Government and 
Technology Acceptance: the Case of the Implementation 
of Section 508 Guidelines for Websites,” Electron. J. 
eGovernment, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 87–98, 2009. 
[54] 
A. Eccles, L. Damodaran, W. Olphert, I. Hardill, M. 
Gilhooly, “Assistive Technologies: Ethical Practice, 
Ethical Research, and Quality of Life,” in Technologies 
for Active Aging, A. Sixsmith and G. Gutman, Eds. 
Boston, MA: Springer US, 2013. 
[55] 
Information Commissioners Office, “Guidance on the 
rules on use of cookies and similar technologies.” 2012. 
[56] 
Ipsos MediaCT, “Understanding Digital Capabilities 
follow-up September 2013 and March 2014,” 2014. 
[57] 
The Daily Beast, “Your Samsung SmartTV Is Spying on 
You, 
Basically,” 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/02/05/your-
samsung-smarttv-is-spying-on-you-basically.html. 
[Accessed: 11-Sep-2015]. 
[58] 
Samsung tomorrow, “Samsung Smart TVs Do Not 
Monitor 
Living 
Room 
Conversations.” 
[Online]. 
Available: http://global.samsungtomorrow.com/samsung-
smart-tvs-do-not-monitor-living-room-conversations/. 
[Accessed: 11-Sep-2015]. 
[59] 
D. Frolich, C. Lim, S. Woods, A. Ahmed, “What older 
people want: A catalogue of co-designed ICT concepts,” 
2012. 
[60] 
New Dynamics of Ageing, “Sus-IT (’Sustaining IT use by 
older people to promote autonomy and independence').” . 
[61] 
A. Waller, V. L. Hanson, and D. Sloan, “Including 
accessibility within and beyond undergraduate computing 
courses,” in 11th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility - ASSETS ’09, 
2009, pp. 155–162. 
[62] 
S. A. Youngblood, “Communicating Web Accessibility to 
the Novice Developer: From User Experience to 
Application,” J. Bus. Tech. Commun., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
209–232, Sep. 2012. 
[63] 
Usable Technology for Older People: Inclusive and 
Appropriate. UTOPIA, Video Trilogy. 2004. 
[64] 
A. Carmichael, A. F. Newell, and M. Morgan, “The 
efficacy of narrative video for raising awareness in ICT 
designers about older users’ requirements,” Interact. 

92
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Comput., vol. 19, no. 5–6, pp. 587–596, 2007. 
[65] 
M. Morgan, V. Hanson, C. Martin, J. Hughes, and A. 
Newell, “Accessibility Challenge - a Game Show 
Investigating the Accessibility of Computer Systems for 
Disabled People,” in Proceedings of ACM CHI 2008 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
2008, vol. 2, pp. 2609–2610. 
[66] 
St. George’s House, “Consulation Report: Falling off the 
bandwagon? Sustaining digital engagement by older 
people,” Windsor, 2012. 
[67] 
KT-EQUAL, New 
Dynamics of 
Ageing, Sus-IT, 
“Promoting 
Digital 
Participation 
The 
Proposition: 
Community hubs. Meeting older people’s technology 
support needs, developing social communities and 
reducing isolation.,” Loughborough, 2012. 
 

