A Survey and Comparison Analysis of Reference Architectures for the Cloud 
Computing and Internet-of-things Context 
 
Hongyu Pei Breivold 
Industrial Internet-of-things 
ABB Corporate Research 
Västerås, Sweden 
hongyu.pei-breivold@se.abb.com 
 
 
Abstract— Increased connectivity and emerging autonomous 
cloud and Internet-of-things technologies are motivating the 
transformation of the traditional product-focused development 
to cloud-based solutions and service-oriented business model in 
many companies. In line with this, several reference 
architectures for the cloud computing and Internet-of-things 
have been developed by various research initiatives and 
industry 
vendors. 
Although 
some 
of 
these 
reference 
architectures have continued their development tracks in 
parallel and have different focus, they also have similarities in 
many perspectives, which may result in confusion in 
understanding 
and 
applying 
appropriate 
reference 
architectures for specific use cases. The aim and main output 
of this study is therefore to survey these existing Internet-of-
things reference architectures using the research method of 
systematic mapping study, clarify their characteristics, and 
analyze in-depth how these reference architectures address 
various perspectives, including technology, process, quality 
and key system concerns, business and people. Based on the 
analysis we discuss motivating factors of the reference 
architectures, the coverage of business architecture and 
customer context in the reference architectures, as well as the 
impacts of the reference architectures to research community 
and practice. In addition, we present several other relevant 
activities and initiatives related to the architecture context for 
cloud computing and Internet-of-things. 
Keywords-reference architecture model; survey; comaprison 
analysis; 
industrial 
internet-of-things; 
smart 
industrial 
automation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article is an extended version of a conference paper 
[1] published at ICSEA 2017 (the twelfth International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances), one of the 
IARIA conferences. This article has extended the previously 
published conference paper with more details on the applied 
research method and a much more in-depth comparison 
analysis of the reference architectures.  
The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
defines Industrie4.0 [2] as the flexibility to enable machines 
and plants to adapt their behavior to changing orders and 
operating 
conditions 
through 
self-optimization 
and 
reconfiguration. Consequently, future smart factories require 
systems to have the ability to perceive information, derive 
findings and insights, and change their behavior accordingly, 
and store knowledge gained from experiences. Many 
organizations start to see the potential opportunities of the 
Internet-of-things and its impacts on providing solutions that 
could offer operational advantages [3].  
Within EU, Cloud Computing and Internet-of-things are 
listed as hot topics. The European Commission has outlined 
a European Cloud Computing Strategy [4], and urged for the 
need to ensure Europe being at the forefront of the 
development of Cloud Computing and Internet-of-things to 
benefit on both demand and supply side through wide-spread 
cloud use and cloud provision. In line with this, there has 
been a number of EU-funded research initiatives and 
activities on Cloud Computing and Internet-of-things, 
covering various aspects such as communication, hardware 
technology, identification and network discovery, security, 
interoperability, standardization, etc. Some examples are 
IERC – European Research Cluster on the Internet of Things 
[5], Industrial Internet Consortium [6], Industri4.0 [7], and 
the creation of the Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation 
(AIOTI) [8] by the European Commission [9], which 
initiates the development and future deployment of the 
Internet-of-things technology in Europe. There has also been 
a number of EU-funded research activities in Internet-of-
things implementation and adoption, addressing various 
domains and use cases in smart cities, smart energy and 
smart grid, healthcare, food and water tracking, logistics and 
retail, and transportation [10]. 
Successful adoption of cloud computing and Internet-of-
things requires guidance around planning and integrating 
relevant technologies into the existing services and 
applications. Both industry and academia that want to 
implement cloud-based solutions seek for more information 
about best practices for migrating and adopting cloud 
computing and Internet-of-things concepts. According to 
[11], “Defining a cloud reference architecture is an essential 
step towards achieving higher levels of cloud maturity. 
Cloud reference architecture addresses the concerns of the 
key stakeholders by defining the architecture capabilities and 
roadmap aligned with the business goals and architecture 
vision”. Study [12] holds similar viewpoints. According to 
[12], in order to effectively build cloud-based enterprise 
solutions, there is a need for the definition of a systematic 
architecture that provides templates and guidelines and can 
be used as a reference for the architects or software engineers 
within the software development lifecycle. Therefore, several 
60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reference architectures have been developed and evolved. 
According to [13], a reference architecture incorporates the 
vision and strategy for the future. With high level of 
abstraction, a reference architecture provides a common 
structure and guidance for dealing with core aspects of 
developing, using and analyzing systems and solutions that 
can be tailored to different use cases and specific needs from 
multiple organizations. 
There are several well-known reference architectures for 
the Internet-of-things that have been developed over the 
years. Some examples are Reference Architecture Model for 
Industrie 4.0 (RAMI4.0) [14], Industrial Internet Reference 
Architecture (IIRA) [15], IoT Architectural Reference Model 
(IoT-ARM) [16], etc. However, only a subset of the 
available IoT reference architectures have been reviewed in 
literature, for instance, study [17] compares two major 
architectures IoT-ARM and IIRA, whereas study [18] 
analyzes the IoT architectural reference model (IoT-ARM) 
and the architecture proposed by WSO2. To our knowledge 
no detailed survey and analysis of a comprehensive coverage 
of IoT reference architectures has been published previously 
to describe the wide spectrum of reference architectures that 
are available for the cloud computing and Internet-of-things 
context. The main objective of our research is therefore to 
systematically select and review published literature, and 
also include the state-of-the-practice results from various 
research initiatives and activities within the cloud computing 
and Internet-of-things area in order to present a holistic 
overview of the existing reference architectures for the cloud 
computing and Internet-of-things context. 
We have noticed that although some of the reference 
architectures in this survey have continued their development 
tracks in parallel and have different focus, they also have 
similarities in many perspectives, which may result in 
confusion in understanding and applying appropriate 
reference architectures for specific use cases. Consequently, 
we have defined the following research questions:  
1) 
What reference architectures have been reported in 
the cloud computing and Internet-of-things context?  
2) 
What are the major perspectives covered in these 
reference architectures? 
3) 
What are the main characteristics for each reference 
architecture with respect to the different perspectives?  
4) 
What are the impacts of the reference architectures 
to research community and practice? 
In this paper, we present a survey of the existing 
reference architectures for the Internet-of-things, identify the 
main perspectives covered in these reference architectures, 
and 
analyze 
the 
characteristics 
of 
these 
reference 
architectures from these identified perspectives, such as 
technology, process, quality and key system concerns, 
business and people.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II describes the research method used for this study. 
Section III presents an overview of the existing reference 
architectures for the cloud computing and Internet-of-things. 
Section IV describes some relevant organized Internet-of-
things initiatives and activities. Section V gives an in-depth 
comparison analysis of the surveyed reference architectures 
from different perspectives, including technology, process, 
quality and key system concerns, business and people. 
Section VI discusses some principle findings of the surveyed 
reference architectures, including the main motivating 
factors of the reference architectures, the coverage of 
business architecture and customer context in the reference 
architectures, as well as the reference architectures’ impacts 
on research and practice. Section VII concludes the paper. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The inclusion of the reference architectures in this survey 
is based on the results from a mapping study [19] as well as 
additional state-of-the-practice information from various 
research initiatives and activities within the cloud computing 
and Internet-of-things area, and covers therefore a collection 
of the existing reference architectures available. The 
systematic mapping study is a formalized and repeatable 
process to document relevant knowledge on a specific 
subject area for obtaining all available research information 
related to a research area. The mapping study includes 
several steps:  
(1) definition of research questions;  
(2) conduct search for primary studies;  
(3) screen papers for relevance using inclusion and 
exclusion criteria defined; and  
(4) classify keywords of abstracts and synthesis of the data 
extracted. These steps are detailed in [19]. 
As pointed in [20], the evolution of cloud computing and 
Internet-of-things has been mainly industry-driven. There are 
a variety of tools, platforms and infrastructures developed by 
different business vendors, providing frameworks with 
various hardware and software capabilities that are used in 
many industrial cloud-based solutions. Therefore, in addition 
to searching in scientific databases, we also searched on web 
sites about different cloud providers, white papers published 
in industrial communities, such as ARC Advisory Group 
[21], which performs technology market research for 
industry. Two major relevant postings from ARC include 
Operational Technology Viewpoints [22], which provides 
insights on emerging technologies, practices, and processes 
for 
enhancing 
industrial 
operations, 
and 
Industrial 
IoT/Industrie 4.0 Viewpoints [23] on digitizing industry and 
infrastructure. 
III. 
REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES FOR CLOUD OMPUTING 
AND THE INTERNET OF THINGS  
This section summarizes the existing well-known 
reference architectures for cloud computing and the Internet-
of-things. 
A. Reference Architecture Model for Industrie 4.0 
(RAMI4.0) 
RAMI 4.0 [14] is a reference architecture for smart 
factories. It was initiated in Germany, and is driven by major 
companies in industry sectors. RAMI 4.0 addresses the 
Industrie4.0 [7] problem space from three dimensions, i.e., it 
61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is hierarchically structured to manage both vertical 
integration within the factory, as well as horizontal 
integration extending beyond individual factory locations, in 
combination 
with 
lifecycle 
and 
value 
streams 
of 
manufacturing applications for all the factories and all the 
parties involved, from engineering through component 
suppliers to the customers. This reference architecture aims 
to address four aspects, including horizontal integration 
through value networks, vertical integration within a factory, 
lifecycle management and end-to-end engineering, and 
human beings orchestrating the value stream. In RAMI4.0, 
the term Industrie4.0 is used to stand for the fourth industrial 
revolution in the organization and control of the entire value 
stream along the life cycle of a product. All relevant 
information is available in real-time through the networking 
of all instances, e.g., people, objects and systems involved in 
value creation. By connecting these instances, the value 
stream are derived from data at all times to create dynamic, 
self-organized, cross-organizational, real-time optimized 
value networks based on a range of criteria, such as costs, 
availability and consumption of resources.  
B. Industrial Internet Reference Architecture (IIRA) 
IIRA [15] is a standard-based reference architecture 
developed by the Industrial Internet Consortium [6] for 
industrial internet systems, which are large end-to-end 
systems integrating industrial control systems with enterprise 
systems, business processes and analytics solutions. In this 
context, the term industrial internet is used to represent 
Internet-of-things, machines, computers and people, enabling 
intelligent industrial operations using advanced data 
analytics for transformational business outcomes. It 
embodies the convergence of the global industrial 
ecosystem, 
advanced 
computing 
and 
manufacturing, 
pervasive sensing and ubiquitous network connectivity. 
This reference architecture is based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011 [24] and adopts the general concepts in the 
specification, such as concern, stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
The term concern refers to any topic of interest pertaining to 
the system. The various concerns of an industrial internet 
system are classified into four viewpoints, i.e., business, 
usage, functional and implementation. The business 
viewpoint addresses the concerns of the identification of 
stakeholders and their business vision, values and objectives. 
The usage viewpoint addresses the concerns of expected 
system usage and capabilities. The functional viewpoint 
focuses on the functional components in an industrial 
internet system, their interrelation and structure, the 
interfaces and interactions between them and with external 
environment. The implementation viewpoint focuses on the 
technologies needed to implement functional components, 
communication schemes and lifecycle procedures. Some key 
system characteristics addressed in IIRA to ensure the core 
functions of industrial systems over time include safety, 
security and resilience.  
C. IoT Architectural Reference Model (IoT-ARM)  
IoT-ARM [16], developed within the European project 
IoT-A, is an architectural reference model that aims to 
connect vertically closed systems, architectures and 
application areas for creating open systems and integrated 
environments and platforms. In this model, Internet-of-things 
is treated as an umbrella term for interconnected 
technologies, devices, objects and services. This reference 
model consists of several sub-models, of which a primary 
and mandatory model is the IoT domain model, describing 
all the concepts and their relations that are relevant in the 
Internet-of-things, such as devices, IoT services, and virtual 
entities. All the other models, such as the IoT information 
model, functional model, communication model, IoT trust, 
security and privacy model, together with the IoT reference 
architecture are based on the concepts introduced in the 
domain model. The IoT reference architecture adopts the 
definition of architectural views and perspectives from [25], 
though excludes use case specific views to ensure IoT- 
specific needs and application-independence in the reference 
architecture. The key architectural views of the Internet-of-
things reference architecture include IoT functional view, 
IoT information view, IoT deployment and operational view. 
The architectural perspectives of the Internet-of-things 
reference architecture tackle non-functional requirements, 
including evolution and interoperability, availability and 
resilience, trust, security and privacy, and performance and 
scalability. 
D. IEEE Standard for an Architectural Framework for 
Internet of Things (P2413) 
The P2413 standard [26] provides an architectural 
framework that aims to capture the commonalities, 
interactions and relationships across multiple domains and 
common architecture elements. It includes descriptions of 
various Internet-of-things domains, definitions of IoT 
domain abstractions, and identification of commonalities 
between different IoT domains. It also provides a blueprint 
for data abstraction and trust that includes protection, 
security, privacy, and safety. Similar to the Industrial 
Internet Reference Architecture, P2413 leverages existing 
applicable standards and follows the recommendations for 
architecture descriptions defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 
[24]. According to [26], this standard provides a reference 
architecture that builds upon the reference model. The 
reference architecture covers the definition of basic 
architectural building blocks and their ability to be integrated 
into multi-tiered systems. The reference architecture also 
addresses how to document and mitigate architecture 
divergence. In this standard, things, apps and services can be 
integrated into what would be abstracted as a “thing”. 
Information exchange could be horizontal or vertical, or 
both. 
E. Arrowhead Framework 
The Arrowhead framework [27] was developed within an 
European research project in automation, which aims to 
facilitate collaborative automation by networked devices for 
five business domains, i.e., production (manufacturing, 
process, and energy), smart buildings and infrastructures, 
electro-mobility, energy production and virtual markets of 
energy. This framework is based on service-oriented 
62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

architecture to enable the Industrial Internet-of-things. The 
loosely coupled and discovery properties of service-oriented 
architecture improve the interoperability between devices 
and the integration of services provided by these devices. 
The concept of local clouds with well-defined isolation from 
the open Internet is used to support some key requirements 
of automation systems, such as real-time, security and safety, 
scalability and engineering simplicity. The dynamic 
characteristic of Internet of things is key in this framework. 
On the one hand, things come and go, and they may have 
limited bandwidth or energy supply. On the other hand, the 
integration of IoT systems needs to be dynamic depending 
on the demand and availability. There are three core 
components in the local cloud services, i.e., service registry, 
authorization, and orchestration. In order to be Arrowhead 
compliant, the applications within the network should 
register the services they provide within the service registry 
component. The authorization component manages the 
access rules for specific services, and the orchestration 
component manages connection rules for specific services to 
allow dynamic reconfiguration of the service consumer and 
service provider endpoints [28].  
F. WSO2 IoT Reference Architecture 
Based on the projects deployed with customers to support 
Internet-of-things capabilities, the company WSO2 has 
proposed a reference architecture [29] that aims to support 
integration between systems and devices. Their definition of 
the Internet-of-things is the set of devices and systems that 
interconnect real-world sensors and actuators to the Internet. 
The WSO2 reference architecture consists of five layers, 
including: 
(1) device layer, in which each device has a unique 
identifier and is directly or indirectly attached to the 
Internet; 
(2) communication layer, which supports the connectivity 
of 
the 
devices 
with 
multiple 
protocols 
for 
communication between the devices and the cloud;  
(3) aggregation/bus 
layer, 
which 
aggregates 
communications 
from 
multiple 
devices, 
brokers 
communications to a specific device, and transform 
between various protocols;  
(4) event processing and analytics layer; which processes 
and acts upon the events from the bus, and perform data 
storage; and  
(5) client/external communication layer, which enables 
users to communicate and interact with devices and 
obtain views into analytics and event processing.  
Besides these vertical layers, there are also two cross-
cutting layers: (i) device manager, which communicates with 
and remotely manages devices, and maintain the list of 
device identities; and (ii) identity and access management for 
access control. 
G. Microsoft Azure IoT Reference Architecture 
The Azure Internet-of-things reference architecture [30] 
is built upon Microsoft Azure platform to connect, store, 
analyze and operationalize device data to provide deep 
business insights. This architecture consists of core platforms 
services and application-level components to facilitate 
processing needs across three main areas of IoT solutions, 
i.e., (1) device connectivity; (2) data processing, analytics 
and management; and (3) presentation and business 
connectivity. The guiding principles for the architecture 
include software and hardware heterogeneity to manage 
diverse scenarios, devices and standards, security and 
privacy, as well as hyper-scale deployments. The goal of the 
reference architecture is to connect sensors, devices, and 
intelligent operations using Microsoft Azure services. The 
key architecture components to reach this goal include: 
(1) device connectivity, which manages different device 
connectivity options for IoT solutions;  
(2) device identity store, which manages all device identity 
information and allows for device authentication and 
management;  
(3) device registry store, which handles discovery and 
reference metadata related to provisioned devices;  
(4) device provisioning, which allows the system to be 
aware of the device capabilities and conditions;  
(5) device state store, which handles operational data related 
to the devices;  
(6) data flow and stream processing;  
(7) solution UX for graphical visualization of device data 
and analysis results;  
(8) App backend, which implements required business logic 
of an IoT solution;  
(9) business systems integration; and  
(10) at-rest data analytics. 
H. Internet-of-everything Reference Model 
The Internet-of-everything reference model [31] is 
developed by the Architecture Committee of the IoT World 
Forum hosted by Cisco. This model defines standard 
terminology and functionality for understanding and 
developing Internet-of-things solutions, which connect 
people, process, data and things to enable intelligent 
interactions between them to achieve relevant and valuable 
business opportunities. This reference model is composed of 
seven levels, including: 
(1) physical devices and controllers that control multiple 
devices;  
(2) connectivity for reliable and timely information 
transmission between devices and the network, across 
networks, and between the network and low-level 
information processing level;  
(3) edge/fog computing that bridges information technology 
and operational technology, i.e., performing high-
volume data analysis and transformation of network data 
flows into information suitable for storage and higher 
level processing;  
(4) data accumulation that converts event-based data 
generated by the devices to query-based data 
consumption for applications to access data when 
necessary;  
63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(5) data abstraction that renders data and its storage to 
enable developing simple and performance-enhanced 
applications;  
(6) applications that vary from control application to mobile 
application or business intelligence and analytics; and 
(7) collaboration and processes that involve people and 
business processes to empower smooth communication 
and collaboration between people. 
I. 
Intel IoT Platform Reference Architecture 
Intel has defined a system architecture specification 
(SAS), which is a reference architecture for Internet-of-
things, i.e., for connecting products and services so that they 
can be aware of each other and surrounding systems in their 
ecosystems [32]. There are two versions of reference 
architectures: version 1.0 for connecting the unconnected, 
using an Internet-of-Things gateway to securely connect and 
manage legacy devices that are lack of intelligence and 
Internet connectivity; version 2.0 for smart and connected 
things, addressing security and integration capabilities that 
are essential for real-time and closed-loop control of the data 
shared between smart things and the cloud. Similar to the 
Internet-of-things reference architecture proposed by IoT 
World Forum Architecture Committee, version 2.0 also 
facilitates the integration of operational technology and 
information 
technology. 
The 
Intel 
Internet-of-things 
reference architecture is a layered architectural framework, 
comprising of: 
(1) communications and connectivity layer, which enables 
multi-protocol data communication between devices at 
the edge and between endpoint devices/gateways, the 
network, and the data center;  
(2) data layer with analytics distributed across the cloud, 
gateways, and smart endpoint devices for optimized 
time-critical or computation-intensive applications;  
(3) management layer for realizing automated discovery 
and provisioning of endpoint devices;  
(4) control layer;  
(5) application layer; and  
(6) business layer utilizing the application layer to access 
other layers in the solution.  
There is a vertical security layer as well, which handles 
protection and security management across all layers, 
spanning endpoint devices, the network, and the cloud. 
IV. 
OTHER INTERNET OF THINGS ACTIVITIES 
In addition to the reference architectures presented in the 
previous section, there are also several other projects, 
activities and initiatives dedicated in the architecture context 
for cloud computing and the Internet-of-things, summarized 
in the following sub-sections. 
A. IoT European Research Cluster (IERC) 
The objective of IERC initiative [5] is to define a 
common vision of Internet-of-things technology and address 
IoT technology research challenges with respect to 
connected objects, the Web of Things, and the future of the 
Internet capabilities at the European level, and enable 
knowledge sharing in the view of global development. 
According to IERC, Internet-of-things is a dynamic global 
network infrastructure with self-configuring capabilities 
based on standard and interoperable communication 
protocols where physical and virtual things have identities, 
physical attributes, and virtual personalities and use 
intelligent interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into the 
information network. To facilitate the vision of Internet-of-
things business ecosystems implementing smart technologies 
to drive innovation, a wide range of research and application 
projects have been set up within the IERC initiative, 
investigating aspects related to (i) devising disruptive 
business models, transforming traditional business model to 
data-driven models where all actors in the value chain are 
closely interconnected; (ii) trust evaluation and management 
in Internet-of-things, concerning provision of reliable 
information and maximizing security, privacy and safety; 
(iii) the impact and consequences of the fast-paced 
technology development enabling connected things, services, 
data and people on society with respect to legal 
considerations, regulations and policies, such as personal 
data protection, data ownership; (iv) standards and IoT 
platforms that support open and dynamic interaction across 
both dimensions of horizontal IoT domains and vertical 
application domains, and overcome the fragmentation of 
closed systems, architectures, and applications. A tightly 
related Internet-of-things activity to IERC is the Alliance for 
Internet of Things Innovation (AIOTI) [8], which was 
initiated by the European Commission to address the 
challenges of Internet-of-things technology and application 
deployment, including standardization, interoperability and 
policy issues that are of common interest among various IoT 
players.  
B. Smart Applicances (SMART) 
SMART is an EU-funded study [33] with focus on 
semantic assets for smart appliance interoperability. Smart 
appliances are devices used in households capable of 
communicating with each other and being controlled via 
Internet. It provides a standardized framework for the smart 
appliances reference ontology, of which recurring concepts 
can be used and extended in several domains in addition to 
residential environments. 
C. Architecture and Interfaces for Web-oriented 
Automation System (WOAS) 
The project WOAS [34] is funded by the German Federal 
Ministry of Economics and Technology as an industrial joint 
research project with ten German automation companies 
involved. The aim of this project is to research a new 
architecture for automation systems based on cloud-based 
web technologies. The proposed architecture is referred to as 
a Web-Oriented Automation System (WOAS). A WOAS 
comprises a system kernel and a configurable number of 
automation services that implement and realize the required 
automation functions. The automation service is realized 
according to the concept of I40 component [14]. The 
connection of the automation service with distributed 
automation devices in the network is implemented via 
64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

standard industrial interfaces and is also based on the 
concept of I40 component. 
D. Reference Architecture for IoT-based Smart Factory 
A research study [35] presents a reference architecture 
for smart factories and defines the main characteristics of 
such factories with a focus on sustainable energy 
management perspective. According to this study, Internet of 
things relies on both smart objects and smart networks. It is a 
system in which the physical items are enriched with 
embedded electronics, such as RFID tags and sensors, and 
are connected to the Internet. This reference architecture 
builds upon the interactive relations between smart factories 
and customers, allowing smart factories to collect and 
analyze data from products and processes for improved 
perception of customers’ needs and behaviors, as well as 
better products and services. There are several sets of 
technologies and perspectives in this reference architecture, 
including 
smart 
machines, 
smart 
devices, 
smart 
manufacturing processes, smart engineering, manufacturing 
IT, smart logistics, big data and cloud computing, smart 
suppliers (i.e., building sustainable relations with suppliers), 
smart customers’ behavior, and smart grid infrastructure for 
energy management. 
V. 
A COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF THE REFERENCE 
ARCHITECTURES 
The reference architectures described in Section III have 
certain similarity in technical concepts and architectural 
principles, but there are also differences in their respective 
technology approaches and implementations. Therefore, we 
group particular characteristics that have similar concerns to 
describe the same or related aspects of these reference 
architectures. The aspects in the comparison that we have 
identified and are going to address include: 
(1) technology perspective, addressing key concepts and 
principles used in the reference architecture; 
(2) process perspective, addressing the coverage of 
guidelines and process steps involved when using the 
reference architecture to generate concrete architectures 
or migrate existing solutions using the reference 
architecture; 
(3) quality and key system concerns perspective, addressing 
main quality attributes and system characteristics that a 
specific reference architecture focuses on; and  
(4) business and people perspective, addressing the 
coverage of value stream aspect and users-centered 
perspective in a specific reference architecture.  
The comparison analysis of the main characteristics of 
the reference architectures is detailed below, and Table I at 
the end of the paper summarizes the comparison of the 
surveyed reference architectures. 
A. Technology  
The transformation of industrial sectors towards 
digitalization represents a complex problem space that often 
requires a solution space with multiple viewpoints or 
dimensions to describe, understand, and manage this 
complexity. 
This 
is 
reflected 
in 
several 
reference 
architectures that are often comprised of multiple models (as 
in e.g., IoT-ARM), multiple viewpoints (as in e.g., IIRA, 
P2413), or multiple layers (as in e.g., RAMI4.0, WSO2, 
Azure IoT, Internet-of-everything model, and Intel IoT). In 
contrast to these architectures, the Arrowhead framework 
takes another approach that focuses on cloud integration 
technologies. It applies service-oriented architecture, and 
builds local and inter cloud with orchestrated services to 
enable collaborative automation. 
The level of standardization and usage of standards are 
also different among the reference architectures. For 
instance, 
IIRA 
and 
P2413 
follow 
the 
architecture 
descriptions and general concepts such as concern, 
stakeholder, and viewpoint as defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010. RAMI4.0 follows and extends other standards, i.e., 
IEC62264 and IEC61512. IoT-ARM adopts the definition of 
architectural views and perspectives from [25], utilizing 
viewpoints 
with 
respect 
to 
function, 
information, 
concurrency, development, deployment and operation to 
describe a system’s internal structure, and the context 
viewpoint to describe a system’s external entities.  
Among the other reference architectures, a different 
approach has been taken instead of using a specific standard. 
A typical approach is the usage of an established architecture 
style. For example, the arrowhead framework applies 
service-oriented architecture to handle interoperability at 
service level. The WSO2 and Azure IoT reference 
architectures choose multi-layered architectures to handle 
interoperability issues within communication layer or device 
layer using specific protocols and technologies. 
B. Process  
Most of the reference architectures provide some 
guidelines and process steps at different levels of detail on 
the instantiation of the reference architectures. For instance, 
RAMI4.0 introduces an administration shell that allows the 
integration of physical things to Industrie4.0. WSO2 
provides a mapping into products and capabilities of the 
WSO2 platform when instantiating the WSO2 reference 
architecture. Regarding reference architectures IIRA, Azure 
IoT, Internet-of-everything, and Intel IoT, they all focus on 
the integration of information technologies (IT) and 
operational 
technologies 
(OT). 
IIRA 
provides 
an 
implementation viewpoint that describes the technical 
representation of an industrial internet system and the 
technologies and system components required for IT/OT 
integration. The reference architectures Azure IoT, Internet-
of-everything, and Intel IoT can be instantiated into concrete 
solutions and align with domain-specific designs. The 
reference architecture IoT-ARM provides very detailed 
guidelines and engineering practices on how to derive 
concrete architecture from the reference architecture, which 
specifies transformation rules for translating the abstract 
models into a concrete architecture. The reference 
architecture P2413 aims to capture the commonalities across 
domains and thus provides a basis for the instantiation of 
concrete domain-specific architectures. 
65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Quality and key system concerns 
Although the quality attributes addressed in the reference 
architectures vary, there are a couple of key quality concerns 
that are common to all, i.e., interoperability and security, 
which are also two major challenges in the context of cloud 
computing and Internet-of-things, in which distributed 
devices and systems from various vendors are connected to 
exchange data.  
Interoperability is defined as “the capability to exchange 
information with each other based on common conceptual 
models and interpretation of information in context” [15]. 
Different reference architectures address interoperability 
differently. 
For 
instance, 
IIRA 
addresses 
syntax 
interoperability in connectivity functional layer, and 
semantic interoperability in data management. WSO2 uses 
standard interoperable protocols such as HTTP, MQTT, and 
AMQP. Similarly, Intel IoT promotes standard-based 
environment for achieving interoperability. In IoT-ARM, the 
interoperability is achieved through the design-choice 
process by identifying and evaluating design choices with 
respect to their impact to interoperability. 
Security is defined as “the condition of the system 
operating without allowing unintended or unauthorized 
access, change or destruction of the system or the data and 
information it encompasses” [15]. As for interoperability, 
various reference architectures address security differently. 
For instance, IIRA proposes an integrated approach to 
security by considering end-to-end security capability across 
all the viewpoints. WSO2 focuses on encryption on devices, 
identity models, access control, and management of keys and 
tokens to address security requirements. Intel IoT provides a 
layered end-to-end security approach for endpoint device, 
network, and cloud levels. In Azure IoT, security measures 
are taken across various areas, including device and user 
identity, 
authentication 
and 
authorization, 
and 
data 
protection, etc. 
D. Business and people 
Interconnecting things, services, and people, and 
extracting useful information and knowledge from data 
analysis will enable intelligent industrial operation, generate 
new revenue opportunities, and lead to innovative business 
models. Therefore, the business context, values, and people 
aspects are essential in reference architectures. Some of the 
reference architectures have defined specific business 
viewpoint and people-oriented aspect. For instance, the 
reference architecture IIRA has a business viewpoint to 
address the concerns of stakeholders and their business 
vision, values and objectives. The key capabilities identified 
in the business viewpoint need to be realized through other 
viewpoints such as usage, functional and implementation 
viewpoints. In the reference architecture RAMI4.0, a 
business process layer is defined to ensure the integrity of the 
functions in the value stream and map the business models 
and the overall business process. In contrary to IIRA and 
RAMI4.0, some other reference architectures do not 
explicitly include the business perspective. Instead, the 
business aspect is addressed in the IoT architecture 
generation process, i.e., generation of requirements and 
transformation of these requirements into a concrete 
architecture. The reference architecture IoT-ARM is one 
such example, in which the definition of business goals sets 
the scope when generating the concrete architecture. The 
P2413 reference architecture does not explicitly address the 
business perspective either, though it explicitly addresses the 
people aspect by identifying the stakeholders who have an 
interest in a system and documenting their respective 
concerns. Some other reference architectures provide 
technical components that enable business value stream 
generation. For instance, the Internet-of-everything reference 
model and Intel IoT reference architecture offer business 
intelligence and data analytics components to enable smart 
decision making as a value proposition. Not all reference 
architectures include the business and people perspective, 
e.g., the Arrowhead framework and the WSO2 reference 
architecture.  
VI. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The reference architectures described in Section III 
provide an overview of the existing software architecture 
research and practice. The following sub-sections discuss the 
motivating factors of the development of these reference 
architectures, the scope of cloud computing and Internet-of-
things reference architectures, as well as the reference 
architectures’ potential impacts on research and practice. 
A. Motivating Factors of IoT Reference Architectures 
From surveying the existing reference architectures for 
Internet-of-things, we have found out several driving forces 
of the development of these reference architectures, 
including: 
(1) increasing complexity and size of the systems due to the 
tremendous amount of connected heterogeneous devices 
both within and across domains;  
(2) increased need for shorter time-to-market and rapid 
development;  
(3) new collaborative solutions that require integrated and 
coordinated 
information 
management 
to 
ensure 
improved effectiveness and optimized production 
processes or process chains in a single plant or across 
plants;  
(4) increasing 
need to achieve 
interoperability 
and 
compliance between different devices and systems;  
(5) increased focus on optimizing the assets in a single 
physical plant, as well as optimizing operations across 
asset types, fleets, customers and partners involved in 
the cloud computing and Internet-of-things value chain 
for value co-creation.  
Many of the above driving forces are also in line with the 
identified objectives of reference architectures as described 
in [13]. 
B. Scope of IoT Reference Architectures 
According to [13], a reference architecture should 
address technical architecture, business architecture and 
customer 
context. 
When 
surveying 
the 
reference 
architectures, we have found that most of the reference 
66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

architectures provide technical solutions, design patterns and 
tactics. However, the business architecture and customer 
context are often missing. For instance, some commonly 
used architecture patterns among these surveyed reference 
architectures include multitier architecture pattern using edge 
tier, platform tier and enterprise tier, edge-to-cloud 
architecture pattern, multi-tier data storage architecture 
pattern, distributed analytics architecture pattern, gateway or 
edge connectivity and management architecture pattern, etc. 
However, the aspects of business models and lifecycle 
considerations in a business architecture are often missing. In 
the surveyed reference architectures, RAMI4.0 and IIRA are 
two reference architectures that explicitly include business 
architecture aspects. A main characteristics of RAMI4.0 is 
the combination of lifecycle and value stream with a 
hierarchically structured approach. IIRA explicitly defines 
business viewpoint to address business vision, value 
proposition and objectives. Besides the missing emphasis on 
business architectures, the customer context that addresses 
the processes and user considerations in the customer 
enterprises are often missing as well. This indicates a need 
for 
further 
enhancement 
of 
the 
existing 
reference 
architectures with business architecture perspective to help 
customers realize potential value proposition during the 
process of concretizing the reference architectures. 
C. Impacts on Research and Practice 
One important aspect of a reference architecture is to 
provide practices and guidance for generating new concrete 
architectures [13] in order to be able to identify and close 
any technical gaps for the implementation of potential use 
cases. Some reference architectures explicitly address this 
aspect. For instance, in the reference architecture IIRA, the 
implementation viewpoint explicitly addresses the technical 
representation, the technologies and system components 
required to implement the activities and functions required 
when generating concrete architectures. Another example is 
the reference architecture IoT-ARM, which provides best 
practices and guidance for generating concrete architectures 
from IoT-ARM. It can also be used to devise system 
roadmaps that lead to minimum changes between two 
product generations while guaranteeing system capability 
and features. Another use of the reference architecture is 
benchmarking during functional components review process. 
One example is the reference architecture P2413, which 
supports 
system 
benchmarking, 
safety 
and 
security 
assessment.  
For practitioners in industry, the capability to cope with 
typical characteristics of legacy systems [36] and address 
legacy issues is often regarded as one important aspect in a 
reference architecture. Among the surveyed reference 
architectures, Arrowhead is one example that addresses 
explicitly the migration of ISA-95 systems [37] to service-
based collaborative automation systems in the cloud. For the 
reference architectures that do not explicitly take the legacy 
aspect into consideration, there is a need for identification of 
further extension and improvement opportunities for the 
future. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have surveyed existing well-known 
reference architectures, activities and initiatives for the cloud 
computing and Internet-of-things. To better understand and 
apply appropriate reference architectures for specific use 
cases, we have described the main aspects of these reference 
architectures, and have made an in-depth comparison 
analysis of these reference architectures from different 
perspectives, including technology, process, quality and key 
system 
concerns, 
business 
and 
people. 
The 
main 
characteristics covered in these perspectives are described, 
analyzed and compared among the reference architectures in 
detail. 
Based on the description and comparison analysis, we 
also discuss the driving forces and motivating factors of 
these reference architectures, the coverage of technical, 
business architecture and customer context in the reference 
architectures, and how they address the generation of 
concrete architectures, as well as the legacy migration 
perspective. Although it is difficult to find information on 
examples of solutions or concrete products implementing 
each architecture described, we believe that our analysis and 
discussions would assist practitioners in their choice of 
reference architectures in practice, and in the meanwhile 
provide input on how to further improve and develop these 
reference architectures. For future work, we will examine 
further the reference architectures to analyze possible options 
of standardization, and analyze these reference architectures’ 
suitability in different business scenarios and concrete case 
study contexts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article is an extended version of the conference 
paper [1]. Thanks to the IARIA Board for promoting 
extended versions of selected papers. 
Special acknowledgement to the Swedish Foundation for 
Strategic Research through the project “Internet-of-things 
and Cloud for Intelligent Manufacturing” (SM16-0025). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Pei-Breivold, “A Survey and Analysis of Reference 
Architectures 
for 
the 
Internet-of-things", 
International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances, ICSEA, 
2017. 
[2] The Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Internet of Things 
Business Index: A Quiet Revolution Gathers Pace,” 2013. 
[3] Industrial Internet Insights Report for 2015, Accenture . 
[4] European Commission, Unleashing the Potential of Cloud 
Computing in Europe, 2012. 
[5] European Research Cluster on the Internet of Things, 
http://www.internet-of-things-research.eu/, retrieved in April 
2018. 
[6] Industrial 
Internet 
Consortium, 
http://www.industrialinternetconsortium.org/, 
retrieved 
in 
April 2018. 
[7] Industri 4.0, http://www.plattform-i40.de/, retrieved in April 
2018. 
[8] https://www.aioti.eu/, retrieved in April 2018. 
67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] European 
Commission 
Internet-of-things, 
http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/internet-things, retrieved 
in April 2018. 
[10] E. Borgia, “The Internet of things vision: key features, 
applications and open issues”, Journal of Computer 
Communications, 2014. 
[11] An Oracle White Paper, “Cloud reference architecture”, 
Oracle Enterprise Transformation Solutions Series, 2012. 
[12] J. Liu, L.J. Zhang, B. Hu, and K. He, “CCRA: Cloud 
computing 
reference 
architecture”, 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Services Computing (SCC), 2012. 
[13] R. Cloutler, G. Muller, D. Verma, R. Nilchiani, E. Hole, and 
M. Bone, “The concept of reference architectures”, Systems 
Engineering, vol.13, 2010. 
[14] RAMI 4.0, https://www.zvei.org/en/subjects/industry-4-0/the-
reference-architectural-model-rami-40-and-the-industrie-40-
component/, retrieved in April 2018. 
[15] IIRA, http://www.iiconsortium.org/, retrieved in April 2018. 
[16] A. Bassi et al, Enabling things to talk – designing IoT 
solutions with the IoT architectural reference model, ISBN 
978-3-642-40402-3, Springer, 2013. 
[17] M. Weyrich, and C. Ebert, “Reference architectures for the 
Internet of things”, IEEE Software, vol. 33, issue 1, 2016. 
[18] E. Cavalcante, M.P. Alves, and T. Batista, “An analysis of 
reference 
architectures 
for 
the 
Internet 
of 
things”, 
International Workshop on Exploring Component-based 
Techniques for Constructing Reference Architectures, 2015. 
[19] H. Pei-Breivold, “Internet-of-things and Cloud computing for 
smart industry: a systematic mapping study”, International 
Conference on Enterprise Systems, 2017. 
[20] C. Fehling, F. Leymann, R. Mietzner, and W. Schupeck, “A 
collection of patterns for cloud types, cloud service models, 
and cloud-based application architectures”, Institute of 
Architecture of Applica-tion Systems, 2011. 
[21] ARC Advisory Group, https://www.arcweb.com/, retrieved in 
April 2018. 
[22] Operational 
Technology 
Viewpoints, 
https://www.arcweb.com/blog/operational-technology-
viewpoints, retrieved in April 2018. 
[23] Industrial IoT/Industrie 4.0 Viewpoints, https://industrial-
iot.com/, retrieved in April 2018. 
[24] ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 Systems and software engineering 
– 
architecture 
description, 
https://www.iso.org/standard/50508.html, retrieved in April 
2018. 
[25] E. Woods, and R. Nick, “The system context architectural 
viewpoint”, Joint Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on 
Software Architecture and European Conference on Software 
Architecture, WICSA/ECSA, 2009. 
[26] IEEE 
P2413, 
IEEE 
Standards 
Association, 
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/2413/, retrieved in April 2018. 
[27] Arrowhead Framework, http://www.arrowhead.eu/, retrieved 
in April 2018. 
[28] H. Derhamy, J. Eliasson, J. Delsing, and P. Priller, “A survey 
of commercial frameworks for the Internet of things”, IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Emerging 
Technologies 
and 
Factory 
Automation, 2015. 
[29] P. Fremantle, “A reference architecture for the Internet of 
things”, WSO2 White Paper, version 0.9.0, 2015. 
[30] https://azure.microsoft.com/en-au/updates/microsoft-azure-
iot-reference-architecture-available/, retrieved in April 2018. 
[31] https://www.iotwf.com/resources, retrieved in April 2018. 
[32] http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-
things/white-papers/iot-platform-reference-architecture-
paper.html, retrieved in April 2018. 
[33] https://sites.google.com/site/smartappliancesproject/home, 
retrieved in April 2018. 
[34] R. Langmann, and L. Meyer, “Automation services from the 
cloud”, 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Remote 
Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation, 2014. 
[35] F. Shrouf, J. Ordieres, and G. Miragliotta, “Smart factories in 
Industry 4.0: a review of the concept and of energy 
management approached in production based on the Internet 
of things paradigm”, IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, 2014. 
[36] S. Demeyer, S. Ducasse, and O. M. Nierstrasz, Object-
Oriented Reengineering Patterns, ISBN 978-3-9523341-2-6, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. 
[37] International Society of Automation (ISA), ANSI/ISA-
95.00.01-2000, Enterprise-Control System Integration - Part 
1-5, 2007. 
 
 
 
68
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE I.  
A COMPARISON OF REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES FOR INTERNET OF THINGS 
 
 
Reference 
Architectures 
Technology 
Process 
Quality and Key System 
Concerns 
Business and People 
RAMI4.0 
A key concept is I4.0 
component. Service-oriented 
and layered architecture. 
Follow and extend IEC62264 
and IEC61512 standards. 
Permit encapsulation of 
functionalities. Standards 
compliant. 
Address product lifecycle 
management dimension, 
horizontal integration 
across factories and 
vertical integration within 
factory. Allow step by step 
migration to I4.0 
components. 
Address security for 
functionality and data, 
functional safety and 
safety measures. The 
I4.0 component possesses 
the quality of service 
properties necessary for 
specific applications. 
Address people 
orchestrating the value 
stream, and value stream 
dimension throughout 
product lifecycle and 
across factories. 
IIRA 
Key concepts include concern, 
stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
Based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011. 
Standard-based open 
architecture. 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies. 
Address safety, security, 
trust and privacy, 
resilience, integrability, 
interoperability and 
composability, 
connectivity. 
Business viewpoint to 
address business vision, 
value proposition and 
objectives. 
IoT-ARM 
Key concepts include aspect-
oriented programming, model-
driven engineering, views and 
perspectives. Evolution and 
interoperability are the main 
drivers for the reference 
model and architecture. 
Provide guidelines and 
process steps on how to 
generate concrete 
architectures, perform IoT 
threat analysis, and derive 
design choices and tactics 
based on qualitative 
requirements. 
Address evolution and 
interoperability, 
performance and 
scalability, trust, security, 
privacy, availability and 
resilience. 
Business goals, cost and 
benefit analysis are used in 
the architecture generation 
process. Specification of 
an IoT business process 
model to make use cases 
IoT-ARM compliant. 
P2413 
Key concepts include concern, 
stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
Based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011 standard. 
Provide guidelines for 
cross-domain interaction, 
documenting and 
migrating architecture 
divergence. 
Address system 
interoperability, functional 
compatibility, protection, 
security, privacy and 
safety. 
People perspective is 
reflected in the process of 
identifying stakeholders 
and their concerns. 
Arrowhead 
Key concepts include local 
cloud, global cloud. 
Automation cloud integration 
based on service-oriented 
architecture. Information 
centric. 
Provide maturity levels of 
legacy system migration to 
cloud, engineering tools 
for development, and test 
support of cloud 
automation systems. 
Address service 
interoperability and 
integrability, security, 
latency, scalability, 
dynamic/continuous 
engineering. 
Not explicit 
WSO2 
Influenced by open-source 
projects and technologies 
Not explicit 
Address connectivity and 
communications, device 
management, data 
collection, analysis and 
actuation, scalability, 
security, and integration. 
Not explicit 
Azure IoT 
Key principles include 
heterogeneity, security, hyper-
scale deployments, and 
flexibility. Data concepts 
include device and data 
model, data streams, and 
device interaction. 
A vendor-specific solution 
architecture 
Not explicit 
Business systems 
integration layer and 
solution UX are two 
architecture components 
relevant to business and 
people. 
Internet-of-
everything 
A key concept is edge-ware. 
Multilevel model for IoT; 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies; 
enablement of legacy 
applications. 
Address interoperability, 
security, and legacy 
compatibility. 
Application layer covering 
business intelligence and 
analytics. Collaboration 
and processes layer 
explicitly involves people 
and processes. 
Intel IoT 
Building blocks include 
things, networks, and cloud. 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies. 
Address data and device 
connectivity, security, and 
interoperability. 
Value proposition by 
smart decision making 
based on data analytics. 
 
 
 
69
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

