The BBC Broadcast of ‘India’s Daughter’: An Examination of the Interactions between
Mainstream Media and Social Media
Balbir S. Barn∗, Ravinder Barn† and Franco Raimondi∗
∗Dept. of Computer Science
Middlesex University, London, UK
Email: b.barn, f.raimondi@mdx.ac.uk
†School of Law
Royal Holloway University of London
Egham, UK
Email: r.barn@rhul.ac.uk
Abstract—The pervasiveness of social media has resulted in
increased public involvement in key discussions about social
issues, as well as creating greater affordances for individual
expression and collective mobilisation. In December 2012, the
rape and murder of a 23-year-old Indian student in New Delhi,
India, was followed by widespread condemnation and public
action organised and coordinated through social media. In March
2015, a controversial BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation)
documentary, “India’s Daughter”, about the incident was broad-
cast despite restrictions imposed by the Indian Government.
This paper explores the interplay between Mainstream Media
("Fourth Estate") and Social Media ("Fifth Estate") through a
case study analysis using computational techniques to analyse
250,000 tweets collated following the broadcast of the documen-
tary. The primary contribution of the paper is a contextualisation
of our ﬁndings and analysis within the theoretical frameworks
of social movement theory and postcolonialism in order to
understand the interactions between mainstream media and social
media. Limitations and issues around implications for conducting
inter-disciplinary social media research are also discussed.
Keywords–Postcolonialism; India’s Daughter; Social Network
Analysis; Mainstream Media; Social Media; Protest Movement;
Twitter
1.
INTRODUCTION
In December 2012, the rape and murder of a 23-year-
old Indian student in New Delhi, India, was followed by
widespread condemnation and public action organised and
coordinated through social media. In March 2015, a contro-
versial BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) documentary,
“India’s Daughter”, about the incident was broadcast despite
restrictions imposed by the Indian Government. Analysis of
social media commenting on the broadcast was ﬁrst reported
at the Third International Conference on Human and Social
Analytics [1]. As the most populous democracy in the modern
world, India has witnessed an increasing growth in the use of
the internet in general, and social media in particular. Although
accurate statistics are difﬁcult to obtain, estimates of the micro-
blogging site of 140 characters, Twitter, range from 23 million
to 35 million [2]. This ﬁgure has more than doubled in the
last 3 years. According to a collective called ‘India on the
Internet 2014’, Twitter users in India total 35 million while
125 million people are on the social networking site (SNS),
Facebook. Further, it is estimated that almost 9 out of 10 web
users in India visit a social networking site. In a climate of
smart phones and their applications, and SNSs, such a ﬁgure
is not so surprising. A core feature of such social media sites is
their reliance on individual users for content creation and active
user involvement. Consequently, such engagement on social
media platforms results in the availability of what has been
termed as big data. Academic researchers have been drawn to
such sources of information to help promote understandings in
a number of key areas including social movements and social
protests, general and local political elections, trends in patterns
of health and health behaviours, consumption of social media
by individuals and groups, social inﬂuence in e-commerce,
work stress, and national happiness [3].
Twitter is notable in that it has rapidly become important
and popular as key tool for organising and generating com-
munication for protestors around the world [4]. Examples of
where Twitter has played a signiﬁcant role include: the Iranian
protests of 2009-2010 [5], the so-called Egyptian revolution of
2011 [6] and also the various Occupy protests that took place
around the world [7]. It is also clear that that the messaging
technology is viewed differently depending upon context.
Hence it is seen as subversive by autocratic regimes as well
as a suitable technology for surveillance [8]. In addition to the
organising and communicating aspects of Twitter, researchers
have also commented on how Twitter and social media in
general is also being used to reconstruct and extend journalism
and notions of what constitutes a Habermasian public sphere
[9], [10]. That is, the realm of social life in which, something
approaching public opinion can be formed and where access
is guaranteed to all citizens. The perception is that networked
individuals have the capacity to use social media to enhance
their role in news production and dissemination to achieve a
growing independence from the mainstream media ( "Fourth
Estate") [11].
In South Delhi, India, the 16 December 2012 rape and
murder of a 23 year old physiotherapy student by six men,
marked a Twitter watershed moment where some commenta-
tors asked whether this heralded an ‘Indian Spring’ [12]. The
street protests across the nation in which social media was
said to have played a part were described by some as the
new ‘unifying force’ [13] through the formulation of a shared
public opinion on social media.
Researchers have analysed social media outlets from that
period [14] [15]. Much of the protest and mobilisation has
1
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

been framed using social movement theories such as that by
McAdam et al. [16] and resource mobilization theory [17].
Several years after the Delhi rape incident, a BBC docu-
mentary titled “India’s Daughter” was broadcast on 4 March
2015 in the UK and on 8th March 2015 in New York. The
broadcast of the documentary directed by Leslee Udwin was
controversial, in that, the Indian Government sought to have it
banned and the BBC chose to bring forward the broadcast to
an earlier programme slot. Early indicators of the controversial
aspects of the documentary were immediately brought to the
foreground. These included: the extent to which mainstream
media occupied the so-called egalitarian and democratising
space of social media; the postcolonial texture of the debate
and the overall sense of how mainstream media handled the
case under question. Twitter naturally formed a predominant
backdrop to this broadcast given its initial role in mobilisation
of public opinion in the original 2012 event (mentioned above)
[12], [13], [18].
We contend that this 2015 debate on Twitter bears likeness
to a protest movement, albeit tempered by the inﬂuence of
mainstream media.
Within a context where the mainstream media and social
activists now largely occupy this micro-blogging space [13],
research that examines the interplay between mainstream me-
dia and social media through speciﬁc case study instances can
have public policy implications. Hence, the research reported
in this paper makes a key analytical contribution of public re-
action, through tweets, to the broadcast of the documentary on
the BBC in the UK and on Youtube, Vimeo and other sources
in India. This interplay is explored through two perspectives.
Two explorations are undertaken. Firstly, we reﬂect on the re-
action to the documentary broadcast as another mode of social
mobilisation. Secondly, we examine how postcolonialism and
anti-postcolonialism rhetoric manifests itself.
This is an extended version of a paper published in the
IARIA HUSO 2017 conference [1]. Here we present additional
theory development of social mobilisation as well as further
commentary and results.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In
Section 2, approaches to research methods for social me-
dia research as well as outlining key concepts and debates
around social mobilisation and postcolonial theory. The latter
is signiﬁcant given that postcolonialism was an important
emergent theme. Crucially, the historical relationship between
the two countries where the incident occurred and the ﬁlm
was shown provided a particular salience and backdrop to the
analysis of this paper. In Section 3, we present the aims and
details of the research methodology we have used. Section
4 presents overview results arising from the blog analysis
and computational analysis of the collected tweets. Section
5 entails a discussion of some tweets followed by commen-
tary on the validity of the results. Finally, in Section 6, we
present concluding remarks and outline some further research
considerations.
2.
RELATED WORK AND UNDERPINNING THEORY
In this section we outline key concepts and debates around
Twitter methodological concerns, social mobilisation and post-
colonial theory given that postcolonialism was an important
emergent theme.
A. Twitter based methods
Twitter evolved from a status, phatic oriented and "in-
consequential chirping" tool, to an event-following reporting
tool. More recently, it has evolved to its current form where
it has settled into a data set from which researchers extract
collections and one that is archived by the US Library of
Congress [19]. Throughout this evolution, Twitter’s data set has
been source of study for social scientists where methodological
approaches which have largely remained as black boxes whose
outputs on analyses such as "reach" taken on trust. It is possible
that Twitter, through its publicly accessible routes to tweet
data, has moved computational social science from being the
preserve of governments and private companies [20].
Methods for analysing tweet data sets rely on under-
standing the interplay between three layers of communication
in Twitter. Bruns and Moe [21] identify these three layers
as: Micro (inter-personal communications); Meso (follower-
followee relationships) and and the macro level of hashtag-
based exchanges. The Meso layer affords the notion of a
personal public space but it is the Macro level, hashtag based
exchanges that dramatically change the nature of discourse.
Regardless of the level, twitter data collection is central
to any method. Most methods and examples of Twitter based
social media research use the Streaming API either through
existing tools or bespoke development to sample or ﬁlter
(via keywords) tweets to form a collection [22]. Collections
are analysed at the micro, meso and macro levels through
statistical tools that offer descriptive measures of the networks
implicit in the tweet collections [23].
For a large collection, another widely used technique is
sentiment analysis and time series analysis [24]. Automatic
sentiment analysis is increasingly popular and is used for
predicting the sentiment content of texts based upon the
features it identiﬁes such as the words used. Sentiment analysis
techniques can be applied over an individual tweet, (sub)
collections, categorised collections for example or over a time
period. There are several automated sentiment analysis tools
available including Sentistrength [25] and VaderSentiment
[26].
For some forms of social media analysis, qualitative textual
analysis can also be appropriate. Thus a key challenge facing
social scientists is determining what approach or technique
to use for a given research question. Later in this paper, we
outline the approach taken with respect to the various methods
used in this paper.
B. Social movements and protest
As noted earlier, Twitter is both important and popular as
a key tool for organising and generating communication for
protestors around the world [4]. Examples of where Twitter
has played a signiﬁcant role include: the Iranian protests of
2009-2010 [5], the so-called Egyptian revolution of 2011 [6]
and also the various Occupy protests that took place around
the world [7].
In 2017, following rape and sexual assault allegations
against one of the top Hollywood ﬁlm makers, Harvey Wein-
stein, the recent #MeToo social media movement has been per-
sistent in its focus on gender based violence, patriarchy, male
power and domination [27]. The national and transnational
2
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

impact of this has been phenomenal with counter arguments
protesting about a ‘witch hunt’ against men [28].
It is also clear that that the messaging technology is viewed
differently depending upon temporality and context. Hence, it
is seen as subversive by autocratic regimes, as well as a suitable
technology for surveillance [8].
Scholarly research continues to point to the ways in which
mainstream media play a key role in determining the agenda
of social media [29]. In an analysis of 104,059 tweets related
to the Delhi rape incident and social protests that took place
across urban India, in line with previous scholarship, Ahmed
and Jaidka (2013) conclude that traditional media still plays a
pivotal role in disseminating information [13]. For instance, the
authors report that less than 10% of the tweets were actually
from ordinary citizens / individuals. Such a ﬁnding certainly
lends credence to previous observations that have questioned
the egalitarian, and democratising promises of such space [30].
Questions also arise as to whether a new public sphere is
being reconstructed where ordinary citizens really do have an
opportunity to form public opinion.
Nevertheless, digital activism was prevalent in the 2012
incident and again during the period around the broadcasting
of the documentary in 2015. Dey deﬁnes digital activism
as "political participation, activites and protests organised in
digital networks beyond representational politics." [31]. Such
activism as a social movement emerges as an outcome of the
existence of number of interrelated factors deﬁned by McAdam
et al. [16] as:
Political-opportunities: the establishment of link between
institutionalised politics and social movements.
Mobilising structures:
the collective set of means which
people generate solidarity and commitment to a movement
or collective action. Such structures could include family and
friend networks, protests and demonstration events.
Framing processes:
the shared understanding, meanings
and deﬁnitions that people bring to their situation.
Ray et al. [15] provide some preliminary insights into
social movement mobilisation of the case under question. They
analysed 1585 top tweets (those presented by Twitter in a
search) around the December 2012 incident. The analysis was
conducted by coding the tweets into ten content oriented cate-
gories. To understand the role of social movements, the tweets
were also categorised according to the critical factors un-
derpinning social movement formation: political opportunity,
mobilising structures and framing processes. Their analysis
suggests that Twitter offered mechanisms to expose political
opportunity as an alternative vehicle to traditional media. For
example, access to powerful political allies or celebrities.
Hashtags served as mobilisation structures especially when
linked to speciﬁc meetings and events. Similarly, hashtags such
as "awareness", "delhirape", served as a language and symbol
set to help frame the shared understanding. Eipe et al. echo
this and also state that social media, more broadly, creates a
less-conﬁned political space by establishing connections with
other social movements in a global community [14].
More critical comment is reported by Losh [32]. Two
examples of criticism are noted. Firstly, participants in activism
need to have "skin in the game" as embodied actors. Secondly,
Silicon Valley has a universalising missionary mentality that
also stiﬂes creativity, thereby masking new solutions, through
personalisation technologies.
C. Media and postcolonialism
In addition to the protest movement discussion, it also
makes sense to provide an understanding of Western main-
stream media’s handling of the case under question. This
is particularly important to help ground the response of the
postcolonial society and to also more properly explore the role
of the impact of social media on public policy.
Over the last several decades, postcolonial theory has
emerged as a major intellectual critical approach. The theory is
generally regarded as having been founded on the contributions
of key writers including Frantz Fanon, Edward Said, Gaya-
tri Spivak, and Homi Bhabha. Primarily, postcolonial theory
seeks to problematise key historical and contemporary notions,
structures and processes including colonialism, race, ethnicity,
culture, racism, gender, identity, inequality, and globalisation.
In short, the theory seeks to ‘critique and aims to transcend the
structures supportive of Western colonialism and its legacie’
[33]. The watershed moment for the polemics of postcolo-
nialism was the publication of Edward Said’s Orientalism
in 1978 [34]. In Orientalism, Said meticulously brought out,
through close textual studies, the prejudices about and biases
against the non-West that informed the colonial discourse and
its meaning productions. He showed how the non-West or
the orient came to occupy the space of an exotic ‘Other’ in
the canon of Western knowledge and how this ‘orientalism’
as a discourse was responsible in justifying the colonial and
imperial projects of the Western powers. Postcolonialism,
therefore, became the rallying point to challenge the pre-
sumptions of Western knowledge systems, to comprehend the
epistemologies of the non-West, to create a space where, as
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak puts it “the marginal can speak
and be spoken, even spoken for” [35]. Such an epistemo-
logical framework is indeed one of the key components of
postcolonial theory. Others include its critique of power in
the forms of economic/cultural/economic/political/ideological
domination (both historically and in the present time), its
stance on the processes of otherisation, and essentialism. In the
context of postcolonial theory, otherisation refers to a process
by which one group uses social and psychological means to
exclude or marginalise another group by focussing on differ-
ences. Whereas essentialism is understood to be the essence
or "whatness" of something. In postcolonialism, essentialism
implies the action of how a colonising power decides what is
and isn’t a particular identity. More often than not, differences
and/or commonalities between groups may be overlooked to
maintain a power relation.
Given this backdrop, in an examination of verbal and visual
texts in United States mainstream news media reporting of the
Delhi rape case, Durham argues that India / Third World is
‘represented as a primitive and undisciplined space populated
by savage males and subordinate women’ [36]. She further
asserts that in the geopolitics of sexual assault, the USA news
media reinscribed social geographies of power and sex in terms
of gender. Such an ethnocentric framework portrays the Third
World woman as oppressed and lacking in agency, and the
nation-state as incompetent and complicit in her subordination.
The mediated deployment of space and place and Delhi in
particular as the ‘rape capital’ of India serve as a key signiﬁer
3
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the political economy of gender and sexuality, and hence
the process of ranking one society over the other.
In her analysis of over 1500 USA (United States of
America) mainstream news articles published over a period
of two months, following the December 2012 rape incident,
Roychowdhury (2013) argues that through its coverage, the
news reporting not only created a polarity between the new and
old India within a neo-liberal consumer world; but also stressed
the ‘notions of Western gender progressivism’ as evidenced
through its language including words such as ‘traditional
societies’, ‘medieval’, ’rape as a weapon of power against
modernity’. Here, in spite of the evidence on crimes of rape
against women in the west, western space with its so-called
modern cosmopolitanism is presented as safer for women [37].
The December 2012 case is used as a platform to present
a dichotomy of the modern Indian woman victim, and the
backward / savage /misogynist brown man. Roychowdhury
cites Spivak‘s 1988 writings, and argues for its ongoing appeal
as witnessed in western media, that is, "white men saving
brown women from brown men." [38].
We use this texturised context of postcolonialism to exam-
ine the extent to which Spivak‘s theoretical framework can be
employed to explore the interaction between the mainstream
media and Twitter in the context of the BBC documentary,
India’s Daughter. Indeed, the broadcast of this ﬁlm, and its
discussion on Twitter provides a useful anchor to extend the
postcolonial lens referred to by scholars, such as Durham and
Roychowdhury.
3.
AIMS AND METHODS
In this study, our primary aim was focused on the interac-
tion between the mainstream media and Twitter. In doing this,
we sought to apply the theory of postcolonialism to understand
the dynamics of this interaction. Additional areas of interest
included an identiﬁcation and exploration of the debates and
discussion generated as a consequence of this controversial
BBC documentary. To this end, we employed a mixed-methods
approach to help understand the situation namely: a series of
blogs written at the time of the broadcasting of the ﬁlm in
the UK (United Kingdom), and USA in March 2015; and
then the collection and analysis of tweets over a period of
4 weeks (3 March 2015 - 3 April 2015). Notably, the ﬁlm
was broadcast during this period to coincide with International
Women’s Week. The topicality and contemporaneous nature
of the study required drawing upon those social media blogs,
written within a week or so of the broadcasting of the ﬁlm.
The blogs were read and analysed manually by two of the
authors and led to the identiﬁcation of the dominant themes
used in the subsequent analysis. These blogs constituted not
only as part of our data collection, but they were also useful
in contextualising and in making sense of our Twitter data.
Sixteen blogs from prominent bloggers were analysed. Most
of the bloggers were female (11), and only three were male.
Two of the bloggers were unknown.
A key challenge in conducting social media based research
is the lack of standard approaches in appropriate methods
for data collection and analysis. This concern tends to be
further compounded by a limited range of integrated tools to
support research methods that can enable the full range of types
of analyses required. The Collaborative Online Social Media
Observatory (COSMOS) is an example of a distributed digital
social research platform that addresses these requirements [39].
However, at the time of this research, the tool was not readily
available and furthermore did not integrate with our efforts at
developing a learning set through manual analysis. Other tools
such as Prometheus is a peer-to-peer service that collects social
data from a number of sources and applies social inferencing
techniques, but it is mostly concerned with privacy-aware
social data management [40].
Given these concerns, we chose to access the Twitter data
stream using the published Twitter Application Programming
Interface (API) via our own bespoke software. Twitter offers
a streaming API that can be ﬁltered on keywords; in our case
we employed the following list: “IndiasDaughter”, “Leslee Ud-
win”, “Udwin” and “banbbc”. The script was kept running to
collect tweets that included the keywords from 3rd March 2015
to 3rd April 2015 following the broadcast of the documentary.
Over 254,000 tweets were collected amounting to around
1GB of data. Such a volume of data requires computational
approaches to analysis. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the
general steps in our method.
Figure 1. Method overview.
Small scale analysis of tweets of say less than 10000 is rel-
atively straightforwardly done by human processing. Compu-
tational approaches provide additional insights that would not
necessarily be possible by manual analysis. Given the volume
of the tweet set, we were interested in several types of analysis.
These analytical tools included: Automatic categorisation: the
use of machine learning to categorise text or other data;
Sentiment analysis: the use of natural language processing and
text analysis to identify attitudes of a respondent with respect
to a topic; Geo-tagging: plotting the location information of
tweets on a map; and Social network analysis: the use of
network and graph theory to investigate social structures. We
discuss the use of the analytical tools below using the diagram
in Figure 1 to provide an overall context.
4.
RESULTS
As indicated earlier, our research questions have centred
around several exploratory areas. The blogs, existing literature
and our own research questions prompted and inﬂuenced these
exploratory areas which would become coding categories in
our thematic analysis of the tweets.
4
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Analysis of the Blogs: Emergent themes/categories
In the analysis of blogs from March 2015, several di-
vergences were identiﬁed. Firstly, some bloggers set out to
support the ban and to justify it [41]. Others proposed taking
a legal stand on the matter and argued that as the case is
still subjudice, the telecast should be postponed until such
time as the judgement is pronounced by the court, but in no
way supporting the ban [42]. Bloggers also chose to challenge
the ban, ask for it to be lifted immediately, and the telecast
to take place as per the schedule [43], [44]. Others took an
informed and critical stand, and commentated from various
perspectives such as feminism, postcolonialism or even with
India’s general use of "bans". Arguments for condemning
and supporting the ban in the same breadth were presented
[45], [43]. An analysis of the blogs helped generate a useful
framework that could be applied to our Twitter dataset. A total
of 7 prominent themes were identiﬁed. These included notions
of legality of broadcasting the documentary (Legality/Ban), the
postcolonial mindset of the ﬁlm and the response from others
(Postcolonialism), representations and discussions about the
lawyers involved (Lawyers), contemporary feminist thinking in
India (Feminism), the role of traditional media in discussions,
in this case BBC and New Delhi TV (NDTV, mainstream
media), representations and discussions about the role of
Government of India (Government), and ﬁnally the role and
value of punishment (Punishment).
B. Categorisation of tweets
Thematic analysis or categorisation is a powerful quali-
tative data analysis tool. The challenge is to deploy it for
1 gigabyte of data. We elected to use machine learning
techniques and the use of training sets. A random sample
of 2000 tweets were extracted from the tweet population and
classiﬁed manually against the categories listed above by two
of the researchers. Where there was discrepancy, discussion
was used to agree a ﬁnal classiﬁcation. This tweet set of 2000
tweets was used as a "Training Set" to reﬁne / parameterise
machine learning algorithms which were then used on the
entire tweet population to categorise the 254K tweets. We
partitioned the 2000 training set using 3 folds. We used NTLK
(Natural Language Toolkit), a Python based toolkit for natural
language processing [46]. This software comes with an open
source library and toolkit for natural language processing to do
stemming and tokenisation, using all the words as features. We
have employed a Naive Bayesian classiﬁer to build our model.
The table in Figure 2 overleaf summarises the categorisation
results. Table I shows sample tweets for each classiﬁcation.
This training set had around 72% accuracy (manual ver-
sus automatic categorisation). This is consistent with other
research [47]. We ﬁnally applied the model to the whole dataset
of 254K tweets. Tweets related to postcolonialism amounted to
26,816, representing 10.5% of the overall total and the second
largest of the analytical categories. The largest category centred
around tweets about legality and banning of the broadcast.
More importantly, the postcolonialism tweets amounted to
23% of the tweets that were classiﬁed against the desired
classiﬁcations by the machine learning algorithm. We used the
’Other’ category to denote discussion that did not fall into the
categories of interest.
TABLE I. Categories and sample tweets
Category
Sample Tweet
Legality / Ban
RT @GladImIndian: After government’s request,
YouTube pulls down Nirbhaya documentary in
India: TV report #IndiasDaughter #NirbhayaDoc-
umentary
#IndiasDaughter is on BBC Four now - but was
BANNED in India today because of its infamous
interview with a rapist. Watch now and RT
Postcolonialism
RT @IndianWatching: @narendramodi All night
tirelessly we have tried to counter SM efforts of
Plan UK the foundation for which Udwin worked
RT @ShekharGupta: Must make Brits pay for de-
meaning #IndiasDaughter also Bharat Mata. Stop
playing cricket, London junkets;
Lawyers
@IndiasDaughter Sickening ideas of lawyer who
defended rapist with equally disgusting ideas
about role of #women in #society BBC4
RT @ImKazKohli: Showing the corrupt side of
India, the lawyer was paid all he cares about his
money #IndiasDaughter
Feminism
RT @gsurya: Just watched #IndiasDaughter on
YouTube, brilliantly made, shows a mirror to these
patriarchal medieval Sanghi types
RT @neelvan_ruak: "We must know that Women
are perhaps softer and weaker than Men" - Sheila
Dixit on Protecting Women, and Rapes. #wtf
Media
One can only hope that the Indian government
reads this. RT @soniafaleiro: I reviewed #Indias-
Daughter for @guardian: http://t.co/Y6rO3H9dge
RT @IndiaSpeaksPR: Sonia Singh assured that
NDTV has NO LINK to the #IndiasDaughter ﬁlm.
Maybe thats why the makers thanked Prannoy Roy
Government
RT @xAnarchyPistolx: #IndiasDaughter Bcuz the
government thinks it’s better to ban the truth than
actually bother to prevent rape
#IndiasDaughter d doc is a grt expos ˝O on the
Indian mindset. Twitter ppl r elitist. hv seen louts
in Haryana Delhi spk the exact same way
Punishment
Devastated. It may take 2 hands to clap but it
will only take 1 hand to send you to your death.
#IndiasDaughter #IAmIndiasDaughter #RIPJyoti
#IndiasDaughter shows you tht even after com-
mitting rape with such BRUTALITY,; being sen-
tenced to DEATH, the Rapist has ZERO RE-
MORSE. WOW!
C. Sentiment Analysis
The use of natural language processing and text analysis to
identify attitudes of a respondent with respect to a topic is a
popular analytical tool used in tweet analysis. Both the original
incident (through the brutality of the crime) and the subsequent
controversial aspects of the televised documentary generated
a wide range of emotions and efforts to assess the overall
sentiment was deemed appropriate. We used the open source
vaderSentiment0.5 tool [26] to conduct a sentiment analysis
of the tweet data set. VaderSentiment represents sentiments on
a scale from -1 to 1 representing negative sentiment at one
end (-1) and positive sentiment at the other end (1). When the
full set of tweets were subjected to a sentiment analysis using
VaderSentiment, we found that tweets related to postcolonial-
ism were ranked 3rd in association with negative sentiment.
The overall compound sentiments for all categorisations is
shown in Figure 2.
5
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Automatic categorisation and overall sentiments.
D. Social Network Analysis
In this paper we are predominantly concerned with the
postcolonial texture of the debate surrounding the broadcasting
of the ﬁlm. Hence, social network analysis on the tweet
set associated with postcolonialism was conducted using two
open source social network analysis tools: NodeXL [48] and
Gephi [49]. The Postcolonialism tweet set (JSON ﬁle) was
transformed using bespoke scripts into a form readable by
NodeXL. In this data set, nodes are Twitter users and the edges
represent tweets that can either be retweets or mentions. This
data set was further cleaned by merging duplicate edges and
the addition of weights to reduce the edge count. NodeXL was
used primarily as a means for creating the GraphML format
for use in the visualisation within the Gephi toolset. Gephi is
better supported on MacOS and we were able to compute and
visualise various social network analysis descriptive statistics.
Within Gephi, the data set comprised 2000 nodes and 13243
undirected edges. Modularity computations were performed
on the network. These measured the strength of division of a
network into communities. We used the modularity algorithm
included in Gephi [50] and produced seven communities of
interest. Each of the top four communities (in size) were
centred around key mainstream media actors such as @BBC,
@NDTV @BDUTT, @BBCIndia and @TimesOf India. Also
apparent was how these same actors were similarly ranked
highly in a range of network centrality measures such as
Betweenness Centrality and Eigenvalue centrality.
Degree Centrality is a measure of a node with respect
to its in-bound connections and its outbound connections. If
a node/actor receives many ties they are often regarded as
prominent or important. Nodes that have a high out-degree
are actors that are inﬂuential.
Betweenness Centrality is a measure of node that is based
on the extent to which a node falls on the geodesic paths
between other pairs of nodes in the network. In social network
analysis, nodes with a high value for betweenness centrality
are an indication of inﬂuence on information ﬂow in a network.
Hence a node with a high value is an important conduit for
information ﬂowing between nodes in the network.
Eigenvalue Centrality considers in-bound and out-bound
connections and also the node’s connection to other important
nodes. Hence, the measure is seen as an indicator of the power
of the node.
Tiryakian et al. note that "Individuals with high between-
ness centrality tend to be inﬂuential because they are well
informed and can affect the ﬂow of information in a network.
As a result, they are often information gatekeepers." [51].
For example, @BBC was top-ranked for both Eigenvector
(0.00929400), and Betweenness centrality (13556362.612). We
also observe that the use of Eigenvalue centrality to denote
power is open to debate and recent results have indicated that
in Twitter, users with high eigenvector centrality need not be
inﬂuential users [52]
The ﬁlm was shown in both USA and the UK of which
the latter has a postcolonial relationship with India. Analysis
of geo-tagged tweets was not considered meaningful given
the low numbers of geo-tagging. None the less even from the
limited, usual 1% of geo-tagged tweets (2637 tweets), we can
observe how mobilisation and activity is centred around areas
where there are known sub-continent diasporas. Thus ﬁgure
3 very clearly delineates tweets from diasporic communities
from the UK, Scandinavia, United Arab Emirates, and USA.
For the latter, the large city connurbations as well as the east
and west coasts are clearly visible as sources of tweets.
To mitigate against the lack of location data, automated
analysis of Twitter handle biographies could be used for
analysing how sentiments and other issues vary between the
countries where the ﬁlms where shown. Our future work will
incorporate such approaches.
Figure 3. All geo-tagged tweets.
Our results for the centrality statistics are shown in table 1.
These data are the non-normalised results. The top 25 results
are shown. From the table it is clear that there is considerable
overlap between the centrality measures of various nodes.
@BBC for example is the most powerful node in the network
and one with the highest betweenness measure. Several BBC
based Twitter accounts feature as important conduits for in-
formation ﬂow. Several of the nodes were Hindu nationalists,
Others were bloggers such as @Sootradhar and @thekinshu.
Presenters on Indian television programmes were represented
and included @dibang, and @BDUTT for example. Most were
individuals.
Figure 4 depicts the core of the 2000 node undirected
network by limiting the map to vertices (nodes) that have
degree range of 25-89 edges and that also have an Eigenvalue
> 0.1111762270211876 (normalised). These parameters were
used primarily for presentation purposes. Additionally, the
vertices are scaled by Betweenness centrality to indicate the
roles that vertices are playing in brokerage and diffusion of
information. The various communities to which vertices belong
are also indicated by the colour.
6
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. Centrality measures
Vertex
Eigenvector
Centrality
Vertex
Betweenness
Centrality
BBC
0.00929400
BBC
13556362.612
lesleeudwin
0.00635000
BBCIndia
9210704.414
YesIamSaffron
0.00344600
AlanaBowker
7989346.749
MahaveerM_
0.00344600
lesleeudwin
7436802.195
Sootradhar
0.00304900
LutyensInsider
4750346.108
ndtv
0.00301000
Sootradhar
3742481.265
TRobinsonNewEra
0.00290400
BBCWorld
2470768.572
dibang
0.00289000
gvicks
2415990.807
rishibagree
0.00261900
ndtv
2385230.780
LutyensInsider
0.00260200
vicky895
2364758.802
PMOIndia
0.00250600
dibang
2340111.494
DrJwalaG
0.00228700
shaliniscribe
2269173.050
BBCWorld
0.00228700
sunnysingh_nw3
2145012.461
thekinshu
0.00193500
M_Lekhi
1981712.913
Keisar_
0.00184800
Keisar_
1967994.765
mediacrooks
0.00169900
rishibagree
1806544.314
narendrapjoshi
0.00168700
MahaveerM_
1738846.955
mariawirth1
0.00155700
rvaidya2000
1634460.299
rvaidya2000
0.00149300
mariawirth1
1634460.299
sankrant
0.00147700
seemagoswami
1523056.837
AskAnshul
0.00143200
YesIamSaffron
1458497.885
BDUTT
0.00142300
SuchayVora
1275945.185
surnell
0.00138700
radhabharadwaj
1259731.335
htTweets
0.00134600
PMOIndia
1206559.332
rohitagarwal86
0.00129200
anniegowen
1176381.602
Figure 4. Power diffusion
5.
DISCUSSION
Our results indicate that mainstream media appear to be
effective in utilising the communication spaces created by
social media. Thus, for example, the BBC and NDTV Twitter
accounts feature in both measures in Table II. However, we can
observe some impact of social media, namely Twitter, through
the centrality measures observed for some inﬂuential bloggers
(@Sootradhar and @thekinshu) but noticeably not from those
bloggers who were perceived to have set the agenda through
their articles. The positioning of social media as a force for
dissemination and a viable growing independent "Fifth Estate"
as an alternative to mainstream media based journalism [53]
should be questioned.
The BBC ﬁnds mention in around 50% of the tweets
that were posted on the issue of the ban (categorised as
Postcolonialism), but there were very few tweets from the
various BBC ofﬁcial handles in that data set (<10). The BBC
World News, with the handle @BBCWorld, on the other hand
retweeted some of the tweets coming from @BBCIndia. These
include the following: @BBCIndia: Letter from Director of
BBC Television to Indian broadcast ministry on #IndiasDaugh-
ter. The letter that was attached to this tweet, was the one
written by Danny Cohen, the Director of Television at the
BBC, to the Joint secretary at the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, Government of India. The following quote from
the letter helps disambiguate the BBC’s position:
...We appreciate your concern but we feel India’s Daughter
has a strong public interest in raising awareness of a global
problem and the BBC is satisﬁed with the editorial standards
of the ﬁlm... The purpose of including the interview with the
perpetrator was to gain an insight into the mind-set of a rapist
with a view to understanding the wider problem of rape and
not just in India. [54]
Further, the letter goes on to make clear whilst there is a
notional respect for Indian legal jurisdiction, the BBC would
bring forward the broadcast of the documentary to an earlier
slot. Reasons are not given, and one possible inference is
potential legal action preventing the broadcast.
...It should be noted, although the BBC is happy to take
your views into consideration, we are not planning to transmit
the ﬁlm in any territory which lies under Indian legal jurisdic-
tion...after lengthy and careful consideration we have decided
to show India’s Daughter on BBC Four in the UK at 22:00
tonight. [54]
What is attempted in this letter has a direct bearing on
our postcolonial understanding, for it redraws the battle-lines
for this debate and depicts ‘rape’, the central issue of the
ﬁlm, as a global and not an India speciﬁc malaise. And in
so doing, it attempts to steer away from any alleged bias in
the representational politics despite the obvious conﬂation in
the title of the documentary which asserts a national identity
to the malaise of rape. The letter’s reference to jurisdiction
appears to underplay the ubiquity and reach of social media,
and seems to embolden the role of mainstream media. The
Twitter discussions amplify some of the positions identiﬁed
by the bloggers. Thus, Mehra notes:
There are many questions regarding why some sections of
the widely-read Western media are so obsessed with reporting
and analysing rapes in India while often conveniently ignoring
similarly grievous nature of the problem in their own back-
yards. and asks: Can you imagine if an Indian ﬁlm-maker
were to make a documentary on the thousands of cases of
sexual abuse and ‘grooming’ of young girls in Rotterham (sic)
between 1997-2013, and title it "Britain’s Daughter"? [55].
The blogs and tweets from other central nodes (including
bloggers and Hindu nationalists) not only accused BBC of
being prejudiced in their framing of the narrative, but also
came down upon the broadcaster for doing so at the expense
of not giving adequate attention to gruesome incidents and
issues at ‘home’. For example:
7
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

@YesIamSaffron How Many Documentaries ve u Seen
@BBC Reporting US Rapes or Biggest Child Exploitation
Scandals in UK? #BanBBC #UHF http://t.co/hglD7lfHOP (297
RTs)
@thekinshu Dear @lesleeudwin can you pl tell me why
you afraid to make a Documentary on your own Rape Case in
London.? #BanBBC
The above tweets demonstrate a strong dynamic of na-
tionalism, and the ‘other’ that portrays the BBC and the
documentary ﬁlm maker as an oppressive force. There is a
challenge to the claim made by the ‘other’ to be the holder
of morality, and superiority. Moreover, the ‘other’s’ stance on
human rights and gender is also questioned in highlighting its
own social problems. Crucially, the BBC and Leslee Udwin
serve to represent the Western ‘other’. In doing so, they
become emblematic of the UK, the ex-colonial power and its
representation of postcolonial India.
A remarkable anomaly was the hijacking of the debate by
the UK anti-muslim, far right party leader, Tommy Robin-
son and how Hindu nationalist Twitter users used a tweet
(retweeted over 2000 times) from Tommy Robinson for their
own ideological stance (see @YesIamSaffron above) bringing
to the foreground a curious postcolonial paradox.
@TRobinsonNewEra We are in the middle of the biggest
rape and child exploitation scandal in our countries history,
and the @BBC are focusing on india’s rapes (2078 RTs)
It would seem that networks and how power is transferred
through such networks appear to be structured by colonial and
national tensions and complicated by religion, and other social
divisions.
The broadcasting of the documentary received widespread
analysis from a range of contributors from both academia
and elsewhere. Titha Bhattacharya, writing in the International
Socialist Review, argued strongly against any restrictions on its
telecast, partial or total [56]. Her review recognised Udwin’s
historical credentials but contrasts the reasons given for the
crime ("the logic of traditional masculinity") with what Bhat-
tacharya considers as a far more important factor, namely the
promise of neoliberalism being tantalisingly beyond reach of
the working class. Separately, Banaji raises concerns around
vicious sexual and gender violence that go beyond national
boundaries and it is the lack of reference in the documentary
that both weaken the documentary and allow the debate about
postcolonialism and nationalism to dominate.
"Nevertheless, the ﬁlm would have been far more
resonant and powerful, had the Indian context been
linked creatively, even brieﬂy, to wider histories of
rape around the globe..." [57]
Banaji’s other themes resonate with our own: She notes
the postcolonial/colonial history of orientalism and its resultant
outcomes of an impulse leading to disavowal of problems such
as misogyny amongst western communities. At the same time,
the documentary narrative ends up otherising certain types
of Indian men while distancing Indian elites from this world
view. The former point is repeated made in the postcolonial
category tweet set and discussed above. Banaji also notes that
the signiﬁcance of judicial ethics and legal context do not
appear to have had much impact on the BBC nor Udwin,
most pertinently demonstrated by the BBC’s letter offering
an explanation for bringing forward the broadcast of the
documentary.
A. Social Movements
The broadcast of the documentary and the resulting furore
presents a peculiar type of social movement in that competing
movements denoted by our categories such as Legality/Ban,
Feminism, and Postcolonialism are observable. Each appears
to represent a political opportunity, exhibits mobilising factors
and documents a shared symbolic language. Considering the
latter and consistent with Ray et al. [15], social media appears
to have played a key role in exposing political opportunities
to express nationalistic views as a response to perceived post-
colonial sentiments. A groundswell of sentiment was achieved
through mobilisation structures such as the Twitter handles
of traditional media, key bloggers and perversely, the UK
anti-muslim, far right party leader, Tommy Robinson. The
network centrality measures presented in table II indicate the
role that key nodes played in information diffusion (sharing
of information). Mobilisation structures were further enhanced
through hashtags related to the documentary. We suggest
that the a shared understanding is implied through frequency
word counts. Thus the top twenty words forming a symbolic
language (cleaned) were: IndiasDaughter, India, Ban, Doc-
umentary, rape, BBC, watch, daughter, rapist, indian (sic),
Udwin, shame, women, NDTV, ﬁlm, Leslee, Like, People and
Nirbhaya. The symbolic language for a framing process seems
to be embedded in these frequently cited words.
B. Threats to Validity
Internal validity issues centre around whether the micro
posts (tweets) are appropriately categorised by the machine
learning algorithms. Here, care was taken to use a manual
process of categorisation of 2000 randomly selected tweets
to help develop the training set for the machine learning
software. While there is conﬁdence that the categorisation has
operated at the reference 72% accuracy [47] it is noted that
a signiﬁcant percentage of tweets could not be automatically
categorised. Note, however, no claims on external validity
(wider generalisations to different domains) are being made.
Retweets form a signiﬁcant portion of the tweet data set.
It is possible that the outcomes may have been different if the
tweets analysed had not been retweets. However, retweets are
a core feature of Twitter. Moreover, as Halavais [58] points
out:
"Retweeting a message represented both an afﬁrma-
tion of the contents of a particular tweet, and a way
of spreading a conversation more widely."
From this perspective, we propose that retweets do not
affect the outcomes signiﬁcantly as retweets invite a structure
for conversation and comment as well as being a ‘people’s
microphone’.
Methodological notions of validity, reliability and repeata-
bility present a concern for much of social media research as
it is challenging to be deﬁnitive that data collected from social
media is actually representative of the phenomena of interest.
Twitter users commenting on a particular phenomena are self-
selecting. Such concerns can be partially mitigated by the use
of large scale analysis (using large data sets) but nonetheless
risks such as social media being generative of the behaviours
8
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

it aims to document are paramount [59]. A further concern
is related to decisions around treating journalists as individual
citizens or as part of the overall machinery of the Fourth Estate.
We view the latter as a more representative deﬁnition.
Social media research requires inter-disciplinary thinking,
but arriving at a common ground whereby a sociological theory
can be adequately expressed for computational purposes is an
ongoing research challenge [60].
Social network analysis, and in particular the centrality
measures can offer some insight about power diffusion in net-
works, but as noted earlier, are open to debate. Eigenvalue cen-
trality for example, unless correlated with inbound/outbound
data may not be a good indicator of power.
Furthermore, there are limited open source seamless soft-
ware tool chains that addressed the types of analyses that we
utilised. There are risks in moving data between software tools.
Importantly, we restrict our claims to the data that we have
collected and make no generalisations for other contexts.
The ethics of using data published in social media is also of
concern. The approach taken in this paper considers two key
dimensions, risks of identiﬁcation / disclosure to users and
ethical risks around the content of the micro-blogs. The data
collection (both the blogs and the tweets) are from users who
would be classiﬁed as low risk users as either the user is not
identiﬁable from a Twitter proﬁle or is from a public, ofﬁcial
or bot account. Ethical risks related to the content of the tweets
are also limited. While the content is at times provocative and
antagonistic, the classiﬁcation of the users as low risk does not
warrant opt in permissions before publication. Possibilities of
masking identities can address conﬁdentiality concerns, but it
is important to note that Twitter Terms and Conditions state
that tweets must be given in their original form and attributed
to the individual who posted the tweet. Furthermore, informed
consent becomes near impossible when dealing with data at
large scale. The dominant use of hashtags by Twitter users
also supports the notion that such users were broadcasting their
thoughts speciﬁcally on a subject in a public discussion [61].
Copyright is of less concern. A user may be considered to be
the author of a tweet, but the tweet may not be protected under
copyright law as there is general consensus that protection
generally requires either ‘originality’ or ‘sweat of the brow’,
i.e., signiﬁcant expenditure of labour [62].
6.
CONCLUSION
Social media is becoming an important communication
channel in the modern world, however its role as a democratic
tool, its reach and therefore direct impact remain questionable
in terms of policy formation. The recent presidential election
in USA has certainly brought to the foreground, the role of
social media and the need for policy discussions [63]. In
particular, there is strong evidence of the critical role of social
media in social mobilisation efforts for causes. Our study
shows that the traditional media and their components such as
individual journalists continue to play a central role in these
new spaces. The inﬂuence and reach of the ordinary citizen is
less well pronounced so it is uncertain that the so-called Fifth
Estate is really coming to the fore. Methodological concerns
remain challenging. For example, common grounds whereby
a sociological theory, for example, postcoloniality (as in this
paper) can be adequately expressed for computational purposes
remains an open question. Software tools that can support both
sociological reasoning and computational analysis in a linked
and coherent way have the potential to make a signiﬁcant
impact on methodological concerns of validity and reliability.
However, considering that there many computational analysis
styles possible, this coherent linking may be some way off.
Some of our future research effort is directed at developing
a software tool chain that social scientists will be able to use
independently of computer scientists.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. S. Barn, R. Barn, F. Raimondi, and U. Mukkerjee, “Exploring the
interaction between the Fourth Estate and Twitter: A Case Study,” in
The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics
(HUSO).
IARIA, 2017.
[2]
I. Facts, “Topic: Internet usage in India,” 2016, Retrieved: 31-
05-2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.statista.com/topics/2157/
internet-usage-in-india/
[3]
C. R. Sunstein, # Republic: Divided democracy in the age of social
media.
Princeton University Press, 2018.
[4]
M. Tremayne, “Anatomy of protest in the digital era: A network analysis
of Twitter and Occupy Wall Street,” Social Movement Studies, vol. 13,
no. 1, 2014, pp. 110–126.
[5]
E. Morozov, “Iran: Downside to the "Twitter revolution",” Dissent,
vol. 56, no. 4, 2009, pp. 10–14.
[6]
A. M. Attia, N. Aziz, B. Friedman, and M. F. Elhusseiny, “Commentary:
The impact of social networking tools on political change in Egypt’s
"Revolution 2.0",” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications,
vol. 10, no. 4, 2011, pp. 369–374.
[7]
M. C. Stoddart and D. Tindall, “We’ve also become quite good friends:
Environmentalists, social networks and social comparison in British
Columbia, Canada,” Social Movement Studies, vol. 9, no. 3, 2010, pp.
253–271.
[8]
E. Morozov, The net delusion: The dark side of Internet freedom.
PublicAffairs, 2012.
[9]
J. Habermas, The structural transformation of the public sphere: An
inquiry into a category of bourgeois society.
MIT press, 1991.
[10]
V. Belair-Gagnon, S. Mishra, and C. Agur, “Reconstructing the Indian
public sphere: Newswork and social media in the Delhi gang rape case,”
Journalism, vol. 15, no. 8, 2014, pp. 1059–1075.
[11]
N. Newman, W. H. Dutton, and G. Blank, “Social media in the changing
ecology of news: The fourth and ﬁfth estates in Britain,” International
Journal of Internet Science, vol. 7, no. 1, 2012, pp. 6–22.
[12]
R.
Barn,
“Social
media
and
protest
-
the
Indian
Spring?” Hufﬁngton Post, 2013, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online].
Available:
http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.co.uk/professor-ravinder-barn/
india-social-media-and-protest_b_2430194.html
[13]
S. Ahmed and K. Jaidka, “The common man: An examination of content
creation and information dissemination on Twitter during the 2012 New
Delhi Gang-Rape Protest,” in International Conference on Asian Digital
Libraries.
Springer, 2013, pp. 117–126.
[14]
J. J. Eipe, T. Varghese, and S. M. Veranani, “‘india against corruption’
movement: An Online Version of a Non-violent Mass Movement,”
Quarterly Journal of the Gandhi Peace Foundation, vol. 34, no. 3, 2012,
pp. 343–353.
[15]
D. Ray and M. Tarafdar, “How does twitter inﬂuence a social move-
ment?” 2017.
[16]
D. McAdam, J. D. McCarthy, and M. N. Zald, Comparative perspectives
on social movements: Political opportunities, mobilizing structures, and
cultural framings.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[17]
J. C. Jenkins, “Resource mobilization theory and the study of social
movements,” Annual review of sociology, vol. 9, no. 1, 1983, pp. 527–
553.
[18]
F.-M. Titzmann, “The voice of the youth, locating a new public sphere
between street protest and digital discussion,” Studying Youth, Media
and Gender in Post-Liberalisation India: Focus on and beyond the Delhi
Gang Rape, vol. 6, 2014, p. 79.
[19]
K. Weller, A. Bruns, J. Burgess, M. Mahrt, and C. Puschmann, Twitter
and society.
P. Lang, 2014, vol. 89.
9
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[20]
D. Lazer, A. S. Pentland, L. Adamic, S. Aral, A. L. Barabasi, D. Brewer,
N. Christakis, N. Contractor, J. Fowler, M. Gutmann et al., “Life in
the network: the coming age of computational social science,” Science
(New York, NY), vol. 323, no. 5915, 2009, p. 721.
[21]
A. Bruns and H. Moe, “Structural layers of communication on Twitter,”
in Twitter and society.
Peter Lang, 2014, vol. 89, pp. 15–28.
[22]
D. Gaffney and C. Puschmann, “Data collection on Twitter,” Twitter
and society, 2014, pp. 55–67.
[23]
A. Bruns and S. Stieglitz, “Metrics for understanding communication
on Twitter,” in Twitter and society.
Peter Lang, 2014, vol. 89, pp.
69–82.
[24]
M. Thelwall, “Sentiment analysis and time series with Twitter,” Twitter
and society, 2014, pp. 83–96.
[25]
M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, and G. Paltoglou, “Sentiment strength de-
tection for the social web,” Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, vol. 63, no. 1, 2012, pp. 163–173.
[26]
C. J. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for
sentiment analysis of social media text,” in Eighth International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2014.
[27]
G. McSherry, “#metoo: Bringing victims of sexual assault into
the
spotlight
won’t
stop
rape.
Bringing
justice
to
perpetrators
will,”
2018,
Retrieved:
31-05-2018.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//isreview.org/issue/97/indias-daughter
[28]
J. Kinos-Goodin, “Catherine deneuve says the #metoo movement has
turned into a ‘witch hunt’,” 2018, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online].
Available: https://goo.gl/XbebTW
[29]
G. Lazaroiu, “The social construction of participatory media technolo-
gies,” Contemporary Readings in Law and Social Justice, vol. 6, no. 1,
2014, p. 104.
[30]
F. Rebillard and A. Touboul, “Promises unfulﬁlled? Journalism 2.0,
user participation and editorial policy on newspaper websites,” Media,
Culture & Society, vol. 32, no. 2, 2010, pp. 323–334.
[31]
A. Dey, “A brief exploration of the effects of ICTs and social media
on the gender activism in india post december 16th 2012,” CECS-
Publicações/eBooks, 2016, pp. 187–204.
[32]
E. Losh, “Hashtag feminism and Twitter activism in India,” Social
Epistemology Review and Reply Collective, vol. 3, no. 3, 2014, pp.
11–22.
[33]
J. Go, “For a postcolonial sociology,” Theory and Society, vol. 42, no. 1,
2013, pp. 25–55.
[34]
E. W. Said, Orientalism.
Vintage, 1979.
[35]
G. C. Spivak, Outside in the teaching machine.
Routledge, 2012.
[36]
M. G. Durham, “Scene of the crime: News discourse of rape in India
and the geopolitics of sexual assault,” Feminist Media Studies, vol. 15,
no. 2, 2015, pp. 175–191.
[37]
R. Barn and R. A. Powers, “Rape Myth Acceptance in Contemporary
Times: A Comparative Study of University Students in India and
the United Kingdom,” Journal of Interpersonal Violence, May 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/0886260518775750
[38]
P. Roychowdhury, “"The Delhi gang rape": The making of international
causes,” Feminist studies, vol. 39, no. 1, 2013, pp. 282–292.
[39]
P. Burnap, O. Rana, M. Williams, W. Housley, A. Edwards, J. Morgan,
L. Sloan, and J. Conejero, “COSMOS: Towards an integrated and
scalable service for analysing social media on demand,” International
Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, vol. 30, no. 2,
2015, pp. 80–100.
[40]
N. Kourtellis, J. Finnis, P. Anderson, J. Blackburn, C. Borcea,
and A. Iamnitchi, “Prometheus: User-controlled p2p social data
management for socially-aware applications,” in Proceedings of the
ACM/IFIP/USENIX 11th International Conference on Middleware.
Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 212–231.
[41]
N. Menon, “India’s Daughter and sexual violence: The issues at
stake - Europe Solidaire Sans Frontieres,” 2015, Retrieved: 31-05-
2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.europe-solidaire.org/spip.php?
article34577
[42]
K. Krishnan, “Rape, rape culture and the debate over India’s Daughter,”
2016, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available: http://scroll.in/article/
711369/rape-rape-culture-and-the-debate-over-indias-daughter
[43]
V. Narayan, “Why the documentary India’s Daughter should be aired,”
2015, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available: https://vinodnarayan.
com/2015/03/04/should-the-documentary-indias-daughter-be-aired/
[44]
S. Dev, “What does banning the documentary India’s Daughter
accomplish exactly?” 2015, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available:
https://goo.gl/mHYYUN
[45]
S.
Krishnan,
“India’s
Daughter:
When
men
come
to-
gether,
but
women
stand
divided,”
2015,
Retrieved:
31-
05-2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tarshi.net/inplainspeak/
indias-daughter-when-men-come-together-but-women-stand-apart/
[46]
I. Facts, “NLTK 3.2.4 documentation,” 2017, Retrieved: 31-05-2018.
[Online]. Available: http://www.nltk.org
[47]
A. Schulz, E. L. Menca, and B. Schmidt, “A rapid-prototyping frame-
work for extracting small-scale incident-related information in mi-
croblogs: Application of multi-label classiﬁcation on tweets,” Informa-
tion Systems, vol. 57, 2016, pp. 88–110.
[48]
M. A. Smith, B. Shneiderman, N. Milic-Frayling, E. Mendes Rodrigues,
V. Barash, C. Dunne, T. Capone, A. Perer, and E. Gleave, “Analyzing
(social media) networks with NodeXL,” in Proceedings of the fourth
international conference on Communities and technologies.
ACM,
2009, pp. 255–264.
[49]
M. Bastian, S. Heymann, M. Jacomy et al., “Gephi: an open source
software for exploring and manipulating networks.” ICWSM, vol. 8,
2009, pp. 361–362.
[50]
V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks,” Journal of statistical
mechanics: theory and experiment, vol. 2008, no. 10, 2008, p. P10008.
[51]
E. A. Tiryakian, A. Gruzd, B. Wellman, and Y. Takhteyev, “Imagining
Twitter as an imagined community,” American Behavioral Scientist,
vol. 55, no. 10, 2011, pp. 1294–1318.
[52]
P. Howlader and K. Sudeep, “Degree centrality, eigenvector centrality
and the relation between them in Twitter,” in Recent Trends in Elec-
tronics, Information & Communication Technology (RTEICT), IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 678–682.
[53]
W. H. Dutton, “The ﬁfth estate emerging through the network of
networks,” Prometheus, vol. 27, no. 1, 2009, pp. 1–15.
[54]
D. Cohen, “BBC - letter from Danny Cohen to Sh. Rakesh Singh
regarding concerns about Storyville - India’s Daughter - Media Centre,”
2015, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.bbc.co.
uk/corporate2/mediacentre/statements/dc-letter-re-indias-daughter
[55]
B. Mehra, “India’s Daughter: An Indian Daughter’s Opinion,” 2014,
Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available: http://swarajyamag.com/
culture/indias-daughter-an-indian-daughters-opinion/
[56]
T. Bhattacharya, “India Daughter Neoliberalism’s dreams and the
nightmares of violence,” 2014, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online].
Available: https://goo.gl/dM4x8a
[57]
S.
Banaji,
“Five
issues
raised
by
BBC
in-
dia’s
daughter
documentary,”
2015,
Retrieved:
31-05-
2018. [Online]. Available: http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/southasia/2015/03/07/
ﬁve-issues-raised-by-the-bbc-indias-daughter-documentary/
[58]
A. Halavais, “Structure of Twitter: Social and technical,” Twitter and
society, 2014, pp. 29–42.
[59]
A. Zubiaga, M. Liakata, R. Procter, G. W. S. Hoi, and P. Tolmie,
“Analysing how people orient to and spread rumours in social media
by looking at conversational threads,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 3, 2016.
[60]
D. Murthy, “Digital ethnography an examination of the use of new
technologies for social research,” Sociology, vol. 42, no. 5, 2008, pp.
837–855.
[61]
L. Townsend and C. Wallace, “Social media research: A guide
to ethics,” 2015, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.gla.ac.uk/media/media_487729_en.pdf
[62]
M. Beurskens, “Legal questions of Twitter research,” Twitter and
society, 2014, p. 123.
[63]
J. Boorstin, “Facebook, Snapchat and Twitter played a bigger role than
ever in the election,” 2017, Retrieved: 31-05-2018. [Online]. Available:
https://goo.gl/YJ62dm
10
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

