Influence of the Perceived Data Security,   
 
 
 
Operator Credibility and Provider Trust   
 
 
 
on Usage Frequency of Internet Services 
Erik Massarczyk, Peter Winzer 
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
Email: erik.massarczyk@hs-rm.de, peter.winzer@hs-rm.de 
 
 
Abstract—An increasing customer usage of Internet services 
with various devices demands a greater effort on data security, 
credibility and trust issues as due to extensive connections 
personal data are spread more widely. However, customers 
often prefer better services rather than higher data security. 
Here, the aim of this paper is to examine the positive influence 
of the perceived data security on the usage frequency of Internet 
services. The main target is to measure how the user (a) 
perceived data security, (b) perceived operator credibility and 
(c) perceived trust influence the usage frequency of Internet 
services. The named variables are analyzed with an adjusted 
conceptual model based on elements of the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology 2. In general, a significant 
positive influence of a perceived data security on the usage 
frequency for specific services could be identified. Yet, the 
perceived trust in the service providers does not significantly 
relate to a stronger usage frequency of Internet services. 
Furthermore, for specific Internet services a positive 
relationship between the user perception about the operator 
credibility and the usage frequency of the Internet services 
could be proven. Consequently, customers have data security 
concerns and these might hinder them to use several Internet 
services. 
Keywords-data security; trust; credibility; usage frequency; 
Internet services.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The following analysis illustrates the further approach of 
the already presented study from us regarding the analysis of 
influence factors of data security and trust on the actual 
customer usage of Internet services [1].  
The growth of the number of Internet services and of the 
number of users lead to an increased amount of gained data. 
Especially services like (a) instant messaging, (b) social 
media, (c) video (broadcasting/streaming), (d) gaming, and 
(e) cloud computing are used by more and more people with 
more different devices [2][3][4]. Consequently, the degree of 
connection of the people and devices increases quite heavily 
[2]. Based on the growth of the number of connections and 
Internet services usages, users are generating more personal 
data that will be distributed to a greater extent [3]. 
From the customer point of view, it is difficult to 
comprehend to which extent personal data is collected, where 
the personal data is stored and which persons get access to 
the raised personal data for legal or illegal motives [4][5]. 
Due to the increased connectivity between the devices, 
unhindered individual communications and marketing 
measures, a wide range of information and personal data is 
disclosed. The data disclosure touches the security and 
privacy concerns of the customers because the personal 
information 
could 
include 
critical 
information 
and 
intellectual properties of the users. Furthermore, personal 
information are countable assets from which enterprises as 
wells as criminals may benefit [2][6][7]. Nonetheless, each 
user is responsible which data she or he releases for the usage 
of the specific Internet services and devices. Obviously, 
many people are willing to distribute their personal 
information to get a good performance of the used services. 
Here, they often do not care about risks of data leakages and 
data misuse.  
The rising number of security incidents shows that 
criminals more frequently attack enterprises, administrations 
and private customers to get the personal data because they 
have identified the values of these personal information and 
intellectual properties [7]. As a result, customers should care 
more about possible data privacy and security concerns, 
while using Internet services. 
Consequently, we have examined if the private customers 
perceive any concerns about their own (a) data privacy and 
(b) data security, and if they have trust and credibility 
concerns about their application/software providers and their 
network operators when they use different Internet services 
with various devices. This study focuses also on the different 
conditions and usage opportunities between wired and 
wireless infrastructures and connections, where different 
types of data security problems could arise. In this respect, 
we want to measure the status and the perception of data 
security, while customers using the following services: (a) 
email, (b) social media, (c) internet telephony, (d) online 
shopping, (e) cloud computing, (f) e-learning, (g) instant 
messaging, (h) online banking, (i) navigation, (j) online 
administration, (j) video on demand, and (k) internet 
television. Additionally, we analyze the customer evaluation 
of the credibility in network operators and the trust of the 
44
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

providers of the named Internet services. Here, it will be 
measured how the customers perceive that the network 
operators keep the private data of the customers (credibility) 
and to what extent the providers of the Internet services 
(trust) in general further distribute their personal data. Due to 
customers use the named Internet services differently in the 
wired and wireless networks, we separate the results in the 
two named considerations. On the hand, we consider the 
perceptions in the fixed/wired infrastructure environment and 
on the other hand, the results in the mobile/wireless 
infrastructure environment are presented. In the further 
consideration of the results and discussion, we present the 
similarities and differences in the usage frequency of the 
services between the both networks concerning the influence 
of data security, trust and credibility issues. The also retrieved 
perceived importance of data security will not be in the major 
consideration of this study. 
In Section II, (a) the term data security, (b) the challenges, 
(c) the known literature as well as the used conceptual models 
and research models will be described. Following this 
section, the methodology, as well as the theoretical approach 
for carrying out the analysis, will be briefly explained. In 
Section IV, the results of the hypothesis tests are presented. 
Finally, in Section V, a critical discussion of the results takes 
place and a further view on the ongoing research will be done.   
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Data Security 
In general, the term "data security" describes the secure 
management of personal data, secure data transmission and 
the transparency which institutions or persons have access to 
the 
personal 
customer 
data 
[6][8]. 
The 
correct 
implementation of data security usually involves that the 
customers themselves decide who is entitled to access their 
data. As mentioned in the introduction, customers often 
ignore possible risks of sharing information and they are not 
aware of the amount of data, which they produce and which 
are the consequences if the personal data would be leaked [9]-
[11]. The ignorance shows critical issues in three dimensions. 
Firstly, customers spread personal data which could be linked 
to confidential information like bank accounts and credit card 
numbers [9][10]. Secondly, many companies use and 
transmit – without permission and knowledge of the 
customers – private customer information, which the 
customers disclose during the usage of Internet services [12]. 
Thirdly, as already mentioned, the number of Internet 
security incidents – like criminal acts of password capturing, 
eavesdropping and blackmails – have increased quite heavily 
during the last couple of years [4][7].  
 
B. Challenges 
Yet, the perceptions of (a) data security, (b) trust, (c) 
credibility, (d) sharing of information and (e) risks differs 
between the individual customers and depend beside others 
on factors like demography and culture [9]. Therefore, the 
user attitudes and beliefs are completely subjective and the 
people have different perceptions about possible risks and 
prevention of risks [9]. We assume that most of the customers 
prefer a good Internet service performance instead of strong 
security or data protection measures. Here, customers 
frequently do not care about the consequences of misuse and 
data leakage. Moreover, the providers of Internet services 
often do not state information about consequences of misuse 
and data leakage and do not insert different messages to make 
sure that the users understand the impacts of their data 
distribution. To increase the customer caution concerning 
data disclosure, also the providers should implement several 
measures, which the customers have to comply with to use 
the services [13]. 
Especially these issues motivate us to investigate which 
factors directly influence the usage frequency of Internet 
services and the individual perception of data security, 
credibility and trust.  
 
C. Research Model – Adjusted Model with Elements of the 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2  
The main target of this study will be to get an increased 
comprehension of private customer behaviors, especially in 
the focus on data security, credibility and trust concerns 
regarding the acceptance and actual usage of services.  
The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
2 (UTAUT2) is the direct expansion of the known UTAUT 
concepts with the factors hedonic motivation, price, and 
habit/experience, which allows a broader consideration of 
critical influence factors on user behavior [14]-[17].  
Nevertheless, 
perceived 
data 
security, 
perceived 
credibility and perceived trust could not be covered by the 
existing 
variables 
of 
UTAUT2. 
Nonetheless, 
an 
implementation of external variables as influence factors of 
the user behavior could be performed. By the approach of 
Escorbar-Rodriguez and Carvajal-Trujillo, the UTAUT2 
model is expanded by external variables trust as well as the 
further components perceived security and perceived privacy 
[14][18]. This expansion makes clear that the influence of 
security measures and perceptions on the behavioral intention 
to use of an innovation can be investigated [14][18]. 
Furthermore, this approach motivates us to use the factors 
perceived data security, perceived credibility and perceived 
trust as external variables in the own adapted model (see 
Figure 1) [18]. The single analysis of each relation between 
the named variables with the usage frequency features here 
the first step of the upcoming regression analyses. As it can 
be seen in Fig. 1, we also combine the different variables in 
one regression analysis to figure out how the different 
variables also affects each other. Each of the analyses will be 
prepared for each named Internet service, which were already 
introduced in the first section of this study. The adapted 
model keeps therefore only the basic idea of the UTAUT2.  
45
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
As mentioned in the introduction, in comparison to the 
already presented pre-study, in the further analysis the 
external variable of perceived credibility of the network 
operators will be added and further examined [2]. 
Consequently, we want to measure directly the impact of 
the perceived data security measures on the actual usage of 
Internet services (instead of testing the relationship with the 
behavioral intention to use, as Zhong et al. already did [19]). 
In other words: The target of investigation is to analyze 
whether perceived data security, credibility and trust issues 
lead to a utilization of an Internet service and how the degree 
of utilization is influenced. 
Generally, we estimate that the perception about the 
increased safety and security of their own data would lead to 
an increased usage of services. The conceptual model in Fig. 
1 bases on the original model of the first presented approach 
[1]. To support the measurement of the component data 
security by the customers, the password changing behavior of 
customers (which is an indicator for the importance of data 
security) and their relation to the importance of data security 
will be considered as additional factors. The password 
changing behavior is therefore relevant to measure if 
customers with a higher awareness of data security will 
change their passwords more regularly. We also believe that 
an outrageous assessment (a) of the proper management of 
data by network operators and (b) the trustworthiness of 
service providers would lead to increased use of Internet 
services. 
Perceived credibility describes the users’ belief that the 
used systems would be free of privacy and security threats.  
In addition, the credibility covers how the customers estimate 
and perceive the safe storage of their personal information 
[17].  
Customers recognize the behavior of providers if they take 
care about the personal information and secure transmissions 
and therefore, if the customers estimate that their personal 
data are safe [19]-[29]. In case, the operators do not take care 
about their system, customers perceive the infrastructure as 
insecure and would avoid to use it.  
However, here we definitely want to admit that this point 
is a pure assumption.  
In daily life, people often log into open wireless networks 
to connect with the Internet and they do not take care or they 
do not realize the possible threat of data disclosures and 
linkages. Nevertheless, it could be also the point that the 
people in the daily life perceive that these infrastructures are 
secure. Due to these reasons, it is necessary to investigate 
how the people estimate the security and trustworthiness of 
their network operators. Furthermore, the customer 
estimation of the network operators enables a possible 
assessment of enterprises’ trustworthiness and adhere the 
accepted rules from customer perspective [30]. For this 
reason, the used survey also includes questions about how the 
customers perceive the security of the infrastructure and how 
the network operators use the gained data from the customer. 
Therefore, we link directly the perceived credibility as 
positive impact factor for the actual usage of a service, due to 
the link between the component perceived credibility and a 
possible behavioral intention to use is already known [18]. 
Due to the fact that using Internet services (especially 
mobile services) include security and privacy threats [20], we 
implement the factor trust. The perception of trust describes 
how credible the customers perceive the provider 
[2][18][31][32][33]. The perceived trust of the service 
providers would be characterized by the fact how the 
customers estimate the reliability of the service providers in 
the distribution of personal information to third parties. 
Based on the assumption that risks and perceived trust 
directly influence the usage processes [34], the customers 
would reduce their usage if they expect a loss of privacy and 
a higher risk in usage [2][35][36][37]. The particular 
importance of the key factors of risk and trust lies in the fact 
that these two factors have a major influence on the customer 
acceptance of innovations (especially mobile payments, 
Figure 1. Conceptual Model 
46
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

mobile banking and mobile shopping) [19][20][38]-[41]. The 
trust variable is needed to cover the risk and privacy concerns 
of the customers and it can be used to figure out how the 
customers perceive the credible and secure information and 
experiences of the providers [18][31][32][33]. In addition, 
trust in a service or in a service provider plays an important 
role for the customer, since this increases the customer's 
sense of satisfaction in the service and thus leads to a higher 
usage frequency [34][42].  
Finally, non-existent trust, credibility or the perception of 
missing security negatively influences customer behavior. 
An increase in security while using a service would give the 
customers a more confident secured and satisfied emotion 
and could possibly imply a stronger usage of this service. 
Here, previous researches identified that the perceived risk 
can be seen as one of the key drivers for the estimation of 
uncertainties in mobile payments, mobile shopping, mobile 
banking and mobile transactions [35][19][38]-[41], because 
customers fear possibilities for attacks by mobile transactions 
and the lack of control. Consequently, customers are paying 
attention to the products and their providers if they take care 
about the customers’ transactions and personal information 
security in the usage of mobile payments [19]. 
Besides mobile banking, mobile payments and mobile 
shopping, the perceived security issues are even higher in 
mobile telecommunication networks, due to the fact that 
mobile networks are shared mediums and different persons 
can use the same mobile radio cell in the same time. This 
structure makes the system more vulnerable for attacks 
within the network [43]. The mobile network operators and 
providers have to take care about these issues and the 
introduction of security measures can mitigate uncertainties 
and risks [44]-[47]. The development of trust in a service is a 
major aim for customers and providers, because the trust in a 
service increase the customer convenience and normally 
leads to a higher performance [34][36][42].  
Consequently, the literature conveys the feedback that in 
several cases trust and the perception of security, risks and 
uncertainties influence the customer user behavior. All 
examples and findings demonstrate that possible security 
issues can significantly negatively influence the intention to 
use mobile Internet services and therefore, the actual usage 
frequency could be reduced. Therefore, the authors have set 
the hypotheses that a better perception in data security leads 
to an increased usage of services. 
Generally, the aim of the analysis is to illustrate how the 
customers perceive their data security and how they rank the 
credibility and trust for each Internet service they use. In 
comparison to the presented relationships between the 
estimation of perceived security, risks and trust and the usage 
of mobile banking or mobile payments [21][22], we consider 
different Internet services for the analysis of the relation 
between (a) the perceived data security, credibility as well as 
trust and (b) the usage of services. 
Based on these explanations, the hypotheses for this 
research paper are: 
H1: The customer perception of data security has a 
directly positive effect on the usage of Internet services. 
H2: An increased perceived provider trust has a directly 
positive effect on the usage of Internet services. 
H3: An increased perceived network operator credibility 
has a directly positive effect on the usage of Internet 
services. 
H4: An increased combined perception of trust, 
credibility and data security has a directly positive effect on 
the usage of Internet services. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The hypotheses are validated based on a current survey. 
The answers were taken by interviewers in personal 
interviews, thus ensuring completeness and accuracy of the 
answers. The respondents were randomly chosen and asked 
if they wanted to answer the questionnaire. The interviewers 
were instructed to choose the interviewees as far as possible 
randomly to make sure to get a sample which represent the 
demographic characteristics of gender and age of the local 
population [48][49]. Generally, test persons are asked in 
December 2016 at public libraries in Wiesbaden (which is a 
city with approx. 290,000 inhabitants in the middle of 
Germany) to reach a diversified and representative selection 
of test persons. In total, the survey includes 290 completed 
questionnaires. In the first part of the survey, the respondents 
were asked about their provider and contracts. The second 
part include questions about the general usage and usage 
frequency of different Internet services. The subsequent third 
part of the survey covers the questions on the customer 
password changing behavior, importance of data security and 
perceived data security. Questions about perceptions of trust 
and credibility of providers and operators, as well as on age 
and gender conclude the survey. 
The collected data has been examined based on 
quantitative research methods with the statistical program 
SPSS. To evaluate the reliability and validity of the obtained 
data, Cronbach Alpha was determined and an Exploratory 
Factor Analysis was performed.  
The perceived data security was queried with the question, 
how the customers perceive their personal data for each 
specific Internet service in the usage of a fixed and/or mobile 
Internet access (5-Point-Likert-scale: very secure to very 
unsecure). For the measurement of the usage frequency of 
(mobile) Internet services, a 5-Point-Likert-scale (very often 
to very few) has been used [50]. The perceived credibility (5-
Point-Likert-scale: very certain to very uncertain) targets on 
the question how the customers perceive that the used 
broadband infrastructure is free of threats. Finally, the trust 
(5-Point-Likert-scale: 
very 
open 
to 
very 
closed 
infrastructure) is measured by the question whether the users 
perceive that the Internet service providers spread their 
personal data without authorization. 
47
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As mentioned above, the used approach only keeps 
elements of the UTAUT2. Therefore, we do not follow the 
analysis with a Structural Equation Modeling. Instead, we use 
the ordinary least square regressions to test the significance 
of each of the named hypotheses [14][15]. In the following 
combined approach under recognizing and controlling of 
further variables like importance of data security, perceived 
credibility and password changing behavior, we use a 
combined regression analysis. 
 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS  
A. Result Conditions   
The following discussion assumes far predominantly that 
the participants of the survey answer as private customers, 
even if it cannot be completely excluded that some of the 
respondents may also answer from their perspective of 
personal small enterprises. 
We will describe the results of the reliability and validity 
tests of the overall used hypotheses briefly. After this testing, 
the regression results of hypotheses will be prioritized to 
figure out the relationships between (a) perceived data 
security as well as perceived trust in the service providers and 
the perceived credibility of network operators and (b) the 
usage of specific Internet services.  
 
B. Descriptive Results 
The results of the second survey presented here extend the 
original first survey conducted in 2016 and cover 7 additional 
sets of questions. 55.0% of the respondents are male and the 
average age of a respondent is between 30 and 39 years. With 
48.1%, the group of the 20 and 29-year-olds has the largest 
share of respondents. Thus, this age group (which is 12.2% 
of the total population in Germany) is overrepresented in the 
survey by a factor of four [51]. Based on a study of ARD/ZDF 
from 2015 the 20 to 29-year-old are nearly 100% Internet 
users [52]. 
The over-representation in younger age groups naturally 
leads to an under-representation of the elder age groups. 
Consequently, the collected data are not representative. 
Although there is no representativeness in terms of age and 
gender, the answers from 290 participants provide much 
information about the usage behavior of the various 
communities and thus some conclusions can be drawn on 
frequency of use and usage preferences. 26.5% of 
respondents feel confident about their data, but on the 
contrary, 32.9% of respondents feel more or less insecure 
about their data. Interestingly, the one third of respondents, 
who feel insecure in their data security, does not fit at all with 
the results of the password changing behavior of the 
customers, since more than 80% of the customers change 
their passwords much less frequently than once a year: For 
email accounts 84.3% and for social media accounts 89.2%. 
Normally, it would be expected that more people change their 
passwords more regularly if they feel a data insecurity. In this 
respect, it can be stated as the first conclusion that the 
perception of the data security does not affect the frequency 
of the password changes. The reason for this could be that 
customers are distributing their own data. Therefore, a higher 
password security increases the overall security, but has no 
influence the perceived data security. Furthermore, users 
consider the changing of passwords as cumbersome and not 
user-friendly.  
89.0% of respondents use an anti-virus program, which fit 
with the quotas of 85.5%, which are also confirmed by 
studies of the software company McAfee [53]. Most 
customers associate the use of anti-virus programs with a 
general increase in data security and often fail to recognize 
that such programs can only protect the hardware and 
software from systematic attacks by viruses and malware. 
However, antivirus programs by their nature do not provide 
protection against human errors (such as insecure passwords) 
and thus can only improve data security to a very limited 
extent. 
In average, the customers believe that fixed Internet 
providers have a little bit safer infrastructure than mobile 
Internet providers do. Email services are the mostly used 
services overall (round about 80%). In the fixed 
infrastructures, about 3/4 of the customers use online 
shopping, video on demand and online banking (independent 
from the usage frequency). In the consideration of mobile 
devices and mobile infrastructures, about 4/5 of the 
customers use instant messaging. 
 
TABLE I. IMPORTANCE OF DATA SECURITY 
 
Internet Services 
Importance of Data Security 
Email 
54.9% very high importance 
Social Media 
31.9% very high importance 
Online Shopping 
53.6% very high importance 
Online Banking 
75.9% very high importance 
Instant Messaging 
47.4% very high importance 
 
TABLE II. USAGE FREQUENCY  
(Only voting for the highest level of the usage rate)   
 
Internet Services 
Usage Frequency 
Email 
35.1% very frequently 
Social Media 
43.8% very frequently 
Online Shopping 
4.9% very frequently 
Online Banking 
6.9% very frequently 
Instant Messaging 
63.0% very frequently 
 
 
TABLE III. TRUST IN SERVICE PROVIDERS 
 
Internet Services 
Trust in Data Usage – 
closed  
Trust in Data Usage – 
open 
Email 
15.7% very closed 
3.9% very open 
Social Media 
2.1% very closed 
21.1% very open 
Online Shopping 
5.1% very closed 
14.1% very open 
Online Banking 
45.0% very closed 
1.7% very open 
Instant Messaging 
4.6% very closed 
14.9% very open 
 
48
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The tables show for the different services: (I) the 
importance of data security, (II) the usage frequency of 
Internet services, and (III) confidence in service providers. 
Interestingly, customers in the services they use very 
frequently (social media and instant messaging) feel a 
relatively low data security. Customers also recognize that 
the providers of these services do not particularly secure the 
customer data and use it for their own purposes. In opposite, 
the usage of online banking is relatively rare, but data security 
is very important to customers in this area, which is, of 
course, mainly due to the nature of the service and is 
presumably independent of the channel through which this 
financial service is provided.  
In the consideration of the differences in the perceptions 
of data security, credibility, trust and usage frequencies of 
Internet services between women and men, no general 
diversity can be concluded. However, in the consideration of 
the difference in means, it can be said that women perceive a 
lesser degree of data security (women 2.79; men 3.06) and 
life security (women 3.21; men 3.57) than men do. Despite 
men feel secure in their life situation, women and men 
perceive just a neutral data security. This comparison also 
shows that the general estimation of the data security is less 
than the general perception about the life security. Therefore, 
data security worries the respondents and lead to a higher 
degree of uncertainty.  
The view on the data security perceptions of women and 
men present for the single Internet services presents no 
difference in means and therefore, we estimate that men and 
women perceive and treat data security similar. Just in the 
services online banking and instant messaging, women and 
men do not perceive similarly in average. Despite men and 
women estimate secure online banking infrastructures, men 
estimate a higher data security than women (women 3.57; 
men 3.98). Contrary, men and women perceive an averagely 
data security, women have a higher perception of data 
security for instant messaging services (women 3.13; men 
2.67). Interestingly, the credibility of the fixed providers 
illustrates no difference between women and men. However, 
the two groups have estimated the credibility of mobile 
providers quite differently, because women perceive the 
mobile network operators quite less trustworthy than men. 
Table IV illustrates the differences in the usage 
frequencies between women and men, which presents in 
general that men use more often Internet services than women 
do. Due to the significant (below p<0.05) F-Ratios about the 
mark of 1 and 3, the values present a good model fit and 
describe significant differences in the usage rates of the 
presented Internet services. The analysis of the means for the 
other Internet services, which are not included in Table IV, 
have no significant differences in means. 
 
C. Reliability and Validity 
Reliability is a measure of the formal accuracy of 
surveys/scientific measurements. It is that part of the 
variance, which can be explained by differences in the 
characteristic to be measured and not by (measurement) 
errors. Reliable results must be mainly free of random errors 
(i.e. reproducibility of results under the same conditions).  
The results of the reliability and validity analyses are 
illustrated in the Tables V and VI. In general, this study 
includes the following 8 aspects: (1) usage of Internet 
services (fixed networks), (2) usage of Internet services 
(mobile networks), (3) usage frequency of Internet services, 
(4) perceived importance of data security, (5) perceived data 
security (fixed networks), (6) perceived data security (mobile 
networks), (7) perceived trust, and (8) perceived credibility. 
Generally, all named concepts are examined in the terms 
of reliability and validity. Following Cronbach, Alpha values 
must be higher than 0.7 to for a good reliability [54][55][56]. 
Based on the results in Table V, the collected data for the 7 
named aspects are reliable. 
 
TABLE IV. MEAN ANALYSIS FOR  
USAGE FREQUENCY AND GENDER 
 
 
After the testing of the reliability, the exploratory factor 
analysis includes the assessment of Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin 
criterion (KMO), the significance test from Bartlett, and the 
examination of the cumulative variance to evaluate the 
validity of the collected data [57]-[61]. Validity considers the 
consistency of an empirical measurement with the based 
conceptual/logical measurement concept. To reach a good 
validity, the concepts should reach significant p values 
Service:  
Usage 
Frequency 
  
Mean 
F-Ratio 
p-significance 
Email 
female 
3.47 
15.411 
.000 
male 
4.03 
Video on 
Demand 
female 
3.35 
4.795 
.029 
male 
3.69 
Social 
Media 
female 
3.47 
9.185 
.003 
male 
4.03 
Online 
Banking 
female 
2.66 
9.742 
.002 
male 
3.13 
Cloud 
Computing 
female 
2.25 
10.611 
.001 
male 
2.81 
Instant 
Messaging 
female 
3.95 
6.778 
.010 
male 
4.38 
IPTV 
female 
3.15 
5.783 
.017 
male 
3.52 
Navigation 
female 
2.58 
9.064 
.003 
male 
2.99 
49
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(p<0.05) in the Bartlett-Test and KMO values above 0.7 [57]-
[61]. 
Table VI shows good validity scores for the collected 
data/aspects. The good validity scores are also supported by 
the results of the cumulative variances higher than 50%, 
which indicate high explanation rates of the variances of the 
collected data [58]-[60]. Consequently, the reliability and 
validity of the collected data are proved. Despite the above-
mentioned non-existent representativeness of the collected 
data, the considered research concepts and scientific 
questions illustrate that the data could be used for further 
evaluations. 
 
TABLE V. RELIABILITY ANALYSIS 
 
Research Concepts 
Cronbach’s 
Alpha 
 
  
Usage of Internet Services (fixed networks) 
Usage of Internet Services (mobile networks) 
Usage Frequency of Internet Services 
Perceived Importance of Data Security 
Perceived Data Security (in fixed infrastructures) 
Perceived Data Security (in mobile infrastructures) 
Perceived Trust 
Perceived Credibility 
0.780 
0.784 
0.803 
0.925 
0.881 
0.915 
0.871 
0.772 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI. VALIDITY ANALYSIS 
 
Research Concepts 
KMO 
Bartlett-
Test 
Cumulative 
Variance 
Usage of Internet 
Services (fixed) 
0.825 
p < 0.000 
50.397% 
Usage of Internet 
Services (mobile) 
0.804 
p < 0.000 
51.240% 
Usage Frequency of 
Internet Services 
0.781 
p < 0.000 
53.724% 
Perceived Importance of 
Data Security 
0.901 
p < 0.000 
64.709% 
Perceived Data Security 
(fixed) 
0.844 
p < 0.000 
57.791% 
Perceived Data Security 
(mobile) 
0.831 
p < 0.000 
62.055% 
Perceived Trust 
0.827 
p < 0.000 
59.372% 
Perceived Credibility 
0.709 
p < 0.000 
55.107% 
 
D. Mean Analysis 
Next to the reliability and validity analysis and the 
consideration of the different concepts, as already mentioned 
in the descriptive results, the survey also covers questions 
about the usage of anti-virus programs. Due to the nominal 
coding of the variables of the usage of anti-virus programs, 
we consider the results based on mean analyses to figure out 
if the usage of Internet services and the perception of data 
security differs if the people use anti-virus programs or not. 
The general view would be that anti-virus programs were 
normally implemented to create more security for the used 
systems and that possible threats would be detected and 
eliminated. 
Generally, the (non-)utilization of anti-virus programs 
does not lead to a significant difference in the perception of 
data security and the perception of the importance of data 
security. In addition, if the users utilize an anti-virus program 
or they refuse to use it, this does not lead to differences in 
means in the password changing behavior. 
The considerations of the decision to use Internet services 
show normally no differences in mean between people who 
already use anti-virus programs and people who do not use 
these services. However, the mean analysis with the help of 
one factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) presents a 
significant difference in means in the usage of email services. 
Only 63% of the people, who does not use anti-virus 
programs, utilizes email services. In comparison, 78% of 
people who have installed anti-virus programs use email 
services. However, when we add the consideration of the 
usage frequency under the presented circumstances, there is 
no significant difference in the usage of email services if the 
people have an anti-virus program or if they do not have an 
anti-virus program. Although Internet users want to have a 
high data security for email services, we cannot finally 
conclude that the utilization of an anti-virus program will 
bring a higher security and therefore, the people use more 
email services. The reason is here that other critical Internet 
services like online banking or cloud services, which also 
cover secret details of the private customers, are not 
influenced by the utilization or non-utilization of anti-virus 
programs. Therefore, a general impact of anti-virus programs 
on the perception of data security and the perception of 
importance of data security cannot be concluded. 
The further considerations and analyses of the relations 
between the named concepts and the conceptual model will 
be described in the next sub-section.  
 
E. Regression Analyses 
As mentioned above, the scope of the study does not allow 
the testing of all hypotheses.  
In the following, at least, the relationship between the 
factors (a) perceived data security, (b) perceived credibility, 
(c) perceived trust and the usage frequency of Internet 
services would be analyzed by means of ordinary least square 
regressions. The perceived data security is analyzed 
differently for fixed and mobile Internet services. This 
differentiation takes account of the fact that the various 
network/service types have different advantages and 
disadvantages, and therefore, different utilizations can be 
expected. 
50
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The multiple regression analyses include on the on hand 
the degree of dependence and on the other hand the grad of 
the linear relationship (correlation analysis). Independently, 
if the focus is on the correlation or regression coefficients, in 
both considerations a ‘perfect’ relation is expressed by the 
value 1.000. Nevertheless, correlation/regression coefficients 
higher than 0.500 symbolize a good interrelation. [60]-[62] 
Following the named regression analyses, we combined all 
possible influence factors of security issues, which have been 
collected in the survey to analyze their impact on the usage 
of Internet services. 
For this purpose, the perceived data security (= 
independent variable) is analyzed separately for mobile and 
fixed broadband infrastructures/services) in relation to the 
usage frequency of the individual Internet services (= 
dependent variables); see Table VII. 
The r-square values of the individual regressions are quite 
low, which is mainly due to two causes. On the one hand, 
only the effects of perceived data security are analyzed for 
the usage frequency of each service. In each individual case, 
an r-square for the regression between only an independent 
variable and a dependent variable is determined. As far as it 
is assumed, the individual r-squares are not quite as high. On 
the other hand, the usage frequency of an Internet service 
does not depend solely on the perceived data security. Based 
on the estimation of many different influencing factors (some 
are mentioned in the presented research model), we assume 
weak regressions, which mean relatively low r-squares. 
For the usage of the following services in the fixed and 
mobile infrastructures, (a) Internet protocol television 
(IPTV), (b) instant messaging, and (c) online gaming, the 
customer data security perception does not impact the usage 
of these services; therefore, the hypothesis H1 cannot be 
accepted. For the services e-learning and cloud computing, 
significant positive regression relations could be found for 
both infrastructures (fixed and mobile). This means that a 
customer perceives a higher data security in his learning 
application, he will use the service more frequently.  The 
coefficients of 0.286 (fixed) and 0.370 (mobile) show a quite 
moderate explanatory rate. As mentioned above, the r-
squares of 3.3% (fixed) and 5.7% (mobile) are quite low and 
describe only a low coefficient of determination. In addition, 
if customers perceive a higher data security when they use 
cloud services then they will use them more frequently. 
Coefficients of 0.330 (fixed) and 0.232 (mobile) and r-
squares of 5.8% (fixed) and 2.8% (mobile) shows a moderate 
explanatory rate and low degree of determination [60]-[62]. 
For these both services, we do not assume differences in the 
usage of the services in the both infrastructures and the 
hypothesis H1 could be accepted. 
The analysis of other services (online shopping, online 
banking, e-mail, social media, and online telephony) shows 
differences in the results of the regression analyses between 
mobile or fixed infrastructures. The main reason for 
differences is the general use of services. Internet users use 
navigation and social media services twice as frequently by 
mobile devices in mobile infrastructures in comparison to the 
fixed-line connections. In contrast, online banking services 
are used much more frequently via fixed broadband 
infrastructures. 
The perceived data security has only a relatively small (but 
measurable) influence on the use of navigation services with 
mobile devices/networks, with regression of 0.161 and r-
square of 2.1%. This may be due to the fact that the primary 
goal of most users of a navigation service is to locate a 
destination and it is self-evident to them that they may have 
to make concessions for data security (for example, by 
authorizing the location). 
For fixed networks, positively significant regressions 
between the perceived data security for (a) emails 
respectively (b) online banking and the usage of these 
services could be identified. Despite low r-squares of 5.8% 
(email) and 5.5% (online banking) and weak regressions, the 
single coefficients of 0.357 (email) and 0.295 (online 
banking) represent a moderate regression [60]-[62]. Since 
emails and, in particular, bank accounts generally contain 
highly sensitive data from customers, the loss of which can 
cause considerable damage, customers' need for high data 
security for these services is particularly high. If the users 
perceive a better data security for these services, or if the 
service providers can guarantee their customers a higher data 
security, they will use these services more frequently. 
In addition, email services are often used in professional 
contact and can contain corresponding confidential 
information [9][10]. 
In general, the test of multicollinearities with the Variance 
Inflation Factor (VIF) shows that all VIF values are below 10 
(mostly below 3) and therefore, multicollinearities not exist 
[57][63][64]. Nonetheless, in some cases, the constants are 
also significant (p<0.05), which could be an indicator for 
other influence factors or an existing endogeneity. In the 
further research and examination of the data, we will consider 
the influence factors and try to figure out which are the 
indicators for the significant constants.  
The relationship of the perceived trust in the service 
providers (independent variable) and the usage frequency of 
Internet services (dependent variable) generally show no 
significant relationship for the specific services. The only 
exception is online shopping. The positive significant 
relationship (coefficient = 0.117) shows that customers, who 
perceive that the shopping providers do not further distribute 
their personal information, will more frequently use these 
online shopping platforms. 
However, the r-square of 1.7% and the coefficient below 
0.200 do not imply a good explanatory rate and the regressive 
connection seems to be weak [60]-[62]. Generally, the 
hypothesis H2 about the influence of the customer perception 
of trust in the service providers of the single specific Internet 
services on the usage frequency of the specific services 
cannot be accepted. It seems that trust, as single factor does 
not have an influence on the customer decision of service 
usage. 
51
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VII. REGRESSION ANALYSIS – COMPARISON PERCEIVED DATA SECURITY AS INFLUENCE FACTOR FOR USAGE 
FREQUENCY (single service consideration) 
 
Dependent variables 
Independent: Perceived Data Security in Fixed Networks 
Independent: Perceived Data Security in Mobile Networks 
 
Regression 
Coefficient B 
Significance 
R-Square 
Regression 
Coefficient B 
Significance 
R-Square 
Usage Frequency of Email 
Services 
0.357* 
p<0.05 
5.8% 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Cloud 
Computing Services 
0.330* 
p<0.05 
5.8% 
0.232* 
p<0.05 
2.8% 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Banking Services 
0.295* 
p<0.05 
5.5% 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of E-
Learning Services 
0.286* 
p<0.05 
3.3% 
0.370* 
p<0.05 
5.7% 
Usage Frequency of Instant 
Messaging Services 
No Significance 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of IPTV 
Services 
No Significance 
No Significance 
Usage 
Frequency 
of 
Navigation Services 
No Significance 
0.161* 
p<0.05 
2.1% 
Usage Frequency of Social 
Media Services 
No Significance 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Gaming Services 
No Significance 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Administration Services 
0.393* 
p<0.05 
6.7% 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Shopping Services 
No Significance 
0.142 
p<0.05 
1.8% 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Telephony Services 
0.228* 
p<0.05 
2.1% 
No Significance 
* The regression presents a significant constant, which could be an indicator for further unconsidered variables or an existing endogeneity, which needs 
further investigation. Furthermore, the Durban-Watson-Test recognizes a value, which could be an indicator for an existing autocorrelation. To cover the 
spurious correlations, further investigations must be performed. 
 
 
A combined regression analysis approach is carried out 
with the consideration of all of the single data security factors 
as independent variables in order to analyze the influence the 
whole impact of perceived data security on the frequency of 
the user behavior of the specific Internet services. The 
following variables are controlled: (a) overall perceived data 
security (in general without any consideration of a single 
service), (b) perceived importance of data security, (c) 
perceived credibility of the network operators, and (d) 
perceived trust in the service providers. The regression 
analyses for each individual service are carried out separately 
and shown according to the use of mobile or fixed network 
services. 
The control of the variables that cover security issues 
(except perceived data security) reveals significant regressive 
influences of perceived data security on the usage frequency 
of the specific Internet services (email, cloud computing, 
online banking and e-learning); see Table VIII. 
The control of the variables confirms the results obtained 
in the first point. When customers use email services over the 
fixed networks and they feel confident about their data, they 
will use the data more frequently. Although nearly 80% of 
the customers use email services over the mobile networks, 
no significant connection could be found. Despite the non-
significance for mobile networks, the regression coefficient 
of 0.363 for fixed networks shows a moderate explanatory 
rate [60]-[62]. However, the r-square of 9.7% describes only 
weak regression with a low coefficient of determination [60]-
[62]. The VIF is below 3, so multicollinearities can be 
excluded [57][63][64]. It seems that customers who 
experience more data security when using email services will 
use these services more frequently. This is mainly because 
customers have stored many confidential information in their 
email accounts and do not want third parties to have access 
to these data. 
A similar relationship exists for cloud computing: when 
customers perceive higher data security for cloud computing 
services, they will use these services more frequently 
(significantly positive). Despite a moderate regression 
coefficient of 0.261, the r-square of 8.2% shows a weak 
regression. The VIF under 3 allows the exclusion of 
multicollinearities [57][63][64].  
The third line of Table VIII represents the influence of the 
perceived data security on the usage of online banking. It can 
be identified (for mobile and fixed networks) that users, who 
have security issues with online banking, do not use online 
banking. The regression coefficients of 0.218 (fixed) and 
0.352 (mobile) describe moderate explanatory rates.  
The r-squares of 12.0% (fixed) and 17.7% (mobile) do not 
imply strong regressions, however, the values are two to three 
times higher than the r-squares, mentioned above (see Table 
VIII). 
52
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
TABLE VIII. REGRESSION ANALYSIS – COMPARISON OF DATA SECURITY AS INFLUENCE FACTOR FOR USAGE FREQUENCY 
(combined independent variables consideration on single service consideration) 
 
Dependent variables 
Independent: Perceived Data Security in Fixed Networks* 
Independent: Perceived Data Security in Mobile Networks* 
 
Regression 
Coefficient B 
Significance 
R-Square 
Regression 
Coefficient B 
Significance 
R-Square 
Usage Frequency of Email 
Services 
0.363** 
p<0.05 
 
9.7% 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Cloud 
Computing Services 
0.261 
p<0.05 
 
8.2% 
No Significance 
Usage Frequency of Online 
Banking Services 
0.218 
p<0.05 
 
12.0% 
0.352 
p<0.05 
 
17.7% 
Usage Frequency of E-
Learning Services 
No Significance 
0.328 
p<0.05 
 
14.5% 
 
* Other independent variables overall perceived data security, perceived importance of data security, perceived credibility of the network operators and 
perceived trust in the service providers are controlled and implemented. 
** The Durban-Watson-Test recognizes a value, which could be an indicator for an existing autocorrelation. To cover the spurious correlations, further 
investigations must be performed. 
 
 
These r-squares values describe how much the perceived 
data security influence the decision how often online banking 
will be used. 
The service e-learning is not used by many customers. 
Nevertheless, when customers use the service in the mobile 
environment, the decision to use is influenced by data 
security issues. The coefficient of 0.328 describes a moderate 
explanatory rate. The r-square of 14.5% is similar to the 
results of online banking. Although this regression is 
classified rather weak, it is still better than most of the 
regression values found earlier. 
For the named services, the hypothesis H1 can be accepted 
because data security concerns influence the decision to use 
a service (frequently). However, for the other services (social 
media, IPTV, online gaming, instant messaging), the 
hypothesis H1 has to be rejected because an impact of data 
security issues on the usage of these services could not be 
(significantly) proved. 
Following the considerations of the hypotheses H1 and 
H2, the hypothesis H3 shall illustrate how the usage 
frequency of the presented Internet services is affected by the 
user estimation of the credibility of the network operators for 
fixed and mobile broadband networks. Table IX visualizes 
the results for the hypothesis H3, gained from the survey. In 
this case, only the results, which have shown a significant 
influence in the model, are presented. For the services email 
(0.192), navigation (0.184), and online banking (0.210) (see 
Table IX), only the credibility for the mobile network 
operators significantly relates to the usage frequency. If the 
users perceive a higher network credibility, security and 
trustworthiness, the users will use these services in a higher 
frequency. 
These results match with the results, which were already 
gained by the analysis for H1. Users have stored personal 
information in the services email and online banking services 
and therefore, they are especially looking for a secure access 
of their own data. For this reason, the users utilize the services 
in a higher degree when they perceive a higher data security 
and when the infrastructures are secure, trustworthy and 
credible. 
For the credibility of the fixed network operators, the 
detected relations cannot be proven. However, all of the three 
performed regressions, the reached r-squares have values 
below the 5%. Together with the regression coefficients 
below 0.3, we have to acknowledge that the explanatory rates 
of the model are weak. [59]-[61]. However, the decision to 
use a service is influenced by a couple of different factors. 
Each of the influence factors show low r-squares when we 
consider the services solely. The VIF values in the 
regressions are below 3 and consequently multicollinearities 
can be excluded [57][63][64]. All regressions have values 
below 1 in the Durbin-Watson-Test, which means possible 
autocorrelation issues (like spurious correlations) cannot be 
excluded for these regressions and further examinations 
would be necessary. 
Despite 
the 
critical 
possible 
impact 
factors 
of 
autocorrelation and the low values for r-squares and 
regression coefficients, 75% of the respondents use email and 
online banking services.  
The consideration of the other mentioned Internet services 
(a) IPTV, (a) online shopping, (c) cloud computing and (d) 
online gaming shows significant relationships between the 
credibility of the fixed or mobile network operators and the 
usage frequency of the named services. Due to the positively 
significant relations, we expect that the users who perceive a 
higher trustworthiness and safety in the networks will use 
these services more frequently than the users without this 
expectation. The services IPTV (0.276/0.250) and online 
gaming (0.244/0.256) have coefficients below 0.3 and r-
squares below 5% (see Table IX), which means weak 
regressions and low relationships [59]-[61]. Here, the VIF 
values are acceptable and multicollinearities can be excluded. 
However, the two regressions suffer the same problem as the 
previous considered ones, that the Durbin-Watson-Test show 
53
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

values around 1. Nonetheless, both services do not face the 
same problem as the services online banking and email, 
because both services do not cover the same degree of 
credible information. Normally, both services give an 
overview about the actual user behavior, which TV-series or 
video games the users like and how much time they spend 
with them. Generally, the usage of these services does not 
depend on critical information. However, more and more 
services are combined with stores and online shopping 
possibilities. Here information about credit cards or personal 
information may are involved. If we speak about the actual 
usage of these services, we can fully comprehend that the 
infrastructures should be secure and transparent, but possible 
data leakages do not normally lead to the same consequences 
than if email or online banking accounts have been attacked. 
The combination of services with online shopping 
elements builds the transition to the consideration of the two 
unconsidered variables, which are also included in Table IX. 
The services online shopping and cloud computing have r-
squares of 7.0% and 8.7% for the analysis of the credibility 
of the fixed network operators and 5.1% for both analyses for 
the credibility of mobile network operators. Although the r-
squares exceed 5%, we estimate weak regressions. Except the 
case for the credibility for cloud computing (mobile), the 
coefficients are below 0.3 and therefore, the credibility 
influences to a low degree the usage frequency of an Internet 
service [59]-[61]. Nevertheless, the Durbin-Watson-Test and 
VIF values are in an acceptable range and so we exclude 
autocorrelation and multicollinearity issues. 
Online shopping and cloud computing also cover critical 
assets and information like payment information, credit card 
numbers or enterprise information. Therefore, it can be 
comprehended that these services have reached slightly better 
values than the services considered previously. The fact that 
the credibility of the mobile infrastructure for cloud 
computing has reached an average rate of explanation shows 
that the infrastructures used for the two mentioned services 
should receive the integrity and free attacker entries. 
Nonetheless, as mentioned above, the results only indicate 
weak regressive connections and we conclude that other 
factors are more influencing the usage of the services than the 
discussed security concerns. 
The hypothesis H3 cannot be (fully) rejected or accepted. 
For the services, which have been presented above, 
significant weak relationships could be identified and so the 
hypothesis could be accepted. However, for the other 
services, which we mentioned in the introduction, relations 
cannot be concluded and so the hypothesis would be rejected. 
Consequently, the known linkage between the security 
patterns of credibility and trust and the behavioral intention, 
which 
were 
already known through the literature 
[18][21][22], cannot be completely confirmed for the link 
with actual usage of the service. 
To support the previous findings and to expand the results, 
we will execute another combined regression analysis with 
the variables, which are used in the first approach above. In 
the following analysis, we look at perceived credibility with 
considering the password-changing behavior and perceived 
importance of data security.  
The hypothesis H4 includes the combined analysis of the 
different security, credibility and trust variables, which have 
been implemented in the survey. Considering Table X, the 
dependent variable usage frequency for each specific service 
depends here directly on the combination of the independent 
variables. 
 
TABLE IX. COMPARISON PERCEIVED OPERATOR 
CREDIBILITY INFLUENCE FACTOR FOR USAGE FREQUENCY 
(single service consideration) 
 
Dependent 
variables: 
Usage 
Frequency 
Independent variable: 
Perceived Credibility of 
Fixed Network Operators 
Independent variable:  
Perceived Credibility of Mobile 
Network Operators 
 
Regression 
Coefficient 
B 
Signi-
ficance 
R-
Square 
Regression 
Coefficient  
B 
Signi-
ficance 
R-
Square 
Email 
No Significance 
0.192 
p<0.05 2.4% 
IPTV 
0.276 
p<0.05 5.1% 
0.250 
p<0.05 4.3% 
Online 
Shopping 
0.280 
p<0.05 7.0% 
0.173 
p<0.05 2.5% 
Cloud 
Computing 
0.281 
p<0.05 5.1% 
0.361 
p<0.05 8.7% 
Online 
Gaming 
0.244 
p<0.05 3.2% 
0.256 
p<0.05 3.5% 
Navigation 
No Significance 
0.184 
p<0.05 2.8% 
Online 
Banking 
No Significance 
0.210 
p<0.05 3.3% 
 
The implemented independent variables in the model are: 
(a) perceived data security (single services) in fixed and 
mobile environments, (b) the general perceived data security, 
(c) password changing behaviors, (d) perceived importance 
of data security, (e) perceived credibility of network 
operators (fixed and mobile), (f) usage of anti-virus 
programs, and (g) the trust in the providers. 
Due to the combined consideration of the variables, higher 
r-squares can be expected [59]-[61]. Besides the r-squares, 
the regression coefficients and the F-ratio will be also suitable 
indicators to present a good feedback about the model fit and 
the deepness of possible relationships. In the following, we 
will discuss some of the results, including the examination of 
H4. 
Firstly, email services seem to be directly influenced by 
the credibility (fixed: -0.289/mobile: 0.289) of the network. 
However, users who perceive that a mobile infrastructure is 
free of threats use email services more frequently. 
Nevertheless, in the consideration in the fixed networks, the 
user perception is reversed. As shown in Table X, the 
perception of data security (0.296) also influences the 
decision how often the service is used. If the users perceive a 
better data security for emails, they will use the services more 
often. Despite the r-square of 13% is not quite high and the 
54
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

coefficients do not exceed 0.3 [59]-[61], the significant F-
ratio is above the value of 3.03, which describes a good model 
fit. The significance of the perceived data security supports 
the results, which were already got and analyzed in the 
examination of hypothesis H1. In addition, the significance 
of the credibility of the mobile network operator positively 
influencing the usage frequency assists the previously results. 
The inverse value (-0.289) for the credibility of the fixed 
network operators makes no sense at first sight. At best, it 
could be interpreted in such a way that most users now access 
their emails primarily via mobile networks. 
Secondly, the results of cloud computing (0.236) and 
online banking (0.280) are mostly influenced by the 
importance of data security. For both services, the data 
security is important and therefore, when the users perceive 
this data security they will use this service in a higher 
frequency. Online banking (0.214) is also influenced by the 
perceived data security in mobile environments. Therefore, 
users who perceive a higher data security while using online 
banking in mobile networks will enhance their usage of this 
service. Both regressions have r-squares of nearly 20% and 
symbolize medium explanatory rates. Together with the 
consideration of the significant F-ratio and F-values above 3, 
we find a good model fit and that the significant independent 
variables could well describe the dependent variable usage 
frequency. 
Bearing in mind that the regression coefficients describe a 
lower degree of relationship. For cloud computing and online 
banking, we already find several connections between 
security variables and the usage frequency of these services 
and all of them are positive. This leads to the conclusion that 
the users estimate for these services a secure infrastructure, 
service area and data keeping. If these criteria are fulfilled or 
at least the customer perceive this status, the users will use 
the services in a higher frequency. 
Considering all results of Table X, we find several 
influence factors for the usage frequency of Internet services. 
There is no general influence factor, which influences the 
usage rate of all services. However, we have to admit that we 
did not expect this one influence factor at all, because the 
Internet services are quite different. Nevertheless, a factor, 
which would be an explanatory factor for the most Internet 
services, would have been a good result. Concluding, we 
expect that we cannot generally accept the hypothesis H4, 
because there is no general influence factor. Otherwise, we 
see in the model that the variables of the perceived 
importance of data security (influence factor of 5 services) 
and operator credibility (influence factor of 4 services) are 
the major impact variables. For this reason, the hypothesis H4 
will not be fully rejected. Several impacts from data security, 
credibility and trust factors on the development of the usage 
frequency can be inferred. 
Despite the high importance of data security, on the hand, 
people do not perceive the security of their personal data. 
This means, the users do not behave in the right way to 
increase their own personal data security. Although the user 
estimation of the trust about the service providers how they 
distribute the data of the users has no influence on the usage 
frequency of a service, we assume that users have some 
concerns about service providers about the distribution of 
personal data. Furthermore, the perception about the 
credibility and trustworthiness of the networks could possibly 
influence the customer usage rate of several Internet services. 
Here, we estimate that most Internet users expect that the 
Internet infrastructure and the Internet services are free of 
threats and risks and therefore, these services would be use. 
Consequently, our estimation is here that the most Internet 
users expect that the operators of infrastructure and providers 
of services take care about the data security of the users. This 
means the most users do not feel responsible for the security 
of their own data. 
Surely, we do not find general security patterns, which 
directly relate to the possible user behavior of Internet users. 
Nonetheless, for specific Internet services several security 
impact factors and indicators could be found and therefore, it 
can be assumed that the user behavior and the usage 
frequency of Internet services are not free of security issues. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In the journal article, we have analyzed indicators, which 
influence the decision and usage frequency of Internet 
services. The focus of the publication is on the effects of 
perceived data security and perceived trust in the use decision 
and the usage frequency of Internet services. In the first step, 
the influence of perceived data security or perceived trust on 
the usage frequency of certain internet services was 
examined. 
To support the results so far and to expand the results, we 
have conducted two further analyses. The third one includes 
the consideration of the impact of perceived credibility on the 
usage frequency of Internet services. Finally, a combined 
regression analysis, focusing on the impact of the data 
security perceived and additional factors by customers on the 
use of the services were conducted. 
It could not be proved in general that security concerns and 
especially concerns in data security and trust in service 
providers lead to a reduced or an increased usage of the 
services. Nonetheless, some evidences and implications for 
specific services like email, online banking and e-learning 
exist. Customers, who perceive that their data will be safe, 
use the service more frequently than customers, who feel 
uncertain. The main question is why only some of the used 
services are influenced. We are in the opinion that these 
developments directly depend on the nature of the service. 
For example, bank accounts and emails usually contain 
confidential information, the losses of which can have serious 
consequences for customers. In contrast, the use of services, 
such as IPTV merely reveals some information to individual 
preferences or behaviors. However, most people do not 
appreciate this information as so critical. 
55
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE X. REGRESSION ANALYSIS – COMPARISON OF MODEL FACTORS AS INFLUENCE FACTOR FOR USAGE FREQUENCY 
(combined independent variables consideration on single service consideration) 
 
 
 
Dependent 
variable* 
Independent variables** 
 
Significant parameters 
Coefficients 
Significance  
R-Square 
F-Ratio  
Significance 
F-value 
Email 
Perceived Credibility of Fixed 
Operator 
-0.289 
p<0.05 
13.0% 
p<0.05 
3.313 
 
Perceived Credibility of Mobile 
Operator 
0.289 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
Perceived Data Security (fixed) 
0.296 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cloud Computing 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.236 
p<0.05 
20.6% 
p<0.05 
3.389 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online Banking 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.28 
p<0.05 
19.7% 
p<0.05 
3.458 
 
Perceived Data Security (mobile) 
0.214 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-Learning 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.274 
p<0.05 
18.8% 
p<0.05 
2.089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instant Messaging 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.223 
p<0.05 
13.2% 
p<0.05 
2.930 
 
Password Changing Rate for 
Emails 
-0.227 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IPTV 
Password Changing Rate for 
Emails 
-0.241 
p<0.05 
8.6% 
p<0.05 
1.472 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Navigation 
Perceived Credibility of Fixed 
Operator 
-0.197 
p<0.05 
14.8% 
p<0.05 
3.068 
 
Perceived Credibility of Mobile 
Operator 
0.244 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.227 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
Password Changing Rate for 
Emails 
0.219 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Media 
Usage of Anti-virus programs 
0.753 
p<0.05 
7.7% 
p<0.05 
1.478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online Gaming 
No Significance 
 
Online 
Administration 
Perceived Importance of Data 
Security 
0.216 
p<0.05 
17.8% 
p<0.05 
1.862 
 
Perceived Data Security (fixed) 
0.333 
p<0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online Shopping 
Perceived Credibility of Fixed 
Operator 
0.244 
p<0.05 
9.5% 
p<0.05 
1.964 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online Telephony 
Perceived Credibility of Mobile 
Operator 
-0.247 
p<0.05 
13.0% 
p<0.05 
1.453 
 
* Usage frequency of the single services. 
** Perceived data security (single services), password changing behaviors, perceived importance of data security, perceived credibility of network operators, 
anti-virus usage, perceived data security (general), perceived provider trust. 
 
 
The second investigation focuses on the perceived trust in 
service providers. It examines how the transfer of customer 
data to third parties is evaluated. Interestingly, no evidences 
for the influence of the perceived trust on the usage of 
Internet services could be found. It must be predicted that 
data distributions by the service providers do not affect the 
user’s decision to use a service. This non-existing relation 
could be explained by the fact that the most people focus on 
the performance and usability of the Internet services instead 
of the security, which is mentioned in the second section of 
this study. Furthermore, it must be assumed that the most 
people are not aware about these distributions of their data. 
Therefore, the rejection of this hypothesis is not surprisingly. 
56
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The following investigations of the hypotheses H3 and H4 
can be well associated with results of the first examination. 
In general, a full relationship between the factors of the 
operator credibility in hypothesis H3, the security patterns in 
the hypothesis H4 and the influence on the usage frequency 
of Internet services cannot be fully underlined. We show that 
in some services like online shopping, cloud computing, 
IPTV and online gaming, that customer perceive the 
credibility of the networks is free of threats and therefore, it 
can be directly linked to the usage frequency of the service. 
In a lower degree, the linkages can also be accepted for the 
use of email, navigation and online banking services. It can 
be concluded that the security of the infrastructure is for the 
use of a couple of services a relevant issue. 
In the final hypothesis H4, the usage frequency of an 
Internet service were directly linked to all of the different 
security patterns, which were included in the survey. The 
results present a quite divers field of impact factors for the 
different Internet services. As mentioned in the section 
before, there is not one influence factor for all the different 
Intern services; however, we do did not expect these kind of 
result. Nonetheless, two security patterns (importance of data 
security and operator credibility) are influence factors for 
50% of the examined Internet services. For this reason, we 
assume that these two patterns are the major influence factor 
for user behavior regarding the concerns about data security. 
As a consequence, these two patterns are more significant 
than the other factors and so further investigations would be 
necessary. 
Generally, the presented results cannot fully describe the 
influence of data security, credibility and trust issues on the 
usage of specific Internet services. However, a general 
comprehension of the influence of data security behaviors 
and the trust and credibility of providers and operators would 
be deepened and for specific Internet services, a relation 
could be proved. One intension of this study is to present the 
influence of the providers’ reputation on the decision to use 
an Internet service more frequently, because researchers 
found out that reputation and credibility of a network and 
system positively rises the trust in a new application and 
system like mobile banking [39][44][65][66].  
The focus on the assessment of the single influence of data 
security (and also trust and credibility) on the actual customer 
usage of Internet services could lead to the problem that the 
presented approach might not lead to the aimed results, due 
to the small number of considered concepts. 
Consequently, we have presented several differences also 
in the usage of Internet services and perceptions about data 
security concerns between the use of the Internet services in 
mobile and fixed environments. Generally, there does not 
exist the big difference, however for several services we 
could find that data security is more important in the mobile 
than the fixed environment. We estimate here that the most 
users use these services more and more in the mobile 
networks and therefore, the perceptions and estimations 
target more on the mobile environment. 
Finally, parts of the differences cannot be explained with 
the illustrated regression analyses and the considerations of 
the descriptive statistics, because as already mentioned 
above, the decision to use an Internet service is quite 
subjective. Determinants like cultural values, traditions, age, 
job, obligatory reasons and necessity directly affect usage 
frequency of an Internet service. Over the time, people 
normally gain experience with the services. Due to increasing 
experience, users will develop an increased confidence in the 
services 
[17][45][46][47][67]. 
Consequently, 
further 
analyses have to be geared on the analysis of the named 
factors culture, experience and age and therefore, next 
surveys and analyses need to test if these factors influence the 
actual usage of Internet services. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Massarczyk and P. Winzer, “Influence of Perceived Data 
Security and Trust on the Usage of Internet Services,” In S. 
Böhm, L. Berntzen, and F. Volk (Eds.), The Tenth 
International Conference on Advances in Human oriented and 
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services 
(CENTRIC 2017, IARIA) [08. - 12. October 2017, Athens]. 
Conference Proceedings and Thinkmind Library (ISSN: 2308-
3492, ISBN: 978-1-61208-592-0) 
[2] E. Massarczyk and P. Winzer, “Influence of the Perception of 
Data Security and Security Importance on Customer Usage of 
Internet Services,” International Journal On Advances in 
Internet Technology, Thinkmind Library (ISSN: 1942-2652), 
volume 10, numbers 1 and 2, 2017, pp. 1-22  
[3] International Telecommunication Union (ITU), “ICT Facts & 
Figures 
– 
The 
world 
in 
2015,” 
May 
2015, 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf, 
[retrieved: 09.2017] 
[4] P. W. Dowd and J. T. McHenry, “Network Security: It’s Time 
to Take It Seriously,” Computer (1998), vol. 31, issue 9, IEEE 
Xplore Digital Library, Sept. 1998, pp. 24-28. 
[5] D. Desai, “Law and Technology – Beyond Location: Data 
Security in the 21st Century,” Magazine Communications of 
the ACM (2013), vol. 56, issue 1, ACM, Jan. 2013, pp. 34-36. 
[6] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. Guimarães Ferraz, “Smart City Security 
Issues: Depicting Information Security Issues in the Role of a 
urban environment,” 7th International Conference on Utility 
and Cloud Computing, IEEE/ACM, 2014, pp. 842-846. 
[7] Kaspersky Lab, “Damage Control: The Cost of Security 
Breaches,” IT Security Risks Special Report Series,  
https://media.kaspersky.com/pdf/it-risks-survey-report-cost-
of-security-breaches.pdf., 2015, [retrieved 09.2017] 
[8] D. Nayak, N. Rajendran, D. B. Phatak, and V. P. Gulati, 
“Security Issues in Mobile Data Networks,” Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC 2004), vol. 5, IEEE Xplore 
Digital Library, Sept. 2004, pp. 3229-3233. 
[9] S. Dhawan, K. Singh, and S. Goel, “Impact of Privacy Attitude. 
Concern and Awareness on Use of Online Social Networking,” 
5th International Conference - Confluence The Next Generation 
Information Technology Summit 2013, IEEE Xplore Digital 
Library, Sept. 2014, pp. 14-17. 
[10] D. Malandrino, V. Scarano, and R. Spinelli, “How Increased 
Awareness Can Impact Attitudes and Behaviors Toward 
Online Privacy Protection,” International Conference on Social 
Computing, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, Sept. 2013, pp. 57-
62. 
57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[11] A. N. Joinson. U.-D. Reips, T. Buchanan, and C. B. Paine 
Schofield, “Privacy, Trust, and Self-Disclosure Online, ” 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1-24. 
[12] B. Krishnamurthy, K. Naryshkin, and C. Wills, “Privacy 
Leakage vs. Protection Measures: the Growing Disconnect,” in 
Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop, 2011, pp. 1-10. 
[13] Q. Tan and F. Pivot, “Big Data Privacy: Changing Perception 
of 
Privacy, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
City/SocialCom/SustainCom, IEEE, 2015, pp. 860-865. 
[14] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. L. Thong, and X. Xin, “Consumer 
Acceptance and Use of Information Technology: Extending the 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 36, issue 1, 2012, pp. 157-178. 
[15] F.-T. Lin, H.-Y. Wu, and T. T. Nguyet Nga, “Adoption of 
Internet Banking: An Empirical Study in Vietnam,” 10th 
International Conference on e-Business Engnineering, IEEE 
Xplore Digital Library, 2013, pp. 282-287. 
[16] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. L. Thong, and X. Xin, “Consumer 
Acceptance and Use of Information Technology: Extending the 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 36, issue 1, 2012, pp. 157-178. 
[17] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
“User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a 
Unified View,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, issue 3, 2003, pp. 425-
478. 
[18] T. Escorbar-Rodriguez and E. Carvajal-Trujillo, “Online 
Purchasing Tickets for Low Cost Carriers: An Application of 
the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) Model,” Tourism Management, vol. 43, 2014, pp. 
70-88. 
[19] J. Zhong, A. Dhir, M. Nieminen, M. Hämäläinen, and J. Laine, 
“Exploring Consumer Adoption of Mobile Payments in 
China,” Academic Mind Trek’13, 2013, pp. 318-325. 
[20] Y. S. Wang, Y. M. Wang, H. H. Lin, and T. I. Tang, 
“Determinants of User Acceptance of Internet Banking: an 
Empirical Study,” International Journal of Service Industry 
Management, vol. 14, 2003, pp. 501-519. 
[21] A. Zmijewska, E. Lawrence, R., and R. Steele, “Towards 
Understanding of Factors Influencing User Acceptance of 
Mobile Payment Systems,” In: Proceedings of the IADIS 
WWW/Internet, Madrid, Spain, 2004. 
[22] T. Dahlberg and A. Öörni, “Understanding Changes in 
Consumer Payment Habits – Do Mobile Payments and 
Electronic Invoices Attract Consumers?,” In: 40th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
2007, p. 50.  
[23] P. G. Schierz, O. Schilke, and B. W. Wirtz, “Understanding 
Consumer Acceptance of Mobile Payment Services: An 
Empirical Analysis,” Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications, vol. 9, issue 3, 2010, pp. 209-216.  
[24] C. Kim, W. Tao, N. Shin, and K. S. Kim, “An Empirical Study 
of Customers' Perceptions of Security and Trust in E-Payment 
Systems,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 
vol. 9, issue 1, 2010, pp. 84-95.  
[25] K. Yang, “Exploring Factors Affecting the Adoption of Mobile 
Commerce in Singapore,” Telematics and Informatics, vol. 22 
issue 3, 2005, pp. 257-277. 
[26] J. Cheong, M. Cheol, and J. Hwang, “Mobile Payment 
Adoption in Korea,” In: ITS 15th biennial conference, Berlin, 
Germany, 2002. 
[27] T. Dahlberg, N. Mallat, and A. Öörni, “Consumer Acceptance 
of Mobile Payment Solutions,” In: G.M. Giaglis (ed.), 
mBusiness 2003 – The Second International Conference on 
Mobile Business, Vienna, 2003, pp. 211-218.  
[28] N. Mallat, “Exploring Consumer Adoption of Mobile 
Payments – a Qualitative Study,” Mobility Roundtable, 
Helsinki, Finland, vol. 16, issue 4, 2006, pp. 413-432. 
[29] K. Pousttchi and M. Zenker, “Current Mobile Payment 
Procedures on the German Market from the view of Customer 
Requirements,” In: 14th International Workshop on Database 
and Expert Systems Applications, 2003, pp. 870-874.  
[30] D. Gefen and D. David, “Reflections on the Dimensions of 
Trust and Trustworthiness among Online Consumers”, 
Database for Advances in Information Systems, vol. 33, issue 
3, 2002, pp. 38-53.  
[31] R. De Sena Abrahao, S. N. Moriguchi, and D. F. Andrade, 
“Intention of Adoption of Mobile Payment: An Analysis in the 
Light of the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT),” Innovation and Management Review, 
vol. 13, 2016, pp. 221-230. 
[32] D. H. McKnight, L. L. Cummings, and N. L. Chervany, “Initial 
Trust Formation in New Organizational Relationships,” 
Academy of Management Review, vol. 23, 1998, pp. 473-490. 
[33] D. H. McKnight, V. Choudhury, and C. Kacmar, “The Impact 
of Initial Consumer Trust on Intentions to Transact with a Web 
Site: a Trust Building Model,” The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems , vol. 11, 2002, pp. 297-323. 
[34] T. Zhou, “Understanding Mobile Internet Continuance Usage 
from the Perspectives of UTAUT and Flow,” Information 
Development vol. 27, 2011, pp. 207-218. 
[35] T. Zhou, Y. Lu, and B. Wang, “Integrating TTF and UTAUT 
to Explain Mobile Banking User Adoption,” Computers in 
Human Behavior, vol. 26, 2010, 760-767. 
[36] T. Zhou, “An Empirical Examination of Initial Trust in Mobile 
Banking,” Information Development, vol. 21, issue 5. 2011, 
pp. 527-540. 
[37] A. Y. L. Chong, “Understanding Mobile Commerce 
Continuance Intentions: An Empirical Analysis of Chinese 
Consumers,” Journal of Computer Information Systems, 2013. 
[38] L.-D. Chen, “A Model of Consumer Acceptance of Mobile 
Payment,” International Journal of Mobile Communications, 
vol. 6, issue 1, 2008, pp. 32-52.  
[39] M. A. Mahfuz, L. Khanam, and W. Hu, “The Influence of 
Culture on M-Banking Technology Adoption: An Integrative 
Approach of UTAUT2 and ITM,” 2016 Proceedings of 
PICMET’16: Technology Management for Social Innovation, 
2016, pp. 70-88. 
[40] X. Luo, H.  Li, J. Zhang, and J. P. Shim, “Examining Multi-
dimensional Trust and Multi-faceted Risk in Initial Acceptance 
of Emerging Technologies: an Empirical Study of Mobile 
Banking Services,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 49, issue 2, 
2010, pp. 222-234. 
[41] H.-P. Lu, and P. Y.-J. Su, “Factors Affecting Purchase 
Intention on Mobile Shopping Websites,” Internet Research, 
vol. 19, issue 4, 2009, pp. 442-458. 
[42] T. Oliveira, M. Faria, M. A. Thomas, and A. Popovic, 
“Extending the Understanding of Mobile Banking Adoption: 
When UTAUT meets TTF and ITM,” International Journal of 
Information Management, vol. 34, 2014, pp. 689-703. 
[43] G. Kim, B. Shin, and H. G. Lee, “Understanding dynamics 
between Initial Trust and Usage Intentions of Mobile 
Banking”, Information Systems Journal, vol. 19, issue 3, 2009, 
pp. 283-311. 
[44] Y.-H. Chen and S. Barnes, “Initial trust and online buyer 
behavior”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 107 
issue 1, 2007, pp. 21-36. 
[45] Y. Lu, S. Yang, P. Y. K. Chau, and Y. Cao, “Dynamics 
between the Trust Transfer Process and Intention to Use 
Mobile Payment Services: A Cross-Environment Perspective.” 
Information & Management, vol. 48, issue 8, 2011, pp. 393-
403. 
[46] Y. Lu, Z. Deng, and B. Wang, “Exploring Factors Affecting 
Chinese Consumers’ Usage of Short Message Service for 
58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Personal Communication”, Information Systems Journal, vol. 
20, issue 2, 2010, pp. 183-208. 
[47] Y. M. Shin, S. C. Lee, B. Shin, and H. G. Lee, “Examining 
Influencing Factors of Post-Adoption Usage of Mobile 
Internet: Focus on the User Perception of Supplier-Side 
Attributes”, Information Systems Frontier, vol. 12, issue 5, 
2010, pp. 595-606. 
[48] J. Bortz and N. Döring, “Research Methods and Evaluations,” 
[German] “Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation; für Human- 
und Sozialwissenschaftler,“ Heidelberg, Springer, vol. 4, 2009. 
[49] M. Kaya, “Data Collection Procedure“, [German] “Verfahren 
der 
Datenerhebung,” 
in 
Albers, 
S./Klapper, 
D./Konradt, U./Walter, A./Wolf, J. (Hrsg.): Methodik der 
empirischen Forschung, Wiesbaden, Gabler, vol. 3, 2013, pp. 
49-64. 
[50] R. Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes,” 
Archives of Psychology, 1932, pp. 199-224. 
[51] Destatis, Statistisches Bundesamt, “Population,“ [German] 
“Bevölkerung,” 
[Online] 
https://www.destatis.de/DE/ZahlenFakten/GesellschaftStaat/B
evoelkerung/Bevoelkerungsstand/Tabellen_/lrbev01.html, 
2015, [retrieved 09.2017] 
[52] Statista, “Internet Users in Germany from 2001 to 2015,” 
[German] “Anteil der Internetnutzer in Deutschland in den 
Jahren 
2001 
bis 
2015,” 
[Online]http://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/13070/umf
rage/entwicklung-der-internetnutzung-in-deutschland-seit-
2001/, 2015, [retrieved: 09.2017]  
[53] Statista, 
“Customers 
without 
Anti-Virus 
Protection,” 
[German], 
“Anteil 
der 
Verbraucher 
ohne 
aktives 
Antivirenprogramm in ausgewählten Ländern weltweit,” 
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/226942/umfrage/a
nteil-der-verbraucher-ohne-aktives-antivirenprogramm/, 2017, 
[retrieved: 09.2017]  
[54] L. J. Cronbach, “Coefficient Alpha and the Internal Structure 
of Tests,” Psychometrika, vol. 16, 1951, pp. 297-334. 
[55] C. Fornell and D. Larcker, “Evaluating Structural Equation 
Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error,” 
Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 18, issue 1, 1981, pp. 39-
50. 
[56] R. Hossiep, “Cronbachs Alpha,” [German] “Cronbachs 
Alpha,” In Wirtz, M. A. (editor): Dorsch – Lexikon der 
Psychologie, vol. 17. Verlag Hans Huber, Bern, 2014.  
[57] J. F. J. Hair, R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. Black,   
“Multivariate Data Analysis,” Macmillan, New York, NY, 
Macmillan, vol. 3, 1995. 
[58] S. Fromm, “Data Analysis with SPSS Part 1,” [German] 
“Datenanalyse mit SPSS für Fortgeschrittene,” Arbeitsbuch, 
vol. 2, VS 
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, GWV 
Fachverlage, Wiesbaden, 2008. 
[59] S. Fromm, “Data Analysis with SPSS Part 2,” [German] 
“Datenanalyse mit SPSS für Fortgeschrittene 2: Multivariate 
Verfahren für Querschnittsdaten,”  Lehrbuch, vol. 1, VS Verlag 
für Sozialwissenschaften, Springer, Wiesbaden, 2010. 
[60] N. M. Schöneck and W. Voß, “Research Project,” [German] 
“Das Forschungsprojekt – Planung, Durchführung und 
Auswertung einer quantitativen Studie,” vol. 2. Springer 
Wiesbaden, 2013 
[61] A. Field, “Discovering Statistics Using SPSS,” Sage 
Publications Ltd., vol. 4, 2013. 
[62] F. Brosius, “SPSS 8 Professional Statistics in Windows,” 
[German] “SPSS 8 Professionelle Statistik unter Windows,” 
Kapitel 21 Korrelation, International Thomson Publishing, vol. 
1, 1998. 
[63] D. Lin, D. P. Foster, and L. H. Ungar, “VIF Regression: A Fast 
Regression Algorithm for Large Data,” Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, vol. 106, issue 493, 2009, pp. 
232-247. 
[64] S. Petter, D. W. Straub, and A. Rai, “Specifying Formative 
Constructs in Information Systems Research,” MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 31, issue 4, 2007, pp. 623-656.  
[65] C. Flavian, M. Guinaliu, and E. Torres, “The Influence of 
Corporate Image on Consumer Trust – a Comparative Analysis 
in Traditional Versus Internet Banking”, Internet Research, 
vol. 15 issue 4, 2005, pp. 447-470. 
[66] M. A. Fuller, M. A. Serva, and J. Benamati, “Seeing is 
Believing: the Transitory Influence of Reputation Information 
on E-Commerce Trust and Decision Making”, Decision 
Sciences, vol. 38, issue 4, 2007, pp. 675-699. 
[67] S. S. Kim and N. K. Malhotra, “A Longitudinal Model of 
Continued IS Use: An Integrative View of Four Mechanisms 
Underlying Post-Adoption Phenomena,” Management Science 
vol. 51, issue 5, 2005, pp. 741-755. 
 
59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

