Activation Mechanism for Recommending Appropriate Users and Comments
on Wedding Community Sites
Toshinori Hayashi∗, Yuanyuan Wang†, Yukiko Kawai‡, and Kazutoshi Sumiya∗
∗Kwansei Gakuin University,
2–1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669–1337, Japan
Email: den82687@kwansei.ac.jp, sumiya@kwansei.ac.jp
†Yamaguchi University,
2–16–1 Tokiwadai, Ube, Yamaguchi 755–8611, Japan
Email: y.wang@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp
‡Kyoto Sangyo University,
Kamigamo Motoyama, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603–8555, Japan
Email: kawai@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we present an active communication
mechanism based on a user behavior analysis on wedding com-
munity websites. To this end, we propose a novel mechanism for
the activation of user communications, which suggests other users
and their related comments by detecting knowledge and interests
from archived comments. Such information on a community
website evokes conversations among users. We focus on a wedding
community website in this study. The proposed mechanism
consists of the following three components: 1) the proﬁling of
user login information, such as users’ ages and locations, and
extraction of user characteristics, such as their interests and
intentions to communicate; 2) the detection and recommendation
of users who are likely to communicate with each other; and
3) the recommendation of comments that may be of interest to
a user. Through the proposed activation mechanism, users on
a wedding community website can easily ﬁnd other users who
share similar experiences, and engage in active communication
with them. We discuss our proposed user characteristic extraction
and user recommendation methods using actual users’ posts
from a wedding community website, and also discuss applications
for e-learning. In addition, we evaluated the activation of user
communications using our proposed system through interviews.
Keywords–user behavior analysis; wedding community site;
communication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, research has been conducted using data
from social networking services (SNSs). In this context, it
is important to collect as much data as possible from SNS
community websites, such as Facebook, LINE, and other Q&A
sites. However, such services that focus on data collection
cannot activate user communications on community websites,
because of differences in human values. In this paper, we
focus on conversations on a wedding community website.
Moreover, we focus on the problem that users cannot ﬁnd
appropriate users to communicate with. We aim to evoke
user communications by recommending appropriate users and
comments, considering human values. Our proposed system
analyzes users’ situations from user login information and
user preferences by extracting user characteristics, because we
assume that human values consist of situations and preferences.
This research constitutes an extension to the work in [1], which
we presented in Venice in April 2017.
Wedding community websites are community sites for
sharing and obtaining information regarding wedding planning,
and are completely distinct from dating websites, the purpose
of which is to meet a partner for dating. We focus on a wedding
community site that shares the same concept as other kinds
of bulletin board systems (BBSs). On this community site,
users can post their opinions and experiences on a conversation
thread created by an administrator. Each conversation thread
has questions that ask about weddings as discussion themes,
such as “how did you choose your wedding location?” Thus,
users post their opinions and experiences in response to these
questions, and exchange information. However, conversations
between users are not active in these threads, because it is
difﬁcult for users to ﬁnd others to communicate with. Our
proposed system solves this problem by ﬁnding appropriate
users based on user login information and characteristics.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel active communication
mechanism that shares comments of users considering their
knowledge and interests by analyzing their behavior on com-
munity websites. To this end, we ﬁrst extract all posts for each
user, and extract their feature words using the term frequency–
inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) method. Next, we calcu-
late the similarities between users to detect appropriate users.
Finally, we recommend their comments by generating links
to them in posts (see Figure 1). Through this mechanism,
users can communicate with other users that are recommended
to them about wedding planning. Furthermore, this promotes
communications among users on a wedding community web-
site.
We also propose an active communication mechanism for
e-learning, in order to conﬁrm the possibility of applying
our proposed system to other community websites. According
to some studies regarding online discussions [2][3], active
communications among users on e-learning is an effective
mechanism for students to learn knowledge efﬁciently. To
extend the effect of our proposed method, we aim to apply
it to e-learning.
To evaluate this system, we use the actual data from a
wedding community website. This is sorted and processed
to provide recommendations to users for evaluation, in order
to verify whether this mechanism is successful. Then, we
interview ﬁve users to ask how helpful the proposed system
is. Although we could not interview many actual users, we
performed a qualitative evaluation through these interviews.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
134
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
User and comment recommendations for the activation of user
communications based on a user behavior analysis.
II provides an overview of our system and reviews related
work. Section III explains how users and their comments are
recommended on a wedding community website. Section IV
explains the application of our proposed methods to e-learning.
Section V presents the experimental results obtained using
a real dataset from a wedding community website. Finally,
Section VII concludes the paper, and Section VI outlines our
future work.
II.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW AND RELATED WORK
A. Active Communication Mechanism
We present an active communication mechanism based on
user behavior analysis on wedding community websites. This
mechanism consists of the following three steps (see Figure
1):
1)
User login information and user characteristic extrac-
tion.
2)
User detection and recommendations.
3)
Comment recommendations.
To use this mechanism, users are required to install a
toolbar (a browser plug-in) on an existing wedding community
website in Japan. Wedding community websites are gener-
ally utilized by people who plan to hold a wedding, and
are intended to assess a couples’ requirements regarding the
wedding. On the website we focus on in this study, there are
conversation threads for wedding planning for various marriage
statuses, and users can freely post their comments on each
thread. The website addresses users’ anxieties and troubles.
For example, a user can create a post such as “I do not know
what I should be careful about in planning for a wedding.”
Users can also share their experiences, such as impressions
and enjoyments. For example, a user could post “I had an
amazing wedding overseas.”
The only way to communicate with other users is by post-
ing comments as replies to other users’ comments on threads.
However, users rarely post replies on other users’ comments,
because they cannot ﬁnd appropriate users to communicate
with. To raise the number of replies, we propose a method
that recommends both users and their comments by analyzing
user behavior and proﬁle information on a wedding community
website to activate conversations.
A wedding community website is not a “question &
answer” site; rather, it is a website where users can share their
opinions and experiences regarding weddings. The proposed
system will recommend other users who have been in similar
situations or have shared values regarding marriage, in order
to evoke communications between users. This system can also
be adopted on other community websites. However, because
the proposed system is considered on a wedding community
website, it uses user login information entered by a user
during their initial registration regarding their ideal wedding
ceremony.
Figure 1 presents an overview of our proposed mechanism.
After a user posts, the mechanism analyzes their behavior and
recommends other users by calculating the similarities between
them. After a user posts information, it will pass through the
link generation system. This system will generate information
to evoke conversations. First, it extracts all of the posts of
users, and analyzes user behavior through feature words. Then,
it detects recommended users by performing selections as
requested by the user. To detect a recommended user, we
categorize each user by three kinds of proﬁle information.
These methods are explained in Section III.
B. Related Work
Issac et al. [4] noted that communication is important for
discussing various topics and working with others as a group.
They mentioned that communication makes people more will-
ing to contribute to society. Moreover, communication on
websites is also effective, not only face-to-face communication.
Ellison et al. [5] focused on SNS communities. L. H. Shaw et
al. found that Internet communication decreases loneliness and
depression signiﬁcantly [6]. According to these studies, com-
municating with others on SNSs makes people feel happier.
In our previous work, users communicated with each other
when searching for web pages [7]. In this work, we extend
our previous work to recommend users and comments based
on link generation for a wedding community site.
Knowledge extraction from online communities [8] have
also been researched. Park et al. [9] conﬁrmed that the
knowledge users obtain through online communications is
connected to their purchasing behavior. They proved that
online communities provide users with important information
regarding purchase behavior. Randhawa et al. [10] improved
the utility of knowledge collaboration between organizations
and online communities for open innovation (OI). There have
been many studies concerning the use of data from online
communities [11][12][13][14] to discover new knowledge.
Our proposed system activates communications on online
community websites. Akihiro et al. [15] conducted an experi-
ment concerning active communication in e-lectures through a
chat system. However, this did not work very effectively, be-
cause it was a burden for students to chat with others during the
lectures. In this paper, we propose a new active communication
mechanism by recommending appropriate users to other users
with various marriage statuses.
Some researchers [16][17][18] analyzed effects of conver-
sation from online community. Hemmings-Jarrett et al. [19]
measured the effect of online communications with a focus
on political topics, comparing before and after the event.
They assumed that the activity levels of users on online
conversations were related to their opinion. However, this
research was not intended to activate conversations.
135
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2.
Proﬁling based on user aspects.
Other studies that have recommended analyzing user be-
havior on news websites [20][21] did not consider the relation-
ships between users. In this paper, we ﬁrst extract user posts
to analyze user behavior, and then detect users to recommend
by extracting the relationships between users.
Our proposed method involves activating user communica-
tions by recommending appropriate users and their comments.
Xu et al. [22] proposed a novel user recommendation sys-
tem based on users interests and networks of relationships.
However, there have not been many studies regarding user
recommendation systems that focus on speciﬁc community
websites.
Although several automatic link generation methods for
websites have been studied [23][24], these have primarily
focused on web pages for knowledge support only; they did
not consider communications among users. To address this
deﬁciency, our proposed method recommends users in order
to evoke communications.
III.
ACTIVE COMMUNICATION MECHANISM FOR
WEDDING WEBSITES
A. User Behavior Analysis on a Wedding Community Website
To evoke communication among users, our active commu-
nication mechanism recommends users and their comments
by analyzing user behavior on a wedding community website.
According to our previous work in [7], users can help other
users when they search for the same web pages. Furthermore,
in general users can communicate with each other easily when
they share similar statuses or situations and have similar pref-
erences. Therefore, in order to recommend users we analyze
users’ humans values by considering three kinds of proﬁle
information based on aspects of a wedding community website
(see Figure 2). In particular, we consider the axes of “Static
Proﬁle Information,” “Marriage Status,” and “Dynamic Proﬁle
Information.”
“Static Proﬁle Information” and “’Marriage Status” indi-
cate a user’s situations. “Dynamic Proﬁle Information” indi-
cates a user’s preferences. This system analyzes users’ human
values based on their situations and preferences. Static proﬁle
information is generated from user login information, such as
age and location, which does not normally change. Marriage
status implies a user’s position regarding a wedding, such
as before or after marriage. Dynamic proﬁle information is
generated from the extraction of user characteristics. This uses
Figure 3.
User detection when the original user is not yet married.
Figure 4.
User detection when the original user is already married.
the data from posts from each user, and so this information
often changes.
On wedding community websites, marriage status is the
most important factor in analyzing users, because this implies
a big difference in the purpose of use. The purpose of using
this website for users who are preparing for a wedding is to
obtain information regarding weddings. On the other hand, for
users who have already ﬁnished their wedding, the purpose is
to share information and their experiences of their wedding
to provide advice and help others. Thus, “Marriage Status” is
the most important factor in the user analysis for categorizing
users.
1) User Login Information Extraction: We extract user
login information by acquiring the information that users input
during registration on a wedding community website. Users
input information such as their age, area where they live, and
marital status. We divide this user login information into user
static proﬁle information and marital status.
2) User Characteristic Extraction: We extract user charac-
teristics by extracting all posts for each user. Next, we calculate
the term frequency and document frequency based on the TF-
IDF method. Speciﬁcally, we use the following formulas:
TFi,j
=
ni,j
∑
k nk,j
,
(1)
IDFi
=
log |D|
dfi
,
(2)
where TF indicates term frequency, IDF indicates inverse
document frequency, and ni,j denotes the term frequency of
the word ti in document dj. In this work, dj denotes the
document that is integrated all posts of one user. Therefore,
136
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I.
FIVE USER PATTERNS FOR RECOMMENDATION.
Pattern
User (Who)
Marriage Status (to who)
Static Proﬁle Information
Active Proﬁle Information
Purpose
1
After marriage
Before
Neutral
Similar
Give advice
2
After marriage
After
Neutral
Similar
Share
3
Before marriage
Before
Similar
Different
Reference
4
Before marriage
Before
Neutral
Similar
Share
5
Before marriage
After
Neutral
Similar
Get advice
TABLE II.
RECOMMENDATION SITUATION FOR EACH USER PATTERN.
Pattern
Purpose
When
How
1
Give advice
Links are generated in the comments
XX needs some advice from you
2
Share
After Login
XX is on the same status as you
3
Reference
Links are generated in the comments
You can refer to XX
4
Share
After Login
XX is on the same status as you
5
Get advice
Links are generated in the comments
XX can be a good adviser for you
the number of documents is equal to the number of users on
the wedding community site. Furthermore, ∑
k nk,j denotes
the sum of the term frequencies of all words in document dj,
and |D| denotes the total number of documents, which is also
equal to the number of users. Finally, dfi denotes the number
of documents that include the word ti.
Based on the above, we use the obtained TF-IDF values
and feature words for each user to determine a user’s active
proﬁle information. This information changes every time a user
posts on a thread on the wedding community site, and so users’
dynamic proﬁle information is normally changed by user posts.
B. User Detection and Recommendation
1) User Detection: “Marriage Status” takes an absolute
value of either “preparing for wedding” or “ﬁnished wedding.”
Therefore, there are only two kinds of value. However, “Static
Proﬁle Information” and “Dynamic Proﬁle Information” are
represented by relative values. These will vary depending on
each user.
To detect a recommended user, the system needs to
calculate the similarity for each axis. First, the method of
calculating the “Static Proﬁle Information” depends on the
dataset. We will explain this in Section . Second, the similarity
for “Marriage Status” is very simple, as this consists of only
two kinds of status, so that the relationship between users for
“Marriage Status” must either be the same or different. Third,
we calculate the similarities for “Dynamic Proﬁle Information”
between users using cosine similarity as follows:
Sim(−→x , −→y ) =
∑|V |
i=1 xi · yi
√∑|V |
i=1(xi)2 ·
√∑|V |
i=1(yi)2
,
(3)
where −→x denotes the feature vector of user x and −→y denotes
the feature vector of user y, and |V | is the number of
dimensions for the feature vector.
Thus, this system calculates the similarities between users
by using three kinds of proﬁle information. Based on these
similarity values, the system detects recommended users for
each original user.
2) User Recommendation: We recommend users to evoke
communications with others by considering users who are in
similar situations. Such users may easily relate to each other
and share their experiences or advice. As mentioned in the pre-
vious section, we use three kinds of proﬁle information: “Static
Proﬁle Information,” “Marriage Status,” and “Dynamic Proﬁle
Information.” Considering the relationships between users,
each type of proﬁle information has a high or low similarity.
However, we assume that “Marriage Status” has four possible
combinations: “preparing for wedding” and “preparing for
wedding,” “preparing for wedding” and “ﬁnished wedding,”
“ﬁnished wedding” and “preparing for wedding,” and “ﬁnished
wedding” and “ﬁnished wedding.” A total of 16 kinds of user
can be extracted by the system. We separate these into two
cases: where the original user is preparing for a wedding and
where the original user has already ﬁnished a wedding.
Figure 3 illustrates the case in which the original user is
preparing for a wedding. There are eight kinds of user that the
system can detect in this case, based on three kinds of proﬁle
information. The idea of recommending users is to suggest an
appropriate user who is able to provide advice or share related
experiences, or could be a reference for a different style of
wedding.
For a user to be recommended who can provide advice,
they should have a high dynamic similarity, which means that
their preferences should be similar. Because they have similar
preferences, the recommended user can provide advice if they
have already ﬁnished their wedding.
For a recommended user to be able to share their expe-
riences, they should have high similarity for dynamic proﬁle
information, which means that their preferences are similar. In
addition, the marital status should be the same for the users
to be in the same situation. We assume that users who are in
a similar situation with similar preferences can communicate
easily to share their experiences.
To recommend a user who could be a reference, that user
should be in a similar situation and have different preferences.
To activate communications among users, recommending sim-
ilar users is important, but users are also interested in others
who are different. For instance, even though a user has an ideal
style of wedding in mind, this might be changed by referring
to others. A user recommended to another for reference has to
have a low similarity for dynamic proﬁle and high similarity
for static proﬁle information.
Figure 4 illustrates the case in which the original user has
already ﬁnished their wedding. There are eight kinds of users
in this case, based on three types of proﬁle information. The
137
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

idea of recommending users is the same as in 3; however, we
assume that a user who has ﬁnished their wedding does not
use this website for reference, because the motivation of these
users is to provide advice or share experiences with other users.
Based on the three axes described in the previous subsec-
tion and the theory of recommending users, we classify ﬁve
useful patterns of users on a wedding community website (see
Table I).
For each user, we detect the other user that is most similar
to them for Patterns 1, 2, 4, and 5. Moreover, we detect the
user that is most different for Pattern 3. Based on the above
procedure, we propose recommendations to users.
C. Comment Recommendation
1) Comment Extraction: In the previous subsection, we
explained how to detect users and make recommendations in
order to stimulate communications on a wedding community
website. To recommend user comments, we calculate the most
closely related comments from the recommended users that are
derived using Eq. (3). The recommended comments suggest
why the recommended user is relevant for the original user.
2) Recommendation Interface: Our active communication
mechanism recommends other appropriate users and their
comments in different scenarios corresponding to each user
pattern in Table II.
This mechanism has two methods of recommending users.
The ﬁrst method recommends users in the comments by
generating links to them. The second method recommends
users on the top page following login.
For the ﬁrst method, the interface provides recommenda-
tion for Patterns 1, 3, and 5. The recommended users for these
patterns have similar preferences. We expected that recom-
mending other users using generated links in the comments
would be an effective way to raise the interest of the original
user, because the recommended users are detected by their
preferences, which are extracted from their comments on
threads.
This mechanism generates links in the comments. To
generate links in the comments after users have posted, we
attach the links to user information or comments to related
words by extracting user characteristics (feature words).
In the second method, the interface provides recommen-
dations for Patterns 2 and 4, and the mechanism presents
users on the top page of the website following login. This
mechanism also recommends users on the top page that are
likely to share similar experiences. We assume that users prefer
to see more users on the top page than in the links generated in
the comments, because this method focuses on recommending
users.
IV.
ACTIVE COMMUNICATION MECHANISM FOR
E-LEARNING
In previous section, we discussed how to activate commu-
nication among users on wedding community websites. How-
ever, we expect that this method for recommending other users
based on user characteristics in order to evoke communication
will also be effective on other community websites, such as
e-learning community sites. To enhance the user community
on e-learning websites, we discuss an active communication
mechanism for e-learning in this section.
Figure 5.
Conceptual diagram of automatic link generation.
A. System Overview for e-Learning
In recent years, massive open online courses (MOOC) have
emerged as a new form of education for students who wish
to attend courses at any level or cannot access traditional
education because of constraints on time, location, or other
factors. However, it is difﬁcult to maintain students’ motivation
for self-learning. Currently, many students can collaborate
during online courses through SNS, such as Facebook and
Twitter. Liao et al. [25] and Chen et al. [26] investigated the
use of SNS in online education. Students can communicate
with each other when they use post threads on SNS. Because
of the different levels of knowledge between students, com-
munications cannot proceed smoothly. This is a problem that
we aim to solve in this research. Therefore, it is necessary
to extract user characteristics from SNS user behavior, which
indicate users’ knowledge and interests, and supplement users’
posts with related information (e.g., search results, Wikipedia
pages, lecture videos, or information on other friends) in the
post thread.
In this work, the goal is to develop a novel automatic link
generation method by analyzing SNS user behavior from user
posts in e-learning. The proposed method generates two kinds
of links: 1) knowledge support for receivers who receive posts
from senders, and 2) conversation evoked support for receivers
to give information to senders (see Figure 5).
Although several automatic link generation methods for
websites have been studied [27][28], these have focused on
web pages for knowledge support only, and they do not solve
the abovementioned issues regarding user communication in
e-learning. Other studies regarding user behavior on news
websites [29] have not considered the relationships between
users.
In this paper, we ﬁrst extract user characteristics by analyz-
ing SNS user behavior in e-learning from their posts. Then, we
can detect users’ relationships based on user characteristics.
Thus, 1) links for knowledge support are attached to posts
by using search results or Wikipedia pages for unknown
vocabulary words for receivers, and 2) links for conversation
evoked support for receivers to offer information regarding
138
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III.
TOP 15 FEATURE WORDS OF USERS A, B, C, AND D.
XXXXXXX
User
Method
1)
2)
3)
A
of, a, ceremony, wedding ceremony, to, sister, I
will, heart, family, after, because, to, did, et al.,
that
sister, wedding ceremony, earthquake disaster,
Fukushima, bata, ﬁreplace, chaya, sister, atten-
dance, column, heart, family, safety, stop, name
wedding ceremony, sister, Earthquake disaster,
bata, attendance, heart, Fukushima, chaya, ﬁre-
place, family, sister, column, 11, safety, inﬂuence
B
of, did, better, object, pull, a marriage, I will,
he, now, a student, generation, learning, Toyama,
now, chestnut
ﬁsh paste, Toyama, red snapper, gift, girlfriend,
object, luck, a student, surprised, age, pull, moun-
tain, form, chestnut, happiness
Toyama, red snapper, ﬁsh paste, object, gift, girl-
friend, luck, a student, surprised, age, mountain,
form, happiness, chestnut, woman
C
did, of, better, reach, day, that, friend, friends,
ceremony, wedding ceremony, while, a, before,
ﬁrst, good
it seems intriguing, eve, limousine, the eve, ﬁrst
meeting, face to face, a van, friend, the other day,
reach, move, the previous day, festival, the best
eve, it seems intriguing, limousine, ﬁrst meeting,
friend, face to face, the best, a van, move, the
previous day, festival, the other day, Hawaii,
fellow, reach
D
a, of, did, one, this, now, better, “”, to, about,
place, et al., yo, ﬁltration, meeting
reserved, snow board, lending, no, alternating
current, table, hair style, comment, ﬁring, male,
rooftop, development, release, frank
reserved, snow board, alternating current, male,
hair style, table, board, BGM, rooftop, ﬁring,
girlfriend, in Tokyo, development, comment
senders are attached to posts by using related lecture videos for
topics of posts or other information on other friends with the
same interests. Thus, the proposed novel method encourages
users to communicate with each other during conversations on
e-learning platforms. This method activates communication not
only by recommending other users, but also by generating links
to relevant knowledge for users’ studies.
In this section, we describe the proposed link generation
method for active communications in e-learning. The proposed
method extracts user characteristics by analyzing user behavior
from their posts, selects vocabulary words as links based on
user characteristics from their posts, and selects vocabulary
words as links based on user characteristics. We ﬁrst extract
feature words for each user from their posts as user char-
acteristics. Then, low or high weight vocabulary words are
selected as link candidates based on users’ relationships. The
link information is classiﬁed into two categories: 1) knowledge
support and 2) conversation evoked support.
B. Analysis of SNS User Behavior
To analyze SNS user behavior, we ﬁrst extract high-
frequency words from each post of each user using the
Yahoo! Web API1. Next, we calculate the average weight of
each extracted high-frequency word. Then, we extract user
characteristics by extracting feature words for each user. We
calculate the weight of each word i that appears in each user’s
posts using the following formula:
weight of i by Yahoo!Web API
#posts with i
× total #posts
#posts with i
(4)
The left part of Eq. (4) calculates the average weight of i
that appears in each post. The right part of Eq. (4) gives an
IDF value of i in all posts of each user. In addition, “Like”
and “Share” options are available on SNS, to respectively
mark interests or spread a post. Therefore, we can improve
the calculation method by adding the numbers of “Like” and
“Share” actions to the weight of each word.
C. Generation of Links in Chats
To generate links in chats between users, we attach link
information to vocabulary words in posts based on users’
relationships by using user characteristics (feature words).
The link information for knowledge support is intended to
supplement unknown vocabulary words for the receiver. We
select the low weight words as unknown vocabulary words to
1http://developer.yahoo.co.jp/webapi/jlp/keyphrase/v1/extract.html
TABLE IV.
NUMBERS OF COMMENTS.
#posts
#users
1 - 10
440 users
11- 20
64 users
21 - 30
37 users
31 - 40
14 users
41 - 50
1 user
51 - 60
1 user
be as link candidates in the post from the extracted feature
words from the receiver’s characteristics. Then, we attach
search results and Wikipedia pages for the low weight words
to the post. In Figure 5, it is determined that the receiver
has a lack of knowledge regarding “C Programming,” and “C
Programming” is generated as a link in the post to the receiver.
The link information for conversation evoked support is
intended to promote user communication for receivers by
offering information regarding the senders. We select the high
weight words from extracted feature words of the receiver’s
characteristics, and detect information on other friends (linked
with the receiver through the network) related to the post as
link candidates using cosine similarity the high weight words
through the formula given below. In Figure 5, it is determined
that a friend is similar to the sender and mentions “the exam”,
and “the exam” is generated as a link in the post to the receiver.
Sim(−→x , −→y ) =
∑|V |
i=1 xi · yi
√∑|V |
i=1(xi)2 ·
√∑|V |
i=1(yi)2
,
(5)
where −→x denotes the feature vector of user x, and −→y denotes
the feature vector of user y. Furthermore, |V | is the number
of dimensions of the feature vector.
V.
EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst extract the actual data from a
wedding community website, in order to verify the user
characteristic extraction method by extracting feature words
for all posts of each user. Next, we detect similar users by
comparing the cosine similarity with collaborative ﬁltering.
The dataset consists of 6,361 posts by 588 users during six
months. Table IV shows the distribution of the numbers of
comments for each user.
A. Experiment 1: Veriﬁcation of User Characteristic Extrac-
tion on a Wedding Community Website
To evaluate our user characteristic extraction method, we
extracted feature words from all posts of each user. We
139
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE V.
COSINE SIMILARITY AMONG 588 USERS.
Value
#user combinations
0 - 0.1
154,132
0.1- 0.2
16,158
0.2 - 0.3
2,022
0.3 - 0.4
209
0.4 - 0.5
46
0.5 - 0.6
7
0.6 - 0.7
4
0.7 - 1.0
0
compared the following three methods:
1)
TF
2)
TF-IDF (DF = all of users)
3)
TF-IDF (DF = the users before or after marriage)
We extracted 7,728 terms from 588 user posts.
Table III shows the top 15 feature words for users A, B,
C, and D for each method. Bold words indicate that feature
words are related to these users. We found that many feature
words are proper nouns for methods 2 and 3, such as “ﬁsh
paste” and “limousine.” However, for method 1, we found
common words that all users often use, i.e., there are no
effective words that can be considered as feature words. We
determined that calculating using IDF is a more effective way
of extracting feature words. However, there are no differences
between methods 2 and 3. The IDF values imply how the
words are generally used by many users. If the IDF value is
high, then the word is rarely used among users, and similarly if
it is low the word is common among users. Therefore, there are
no differences between the posts of users before marriage and
the posts of those after marriage. Thus, we considered different
deﬁnitions of document groups, which are not limited to the
marital status.
Our results suggest that in the future we need to remove
common words, because some generally used words were
identiﬁed using methods 2 and 3.
The above discussion conﬁrms that many feature words of
users are effectively extracted using TF-IDF methods, namely
methods 2 and 3. To detect user characteristics with feature
words, more advanced methods are required.
B. Experiment 2: Veriﬁcation of User Detection on a Wedding
Community Website
In our active communication mechanism, the similarities
between users constitute the key aspect for recommending
users. In the previous section, we described our classiﬁcation
scheme that classiﬁes users based on similarities of three axes.
In this manner, we choose the most suitable users to promote
communication.
To evaluate the similarities between users, we compared
two calculation methods. The ﬁrst is the proposed method,
speciﬁcally the content-based recommendation method using
the cosine similarity with active proﬁle information. The
second method is an item-based recommendation method that
uses collaborative ﬁltering with static proﬁle information and
marriage status. As mentioned previously, we calculated the
cosine similarity based on user characteristics, which consist
of feature words for each user. Therefore, each user has
feature vectors of TF-IDF values. In Experiment 1, method
TABLE VI.
COLLABORATIVE FILTERING AMONG 30 USERS.
Value
#user combinations
-1.0 - -0.9
0
-0.9 - -0.8
0
-0.8 - -0.7
2
-0.7 - -0.6
4
-0.6 - -0.5
5
-0.5 - -0.4
8
-0.4 - -0.3
8
-0.3 - -0.2
15
-0.2 - -0.1
23
-0.1 - 0
26
0 - 0.1
35
0.1- 0.2
39
0.2 - 0.3
40
0.3 - 0.4
38
0.4 - 0.5
41
0.5 - 0.6
41
0.3 - 0.7
44
0.7 - 0.8
31
0.8 - 0.9
26
0.9 - 1.0
9
2 is the most useful method for extracting feature words.
We also calculated the cosine similarity based on the feature
words produced by method 2. Collaborative ﬁltering is also
a method used to calculate similarities between users. This
method calculates similarities using user login information as
items for each user. This is mainly used to recommend other
items to users according to the following formula:
Sim(X, Y ) =
∑(x − ¯x)(y − ¯y)
√∑(x − ¯x)2 ∑(y − ¯y)2 .
(6)
This equation calculates the similarity between users X and
Y . On a wedding community website, users create individual
accounts by answering questions regarding their wedding
planning. For example, “Do you agree with a simple style
marriage?” For each question, a user may choose from one
of the following responses: “Strongly disagree,” “Disagree,”
“Neither disagree nor agree,” “Agree,” or “Strongly agree.”
Each of these responses was assigned a numerical value rang-
ing from 1 to 5, for calculation purposes. We then calculated
the similarities using these numbers. Note that ¯x and ¯y denote
the averages of the chosen answers. For example, if a user
chose answer 1 and 5, the average value would be 3.
The users evaluated for our proposed user characteristic
extraction method are shown in Table III. For this evaluation,
we calculated 172,578 combinations from 588 users. The value
of the cosine similarity ranges between 0 and 1.
Table V shows the distribution of results for the cosine
similarity. The average value of all combinations is 0.045. We
found that many results of user combinations are below 0.1.
This can be attributed to the fact that most users talk about
different topics relating to their wedding planning. However,
some user combinations induce a high cosine similarity.
Table VI shows the distribution of results of collaborative
ﬁltering. The value of collaborative ﬁltering should be between
-1 and 1. For this method, the values are calculated based on
the answers from the questions regarding wedding planning
140
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6.
Distribution of the cosine similarity and collaborative ﬁltering 1.
Figure 7.
Distribution of the cosine similarity and collaborative ﬁltering 2.
when users are creating accounts on the wedding community
website. A high value implies that the users have similar
wedding planning ideas. For this evaluation, we calculated
435 combinations of 30 users. The average value of all
combinations was 0.304, which conﬁrms that many users have
similar wedding planning tastes.
Based on these results, we compared two similarity cal-
culation methods. Here, we focused on user E, who has a
high cosine similarity with other users and often posts on the
wedding community site as a main user. We calculated all
combinations with user E. Therefore, there were a total of 588
values for the cosine similarity and 588 values for collaborative
ﬁltering.
Figure 6 shows the distribution of the cosine similarity
and collaborative ﬁltering for 10 users, speciﬁcally users E,
H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, and P. Each dot corresponds to one
user and has two values: the cosine similarity with each user
and the collaborative ﬁltering with each user. The vertical
axis corresponds to the values of the cosine similarity, and
the horizontal axis corresponds to the values of collaborative
ﬁltering. We focused on two users for user E, speciﬁcally F
and G. Both of these users have high cosine similarity values
of over 0.6, but their values of collaborative ﬁltering are 0 and
0.54, respectively.
First, we compared the posts of users E and F. A post
by user E describes their cousin’s impressive wedding and
the groom’s tears. On the other hand, a post of user F
describes how their cousin’s wedding was organized. Even
though common words were used in their posts, the meanings
of these sentences and their topics are different.
Second, we compared the posts of users E and G. The post
from user E is the same one as mentioned above. A post from
user G describes their cousin’s wedding, with tears resulting
from a letter about a grandmother who has passed away. These
posts both mention the same type of wedding and their cousin’s
weddings with tears, even though the content of these posts is
slightly different.
As a result, we found that only calculating the cosine
similarity is not effective for detecting similar comments.
However, we found that calculating both the cosine similarity
and collaborative ﬁltering is effective. Therefore, these two
methods can help to detect similar user comments in order to
evoke communications among users. However, we must still
evaluate different situations for a user by considering other
users’ axes and marriage statuses.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the cosine similarity and
collaborative ﬁltering for users E, K, M, N, and O. We found
several users that are particularly similar to these users, such
as users Q and R. In the future, we plan to propose methods
for clustering using the cosine similarity and collaborative
ﬁltering.
C. Experiment 3: Veriﬁcation of Recommendation Effect
We interviewed ﬁve users to evaluate effect of our pro-
posed recommendation system. On experiments 1 and 2,
we veriﬁed that our proposed methods work effectively to
detect recommended users. For this experiment, we evaluated
the similarities for comments and the communication desire
through interviews.
We interviewed ﬁve users of the wedding community
website. On this community website, majority of users want to
communicate with others to share their experiments, and want
to obtain information from other users. The purpose of using
this community website for the ﬁve users is same as for the
majority. Therefore, these ﬁve users’ opinions should reﬂect
the opinions of the majority on this website.
The interviewer evaluated the two questions below regard-
ing the users ’ own comments and those of recommended
users.
1)
Similarity of comments
2)
Communication desire
As mentioned in Section III, this system is able to recom-
mend ﬁve patterns of different users (see Table I). For this eval-
uation, we considered two kinds of comments: 1) comments of
recommended users whose preferences are similar according to
one of the patterns 1, 2, 4, and 5; and 2) recommended users’
comments whose situation is similar, but whose preferences
are different, corresponding to pattern 3.
1)
Other users’ comments
whose preferences are similar,
(corresponding to one of the patterns 1, 2, 4, 5)
2)
Other users’ comments
whose situation is similar,
but whose preferences are different,
(corresponding to pattern 3)
141
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VII.
VERIFICATION OF RECOMMENDATION EFFECTS.
Recommended user
Comments similarity (adv)
Communication desire (adv)
1. High posting similarity
3.00
3.33
(users with similar preferences)
2. Low posting similarity, but high static similarity
2.89
3.56
(different preferences and similar situation)
TABLE VIII.
EFFECTIVE RECOMMENDED USER FOR ACTIVATING
CONVERSATION.
Similar Situation
Different Situation
Similar Preference
Good
Good
Different Preference 　
Very Good
—
Figure 8.
An example of recommender system.
Table VII presents the results of the interview experiments.
The ﬁve users answered using the numbers between 1 and
5. The number 1 indicates strong disagreement, and 5 means
strong agreement. According to the results, we can see that
recommending other users is effective for activating commu-
nication, as the users want to communicate with others.
However, we could determine whether recommending a
user who has a similar situation and different preferences is
more effective than recommending similar users. We assume
that recommending a similar user would activate communica-
tion, but this turned out not to be true at all (see Table IV).
Through this experience, we created one example of our
proposed recommendation system (see Figure 8). In this ex-
ample, based on the original user, the recommended user’s
situation is similar, but their interests, which also correspond
to preferences, are different. We could determine that their
conversations will be activated through this experiment by
interviews.
D. Experiment 4: Veriﬁcation of User Characteristics on SNS
The purpose of this evaluation is to verify whether our
proposed method is useful for extracting user characteristics
based on SNS user behavior. We acquired posts for public
online course pages using the Facebook API2 as follows:
•
A: the latest 50 posts of “Exciting Programming
Starting from Elementary School”
•
B: the latest 50 posts of “Online Programming Learn-
ing Service on APP Development”
A is an online course for programming beginners, and B is
an online course for advanced learners in programming. In this
evaluation, we extracted feature words as user characteristics
of A and B by using the following four methods:
1)
The weight of word i given by Eq. (1)
2https://developers.facebook.com/
2)
1) × #likes of posts with i
3)
2) × #shares of posts with i
4)
3) + 1) for each reply × #likes for each reply
Here, #likes and #shares for A or B were normalized to ﬁt
within the range of 0 to 1. As described above, we proposed the
following methods to test: 1) TF-IDF, which was calculated
using only the text that the user has posted; 2) integrating the
value of 1) with the number of likes, which was normalized as
the weight; and 3) integrating the value of 2) with the number
of shares, which was normalized as the weight. In addition,
4) we veriﬁed user characteristics (feature words) by adding
the value of 3) to the value obtained by integrating 1) TF-IDF
for each comment with the number of likes for each comment.
Table IX shows the top 15 feature words for A and B obtained
using each method. Bold words denote feature words that are
related to A or B.
We found that many feature words are proper nouns, such
as “Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo” and “jQuery UI.” In all methods, the
ranking orders of the same feature words are different, and
several feature words are different. For example, the feature
word “Kenichirou Mogi” of A ranked highest for method 1,
and does not occur in the top 15 for methods 2-4. In this work,
high weight feature words representing user characteristics are
used to extract the relationships between users. Therefore,
these feature words for generating feature vectors for each
user are useful for both receivers and senders in conversations.
According to the correlations between the method 1 and other
methods found by comparing the rankings of the top 15 feature
words based on Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient, the
correlation coefﬁcient for methods 1 and 2 is 0.77, that for
methods 1 and 3 is 0.76, and the value for 1 and 4 is
0.72. Although the correlations between method 1 and the
other methods are similar, method 4, which considers #likes,
#shares, and replies, is different from method 1. In addition,
the correlations between method 1 and the other methods are
not high, and we could conﬁrm that the feature words obtained
using these four methods are different.
As discussed above, many proper nouns occur that do
not require knowledge assistance. Conversely, common words
are widely used, and they are not useful for our proposed
system. In the future, we need to improve the calculation
method in order to remove common words when extracting
user characteristics.
E. Future Work
We veriﬁed the validation of our proposed system by
evaluation, however, we still need to consider several points of
our proposed methods as future work. In the future, we plan
to enhance the proposed method based on our experimental
results, and evaluate the effects of user recommendations.
Furthermore, we plan to extract the relationships between users
142
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IX.
TOP 10 FEATURE WORDS OF A AND B.
Method
A
B
1)
Kenichiro Mogi, Nikkei software, debate, Graduate School of Information
Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Kuramoto Daishi,
innovation, self-expression, industrial competitiveness conference, robot pro-
gramming teaching materials, programming compulsory subject, Newsweek
Japanese version, trilingual, study Roh, Mitsuru Sugaya, account every single
CSS3, EdTech JAPAN Pitch Festival vol.4, go to jappan, Higher or Lower,
IE 　 KMD 　 Venture Day Tokyo, jQuery UI, Tech academy, u-note,
parallax, Engineering, good, SF JAPAN NIGHT semi Finals team, learning,
Now we’re hiring a great web designer, SF JapanNight
2)
Hour of Code Japan, Graduate School of Information Science and Tech-
nology, The University of Tokyo, programming compulsory, scratch Di,
Prof. Yoshiaki Hashimoto, PC away, a few lines, study Roh, Show&Tell,
Touch& Try, Code.org, World Business satellite, self-expression, Minecraft
EDU，robot programming
CSS3, jQuery UI, Thanks for Five Thousand Fans, learning, u-note, Higher
of Lower, feedback, SF JAPAN NIGHT semiﬁnalists decision, intern, we’ll
launch a radical web wervice which, Trello, Pyhonista, Now we’re hiring a
great web designer, SF Japan Night, This new service has already decided
3)
scratch Di, Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The
University of Tokyo, Show &Tell, Touch &Try, Prof. Yoshiaki Hashimoto,
Hour of Code Japan, PC away, study Roh, robot programming, Code.org,
World Business Satellite, programming a compulsory subject, Nikkei style，
the former, co-workers
Yukihiro Matsumoto, learning, object-oriented scripting language, jQuery
UI, server-side scripting language, tab, SF JAPAN NIGHT semi fainalists
decision, Higher or Lower, the three-column layout, already learned, inquiry,
voice, learning situation, Mats，CSS3
4)
nowadays, education, scratch Di, faculty side, Graduate School of Informa-
tion Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Show &Tell, Touch
&Try, compulsory, high school, Nikkei BP booth, challenge, Prof. Yoshiaki
Hashimoto, maximum, case, Hour or Code Japan
very, sue, Yukihiro Matsumoto, learning, Koushou Kawasoe, object-oriented
scripting language, jQuery UI, server-side language ban, tab, SF JAPAN
NIGHT semiﬁnalists decision, Higher or Lower，three-stage assenmbly
layout, already learned, inquiry, voice
by constructing a matrix based on user behavior, as in our
previous work [30].
Our proposed method has only been applied to users of an
existing wedding community website in Japan. It should also
be considered for intercultural communications. Furthermore,
we are planning to verify this mechanism on other community
websites.
Moreover, we are planning to propose a more effective user
interface that considers the security implications of sharing and
combining the information. Some users may feel annoyed to be
suggested to other users, and so this system requires additional
options to protect privacy. This problem should be discussed
more in future research.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an active communication mech-
anism for a wedding community website. This mechanism rec-
ommended users who may potentially evoke communications,
as well as their comments. To detect users, this mechanism
classiﬁed all users according to three axes, speciﬁcally “Static
Proﬁle Information,” “Marriage Status,” and “Dynamic Proﬁle
Information.” We then calculated the similarities between users
using the cosine similarity. To extract comments that were
posted on a wedding community website by recommended
users, our mechanism detected the most closely related com-
ments. We also proposed an activation mechanism for e-
learning. Finally, we evaluated the method for extracting user
characteristics from posts by comparing TF-IDF methods, and
evaluated the similarity calculation methods using the cosine
similarity and collaborative ﬁltering. Moreover, we veriﬁed the
extraction of user characteristics using data from Facebook.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Numbers 15K00162, 16H01722, and 17K12686.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Hayashi, Y. Wang, Y. Kawai, and K. Sumiya, “A Proposal of Ac-
tivation Mechanism for User Communication based on User Behavior
Analysis on Wedding Community Sites,” in Proceeding of The Ninth
International Conference on Advances in Multimedia (MMEDIA 2017).
IARIA, APR 2017, pp. 67–72, ISBN: 978-1-61208-548-7.
[2]
M. Rathakrishnan, R. Ahmad, and C. L. Suan, “Online discussion: En-
hancing students’critical thinking skills,” AIP Conference Proceedings,
vol. 1891, no. 1, 2017, p. 020120.
[3]
F. Abel, I. I. Bittencourt, E. Costa, N. Henze, D. Krause, and J. Vas-
sileva, “Recommendations in online discussion forums for e-learning
systems,” IEEE transactions on learning technologies, vol. 3, no. 2,
2010, pp. 165–176.
[4]
R. Isaac and J. Walker, “Communication and free-riding behavior: The
voluntary contribution mechanism,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 26, no. 4,
1988, pp. 585–608.
[5]
N. B. Ellison, C. Steinﬁeld, and C. Lampe, “The beneﬁts of facebook
“friends:” social capital and college students’ use of online social
network sites,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 12,
no. 4, 2007, pp. 1143–1168.
[6]
L. H. Shaw and L. M. Gant, “In defense of the internet: The relation-
ship between internet communication and depression, loneliness, self-
esteem, and perceived social support,” Cyberpsychology & behavior,
vol. 5, no. 2, 2002, pp. 157–171.
[7]
Y. Mastsui and Y. Kawai, “Social search system for retrieval and
communication based on networks of pages and users,” Computer
Software, vol. 28, no. 4, 2011, pp. 196–205.
[8]
J. Preece and D. Maloney-Krichmar, “Online communities: Design,
theory, and practice,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
vol. 10, no. 4, 2005, pp. 00–00.
[9]
E. Park, R. Rishika, R. Janakiraman, M. B. Houston, and B. Yoo,
“Social dollars in online communities: The effect of product, user and
network characteristics,” Journal of Marketing, 2017.
[10]
K. Randhawa, E. Josserand, J. Schweitzer, and D. Logue, “Knowledge
collaboration between organizations and online communities: the role
of open innovation intermediaries,” Journal of Knowledge Management,
no. just-accepted, 2017, pp. 00–00.
[11]
P. Grace-Farfaglia, A. Dekkers, B. Sundararajan, L. Peters, and S.-H.
Park, “Multinational web uses and gratiﬁcations: Measuring the social
impact of online community participation across national boundaries,”
Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 6, no. 1, 2006, pp. 75–101.
[12]
J. Preece, “Sociability and usability in online communities: Determining
and measuring success,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 20,
no. 5, 2001, pp. 347–356.
[13]
P. J. Batterham and A. L. Calear, “Preferences for internet-based mental
health interventions in an adult online sample: Findings from an online
community survey,” JMIR mental health, vol. 4, no. 2, 2017.
[14]
C. Liang, C.-C. Chang, W. Rothwell, and K.-M. Shu, “Inﬂuences
of organizational culture on knowledge sharing in an online virtual
community: Interactive effects of trust, communication and leadership,”
in Organizational Culture and Behavior: Concepts, Methodologies,
Tools, and Applications.
IGI Global, 2017, pp. 972–992.
[15]
H. Akihiro, Y. Madoka, T. Hiroyuki, and K. Yahiko, “Experimental
chat sessions to encourage active communication in lectures,” IPSJ SIG
Notes, vol. 2000, no. 45, 2000, pp. 61–66.
143
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[16]
D. Godes and D. Mayzlin, “Using online conversations to study word-
of-mouth communication,” Marketing science, vol. 23, no. 4, 2004, pp.
545–560.
[17]
J. M. Kayany and P. Yelsma, “Displacement effects of online media in
the socio-technical contexts of households,” Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media, vol. 44, no. 2, 2000, pp. 215–229.
[18]
P. K. Chintagunta, S. Gopinath, and S. Venkataraman, “The effects
of online user reviews on movie box ofﬁce performance: Accounting
for sequential rollout and aggregation across local markets,” Marketing
Science, vol. 29, no. 5, 2010, pp. 944–957.
[19]
K. Hemmings-Jarrett, J. Jarrett, and M. B. Blake, “Evaluation of user
engagement on social media to leverage active and passive commu-
nication,” in Cognitive Computing (ICCC), 2017 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 132–135.
[20]
J. Liu, E. Pedersen, and P. Dolan, “Personalized news recommendation
based on click behavior,” Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2010, pp. 31–40.
[21]
L. Li and T. Li, “News recommendation via hypergraph learning:
encapsulation of user behavior and news content,” in Proceedings of the
sixth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining.
ACM, 2013, pp. 305–314.
[22]
K. Xu, Y. Cai, H. Min, X. Zheng, T. Wong et al., “Uis-lda: a user
recommendation based on social connections and interests of users
in uni-directional social networks,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Web Intelligence.
ACM, 2017, pp. 260–265.
[23]
D. Zhou, M. Truran, T. Brailsford, H. Ashman, and A. Pourabdollah,
“Llama-b: Automatic hyperlink authoring in the blogosphere,” in
Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Conference on Hypertext and
Hypermedia, ser. HT ’08. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 133–
138. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1379092.1379119
[24]
R. D’souza, A. Kulkarni, and I. A. Mirza, “Automatic link generation
for search engine optimization,” International Journal of Information
and Education Technology, vol. 2, no. 4, 2012, pp. 401–403, ISSN:
2010-3689.
[25]
H.-C. C. Yi-Wen Liao, Yueh-Min Huang and S.-H. Huang, “Exploring
the antecedents of collaborative learning performance over social net-
working sites in a ubiquitous learning context,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 43, 2015, pp. 313–323.
[26]
R. Cheng and S. K. Sharma, “Learning and self-disclosure behavior on
social networking sites: the case of facebook users,” European Journal
of Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, 2015, pp. 93–106.
[27]
R. D ’souza, A. Kulkarni, and I. A. Mirza, “Automatic link generation
for search engine optimization,” International Journal of Information
and Education Technology, vol. 2, no. 4, 2015, pp. 401–403.
[28]
Y. Aoki, R. Koshijima, and M. Toyama, “Automatic determination of
hyperlink destination in web index,” Proc. of IDEAS 2015, 2015, pp.
206–207.
[29]
J. Liu, P. Dolan, and E. R. Pedersen, “Personalized news recommenda-
tion based on click behavior,” Proc. of IUI 2010, 2010, pp. 31–40.
[30]
Y. Wang, Y. Kawai, S. Miyamoto, and K. Sumiya, “An automatic
scoring system for e-reports based on student peer evaluation using
groupware,” DBSJ Journal, vol. 13, no. 1, 2015, pp. 71–76.
144
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

