An Investigation of Twitter Users
Who Gave Likes to Deleted Tweets Disclosing Submitters’ Personal Information
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Toshiki Nakano, Hiromu Nishimura, and Yoshihiro Okada
Ryukoku University
Seta, Otsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp, t180450@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp,
t160405@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp, okada@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract—Nowadays, many people use a Social Networking Ser-
vice (SNS). Most SNS users are careful in protecting the privacy
of personal information: name, age, gender, address, telephone
number, birthday, etc. However, some SNS users disclose their
personal information that can threaten their privacy and security
even if they use unreal name accounts. In this study, we
investigated Twitter users who gave likes to tweets disclosing
submitters’ personal information that potentially threatened sub-
mitters’ privacy and security. We collected 318 tweets promising
to disclose submitters’ personal information. 30 tweets out of
them were deleted in short order, speciﬁcally within a week after
they were submitted. Then, we investigated the relations between
the submitters of these 318 tweets and users who gave likes to
them, taking into account whether or not the submitters deleted
their tweets in short order. The results of our survey showed
that the submitters followed most of the users mutually before
the users gave likes to the tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal information whether or not the submitters deleted their
tweets in short order. On the other hand, most of the users did
not follow each other although they followed the same submitters
and gave likes to their tweets.
Keywords–personal information; Twitter; SNS; mutual follows;
privacy risk; unreal name account user.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, many people use a Social Networking Service
(SNS) to communicate with each other and try to enlarge their
circle of friends. SNS users are generally concerned about
potential privacy risks. To be speciﬁc, they are afraid that
unwanted audiences will obtain information about them or
their families, such as where they live, work, and play. As
a result, SNS users are generally careful in disclosing their
personal information. However, some SNS users, especially
young users, disclose their personal information on their
proﬁles, for example, real full name, gender, hometown and
full date of birth, which can potentially be used to identify
details of their real life. In order to discuss the reasons why
some SNS users disclose their personal information willingly,
it is important to investigate who they want to read their SNS
messages disclosing their personal information. However, it is
difﬁcult to ask them who they want to read them. To solve
this problem, it is important to investigate who gave responses
to their SNS messages disclosing their personal information.
This is because, if submitters felt unwanted audiences read and
gave responses to their SNS messages disclosing their personal
information, they would delete them. In order to investigate
who gave responses to SNS messages disclosing submitters’
personal information, we investigated Twitter users who gave
likes to tweets disclosing submitters’ personal information [1].
Furthermore, we investigated whether users concerned with
a tweet disclosing submitter’s personal information followed
each other. In other words, we investigated
•
whether a submitter followed users who gave likes to
his/her tweet disclosing his/her personal information,
•
whether users who gave likes to a tweet disclosing
submitter’s personal information followed the submit-
ter, and
•
whether each user who gave a like to a tweet disclos-
ing submitter’s personal information followed every
other user who gave a like to the same tweet.
In this study, we examine these points by checking their
Twitter follow relations, taking into account whether or not
a submitter deleted his/her tweet disclosing his/her personal
information in short order. The investigation is based on an
idea: when an user follow someone on Twitter, he/she is not a
stranger to the user. By using the results of the investigation,
we discuss the relations of submitters of tweets disclosing
their personal information and users who gave likes to the
tweets. The results of the investigation might improve social
media design elements, such as privacy controls and friend
introductions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section
II, we survey the related works. In Section III, we show how
to collect tweets where submitters seemingly disclosed their
personal information honestly and detect users who gave likes
to them. In Section IV, we examine whether users concerned
with a tweet disclosing submitter’s personal information fol-
lowed each other and discuss the relations of them. In Section
V, we investigate users who gave likes to tweets that disclosed
submitters’ personal information and were deleted in short
order. Finally, in Section VI, we present our conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Personally identiﬁable information is deﬁned as informa-
tion, which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity, such as social security number, biometric records,
etc. alone, or when combined with other information that
is linkable to a speciﬁc individual, such as date and place
of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc. [2] [3]. Internet users
are generally concerned about unwanted audiences obtaining
personal information. Fox et al. reported that 86% of Internet
users are concerned that unwanted audiences will obtain in-
formation about them or their families [4]. However, Internet
users, especially young users, tend to disclose personal infor-
mation on their proﬁles, for example, real full name, gender,
78
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. An unreal name account user, Yata, disclosed her personal proﬁle
items in her tweets.
hometown and full date of birth. As a result, many researchers
discussed the reasons why young users willingly disclose
personal information on their SNS proﬁles. Acquisti and Gross
explained this phenomenon as a disconnection between the
users’ desire to protect their privacy and their actual behavior
[5]. Also, Livingstone pointed out that teenagers’ conception of
privacy does not match the privacy settings of most SNSs [6].
On the other hand, Barnes argued that Internet users, especially
teenagers, are not aware of the nature of the Internet and SNSs
[7]. Viseu, Clement, and Aspinall reported that many online
users believe the beneﬁts of disclosing personal information
in order to use an Internet site is greater than the potential
privacy risks [8]. The authors think that most SNS users are
seriously concerned about their privacy and security. However,
they often underestimate the risk of their online messages and
submit them. Hirai reported that many users had troubles in
SNSs because they never thought that strangers observed their
communication with their friends [9]. Watanabe, Nishimura,
Chikuki, Nakajima, and Okada reported that some Twitter
users submitted tweets disclosing their personal information
that can threaten their privacy and security even if they
use unreal name accounts [10]. In this study, we investigate
what relations existed between users concerned with a tweet
disclosing submitter’s personal information. In order to analyze
relations in communities, many researchers have adopted tie
strength. Granovetter deﬁned tie strength as the strength of
a friendship: close friends are strong ties and acquaintances
are weak ties [11]. Both strong ties and weak ties are useful
because they provide access to different types of resources
[12]. For example, strongly tied peers have greater motivation
for assistance and provide access to information known by the
group [11]. In contrast, weak ties provide diverse perspectives
as well as novel information and resources [13]. Panovich,
Miller, and Karger investigated the relation of tie strength to
answer quality and showed that social network Q&A is more
effective when the asker and answerer know each other well
[14]. Gilbert and Karahalios proposed a predictive model of tie
strength on Facebook using proﬁle characteristics [15]. In this
study, we investigate what relations existed between Twitter
users concerned with a tweet disclosing submitter’s personal
information by checking their Twitter follow relations.
Figure 2. A tweet promising to disclose the same number of submitter’s
personal proﬁle items as likes to it.
III.
A COLLECTION OF TWEETS DISCLOSING
SUBMITTERS’ PERSONAL INFORMATION
It is difﬁcult to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ per-
sonal information, such as tweets in Figure 1, directly. To solve
this problem, we focused on tweets where submitters promised
their audiences to disclose the same number of their own
personal proﬁle items as likes to their tweets. Figure 2 shows a
tweet submitted by Yata on December 30, 2021. Both in Figure
1 and Figure 2, her screen name is redacted for privacy. Figure
2 shows that Yata promised her audiences to disclose the same
number of her personal proﬁle items as likes to her tweet.
Actually, as shown in Figure 1, Yata submitted three replies
disclosing her ﬁve personal proﬁle items to her tweet shown
in Figure 2 on December 30, 2021. Watanabe, Nishimura,
Chikuki, Nakajima, and Okada reported that Twitter users
seemingly disclosed their personal information honestly when
they promised to do it, such as Yata’s tweet in Figure 2 [10].
As a result, it is easy to collect tweets disclosing submitters’
personal proﬁle items when we collect tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal proﬁle items. Furthermore, they
often used the same sentence in their tweets, like a game
password, as shown in Figure 2, # I will show the same number
of my proﬁle items as your likes. In order to collect tweets
promising to disclose submitters’ personal proﬁle items, we
used the shared sentence as key to collect them. To be speciﬁc,
79
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

we collected these tweets by using Twitter API v2 [16]. Twitter
API v2 helps us to collect tweets where the given sentence is
used. Also, Twitter API v2 helps us to collect user accounts
who submitted a speciﬁc tweet and who gave likes to it. Every
10 PM, we tried to collect user accounts and their tweets
•
that contained # I will show the same number of my
proﬁle items as your likes
•
that were submitted in the past 24 hours, and
•
that were given one or more likes.
After we obtained the tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal proﬁle items, we tried to collect user accounts who
gave likes to the obtained tweets every 10 PM for a week.
Finally, we collected 318 Japanese tweets promising to dis-
close submitters’ personal information. These 318 tweets were
submitted from December 30, 2021 to January 31, 2022 by 317
users. One out of the 317 users submitted two tweets promising
to disclose his personal information on January 12 and 17,
2022. These 318 tweets were given 7060 likes by 6325 users
within a week after they were submitted. These 318 tweets can
be classiﬁed into
•
30 tweets that were deleted during the investigation
period (one week), and
•
288 tweets that were not.
The 30 tweets and the other 288 tweets were given 708 and
6352 likes, respectively. Figure 3 shows the histogram of the
number of likes given to the 288 tweets that were not deleted
during the investigation period, speciﬁcally within a week
after they were submitted. Figure 4 shows the daily number
of likes given to the 288 tweets in the investigation period.
Day N in Figure 4 means that N days have passed since the
obtained tweet was submitted and our investigation started.
Day 6 was the last day of the investigation period. Figure
4 shows that 77 % and 15 % of likes were given on Day
0 and Day 1, respectively. Figure 5 shows the histogram of
the number of likes given to the 30 tweets that were deleted
during the investigation period (one week). Figure 6 shows
the daily number of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets in the
investigation period. Figure 6 shows that 80 % and 14 % of
likes were given on Day 0 and Day 1, respectively. As shown
in Figure 4 and Figure 6, the distribution of the daily number
of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets is similar to that of the
other 288 tweets. Figure 7 shows the daily number of deleted
tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal information
in the investigation period. As shown in Figure 7, tweets were
most often deleted on Day 4.
IV.
AN INVESTIGATION OF USERS CONCERNED IN
TWEETS PROMISING TO DISCLOSE SUBMITTERS’ PERSONAL
INFORMATION
In this section, we investigate whether users concerned with
a tweet promising to disclose submitter’s personal information
followed each other. To be speciﬁc, we survey
•
Twitter users who submitted tweets promising to dis-
close the same number of their own personal proﬁle
items as likes and
•
Twitter users who gave likes to these tweets
and investigate
•
whether an user who submitted a tweet promising to
disclose his/her personal information followed users
who gave likes to the tweet,
•
whether users who gave likes to a tweet promising to
disclose submitter’s personal information followed the
submitter, and
•
whether users who gave likes to a tweet promising
to disclose submitter’s personal information followed
each other.
The investigation is based on an idea: when an user follow
someone on Twitter, he/she is not a stranger to the user. We
can know whether an user follows someone on Twitter by using
Twitter API v2.
After collecting user accounts of submitters and users
who gave likes to tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal information, we analyze the relations between them.
The relations between a submitter and an user who gave a
like to a tweet promising to disclose submitter’s personal
information can be classiﬁed into three types:
•
mutual follow relation: the submitter and the user
mutually followed each other.
•
one sided follow relation: the submitter followed the
user, however, the user did not. Or, the user followed
the submitter, however, the submitter did not.
•
no follow relation: the submitter and the user did not
follow each other.
Furthermore, we analyze the relations among users who gave
likes to a tweet promising to disclose submitter’s personal
information. They can also be classiﬁed into three types:
mutual follow relation, on sided follow relation, or no follow
relation.
Let us consider one example. As shown in Figure 2, a
Twitter user, Yata, submitted a tweet promising her audiences
to disclose the same number of her own personal proﬁle items
as likes on December 30, 2021 at 9:02 PM. We detected her
tweet on the same day at 10:00 PM, and then, recorded that
she received ﬁve likes and submitted three replies disclosing
her ﬁve personal proﬁle items on December 30, 2021. After
that, every 10 PM, we tried to check whether someone gave
likes to her tweet. On January 5, 2022, we conﬁrmed that
ﬁve users gave ﬁve likes to her tweet on December 30, 2021,
as shown in Figure 2, and ﬁnished the investigation on her
tweet. Then, we analyzed the relations between Yata and each
of the ﬁve users and conﬁrmed that she followed them and
each of them followed her. As a result, the relations between
Yata and each of the ﬁve users were mutual follow relations.
Furthermore, we analyzed the relations among the ﬁve users.
There were ten cases to choose two out of the ﬁve users. In
one case out of the ten, two users followed each other. On
the other hand, in nine cases out of the ten, two users did not
follow each other. As a result, the relation of one case was a
mutual follow relation and the relations of the other nine cases
were no follow relations.
As mentioned in Section III, the obtained 318 tweets
promising to disclose submitters’ personal information can be
classiﬁed into
•
30 tweets that were deleted during the investigation
period (one week), and
80
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the number of likes given to the 288 tweets during the investigation period (one week).
(b) the number of likes given to the 288 tweets on the ﬁrst day of the investigation period.
Figure 3. The histogram of the number of likes given to the 288 tweets that promised to disclose submitters’ personal information and were not deleted during
the investigation period (one week).
Figure 4. The daily number of likes given to the 288 tweets since the tweets
were submitted.
•
288 tweets that were not.
In this section, we survey the 288 tweets that were not deleted
during the investigation period and investigate the relations
between the submitters of the 288 tweets and the users who
gave likes to them.
A. Follow relations between submitters and users who gave
likes to tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal
information
At ﬁrst, we discuss the mutual follow relations between
submitters and users who gave likes to tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal information. In order to discuss
this problem, we introduce the ratio of mutual follow relations
between a submitter and users who gave likes to his/her tweet.
Suppose that the number of users who gave likes to tweet t
is n and m of them are mutually following the submitter of
81
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the number of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets during the investigation period (one week).
(b) the number of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets on the ﬁrst day of the investigation period.
Figure 5. The histogram of the number of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal information.
Figure 6. The daily number of likes given to the deleted 30 tweets since the
tweets were submitted.
Figure 7. The daily number of deleted tweets promising to disclose
submitters’ personal information since the tweets were submitted.
82
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 8. The histograms of the ratio of mutual follow relations between the submitters of the 288 tweets that were not deleted during the investigation period
and the users who gave likes to them on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 9. The histograms of the ratio of no follow relations between the submitters of the 288 tweets that were not deleted during the investigation period and
the users who gave likes to them on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
tweet t. Then, the ratio of mutual follow relations between
the submitter of tweet t and the users who gave likes to it,
PMF 1(t), is deﬁned as follows:
PMF 1(t) = m
n
Figure 8 shows the distribution of the ratio of mutual follow
relations between the submitters of the 288 tweets that were
not deleted during the investigation period and the users who
gave likes to them. Furthermore, Figures 8 (a) and (b) show
the distribution of them investigated on the Day 0 and Day 6,
respectively. As shown in Figure 8, it is probable that most of
the users have followed the submitters mutually before they
gave likes to submitters’ tweets promising to disclose their
personal information. In other words, the submitters and most
of the users were not strangers to each other. The distribution
of the mutual relation ratio on Day 6 (Figure 8 (b)) moved
to the left than that on Day 0 (Figure 8 (a)). It showed that
the number of users who did not follow the submitters and
whom the submitters did not follow increased. It is probable
that submitters were careful to follow unfamiliar users even if
they gave likes to their tweets.
Next, we discuss the no follow relations between submitters
and users who gave likes to tweets promising to disclose
submitters’ personal information. In order to discuss this
problem, we introduce the ratio of no follow relations between
a submitter and users who gave likes to his/her tweet. Suppose
that the number of users who gave likes to tweet t is n and
l of them are not following the submitter of tweet t and the
submitter is not following them, too. Then, the ratio of no
follow relations between the submitter of tweet t and the users
who gave likes to it, PNF 1(t), is deﬁned as follows:
PNF 1(t) = l
n
83
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 10. The histograms of the ratio of mutual follow relations among the users who gave likes to the 288 tweets that were not deleted during the
investigation period on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 11. The histograms of the ratio of no follow relations among the users who gave likes to the 288 tweets that were not deleted during the investigation
period on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
Figure 9 shows the distribution of the ratio of no follow
relations between the submitters of the 288 tweets that were not
deleted during the investigation period and the users who gave
likes to them. Figure 9 shows that the number of users who had
the no follow relations with the submitters was small on Day
0 and increased since then. It is probable that the delays were
caused by the time it took to ﬁnd tweets disclosing submitters’
personal information.
B. Follow relations among users who gave likes to tweets
promising to disclose submitters’ personal information
At ﬁrst, we discuss the mutual follow relations among users
who gave likes to tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal information. In order to discuss this problem, we
introduce the ratio of mutual follow relations among users
who gave likes to a tweet. Suppose that the number of users
who gave likes to tweet t is n and there are m cases where
two users of them are following each other. Then, the ratio
of mutual follow relations among the users who gave likes to
tweet t, PMF 2(t), is deﬁned as follows:
PMF 2(t) =
m
n(n − 1)/2
Figure 10 shows the distribution of the ratio of mutual follow
relations among the users who gave likes to the 288 tweets
that were not deleted during the investigation period. Figure
10 shows that it is probable that most of the users did not
follow each other mutually. In other words, most of the users
were strangers to each other although they followed the same
submitters and gave likes to their tweets.
Next, we discuss the no follow relations among users who
gave likes to tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal
information. In order to discuss this problem, we introduce the
ratio of no follow relations among users who gave likes to a
84
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) one day prior to the day they were deleted
Figure 12. The histograms of the ratio of mutual follow relations between the submitters of the deleted 30 tweets and the users who gave likes to them on the
ﬁrst day (Day 0) and one day prior to the day they were deleted.
(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) one day prior to the day they were deleted
Figure 13. The histograms of the ratio of no follow relations between the submitters of the deleted 30 tweets and the users who gave likes to them on the ﬁrst
day (Day 0) and one day prior to the day they were deleted.
tweet. Suppose that the number of users who gave likes to
tweet t is n and there are l cases where two users of them are
not following each other. Then, the ratio of no follow relations
among the users who gave likes to tweet t, PNF 2(t), is deﬁned
as follows:
PNF 2(t) =
l
n(n − 1)/2
Figure 11 shows the distribution of the ratio of no follow
relations among the users who gave likes to the 288 tweets
that were not deleted during the investigation period. The
distribution of the no relation ratio on Day 6 (Figure 11 (b))
was similar to that on Day 0 (Figure 11 (a)). It showed that it
is probable that not many users started to follow users within a
week even if they gave likes to the same tweets. It is probable
that users were careful to follow unfamiliar users even if they
gave likes to the same tweets.
V.
AN INVESTIGATION OF USERS CONCERNED IN
DELETED TWEETS PROMISING TO DISCLOSE SUBMITTERS’
PERSONAL INFORMATION
As mentioned in Section III, the obtained 318 tweets
promising to disclose submitters’ personal information con-
tained 30 tweets that were deleted during the investigation
period, speciﬁcally within a week after they were submitted. In
this section, we investigate the relations between the submitters
of the deleted 30 tweets and the users who gave likes to them.
Figure 12 shows the distribution of the ratio of mutual
follow relations between the submitters of the deleted 30
tweets and the users who gave likes to them. Furthermore,
Figures 12 (a) and (b) show the distribution of them investi-
gated on the Day 0 and one day prior to the day they were
deleted, respectively. As in Figure 8, Figure 12 shows that it is
probable that most of the users have followed the submitters
mutually before they gave likes to submitters’ tweets promising
85
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) one day prior to the day they were deleted
Figure 14. The histograms of the ratio of mutual follow relations among the users who gave likes to the deleted 30 tweets on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and one day
prior to the day they were deleted.
(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) one day prior to the day they were deleted
Figure 15. The histograms of the ratio of no follow relations among the users who gave likes to the deleted 30 tweets on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and one day
prior to the day they were deleted.
to disclose their personal information. In other words, the
submitters and most of the users were not strangers to each
other for some time.
Figure 13 shows the distribution of the ratio of no follow
relations between the submitters of the deleted 30 tweets and
the users who gave likes to them. As in Figure 9, Figure 13
shows that the number of users who had the no follow relations
with the submitters was small.
Figure 14 and Figure 15 show the distribution of the ratio
of mutual follow relations and no follow relations among the
users who gave likes to the deleted 30 tweets, respectively. As
in Figure 10 and Figure 11, Figure 14 and Figure 15 show
that it is probable that many of the users did not follow each
other mutually although they followed the same submitters and
gave likes to their tweets. In other words, many of the users
were strangers to each other even if they followed the same
submitters and gave likes to the same tweets.
In this way, the follow relations of users concerned with the
deleted 30 tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal
information are similar to those of users concerned with the
288 tweets that were not deleted during the investigation
period. As a result, the results of our survey showed that,
whether or not submitters deleted their tweets disclosing their
personal information in short order,
•
the submitters followed most of the users mutually
before the users gave likes to tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal information, and
•
most of the users did not follow each other although
they followed the same submitters and gave likes to
their tweets.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the relations of submitters
of tweets promising to disclose their personal information
86
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and users who gave likes to the tweets, taking into account
whether or not the submitters deleted their tweets in short
order. The results of our investigation show that most of the
users had followed the submitters mutually before they gave
likes to submitters’ tweets promising to disclose their personal
information whether or not the submitter deleted their tweets
in short order. On the other hand, most of the users did not
follow each other although they followed the same submitters
and gave likes to their tweets. As time went on, the number
of users who gave likes to submitters’ tweets promising to
disclose their personal information but did not follow the
submitters and whom the submitters did not follow increased.
It is probable that submitters were careful to follow unfamiliar
users even if they gave likes to their tweets. Also, users were
careful to follow unfamiliar users even if they followed the
same submitters and gave likes to the same tweets. The system
that understands these relations might carefully treat users who
choose not to friend someone with good reasons.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.
Watanabe,
T.
Nakano,
H.
Nishimura,
and
Y.
Okada,
“An
Investigation
of
Twitter
Users
Who
Gave
Likes
to
Tweets
Disclosing
Submitters’
Personal
Information,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Eighth
International
Conference
on
Human
and
Social
Analytics (HUSO 2022), May 2022, pp. 10–15. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=huso 2022
1 30 80026 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[2]
C.
Johnson
III,
Safeguarding
against
and
responding
to
the
breach
of
personally
identiﬁable
information,
Ofﬁce
of
Management
and
Budget
Memorandum,
2007.
[Online].
Available: https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/omb/
assets/omb/memoranda/fy2007/m07-16.pdf [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[3]
B. Krishnamurthy and C. E. Wills, “On the leakage of personally
identiﬁable
information
via
online
social
networks,”
Computer
Communication Review, vol. 40, no. 1, 2010, pp. 112–117. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1672308.1672328 [accessed: 2022-
12-12]
[4]
S. Fox et al., Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to
Rewrite the Rules, The Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www.pewinternet.org/2000/08/20/trust-and-
privacy-online/ [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[5]
A. Acquisti and R. Gross, “Imagined Communities: Awareness,
Information Sharing, and Privacy on the Facebook,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,
ser. PET’06.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 36–
58. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/11957454 3 [accessed:
2022-12-12]
[6]
S.
Livingstone,
“Taking
risky
opportunities
in
youthful
content
creation:
teenagers’
use
of
social
networking
sites
for
intimacy,
privacy
and
self-expression.”
New
Media
&
Society,
vol.
10,
no.
3,
2008,
pp.
393–411.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1461444808089415 [ac-
cessed: 2022-12-12]
[7]
S. B. Barnes, “A privacy paradox: Social networking in the United
States.” First Monday, vol. 11, no. 9, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://ﬁrstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[8]
A.
Viseu,
A.
Clement,
and
J.
Aspinall,
“Situating
privacy
online: Complex perception and everyday practices,” Information,
Communication & Society, 2004, pp. 92–114. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118042000208924 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[9]
T. Hirai, “Why does “Enjyo“ happen on the Web? : An Examination
based
on
Japanese
Web
Culture,”
Journal
of
Information
and
Communication Research, vol. 29, no. 4, mar 2012, pp. 61–71.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.org/10.11430/jsicr.29.4 61
[accessed:
2022-12-12]
[10]
Y.
Watanabe,
H.
Nishimura,
Y.
Chikuki,
K.
Nakajima,
and
Y. Okada, “An Investigation of Twitter Users Who Disclosed Their
Personal Proﬁle Items in Their Tweets Honestly,” in Proceedings
of
the
Sixth
International
Conference
on
Human
and
Social
Analytics (HUSO 2020), Oct 2020, pp. 20–25. [Online]. Available:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=huso 2020
1 40 80035 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[11]
M. S. Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American Journal of
Sociology, vol. 78, no. 6, 1973, pp. 1360–1380.
[12]
C.
Haythornthwaite,
“Strong,
Weak
and
Latent
Ties
and
the
Impact
of
New
Media,”
The
Information
Society,
vol.
18,
no.
5,
October
2002,
pp.
385–401.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01972240290108195 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[13]
N. B. Ellison, J. Vitak, R. Gray, and C. Lampe, “Cultivating
Social Resources on Social Network Sites: Facebook Relationship
Maintenance Behaviors and Their Role in Social Capital Processes,”
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 19, no. 4, 07 2014,
pp. 855–870. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12078
[accessed: 2022-12-12]
[14]
K. Panovich, R. Miller, and D. Karger, “Tie Strength in Question
&
Answer
on
Social
Network
Sites,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
ACM
2012
Conference
on
Computer
Supported
Cooperative
Work, ser. CSCW ’12.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing
Machinery,
2012,
p.
10571066.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145361 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[15]
E. Gilbert and K. Karahalios, “Predicting Tie Strength with Social
Media,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’09.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2009, p. 211220. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518736 [accessed: 2022-12-12]
[16]
Twitter,
Inc.
Twitter
API.
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api [accessed: 2022-12-12]
87
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

