64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Review of Internet-based Technologies and Applications in the Food Industry 
Saeed Samadi 
Food Machinery dept. 
 Research Institute of Food Science & Technology (RIFST) 
Mashhad, Iran 
s.samadi@rifst.ac.ir 
 Abbas Pourzaki 
Electrical Eng. dept.    
Asrar Institute of Higher Education    
Mashhad, Iran 
a_pourzaki@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract— In the modern world, information technology 
(IT) has been incorporated in most development activities. The 
food production industry is one of the recent industries to 
embrace IT in their major daily operations. The aim of this 
paper is to review the technical and scientific state of the art of 
internet-based technologies and future trends in the Food 
industry. These technologies are mainly classified into Radio 
Frequency IDentification (RFID) for supply chain management, 
quality and safety monitoring, e-commerce, robotics, Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN), and Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS). Since all emerging technologies are coupled with 
challenges, the study addresses both challenges and benefits of 
incorporating IT in the food industry. This paper discusses how 
IT can be integrated to enhance the safety and quality of food 
products. Internet standards and the role of social media and 
smartphone applications in agriculture and food industry are 
the other important aspects that are discussed in separate 
sections. Also, this paper highlights the potential of Internet-
based applications, which may be efficient in future as well as 
the role of IT in support of sustainable food choices. The paper 
concludes by arguing that awareness be raised within the agro-
food industry on the importance of the adoption of Internet-
based technologies as a critical success factor in the twenty-first 
century. 
Keywords - food industry; information technology; Internet; 
RFID; standards; social media; e-commerce; SME. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an improved and expanded version of the 
AFIN 2014 conference paper "Applications and Opportunities 
for Internet-based Technologies in the Food Industry" [1]. 
Information and communication technology has been 
defined as capturing, exchange, processing, transforming, and 
emission of the data. Its advances are based on penetrating of 
internet and mobile set in mass people all around the world.  
 
 
Figure 1. Individuals using the Internet, 2005-2014 [2] 
 
 
Figure 2. Mobile-cellular subscriptions, 2005-2014 [2] 
 
Information technology (IT) is one of the individual forces 
that has contributed to globalization and advancement of life 
standards. These advancements have been occurring rapidly 
due to the rate of innovation from the IT industry. Significant 
incorporation of IT in most of the developmental activities is 
proof of the spread and importance of this technology. IT has 
been globally incorporated in construction industries, 
production, 
manufacturing, 
healthcare, 
education, 
information management, security, and food and agricultural 
production. However, IT has been embraced at different levels 
by the fields mentioned above. Information management 
ranks as the most advanced field concerning use of IT [3]. On 
the other hand, agriculture ranks as the least innovative field 
as far as incorporation of IT is concerned. Other fields of 
production besides agriculture and food obtain maximum 
potential production from their fields due to highly 
incorporated IT systems  [4]. Unfortunately, agriculture and 
food production do not extract their maximum potential 
because of their low level of IT incorporation. Most of the 
yield available in the agricultural sector is retrieved from 
small and medium sized enterprises (SME). Therefore, high 
scale production firms from the food and agriculture 
production industry are not constructive parties in the 
business  [5]. SME are characterized by either low or medium 
financial capacity. This financial background is not able to 
fully fund state-of-the-art technologies such as radio 
frequency identification (RFID), wireless sensor networks 
(WSN), and integration to e-commerce. These technologies 
are available for application by the food and agriculture 
industry, and once incorporated, agricultural and food 
production would be able to maximize its potential  [6]-[8].  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes a review of literature. Section III discusses the use 
of the most important and available Internet-based 
technologies in the food industry, the main aim of the paper. 

65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It is includes: RFID, Tracking and Tracing, monitoring, E-
commerce, Robotics technology, Wireless sensor network, 
and Farm management. Section IV discusses internet 
standards in the agro-food industry from EDI protocol to 
AgroXML and trace2p2 in finer detail. Section V includes 
applications of social media to smartphones. Section VI 
describes future internet based solutions and Section VII 
demonstrates 
information 
technology 
in 
support 
of 
sustainable food choices. Finally, Section VIII includes 
overall discussions and concluding remarks. 
II. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
 Currently, food and agricultural production has 
incorporated IT to a significant degree. Unfortunately, there 
still exist technical challenges that have resulted in the 
industry incurring losses and gaining a bad reputation. These 
technical challenges can be corrected through application of 
the mentioned technologies  [9]. IT is signified by techniques 
that result in faster, efficient production with minimal human 
effort. Agricultural production is an economic activity that is 
more dependent on human input relative to machine input than 
other activities. This does not mean that technologies to 
minimize human effort and input in the industry are absent. 
Technologies that can result in reduction of human input exist 
in the industry, but the prevailing challenge is the cost of 
operation. As initially stated, SMEs comprise robust 
producers in the industry and lack sufficient capital to sustain 
these technologies  [10]. IT applications relevant to the field 
of agriculture require high initial capital, but are cost effective. 
Areas within the field of agricultural production that can 
incorporate 
IT 
include: 
supply 
chains, 
harvest, 
standardization, marketing, soil fertility, and yield prediction  
[11]. These areas can be improved by the following 
technologies: RFID, WSN, GIS, robotics control, and e-
commerce. These technologies are applied in the agricultural 
and food production industry to fulfill different objectives. 
These technologies utilize networks for communication.  
However, some technologies such as RFID have more than 
one application in the industry. It can be used in supply chain 
management and also in traceability for standardization  [12].  
III. 
AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES 
In this section some main technologies on it-based food 
topics are discussed. 
A. RFID Technology  
This technology uses radio frequency to identify or 
retrieve information from production. It operates using the 
same mechanism as barcodes with magnetic strips  [13]. 
Instead, of a barcode, RFID uses microchips that are 
embedded on the product of interest. RFID has two main 
advantages over barcodes. In the case of a barcode, it has to 
be on the line of sight of the barcode reader for information to 
be obtained from it. RFID is advantageous because the chip 
and the reader do not have to be on a line of sight to retrieve 
information from the chip, because the chip produces specific 
radio frequencies. The other advantage of RFID is that the 
chip is more reliable than the barcode  [10]. This is because 
validity of barcodes is ruined once the code is scratched or 
removed. RFID microchips are not easily removed because 
they are not attached to the surface of the product.  
RFID technology can be used in supply chain management 
and standardization. Food quality has been the cause of 
controversy in the food industry. Food that has not been 
properly stored has higher chances of going bad and once food 
has attained this status, it can become toxic. Food toxicity is 
dangerous as it can result in complex health disorders or even 
death. Therefore, a compromise on the quality of food is likely 
to ruin the reputations of the supplier and manufacturer, and 
this translates into losses  [5]. RFID enables the user to 
establish the amount and type of ingredients contained in the 
food product. In addition, it also provides the time elapsed 
from the time of manufacture to the time of first use. This 
information is imperative to both the retailer and the 
consumer. Cases of food poisoning as a result of consuming 
expired food or allergic substances would be substantially 
reduced.  
The other core challenge in the food production and 
agriculture industry is supply chain management. Some food 
products are essential for humans, but their production is 
unique in specific regions. Therefore, a comprehensive supply 
chain should be established so as to benefit both the 
manufacturer and consumer. The supply chain involves the 
food transit process from harvest, to processing, to distribution 
to the retailer [14]. Food undergoes this process before 
reaching the end user. Despite the extensive route, which is 
undergone before a product’s use, monetary value has to be 
established. This means that the end user is not overcharged 
and the manufacturer is not underpaid [15]. RFID technology 
establishes an infrastructure that tracks a food product’s 
location and ingredients, thus enhancing reliability of the end 
product. Farmers, specifically involved in food production, 
have been discouraged from expanding their investment due 
to limited profit from their enterprise. Previously, middle-men 
have benefited more than either the farmer or the consumer, 
minimizing profits to these constituents. Currently, with the 
employment of RFID, profits and satisfaction have improved 
because the supply chain of the goods has been bolstered by 
the technology. RFID technology has to be applied from the 
point of production (farmer) to the consumer. This reduces the 
bulk cost that could have been incurred by the distributor or 
supplier [16]. Wal-Mart is among the supply companies that 
have encouraged manufacturers to incorporate RFID to 
increase their profits. They encourage manufacturers through 
financing part of the RFID implementation. This practice is 
prevailing in most developing countries, as SMEs are financed 
to increase agricultural food production performance in the 
international market. 
B. Tracking and Tracing 
Traceability is the track or trace product ability in a 
production line, distribution processes, etc. It indicates that 
product flows are recognizable and can be logged uniquely 
and systematically (see Figure 3). The main reasons for 
growing attention to traceability in the food technology are 
new legislative requirements and the increasing demand for 
administrative systems and quality [16]. 
 

66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. Tracking and Tracing Systems Investment Model  [16]  
 
 Tracking and tracing are similar in some features but 
different in main characteristics. Tracing can be divided into 
upstream and downstream. Tracking follows the flow of 
downstream wares in in real-time (e.g., for creating situation 
data) while downstream tracing is not due to time. Tracing can 
be used in marketing or it can active goods recalls. Tracing 
has the ability to follow a product reverse direction, from the 
end product towards its start point. This can detect potential 
fail origin in food source networks [17]- [18]. 
In Japan, for safety assurance, a food traceability design 
has been constructed, which got knowledge about food 
production and distribution chains. Toward this object, the 
Japan Agricultural Cooperatives (JA), local governments, and 
the Japanese government have been  incorporating in the 
proceeding of  national projects, i.e., food traceability systems 
(FTS). 
Filling the data forms of farm management is a labor work 
for almost farmers. Nowadays, Internet services and mobile 
phones are spread among peoples, especially farmers. Thus, 
for managing the agricultural production process an efficient 
“Farming Diary System” is developed. It use web compatible 
mobile phones [19]. As a commercialized version of this 
system, an internet software, "Application for Agricultural 
Methodological Analysis" (AFAMA) was developed in 2002. 
Farmers, the major users of AFAMA, can insert their agro-
food process information such as farm works and material 
applications in their cultivated fields while he/she do his 
activities in farm. The individuals can select input options 
such as materials, machines, fields, and crops. Using the 
AFAMA can be stepped as following: 
a) Connecting a computer or mobile phone to the 
AFAMA Website log in using user ID and password. 
b) Insert own data to customize one's materials, 
machines, fields, and crops. 
c) Input the designs of material and cultivation and the 
operation data to choice the scheduled items. 
C. Monitoring  
Intervention in hot situations can be succeed if real-time 
data available. This avoids the cargo have been missed 
because of quality deficits. For example, fruits and vegetables 
transport from the countries of Southern European to 
Germany suffer transport time of about 50 hours (Spain to 
Germany). In this interval, the quality of products can 
decreases considerably under undesired conditions. In failing 
cooling system the monitoring system generates instantaneous 
information to the owner of the cargo. The cargo can be 
delivered to a near cold storage until the cooling system of the 
vehicle have been repaired. 
Advances in the sensor network adding to communication 
allow the ability to real time observe of trucks positions and 
status. These technologies are developed more by new logistic 
service suppliers. These service suppliers get real time 
monitoring data and are able to convert them as a service for 
fresh produce customers. Especially, distribution chain data 
such as approximated arrival times and the transport status 
activate development in the commercial system of distribution 
shops. These developments decrease time of arranging 
reception of products and the shipping of them from 
distribution shops. 
The position due to quality monitoring is such that cause 
the communication and processing will be unsuitable. High 
quality monitoring of food needs complicated sensor and 
information communication technology. Fresh goods sense 
out changes.  
Temperature and humidity are the most important 
parameters for maintain desired food quality. They must be 
controlled and communicated within the information service, 
throughout the distribution chain from start (harvest) to end 
(retail outlets). Other interests in monitoring are far from 
forward product quality and include more environment data 
(e.g., CO2 or NH3 emissions). 
Food quality and safety monitoring 
In China, profits in the food industry have declined by 50 
percent as a result of contaminated food. This shows the 
sensitive nature of the food industry as a single flaw has the 
potential to bring down the whole industry. In addition, 
China’s food production is also mainly extracted from small 
scale investors. This means the sector is not fully exploited. 
One of the technologies that the country has embraced to 
enhance the status of the food supply is RFID food packaging. 
This technology uses RFID to identify the ingredients and the 
inventory of food products  [21]. It utilizes disposable 
biosensors that produce an antigen-antibody reaction to 
identify any bacterial cells in the food product. When bacteria 
thrive in an enclosed food product, the result is a bio-chemical 
reaction that would either make the food product stale or 
poisonous. Therefore, this technology helps the food industry 
upgrade their monitoring systems, and the quality and safety 
of food products is enhanced. As a result, IT has aided in the 
restoration of trust between consumers and manufacturers. 
Furthermore, since the introduction of RFID food packaging, 
the number of health issues associated with food poisoning or 
food quality has declined by more than 50 percent. RFID 
technology also has an additional use as biosensors used in the 
tags containing inventory information that can be used in 
supply chain management. Traceability of food products from 
the farmer to the consumer is the other main concern in the 
food production industry. Effective supply management is a 
barrier that prevents SMEs from maximizing their potential. 
RFID detection technology poses a remedy to this barrier; 
RFID stores ingredients, destination, and the appropriate 

67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
geographic location of products  [21]. This helps the food 
industry realize their market extent and as a result increase or 
reduce their production where necessary, thus minimizing 
losses. This technology enables rapid detection of poisons or 
derailed quality of finished food products. It also enables 
automatic identification of food products along a supply 
chain.  
D. E-commerce  
Internet technologies within the context of e-commerce 
have provided a more interactive market that enhances 
communication between manufacturers and consumers. This 
can be accomplished through existing social networking sites 
such as Facebook and Twitter. Manufacturers append their 
social networking websites on containers of food products so 
that in case of a complaint or compliment, the user can directly 
communicate with the food company  [22].  
When there is a reliable communication pathway between 
service or good providers and the end user, performance of the 
product is likely to be high. This is relative to a scenario where 
there is no elaborate communication between the user and 
manufacturer. IT provides better database management 
systems that portray the accurate needs of consumers. E-
commerce expands the food market as the Internet is able to 
establish new consumers from regions where a specific food 
product has not yet been sold. E-commerce serves to benefit 
SMEs more because of their otherwise insufficient capital to 
market their food products. E-commerce is cheaper than 
hiring a marketing firm. This system requires less than five 
users to conduct online marketing and thus is affordable for 
SMEs  [23].  
As a result, SMEs can access a larger market without 
seeking additional financial assistance to facilitate marketing. 
Therefore, Internet technologies ensure development of a 
more reliable supply chain, higher quality food products, and 
a larger market for food products  [24]. 
SMEs and consumer groups in local agribusiness 
The main activities in retail is focused on decreasing the 
number of firms controlling portions of the retail bazar [25]. 
It is motivation of agrifood SMEs to give competitive 
advantages in their businesses. Some of their ways were joint 
initiatives and new methods for co-working [26]. A new 
method to exploit the benefits of repositioning is the new food 
networks for exchanging coalitions of consumers and clusters 
of agrifood producers in order to overcome the large-scale 
chain of retails. These arrangements have become 
increasingly important as a tools of decreasing cost, or 
mitigating economic risk  [27].  
If the compatibility of a commerce ICT proposal allows to 
purchase/sell agrifood goods more economic and efficiently, 
the main activator is "trust". Trust is a key in e-commerce and 
that its lack is one of the main factors for buyers to not use the 
Internet market. From the view of customers, for an online 
business trust in sellers is required but not sufficient [28]. It is 
investigated that customers trust almost are based on the 
reputation of the intermediary, web usability, and transaction 
security. So, intermediary should guarantee completion of the 
transaction chain and the sellers trust. 
The trusted third party (TTP) is a systematic unit that uses 
equal trust from both the agrifood suppliers and buyers. Its 
goals are influence on innovation decisions, facilitate 
transactions, systemize the agrifood trade network, and, more 
important, provide and manage the 'trust structure', where e-
commerce motivated by agrifood supplier clusters and buyer 
groups can be sufficiently guaranteed. 
TTP has three roles in intermediation between suppliers 
and buyers groups: 
 
Technology intermediary, whose duty is to supply the 
ICT components such as security, hardware, and 
communication; 
 
Transaction intermediary services such as consultancy, 
hosting, and applications software. Among its roles, there 
are the co-working and direction of data flows (from 
agribusiness to consumers and vice-versa) and the 
logistic process (from agribusinesses to consumers 
application).  
 
Ensure authority that defines an "ethical code" and 
behavioral laws in transaction chains. 
In practice, it reserves cumulative buying orders from 
consumers and reform individual orders for each agrifood 
producers cluster by analysis them. Once products get from 
clusters, they have been packed due to each consumers order 
and send to the primary consumers group location; 
TTP is a main tool in obtaining the commitment of future 
participants, as groups and/or individuals, to insert the 
aggregation. It supplies a wide governance duty, actives the 
promotion of co-working among groups and controls 
interactions to guarantee transactions behavioral correctness 
in the network nodes. 
The consumers group (CG): it is a special no-profit buying 
group that is self-systemized. The members are typically 
households, who need to buy cheap agrifood products. 
However, due to advances in discovery of regional traditions 
as tools to trust the quality and origin of goods, consumers 
request to gain secured local foods, where trace and producers 
reputation can be obtain assure and trust. For accessing 
purchasing power to gain the favorite traditional off, 
consumers must share "shopping lists" in one order. In 
creating the cumulative order, the CG follows previous ethical 
code and behavioral laws. 
E. Robotics technology 
Opposed to human input, machine input (as a result of IT) 
is both uniform and reliable. In addition, it is faster and 
produces more profit than human input. Robotics is applied in 
land preparation, planting, and weeding  [24]. A series of 
corporative IT devices can sufficiently handle agricultural 
production leaving human application to solely play an 
oversight role. A combine harvester is one of the machines 
that has replaced human involvement in harvesting activity 
(see Figure 4). In cases where the machine has been used, 
there has been a greater than 100 percent advantage in yield 
compared to regions where human effort was used in 
harvesting. This prevailed in areas with the same size and 
climatic conditions.  
 

68
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4. Diagram showing robotic harvesters 
F. Wireless sensor network  
Wireless sensor network (WSN) differs from RFID in that 
it is able to integrate with other network devices in the field 
while an RFID tag can only be read with the RFID tag reader. 
WSNs comprise of Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and ZigBee. The latter 
two operate within the Industrial Scientific and Medical (ISM) 
band of 2.4 GHz, which provides license-free operations, 
enormous spectrum allocation, and global compatibility. 
Other devices deployed on a farm to aid agricultural activities 
[30].   
Diagram showing robotic harvesters is used in this 
industry for monitoring and surveillance of crops within a 
farm. However, weather variation is the sole challenge that 
affects performance of WSN in the agriculture industry. The 
technology utilizes radio frequencies that can be interfered 
with by weather conditions [31]. The technology is used in 
maintenance and monitoring of farmlands. This is achieved 
through installation of sensors and cameras on the field. These 
devices are linked to the control station on the farm via the 
mentioned wireless technology. Monitoring fields enables 
identification of severe conditions on the soil and weather. 
When soil moisture content is below the minimum, the 
information is transferred to the control that commands the 
irrigator to sprinkle the soil. Phytophotra is a disease that 
affects potatoes and is influenced by temperature and 
humidity conditions. Between 868MHz and 916MHz, motes 
can be used in determining moisture content on air and 
temperature  [32]. Extreme temperatures can be reflected and 
relayed to the control station, which initiates spray of 
pesticides. 
G. Farm management  
In the new societies, from any place the farmer can 
connect to the network. It is done by powered wireless links. 
Nowadays, all farm equipment, machinery, and animals are 
supplied with various sensors and computers, which 
connected to the network; so he/she can observe any data in 
all point of the farm. 
In East Asia, i.e., Japan and Korea, greenhouse farming 
has been extended. Shin et al. access the data by remote 
control by connecting the computer of the controlled 
greenhouse weather to the Internet [33]. Nonomiya and 
Kouno developed similar conjuration with a remote camera to 
visualize the crop conditions impression as a valuable 
marketing aspect [34].  
The microchips can compute in much farm machinery and 
equipment, e.g., automatic feeding, in-house weather control. 
These computers will have networking so easy in the future. 
The farm boss will have remote control ability, and he may 
monitor the system functions anywhere in the farm. 
A particularly non-neglectable extension may take place 
in animal husbandry  [35]. A microelectronic herdsman can 
get information about the position by GPS (Global Positioning 
Systems) and about the health and welfare situation of cows, 
sows or sheep. In hot conditions, the microelectronic 
herdsman retains the animal at a feed suspensor and alarm the 
farm staff by a mobile set call.  
Train animals respond to impulses of the electronic 
herdsman, which forces a suitable behavior of the animal. The 
perspectives of such a development are increasing animal 
welfare and higher outdoor care, because the need of keeping 
a control on animals systems, in which animals are integrated 
in small regions. This technology allows a cheap goods with 
no animals' natural need for free space and movement or the 
observation of the animals' welfare and health. 
The farmers can communicate with out sources via 
networked farms, at any position and time. For example, the 
farmer can obtain weather updated observations data and its 
decision support throughout the day. For precise plant 
protection, the chemicals apply abilities can be enhanced. 
Plant weakness and illness alarming systems are new 
applications for local offices by the Internet. 
Some advice can reach to former about where and when 
by natural speak powered by photos or video recordings; time 
and position are saved automatically. Then the problem can 
be send by email to the extension operator and receive a 
response later, or they may dialogue with each together.  
GIS applications 
A GIS uses unique colors and shades of colors to represent 
different atmospheric and soil conditions. It also uses the same 
set of unique colors to depict different terrains and ground 
cover. They utilize satellites to obtain aerial images of the 
Earth’s surface. These satellites exist exclusively for GISs as 
the colors of objects and surfaces are different from ordinary 
depiction and representation. For instance, a water body 
would appear blue from ordinary satellites, whereas a GIS 
satellite depicts water bodies in dark. Food production and 
agriculture is governed by atmospheric conditions and soil 
fertility. Globally, farmers’ yields are affected by changes in 
weather and climate. This is because of poor decisions that are 
dependent on farm activities  [33].  
For instance, harvesting time is signified by dry weather 
and medium to high temperatures. Therefore, when a farmer 
harvests during other atmospheric conditions, the resultant 
yield will be low. Through GIS technology farmers have been 
able to obtain atmospheric conditions in real-time diagram of 
remote-sensed image of the soil (GIS image) that have 
enabled them to conduct farming activities appropriately.  
GIS images are specific to natural, physical features. As a 
result, farmers or investors are able to locate ideal regions that 
will favor their agricultural investments. 
 

69
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5. Diagram of remote-sensed image of the soil (GIS image) 
 Planting on the wrong soil will result in lower yield and 
losses. Analyzing a soil using the naked eye does not 
necessarily yield an accurate description of the soil’s 
composition  [37]. Therefore, advanced methods induced by 
IT would result in better land use, thus maximizing yield from 
the food production and agricultural industry (see Figure 5).  
Mapping technologies 
The accessibility of Internet-based atlas facilities (for 
example Google Maps) have motivated home location-based 
services as a whole. These are based on GIS tools to 
accumulate, form and register spatial records and maps. Such 
tools incorporate and spread over spatial and non-spatial 
databanks for combined examination, and are used to 
interconnect and bit geographic information. 
In nutrition aid, as shown in Figure 6, these tools funding 
procedures related to, food security examination, eventuality 
and crisis planning, first cautionary organizations and logistics 
arrangement, by incorporating records taken in the ground 
with spatial records to funding result- making. 
 
 
Figure 6. Map of global croplands and their water use for food security 
IV. 
INTERNET STANDARDS CONSIDERATIONS 
In this section some important notes on it-based standards 
in food industries are described.  
A. Electronic Data Interchange 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is the technique of 
using computers to exchange commercial docs among firms. 
Before, facsimiles or customary mail was used to exchange 
docs. Mailing and faxing are still used in commercial, but EDI 
is a much quicker method to get the same object. EDI is used 
by an enormous number of companies. Over 100,000 
businesses have substituted the more old-style means by EDI. 
This innovative scheme has a number of aids; price is one of 
them. Computer to computer exchange is much cheaper than 
old-style means of doc exchange. 
EDI structures are expected to be Internet-based in the 
future. Although now only very insufficient initiatives use 
Web EDI, over 50 percent of the initiatives strategy to 
appliance this technology in the future. A main stage in 
decrease of costs of EDI answers is the use of the Internet with 
its current communication substructure as a means of carrying 
for EDI messages. A number of dissimilar communication 
rules can be used for the transmission of EDI messages via the 
Internet. Depending upon the task, the exchange can be made 
via FTP (File Transfer Protocol), HTTP (Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol) or SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), whereas 
the files are encoded either with PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), 
S/MIME (Secure Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension) or 
SSL (Secure Socket Layer). Cheap combination with the huge 
number of emerging technologies for the Internet possibly 
will create a significant involvement to the rise of EDI users 
and particularly permit SMEs to join in EDI networks. The 
clear benefit of using the Web as a tool for EDI 
communication is that the single precondition is an Internet 
linking and a web browser. All communication uses the 
omnipresent HTTP-protocol. Safety subjects can be addressed 
by using SSL, for instance. Thus, all mandatory substructure 
is most possibly nearly anyplace accessible minus obliging the 
partners to participate bulky amounts of cash. In this situation, 
form-based EDI evidences to be a respectable hint for large 
businesses looking for means of having their small users send 
their documents in a regular layout. 
B. Extensible Markup Language 
The extensible markup language (XML) has the ability to 
be the information format of choice used together with the 
programming language of choice for the Web, Java, to allow 
the next stage in the development of EDI. Using open 
standards can significantly decrease the time and money 
consumed on realizing a solution. By escaping exclusive 
formats, the risk of asset ruins is decreased and future-oriented 
resolutions can be advanced. Though traditional EDI 
connections are regularly long-term and highly integrated, 
which are meaningful solitary with a large number of 
connections and for a long time, the readiness to devote into 
open, compatible IT-substructures is robust at any point of the 
Value Chain. Conventionally, the founding of compatibility 
between dissimilar EDI solution-systems was recognized over 
deep mixing of the EDI standard into the applications of the 
communication partners. XML is a guileless, very elastic text 
format resulting from SGML (Standard Generalized Markup 
Language). Formerly aimed to encounter the challenges of 
large-scale electronic publishing, XML has also a significant 
role in the exchange of an inclusive diversity of information 
on the Web and in another place. XML shares common origins 
with HTML and SGML (ISO 8879). The latter was envisioned 
for semantic rise that would assist computer classification and 
indexing. SGML delivered flexibility that had not been 
obtainable earlier and turn into very general beyond the 

70
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
intentions of the original inventors. But it was very difficult 
and costly. 
C. EDI - XML technologies in the agri-food industry 
The continually cumulative requests for the level of 
tracing and tracking sequentially require even more 
innovative IT methods. Growing the speed of a tracing 
process is frequently the motive to accumulate data about 
loads and tracing in an ERP system, but these systems can also 
be applied to RF scanning and for EDI to communicate with 
customers and providers. In addition, speed also raises the 
efficiency of registration that guarantees recording the 
information totally suitable. Moreover, a data system that has 
been arranged well will decrease need to persons, since some 
data is kept in the information system itself. There are three 
main features of the donation of data: 
• 
Identification of the lot, which is to be observed. A 
lot has an exclusive identity made by the mixture of item 
quantity and lot quantity. 
• 
Recording and management of the lot past when 
provider send the raw material and when it was used in 
production, and so on. 
• 
Link about the lot with other nodes in the chain 
network. EAN standards for barcodes and EDI have a 
significant role. 
D. AGRO EDI Europe (AEE) 
Later than 1992, Agro EDI Europe is working on 
association and regularization of information interchanges on 
the agricultural and its industrial parts. Nowadays, the 
association collects about 250 members from several sectors 
(farming input, agro equipment, management and accounting 
Sections, money support and reservation, insurance, packing, 
storage, quality control laboratories, etc.). 
Since 2001, the commercial partners the Agro EDI Europe 
association introduced a regular data-processing format of 
exchange the data harvest page: the DAPLOS message. After 
rising this "plot message", AEE tries to solve the problems of 
supplement of farming works and computation of uncultured 
boundary, and benchmarking of harvest growing methods. 
Then, AEE faces                                  to the domain of 
traceability, 
wholly 
tools 
allowing 
farm 
production 
administration being marketed nowadays as traceability 
resolutions. AEE formed the "plot message" (DAPLOS: Data 
Plot Sheet), which is a standard for relating data related to a 
particular social plot, to enable information exchange between 
different information systems. French software editors tried to 
twig to this standard though extending databases and 
programs, generally by executing some transfer data functions 
according to AEE message, which has focused consideration 
on the interactions of the farmer and service providers. 
Compared with AgroXML, the data description is not 
involved because it is an EDIFACT message. 
E. AgroXML 
Farmers must document agricultural activities. AgroXML 
is the consequence of a fitted assistance with agricultural 
software makers and online service suppliers, which mix 
AgroXML into their software. AgroXML presents a standard, 
which enables data exchange and storage. AgroXML is based 
on the worldwide standard XML and contains several content 
lists. Several claims in marketable software are surviving ever 
since two weeks. AgroXML is a language that assists the 
explanation of agricultural data that will assist a whole 
documentation of agricultural creation chains. The AgroXML 
object is to permit data exchanges minus dismissal among 
land proprietors, farmers, food industry, etc. AgroXML will 
be obtainable open on the web, and will be free of platform. 
An XML Schema introduces electronic documents to 
exchange information. The AgroXML schema is founded on 
a model of the actual procedures in agricultural production. 
They are denoted in a tree-like hierarchy. Schema expansion 
will be taken place in the English linguistic. Presently 
delimited terms have previously been interpreted. Other 
subjects to be functioned upgrading of geo-data in addition to 
elements for farm animals and plants. At present, various 
corporations are applying AgroXML as a files exchange 
standard. Creators of agricultural tools like Claas and John 
Deere funding expansion of AgroXML. AgroXML has a high 
primacy for the agricultural software. 
F. The benefits of AgroXML 
Prospective users of AgroXML comprise someone along 
the making and providing process in the agricultural. 
 
Figure 7. Data and information requirements in the Agribusiness sector  [69]  
 
1. Farmers 
Hereafter farmers will not be knotted to a particular 
gathering or analyzing of data through the wide translation of 
documentation obligations. AgroXML does not register 
information and enables a struggle free communication with 
the farming management, accessing services and software 
corporations, without demanding an additional information 
input. Production procedures data, which must be stored, are 
accessible whenever must be used. 
2. Consulting services 
Combined vegetable production requires measuring 
agronomic must to be compatible to the local circumstances 
of the only one type. For adaptation there are many tools, 
available at the business position, or must be buy (monitoring 
section, weather station, warning tools, etc.). Farmers used the 
power of the combined vegetable production, if advisors and 

71
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
development experts will access to type and specific oriented 
select aiding from internet. This method of obtaining advisor 
services makes advanced agriculture principally interesting  
[69]. 
3. Software companies 
The requirement of a uniform information exchange 
protocol such as AgroXML will rise and quicken the 
development growth for farming software corporations. 
Agricultural software is progressively reliant on the 
information input from outer the commercial place. Although 
this worries the updating and care of forms and loads for 
request of subsidies, and the use of data relate the tools of the 
business. The matching updates need more work, so tend to 
more charge, which can be decreased greatly if this data will 
be accessible in a standardized format through the internet. 
Gradually, the clients will presume that the business software 
and type oriented online advisory services can networked 
suitably, so easy using AgroXML application. 
G. Trace2p2 
The P2P Project, co-supported by the European 
Community, goals to training, progress and test dissimilar 
procedures and apparatuses backup the speedy gathering of 
data from unlike traceability systems, in order to describe and 
extend a joined method to gather data from the different 
traceability systems working at the various corporates. In this 
method every corporation can pick its personal traceability 
system with fit to buyers, people and official personnel that 
will take a united line to ask automatically for goods 
information through Internet. 
The key aim of the P2P plan are defining a Procedure 
(Trace Methodology) and a Software Style as the base of 
solution the crucial topics of incorporation. It means to regard 
and grow an answer intended at backup rapid gathering of data 
from dissimilar traceability systems of corporations of 
assumed farming cost procedure, presenting solution to the 
entire cost procedure traceability. An experimental system is 
developed for the swine value procedure. The most significant 
section of the software is the link standard to share data, i.e., 
the TRACE-XML protocol. The TRACE-XML defines the 
least set of data to trace all goods collection. 
The TRACE-XML protocol will characterize the first 
stage to describe standard of automatic catching traceability 
data and documents of all corporation of the farming sector. 
For example, it could comprise of a subgroup of data and 
comments of the ebXML protocol. The TRACE-XML could 
denote an open protocol that could report the swine and 
especially all farming section. In brief, the key results of the 
project are: 
• 
Trace Methodology: a procedure backup traceability 
data group in the corporations (especially what and how data); 
• 
Trace-XML protocol: a least set of data to trace each 
collection and the associated communication standard; 
• 
Trace-SW: a software assistant protocol and 
organization of data and documents associated to the 
traceability; 
• 
Trace-Browser: a tool for browsing the traceability 
data obedient with the TRACE-XML protocol. 
V. 
FROM SOCIAL MEDIA TO SMARTPHONE 
APPLICATIONS (APPS)  
Each societal medium has an important role in passing 
data to publics via diverse internet tools, it has added 
improved usage in new times  [38]. Social media service 
mobile and web-based tools to generate communicating 
platforms through which persons and groups share, debate, 
and adapt operator- produced content  [39]. It includes a 
various kind of word-of-mouth, online forums including 
blogs, corporation backed argument boards and chat rooms, 
customer-to-customer e-mail, customer goods or service 
grades homepages and forums, Internet argument boards and 
forums, sites encompassing digital images, movies, or 
photos), and communal networking webs, to term a few  [40]  
Administrations big and minor have hopped on the communal 
media fashion, feeling their method everywhere to make sense 
of its utility. They have peeped on Twitter, shaped pages on 
Facebook, and sent videos on YouTube [41]  Internet has 
many sites for interacting users altogether and deliberate 
numerous viewpoints on nutrition. These variety from the 
farm and its situation of food making to the end artefact, 
investigation where, when and how to eat food, through 
furthermost sites based about an unambiguous objective or 
sphere. For example, Allotment Veg Growing  [42]  gives 
people data on vegetables, a forum for this and a webpage 
section for showing comment of users. Allrecipes.com  [43] is 
similar, whereby people can add a storeroom to select recipes 
with ingredients and they can provide assured standards when 
browsing such as superior nutritional wants, season, or meal 
time kind. Using websites people can also instruction, catch 
and assessment food formations, JustEat [44] is a site that 
provides data on the adjacent carryout, whereby user can 
observe the menu, other user's comment and instruction the 
food to be conveyed. Urbanspoon  [45] is a site to review 
eating locates, the people can division on liking the place, 
leave written comments and add data about the menu. EatPost  
[46] is like previous but it appraisals the meal, users send 
photographs of the plate with info about its origin place, other 
plates from the similar place, evaluations of the plate and 
proposals of extra alike founding. 
Farm Blogs from Around the World has the purpose of 
gathering in one locate the best farm blogs, suggested farm 
blogs are requested to guide a short email on their farm and 
blog, and to contain private suggested farm blogs [47]. It 
provides attracted parties a gamble to study more about 
farming, with bloggers inclining to post at most one-time per 
day, and their posts tending to be one page length to less work 
for keeping up-to-date. Blogs are similarly obtainable that 
appearance at food in a more overall method, the Guardian's 
Word of Mouth Blog provides users data from the profits of 
red shoots [48], and the damage of Harry Ramsden's famous 
Fish and Chip Shop [49], these are all posted by dissimilar 
users sending the blog a broader comment. 
Twitter is a microblogging site concentrating on donation 
real time updates with an middling of 90 million daily 'tweets', 
every one containing of 140 characters or fewer, these are 
typically small status updates of what people are undertaking, 
where they are, how they are feeling, they have confidence in 

72
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
attention to the follower [38]. Many big food administrations 
have twitter pages, e.g., McDonalds [50], where the user can 
study about McDonald's history, food, persons and news 
everywhere in the world. It passes on data via twitters to 
17,157 followers generous the positive social sensitivity, 
cooperating with a more 'human' singing than a 'corporate' 
singing  [41]  that McDonalds demands people to hear  [50]. 
Burger King [51], a competing to McDonalds also has a 
twitter account and provides users data from the corporation. 
These corporations can show their wider worries through 
twitter, as shown from Burger King 'Through our BK 
CROWN Program, kids can learn about the National Parks 
Conservation Association. What's your favorite park?' (ibid.). 
There are also tweets that customers use for chatting eating 
food. Fastfoodie  [52] in title of ‘This is what we eat’ where 
users tweet eating date and location online. Food.com  [53] 
has 450,000 recipes, millions of reviews and photos, it is uses 
the twitter feed to direct people to the website for different 
recipes. There are also bloggers using these microblogs, 
where Irish Foodies is one of the largest who created a site for 
Irish and Irish-based food bloggers to link to others  [54]. 
Food on Facebook is seen typically in two methods either 
via some initiative desiring to inspire the potential consumer 
to purchase their product or observe their locations [41]. This 
can been seen from the minor farm bazars, for example, 
Becketts Farm  [55] , through to the larger supermarkets and 
professional shops, such as Camp Cupcake  [56]. These 
corporations use facebook to shape a community and get 
members, they present new products, proposal discounts 
vouchers and competitive through the site. Facebook has 
different pages on awaring of food production, for example 
Farmers weekly, where one can find all the strangest news 
from the landscape  [57]. Dairy Farming UK is a people 
cluster of all ages who support dairy agriculture in the UK  
[58]. There are more overall clusters who love Arable, Dairy, 
Poultry, Livestock, Horticulture, Mud, Tractors, Wellies, and 
The Crunchyside [59]. 
VI. 
FUTURE INTERNET BASED SOLUTIONS 
In this section, a set of potential FI or electronic based 
results and expected applications were identified, which may 
be efficient in the future. In the focus clusters, these thoughts 
were discussed in order to try to acquire if a reason is 
applicable or not. 
 
In Smart Farming area, the most applicable ideas 
uniformly were the "System for inessential and foreign bodies' 
detection ", the "Recommending system", and the 
"Development of the day-to-day work of the farmer "; beside 
these the idea of "Barcode/RFID system -Traceability system 
facilities" also was initiate significantly by the contributors of 
emphasis groups. 
Recommending system for choosing the refined vegetation 
based on a databank 
A large databank on diverse farming techniques must be 
accessible to notify every farmer about his/her refined crops. 
The system will compare the information provided by the 
farmers with the effects of dust trainings and principles and 
must recommend for vegetation, which could be grownup 
well on the explicit zone. 
Watching surroundings for farms and vegetation - 
recommending system 
The young farmers want access to a dependable and 
regularly updated watching / recommending system for their 
plants' or animals' health. The farmer should give information 
that may contain sensors' information, on and off time video, 
pictures, activities etc. The watching system should trigger an 
alarm when some thresholds have been passed; suitable 
advisory could be showed to the corresponding farmer in 
order to do further activities. For illustration if the temperature 
is too high and the humidity is too low, an approval can find a 
contractor for spraying, or a fertilizer contractor since those 
situations are hazardous for the vegetation to be infected by a 
illness. 
Barcode/RFID system -Traceability system facilities 
The farmer requires printing an elementary barcode tag for 
his/her ending product in the past it's storing or delivery. This 
barcode tag must encompass data such as the title of the 
corporation- farm, its origin area, the title of the product, the 
epoch of the production, etc. An internet based system may be 
beneficial for farmers with small production. They cannot 
spend a lot of money for resident software to make and 
printing the needed barcode tags. This automation must 
propose online barcode producer and RFID facilities, error 
tolerant without the load of managing hardware, organizing 
patches and upgrades, or watching performance. 
Fundamentally, the accused named the most key functions 
of the FI as receiving more data (climate and ambient 
circumstances, dust conditions, etc.), and accumulating this 
united into an associated databank. Though, it should be 
considered that as a giant amount of data can be composed, it 
must can be shared. Accomplishment the right data or sharing 
the data and knowledge with the adjacent farmers - via a 
shared substructure - was similarly essential. 
Many of these above stated systems are previously 
applied, but not common for their costs. Habits of such great 
numbers of sensors or applying such automatic interference 
systems have quite a high price. 
A QR or RFID founded system, with developed 
traceability, is similarly excessively classy currently, though 
it is vital for the farmer. After the prices, two restrictions were 
recognized in the present exercise for a well- functioning, 
QR/RFID founded traceability system. One is the absence of 
a complex and public database, where the data can be 
composed and integrated. The other one is that in farming 
exercise it is rather hard to recognize a group or a smaller unit 
of crops in the harvest. In additional, Grease contributors 
agreed that farmers could use this type of systems if the 
program translated into the nationwide linguistic and had an 
actually modest user interface. 
In Smart Agro-logistics area the maximum appropriate 
thoughts totally were the "Road watching application", the 
"Dock booking system" and the thought of "Combined cargo 
and navy organization for selling machines and small retail 
outlets" in a more wide-ranging way as "Combined cargo and 
navy organization in overall". The thought of "secure bank 
system" also was mentioned as being quite important. 

73
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Road observing application 
The scope of this example is to share online monitoring 
information from trucks during the transport of cargo. Current 
practice allows monitoring trucks during transport with 
individual software applications and collects the monitoring 
data with available telematics systems. However, the access 
to such monitoring data is not organized on standards, which 
makes the exchange of data a complex task. Due to a divers 
spectrum of possible events disturbing the transport process 
(e.g., traffic jams or technical malfunctions) information 
needs to arise from uncertainties about arrival times and 
complications for further distribution planning as well as 
warehouse dock organization. The example shows an 
idealistic aggregation of information from different systems 
(order management system, online monitoring and event 
management system). This application can be opened for 
customers contracting a specific logistic service provider and 
enable a real-time event management in order to support 
decisions and planning. 
Dock booking system 
Current society systems of cross-docks are concentrating 
on first-come-first-serve philosophies. Online applications for 
dock booking are just applied for a short time. These 
applications permit reservation of dock places for a definite 
time ahead, but regularly need the recording up to 24 hours 
before passage entrance. The logistic service providers require 
an elastic solution, which has benefits for all joining 
enterprises. The procedure presented is based on the 
credentials of trucks and their mission in a particular 
topographical area (geo-fence) based on GPS directs around 
the storeroom/cross-dock. The telecommunication between 
storeroom and truck association needs the exchange of data on 
the truck (identification data based on license dish) and its 
duty (loading or unloading cargo) in addition to the recording 
and communication of a dock interplanetary and time epochs 
for the truck user approaching the storeroom. 
Combined cargo and navy organization for selling 
machines and small retail outlets 
Farmers expect a combined management system, which 
can improve logistics assets and to develop the typical control 
and production organization. 
A software and/or internet reinforced stockholding and 
storing system - which assistances the corporation to enhance 
its stock, and the stock recording and the stock picking are 
automatic - is a common request by the people, but it is used 
previously at a number of corporations. Furthermore, this 
organization should grip the essential connections (worrying, 
re-ordering etc.) automatically too. 
In small sales markets, which cannot reserves large stock 
such as selling machines and containers, it is expected that at 
the reduction of the stock to a regular level, an alarm indicator 
should be on or an automatic re-order should be produced for 
the provider. The problem of vending machines is that the 
provider has to convey lesser quantities of dissimilar products 
to numerous sites, the automatic orders encompass as much 
data as thinkable (what kind of product is wanted, in what 
quantity and how many portions can be served from the 
remained stock). Thus, the distribution way can be 
programmed after accumulating and processing the data from 
the diverse selling machines. 
Refining the stock control is hope of the manufacturers, 
retailers and logistic service supplier too, then they could 
advantage by the better estimate and prediction (production 
plan, distribution ways), by the decrease of distribution and 
production budgets. 
So, outside a GPS system, it needs a straight, real-time and 
long-range communication and information transmission 
among the solo units, the provider and the sole trucks of the 
provider. A sole selling machine should capable to show its 
data. This automatic alarming and re-ordering system may be 
used in smart households for refining the stock control in the 
storeroom or in the fridge, and for supplying input for the real 
shop list. 
As a whole, all the particular applications have the same 
real profits as charge lessening, better organization and better 
data for choosing, and the practical control of procedures 
tending to cumulative efficacy. 
Thoughts  of a road watching application and the dock 
booking system essentially belongs to the opinion of navy 
organization - all these collected looked to be relatively 
applicable for two main reasons. First, numerous application 
previously exist and are applied, as GPS based navigation 
system, telematics systems or dock booking systems. Instead, 
most of the corporations considers needed in having these 
applications or systems for the easier association and more 
effective accomplishment of the conveyance procedures. 
VII. 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SUPPORT OF 
SUSTAINABLE FOOD CHOICES 
Nowadays, attentions to application for data on agriculture 
and food choices are rising. Many local and international 
associations, events, and papers are developed to support its 
advance [60].  
This kind of ingesting is a vital form of political 
commotion. A concentration sustainable ingesting may lead 
customers towards specific farming. Cohen  [61] lists five 
contradictions intrinsic in the perception of sustainable 
ingesting: it encounters the universal delusion of customer 
dominion that occurs in most industrialized countries; the 
efforts to generate a distinct space for examination of 
sustainable ingesting are challenged by labors to place it in 
sustainable production area; superior ingesting efficiency and 
the 
development 
of 
technically 
"green" 
customer 
predilections together loan themselves to unwanted ricochet 
things; customer policymaking in greatest industrial countries 
is actual muddled and controlling answerability is fragmented; 
and public explanations of "customer interest" do not usually 
approve policy programs that intend to reduce the capacity of 
ingesting or the variety of elections. 
Should one attentive in sustainable ingesting always 
choose organic, regardless of how it was created and 
qualified? The honestly new growth of large, conservatively 
accomplished, organic farms has produced subjects around 
strengthening. Guthman  [62] pronounces how customary 
organic farms are challenging force to exaggerate their 
operations, which undercuts their skill to practice their 
accurate form of organic farming. Duchin  [63]  designates the 

74
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
use of input-output and life-cycle examines in assessing food 
choices. For instance, Faist et al.  [64] recognize that efficient 
cooling applications had more ability to drive requirements 
than a wholesale change to organically produced foods. Pretty 
et al.  [65] do a cost analysis based on food miles and the 
various charges of conveying food over long road. The March 
2, 2007 of TIME magazine issued that read "Forget Organic. 
Eat Local." Such a note is too unsophisticated, but the cover 
story [66] presented more steadiness. Merger of these 
numerous compound models in decision provision tools for 
customers interested in sustainable ingesting. 
Globalization is an affluence of food choices, but it have a 
bad influence on food safety, security, and dominion. How 
does a customer choose between these options? Epistemic 
distance [67] is significant in setting primacies for customers, 
but how can one successfully progression all the variables? 
Waldfogel  [68] discovers that customer dominion is 
necessary in convinced definite circumstances including 
choices between accustomed objects, but when user want to 
make inter-chronological ingesting choices, for example, 
"authoritarian involvements could advance their conclusions." 
The producer must be sustainably operate before a 
customer can choose an ecological food item. Carolan  [67] 
dialogs about the requirements to make the assistances of 
sustainable agriculture more noticeable to farmers. The 
assistances of sustainable agriculture are much less noticeable 
than those of conservative agriculture. Likewise, the charges 
of conservative agriculture are much less noticeable than those 
of ecological agriculture. What sustainable farmers might call 
"wildflowers" or "biodiversity", conservative farmers might 
demand "weeds". Cumulative the scale of thoughtful, from a 
solo farm to the entire watershed or food shed helps to 
visualize the benefits of ecological agriculture and the charges 
of conservative agriculture. Classification and "food miles" 
calculations are other techniques the corresponding benefits 
and charges can be made more noticeable. Caution is vital 
because of the incomplete viewpoint any one inventiveness 
can deliver. 
Excessive transaction of potential in considering tend to 
use the internet for existing data in a method that develops 
easily criminal. The propensity is to fragment and the 
challenge is how to keep the whole thing together. This larger 
community must be addressed in some way. To get a model 
of an umbrella organization that can exist on the web and 
handle communication is also worthwhile. To move from a 
concept of "no wrong answers" to an available procedure for 
counting the sustainability of diverse food picks is significant. 
This data can be developed over the progress and use of 
complete computer models. 
The internet can be used to advance the expediency of 
ecological food choices, for makers and customers by 
generating online clearinghouses for food objects that enable 
both commercial to commercial and commercial to customer 
interconnection. Cheap tries to assist traceability of products 
will expand the customer's belief in makers and affluence the 
acceptance of these another food chains. Although fruitful 
local food creativities may become, but everybody convoluted 
will progress individual relations with each other. So, as 
source chains grow, it is significant to stability local with 
expediency and sanctuary. 
VIII. 
DISCUSSION  
The primary goal of IT incorporation in the food industry 
is to foster food security and extract maximum sustainable 
yield. Once the primary role has been fulfilled, there are 
numerous secondary goals that IT ensures are effectively 
addressed. They include: processing, distribution, marketing, 
and storage  [69]. IT, through the technologies previously 
discussed, fulfills each of these goals successfully. RFID 
ensures comprehensive results from supply management, 
which constitutes a secondary goal of the industry [71]. 
Regions that have incorporated RFID in their supply chains 
receive more revenue from the agriculture and food 
production industry than regions that have not applied RFID 
technology  [72]. Similarly, regions that have incorporated 
WSN practice sustainable farming on a larger scale than in 
regions where the technology has not been applied. After 
production, the other barrier to extracting maximum potential 
from agriculture is the marketing of harvested goods. Large 
scale producers in farming have extensive marketing 
strategies that cover almost ninety percent of their produce. 
On the other hand, SMEs in agricultural and food production 
lack elaborate marketing avenues that can ensure intake of 
their products in the market. The first obstacle is the cost, 
which is a requirement for establishing an elaborate marketing 
network. The other obstacle is technology. Technology now 
offers a solution to its initial problem in that the Internet has 
contributed positively towards establishing global villages. 
Farmers are able to establish first person contact between the 
manufacturer and the user or processing firm. For instance, the 
Kenyan association of coffee growers has established a direct 
link to coffee processing firms in England and the United 
States. This ensures that farmers obtain maximum 
compensation for their products, and therefore represents an 
appropriate motivation for farmers to expand their farms. As 
a result, the potential of food and agricultural production is 
optimized.  
 Food investors who have embraced robotics and e-
commerce receive more income from the food industry than 
food investors not aware of the technology or those who have 
shunned it. Consequently, in countries where these practices 
have been encouraged and are prevailing at significant levels 
have a better economy than in countries where IT application 
is limited.  
Another added value of internet-based technologies in the 
agro-food industry is the improvement of efficiency and 
reactivity from real-time management of supply chains from 
farm to fork  [73]. From a “food miles” point of view, this 
could result in a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and in 
the carbon footprint, e.g., decrease of transport kilometers or 
empty vehicles, less waste, and better decay management. 
The digital divide is a challenge that might hinder the 
applicability of the technologies discussed in this paper. 
Digital divide is mainly the gap between those with and those 
without access to ICT technologies and/or skills necessary to 
take advantage of ICT services. In addition, there is a 
widening gap between the urban and rural sectors on utilizing 

75
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
advanced and emerging technologies  [74]. To overcome this, 
measures should be taken to strengthen informatics in the 
agro-food industry by fostering the development of national 
information capacity and new databases, linking national and 
international databases, and adding value to information to 
facilitate utilizing them at various levels. Also, innovative 
ways of combining ICT-based information sources (such as 
agro-food information systems) with traditional ones should 
be considered. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper gives an overview of major IT-based 
technologies and their impact on the food industry. It presents 
how selected fields of application can make a considerable 
contribution to food industry both in increasing efficiency and 
making data more available and easily managed. It discusses 
how these technologies can be integrated to enhance safety 
and quality of food products and provide advantages such as 
mobility, transparency and autonomy. The example 
technologies are mainly built on networked devices or utilize 
networks for communication. However, much additional 
work still should be done for a large scale integrated 
communication and scalable coordination throughout the 
agro-food networks.  
Traditional industrial food manufacture has the objective 
of maximizing productivity and income. The motivation for 
acceptance of sustainable approaches comes first from 
customers who influence significantly on the obtainability of 
sustainable food choices by advantage of their purchases. By 
emphasis on food, ingesting efficiency and green partialities 
tend to very remarkable choices with doubtful sustainability. 
Nowadays, farm smarting problems have been become 
more interesting and important for people. We can divide 
Smart Farming duties in main sections: 
1. Recommending system for choosing the refined 
vegetation based on a databank 
2. Watching surroundings for farms and vegetation - 
recommending system 
3. Barcode/RFID system -Traceability system facilities 
4. Shared substructure 
5. Watching surroundings for animal welfare and sensors  
6. e-commerce 
7. System for inessential and foreign bodies' detection 
Monitoring of product and their change is especially 
relevant for fresh products such as fresh fruits, warm meat, 
and daily vegetables, need monitoring of quality control in the 
distribution chain. Data of quality control is required to 
reserve the product quality during carrying. 
In the last 20 years the structure of agrifood business 
industry has been improved considerably. For a lot of reasons 
such as advances in ICT, enhancing the customer quality 
prediction, nowadays hard functions, low agriculture 
commodity charges, the force of international retails and 
increasing of huge stores, all details of this industry has been 
changed and deformed. The disadvantage of Internet 
technology among SMEs is that the business owners and staff 
have to undergo training so that they can understand 
computer. This is an additional cost that a small scale investor 
aims to reduce by all means necessary. IT exposes SMEs to 
Internet hazards such as hacking and fraud, which can cause 
huge losses to investors.  
Another important aspect of food networks, which is 
discussed in this paper is trade characteristics of a close 
relationship 
between 
customers 
and 
producers 
of 
goods/services using purchasing groups. Farmers can fill their 
agro-food process information forms on farm works, material 
applications, and so on, in their cultivated fields while he/she 
do his/her activities in farm. Using web connected mobile 
phones, the farmer store data in the databank. With this 
information, 
farmers 
make 
comprehensive 
decisions 
concerning planting activities. Wireless technology also 
enables pest control and irrigation activities that are essential 
when pursuing maximum yield. Sensors deployed on the soil 
are able to determine moisture content of the soil. 
The utility of Internet-based atlas facilities have motivated 
home location-based services. Social media service mobile 
and web-based tools to generate communicating platforms 
through which persons and groups share, debate, and adapt 
operator- produced content. Weblogs naturally define a 
private diary, reserved on the web, which can be corrected by 
people with few web edition abilities, as well as blogs to 
increase wakefulness of food goods. An online public forum 
can combine a somewhat large amount of rich, including data 
on a subject. These societies can cover a range of dissimilar 
zones. 
The paper also highlights that there is great opportunity for 
internet-based applications in developing countries. However, 
in most developing countries, strategies should be employed 
to overcome technical and societal barriers that can hinder 
further development of these technologies in agro-food sector. 
Therefore, it is a mandate of the ministry of agriculture and/or 
other governmental authorities to ensure IT techniques are 
being used in the food and agriculture sector to boost 
production and create an extensive market for the produced 
goods. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  S. Samadi, "Applications and Opportunities for Internet-based 
Technologies in the Food Industry," In The Sixth International 
Conference on Advances in Future Internet, AFIN 2014, 
Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2014, pp. 67-71. 
[2]  “Measuring the Information Society Report,” International 
Telecommunications Union, 2015.  
[3]  N. P. Mahalik and A. N. Nambiar, “Trends in food packaging 
and manufacturing systems and technology,” Trends in food 
science & technology, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 117-128. 
[4]  Z. Abbasi, N. Islam, and Z. A. Shaikh, “A review of wireless 
sensors and networks' applications in agriculture,” Computer 
Standards & Interfaces, vol. 36, 2014, pp. 263-270. 
[5]  D. Prajogo and J. Olhager, “Supply chain integration and 
performance: 
The 
effects 
of 
long-term 
relationships, 
information technology and sharing, and logistics integration,” 
International Journal of Production Economics,  vol. 135, 2012, 
pp. 514-522. 
[6]  A. Suprem, N. Mahalik, and K. Kim, “A review on application 
of technology systems, standards and interfaces for agriculture 
and food sector,” Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 35, 
2013, pp. 355-364. 

76
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[7]  M. Cinque, D. Cotroneo, C. Di Martino, S. Russo, and A. 
Testa, “Avr-inject: A tool for injecting faults in wireless sensor 
nodes,” In IEEE International Symposium on Parallel & 
Distributed Processing, IEEE IPDPS 2009, May 2009, pp. 1-8. 
[8]  D. Martino, G.  D’Avino, and A. Testa, “icaas: An 
interoperable and configurable architecture for accessing 
sensor networks,”  International Journal of Adaptive, Resilient 
and Autonomic Systems, vol. 1 , no .2 , 2010, pp. 30-45. 
[9]  J. Von Braun,  The world food situation: new driving forces 
and required actions. Intl Food Policy Res Inst, 2007. 
[10]  M.E. Yüksel and A. S. Yüksel, “RFID technology in business 
systems and supply chain management,” Journal of Economic 
and Social Studies, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011, pp. 53-71. 
[11]  J. Wolfert, C. N. Verdouw, C. M. Verloop, and A. J. M. 
Beulens, “Organizing information integration in agri-food—A 
method based on a service-oriented architecture and living lab 
approach,” Computers and electronics in agriculture, vol. 70, 
no. 2, 2010, pp. 389-405.     
[12]  T. Kelepouris, K. Pramatari, and G. Doukidis, “RFID-enabled 
traceability in the food supply chain,” Industrial Management 
& Data Systems, vol. 107, no. 2, 2007, pp. 183-200. 
[13]  E. A. Soujeri, R. Rajan, and A. Harikrishnan, “Design of a 
zigbee-based RFID network for industry applications,” 
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Security of 
information and networks. ACM, 2009, pp. 111-116.   
[14]  A. Sarac, N. Absi, and S. Dauzère-Pérès, “A literature review 
on the impact of RFID technologies on supply chain 
management,” International Journal of Production Economics, 
vol. 128, no. 1, 2010, pp. 77-95. 
[15]  J. Fontanella, “Finding the ROI in RFID,” Supply Chain 
Management Review, vol. 8, no. 1, 2004, pp. 13-16. 
[16]  L. Theuvsen and T.Hollmann-Hespos, 2005, The Economics 
of  raceability: A Model of Investments in Tracking and 
Tracing Systems in Agriculture and the Food Industry, Vila 
Real (Portugal), pp. 914-921. 
[17]  J. H. Trienekens and J. G. A. J.  van der Vorst, 2006. 
Traceability in food supply chains. Wageningen Academic 
Publishers, Wageningen, pp. 439–470. 
[18]  M. Fritz and G. Schiefer, “Tracking, tracing and business 
process interests in food commodities: a multi-level decision 
complexity,” International Journal of Production Economics 
vol 117, no. 2, pp. 317–329, Feb.. 2009. 
[19]  K. Sugahara, “Farming Diary System using Internet-enabled 
cellular phones”. In Internet Workshop 2001, Proceeding II 
Applications. pp. 247-252. 
[20]  K. Butner, “The smarter supply chain of the future,” Strategy 
& Leadership, vol. 38, no. 1, 2010, pp. 22-31. 
[21]  X.Zhu, S. K. Mukhopadhyay, and H. Kurata, “A review of 
RFID technology and its managerial applications in different 
industries,” 
Journal 
of 
Engineering 
and 
Technology 
Management, vol. 29, no. 1, 2012, pp. 152-167. 
[22]  N. P. Mahalik, “Processing and packaging automation systems: 
a review,” Sensing and Instrumentation for Food Quality and 
Safety, vol. 3, no. 1, 2009, pp. 12-25. 
[23]  M. J. Meixell, “Quantifying the value of web services in 
supplier networks,” Industrial Management & Data Systems, 
vol. 06, no. 3, 2006, pp. 407-422. 
[24]  R. A. Tabile et al., “Design and development of the architecture 
of an agricultural mobile robot,” Engenharia Agricola, vol. 31, 
no. 1, 2011, pp. 130-142. 
[25]  A. C. Vias, “Bigger stores, more stores, or no stores: paths of 
retail restructuring in rural America,” Journal of Rural Studies, 
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 303-318, July 2004.  
[26]  G. Schiefer, “New technologies and their impact on the agri-
food sector: an economists view. Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture,” Industrial Management & Data Systems 106.1, 
2006, pp. 5-20. 
[27]  P. Wang and A. Watts, “Formation of buyer-seller trade 
etworks in a quality-differentiated product market,” Canadian 
Journal of Economics,  2006, pp. 971-1004. 
[28]  K. Myoung-Soo and A. Jae-Hyeon, “A Model for Buyer's Trust 
in the E-marketplace,” Proceedings of ICEC'05, August 15-17, 
2005, Xi'an, China. 
[29]  L. Ruiz-Garcia, P. Barreiro, and J. I. Robla, “Performance of 
ZigBee-based wireless sensor nodes for real-time monitoring 
of fruit logistics,” Journal of Food Engineering, vol. 87, no. 3, 
2008, pp. 405-415. 
[30]  A. Testa, M. Coronato, and J. C. Augusto, “Static verification 
of wireless sensor networks with formal methods,” In Signal 
Image Technology and Internet Based Systems (SITIS), 2012 
Eighth International Conference on, IEEE, November 2012, 
pp. 587-594. 
[31]  M. C. Cinque, D. Di Martino, and A. Catello Testa, “An 
effective approach for injecting faults in wireless sensor 
network operating systems,” Computers and Communications 
(ISCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on. June 2010. 
[32]  Baggio, “Wireless sensor networks in precision agriculture,” 
ACM Workshop on Real-World Wireless Sensor Networks 
(REALWSN 2005), Stockholm, Sweden. 2005. 
[33]  J. H. Shin, W. S. Hahn, and B. W. Lee, “Development of 
greenhouse control environment analysis system on World 
Wide Web,” Second European Conference of the European 
Federation for Information Technology in Agriculture, Food 
and the Environment, 27-30 September, 1999, Bonn, Germany, 
pp. 83-87. 
[34]  S. Nonomiya and T. Kouno, “Internet remote camera system 
and its application in agriculture,” Second European 
Conference of the European Federation for Information 
Technology in Agriculture, Food and the Environment, 27-30 
September, 1999, Bonn, Germany, pp. 75-81. 
[35]  W. Rossing,“Electronic animal identification. Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture,” (Special Issue), 1999. 
[36]  I. Thysen and P. K. Haneveld, “Evading murphy: A sensor 
network deployment in precision agriculture,” O teu-Delft, 
Xuño 2007.  
[37]  T. Kalaivani, A. Allirani, and P. Priya, “A survey on Zigbee 
based wireless sensor networks in agriculture,” Trendz in 
Information Sciences and Computing (TISC), 2011 3rd 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2011. 
[38]  D.Westerman, P. Spence, and B. Van Der Heude, “A social 
network as information: The effect of system generated reports 
of connectedness on credibility on Twitter,” Computers in 
Human Behavior, 28(1), pp. 199-206. 
[39]  Kietzmann J.H., Hermkens K., McCarthy I.P. and Silvestre 
B.S., “Social media? Get serious! Understanding the functional 
building blocks of social media. Business Horizons,” 54(3), pp. 
241-251. 
[40]  W. G. Mangold and D. J. Faulds, “Social media: The new 
hybrid element of the promotion mix. Business Horizons” vol. 
52, pp. 357-365. 
[41]  B. Weinberg and E. Pehlivan, “Soical spending: Managning 
the social mix. Business Horizons,” 54, pp. 275-282. 
[42]  Allotment Veg Growing, Retrieved September 2, 2015 from 
http://www.allotment.org.uk. 
[43]  Allrecipes, 2011. Retrieved September 2, 2015 from 
http://Allrecipes.com. 
[44]  JustEat, 2011. Retrieved September 2, 2015 from http:// 
www.just-eat.co.uk . 
[45]  Urbanspoon, 2011. Retrieved September 2, 2015 from 
http://www.urbanspoon.com. 

77
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[46]  EatPost, 
2011. 
Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
http://www.eatpost.com. 
[47]  R. Kwai Fun and C. Wagner , 2008. Weblogging: A study of 
social computing and its impact on organizations. Decision 
Support Systems 45, 242-250. 
[48]  O. Thring, 2015. Benefit of the (red) sprout. Guardian.co.uk 
Word of Mouth Blog, [Blog] 28 September. Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/ 
lifeandstyle/wordofmouth. 
[49]  M. Wainwright, 2015. Harry Ramsden's famous original fish 
and chip shop faces closure after losses. Guardian.co.uk Word 
of Mouth Blog, [Blog] 30 September. Retrieved September 2, 
2015 
from 
http:// 
www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/ 
wordofmouth. 
[50]  McDonaldsCorps, 2015, 28 September. Happy Cyber Monday! 
Scoring any good deals today? It's chilly in McDonald land so 
I'm gonna shop w/a McCafe Hot Chocolate in hand. :) [Twitter 
post]. Retrieved September 2, 2015 from http://twitter.com/ 
#!/McDonaldsCorp> 
[51]  BurgerKing, 2011, 28 September. Through our BK CROWN 
Program, kids can learn about the National Parks Conservation 
Association. What's your favourite park? [Twitter post]. Re 
trieved September 2, 2015 from http:// http://twitter.com/ 
#!/BurgerKing> 
[52]  Fastfoodie, 2015, 30 September. [Twitter Post]. Retrieved 
September 2, 2015 from http://twitter.com/#!/fastfoodie> 
[53]  Food.com, 2015, 30 September. [Twitter Post]. Retrieved 
September 2, 2015 from http://twitter.com/#!/Fooddotcom> 
[54]  IrishFoodies, 2015, 30 September. [Twitter Post]. Retrieved 
September 2, 2015 from (http://twitter.com/#!/IrishFoodies> 
[55]  Becketts farm, 2015, 30 September. [Twitter Post]. Retrieved 
September 2, 2015 from http://twitter.com/#!/BeckettsFarm> 
[56]  Camp Cupcake, 2015, 30 September. [Facebook Update] 
Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
http://www.facebook.com/campcupcakecakes> 
[57]  Farmers weekly, 2015c, 30 September. [Facebook Update] 
Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
https://www.facebook.com/farmersweeklyuk> 
[58]  Dairy Farming UK , 2015, 30 September. [Facebook Update] 
Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
https://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=6220759330#!/gro
up.php?gid=41237147430> 
[59]  Farming, 2015, 30 September. [Facebook Update] Retrieved 
September 
2, 
2015 
from 
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Farming/1021816?sk=info> 
[60]  D. Stolle et al., Politics in the Supermarket: Policitical 
Consumerism as a Form of Political Participation, International 
Political Science Review, Volume 26, Number 3, 2005, pp. 25-
269. 
[61]  M. J. Cohen, Sustainable Consumption Research as 
Democratic Expertise, Journal of Consumer Policy, Springer 
Verlag, Volume 29, 2006, pp. 67-77.  
[62]  J. Guthman, The trouble with 'organic lite' in California: a 
rejoinder to the 'conventionalisation' debate, Sociologia 
Ruralis, Volume 44, Number 3, 2004, pp. 3-16. 
[63]  F. Duchin, Sustainable Consumption of Food: A Framework 
for Analyzing Scenarios about Changes in Diets, Journal of 
Industrial Ecology, MIT Press, Volume 9, Number 1-2, 2005, 
pp. 99-114. 
[64]  M. Faist et al., The impact of household food consumption on 
resource and energy management, International Journal of 
Environment and Pollution, Volume 15, Number 2, 2001, pp. 
181-199. 
[65]  J. N. Pretty et al., Farm costs and food miles: An assessment of 
the full cost of the UK weekly food basket, Food Policy, 
Volume 30, 2005, pp. 1-19. 
[66]  J. Cloud, Eating Better Than Organic, TIME Magazine, Time 
Inc., March 2, 2007. http://www.time.com/time/magazine 
[67]  M. S. Carolan, Do You See What I See? Examining the 
Epistemic 
Barriers 
to 
Sustainable 
Agriculture, 
Rural 
Sociology, Volume 71, Number 2, 2006, pp. 232-260. 
[68]  J. Waldfogel, Does Consumer Irrationality Trump Consumer 
Sovereignty?, Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 87, 
Number 4, September 2005, pp. 691-696. 
[69]  R. Doluschitz, 2004. Der Beitrag der Informationstechnologie 
zu 
Produktionsmanagement, 
Qualitatssicherung 
und 
Ruckverfolgbarkeit in der Agro-Food-Chain - Notwendigkeit, 
Strategien 
und 
Perspektiven: 
In: 
FAT-Schriftenreihe, 
Agroscope FAT Tanikon/CH, 2004, H. 59, 5-25. 
[70]  D. Restuccia, et al, “New EU regulation aspects and global 
market of active and intelligent packaging for food industry 
applications,” Food Control, vol. 21, no. 11, 2010, pp. 1425-
1435. 
[71]  M. Bolic, D. Simplot-Ryl, and I. Stojmenovic (Eds), RFID 
systems: research trends and challenges. John Wiley & Sons, 
2010. 
[72]  M. Canavari, R. Centonze, M. Hingley, and R. Spadoni, 
“Traceability as part of competitive strategy in the fruit supply 
chain,” British Food Journal, vol. 112, no. 2, 2010, pp.  171-
186. 
[73]  G. Schiefer, R. Reiche, and J. Deiters, “Transparency in Food 
Networks‐Where to Go,” International Journal on Food 
System Dynamics, vol. 4, no. 4, 2014, pp. 283-293. 
[74]  R. Bertolini, “Making information and communication 
technologies work for food security in Africa,” International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), No. 11, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 

