 
 
Functional Layered Architectures and Control Solutions in Internet of Vehicles –  
Comparison 
Eugen Borcoci 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest  
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
Serban Georgica Obreja  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: serban@radio.pub.ro 
Marius Constantin Vochin  
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: marius.vochin@upb.ro 
 
 
 
 
Abstract — The Internet of Vehicles is a novel development 
trend in vehicular networking. Its driving factor is, on one 
part, the high growth of the vehicles number, including the 
intelligent ones and the need to solve numerous problems 
encountered in transportation systems related to safety, traffic 
management, 
information 
and 
entertainment 
services, 
autonomic vehicles challenges and so on. Internet of Vehicles 
extends the capabilities of the traditional Intelligent Transport 
System technologies but also takes benefit from new 
technologies used in Future Internet. It is considered by many 
authors as a sub-domain of Future Internet and specifically of 
Internet of Things. Internet of Vehicles will integrate the 
previous Vehicular Networks and also functionalities already 
developed in ITS.  However, there is no unique definition of 
what Internet of Vehicles exactly is; some concepts and 
architectural aspects are still open research issues. This paper 
is   not an exhaustive survey; it attempts a comparative critical 
analysis of several functional architectures and systems 
proposed for Internet of Vehicles. Recent approaches Fog/Edge 
computing – based systems   and Software Defined Networking 
are also considered. An enriched SDN/Fog based architecture 
is proposed.  
Keywords 
— 
Internet 
of 
Vehicles; 
V(A)NET; 
Fog 
computing; Edge computing; Software Defined Networking; 
Network Function Virtualization. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended version of the work [1], 
dedicated to a comparative analysis of some relevant 
functional architectures recently proposed for the Internet of 
vehicles (IoV). The aim here is not to detail certain 
functions or services, but to evaluate several variants of 
structured layering of functions and possible separation of 
functions among several architectural planes.  
Vehicular 
communications, 
networks 
and 
many 
associated services have been intensively studied, designed, 
standardized and also implemented in the last two decades. 
The driving force has been and still is, the significant 
growth of the vehicles number all over the world, together 
with many problems related to transportation, but also due 
to the market needs of new services available in vehicular 
environment. The umbrella and framework for such 
developments is the Intelligent Transport System (ITS) [2].  
Complementary support networking technologies have 
been developed in this area including the lower layers 
(physical and data link layers for wireless access) Dedicated 
Short-Range Communications (DSRC) and also higher 
functional 
layers 
Wireless 
Access 
in 
Vehicular 
Environments (WAVE) [3].  The IEEE 802.11a/p and 
respectively IEEE 1609 represent a mature set of standards 
for DSRC/WAVE networks. For wide area and high-speed 
mobility, another solution for wireless access of vehicles is 
based on 4G, Long Term Evolution (LTE) technology and 
recently on LTE-A (LTE-Advanced). Experiments have 
shown that the vehicles can operate with the speed of ~150 
km/h. An alternative to LTE is WiMAX (World-wide 
interoperability for Microwave Access). 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET) [4] have been 
defined to support basic vehicular communications types: 
vehicle to vehicle (V2V), vehicle to road (V2R), or vehicle to 
Infrastructure (V2I) in uni-directional or bi-directional 
communications (note that, some authors include V2R into 
V2I type). The basic VANET functional components are the 
On-Board-Unit (OBU), installed into the vehicles and Road-
Side–Unit (RSU) placed on the roads. The RSUs 
communicates with vehicles, can inter-communicate and 
also could be linked to external networks like Internet. The 
main applications and services of VANET have been 
oriented to safety and traffic management use-cases. 
The VANETs have several limitations related to their 
pure ad hoc network architecture (in V2V case), unreliable 
Internet service, incompatibility with personal devices, non-
cooperation with cloud computing, low accuracy of the 
services, operational network dependency and restricted 
areas of applications and services.  Therefore, extending the 
VANET architecture is considered today as a strong need 
and an opportunity. 
31
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Recently, Internet of Vehicles (IoV) concepts and 
architectures have 
been 
proposed as a significant 
enhancement in vehicular communication area. IoV could 
be seen as a global span of a vehicle network [5-9]. On the 
other part, IoV is considered as a special case of Internet of 
Things [10] [11], where the “things” are either vehicles or 
their subsystems. The IoV will connect the vehicles and 
RSUs through different Wireless/Radio Access Technologies 
(WAT/RAT), 
while 
traditional 
Internet 
and 
other 
heterogeneous networks will be used for wide area. In terms 
of services, IoV has as objectives to include the traditional 
VANET services but also will be open for development of 
novel ones, e.g., vehicle traffic management in urban or 
country areas, automobile production, repair and vehicle 
insurance, road infrastructure construction and repair, 
logistics and transportation, etc.  
The IoV can be strongly supported by recent 
technologies like centralized Cloud Computing (CC) 
combined with Fog or Edge Computing [11] [12]; in 
comparison with CC, the Fog/Edge can offer for IoV a 
better time response, more flexibility and higher degree of 
functional distribution, context awareness, reduction in the 
amount of data exchanged between a cloud data center and a 
vehicle. All these features are more appropriate for 
vehicular world in comparison to centralized cloud 
computing approach. 
In terms of management and control, Software-defined 
networking (SDN) technology [13] can offer to IoV its 
centralized up-to-date logical view upon the network, 
programmability, 
facilitating 
a 
flexible 
network 
management and on-the-fly modification of the network 
elements behavior.  
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [14] can add 
flexibility by virtualizing many network functions and 
deploying 
them 
into 
software 
packages. 
Dedicated 
Virtualized Network Functions (VNF) can be defined, then 
dynamically created/used/destroyed, assembled and chained 
to implement legacy or novel services. Challenges and open 
research issues exist, related to NFV and SDN cooperation 
and their adaptation to the vehicular networks requirements 
concerning high mobility, distributed character, aiming 
finally to realize new flexible and powerful IoV 
architectures and systems. 
The large communities of users/terminal devices in IoV 
need powerful and scalable Radio Access Technologies 
(RAT). The 4G and the emergent 5G technologies, based on 
cloud computing architectures (Cloud Radio Access 
Network- CRAN) are significant candidates for constructing 
the IoV access infrastructure [15]. 
Despite IoV promises high capabilities, there still exist 
many challenges, both in conceptual and architectural 
aspects and also from implementation and deployment 
points of view. Many IoV advanced features and integration 
with the above technologies (CC, Fog/Edge, SDN, NFV) are 
still open research issues.  
This paper attempts a comparative critical study of 
several functional layered architectures proposed for IoV, 
including recent ones based on Fog/Edge computing and 
Software defined networking (SDN) - control. An enriched 
functional architecture with Fog computing and SDN 
control is proposed in the paper. Other candidate support 
technologies for IoV, like Mobile Edge Computing are 
shortly discussed. The Sections III and V contains the main 
additional contributions w.r.t the original work [1]. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II is a short 
overview of related work on IoT layered architecture. 
Section III exposes a comparative presentation of some IoV 
generic layered functional architectures. Section IV revisits 
the SDN-based architectures of IoV. Section V proposes a 
Fog-SDN oriented, enriched integrated architecture. Section 
VI presents a mapping example of the generic IoV 
architecture on Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) technology. 
Section VII draws some conclusions and exposes future 
work. 
II. 
INTERNET OF THINGS  LAYERED ARCHITECTURES 
IoV is frequently seen as a part of the more general 
Internet of Things (IoT), so it is of interest to compare how 
the IoV architectures are generally consistent with 
previously proposed IoT architectures.  
Among several architectural overviews and stacks 
suggested for IoT, Al-Fuqaha et al. [10] present an 
interesting IoT overview. They identify several IoT 
elements, i.e., identification, sensing, communication, 
computation, services and semantics. Several variants of 
IoT layered architectures are presented, where the most 
comprehensive has 5-layers:  
• 
Business (BL)- highest layer 
• 
Application (AL) 
• 
Service Management (SML)  
• 
Object Abstraction (OAL)  
• 
Objects (perception) (OL)- lowest layer  
If compared with the classical TCP/IP architecture, the 
above layers are defined in a more general way, but the 
layering principles are still preserved, in the sense that a 
given layer offers a set of services to the upper layer. 
The Object (perception) layer (lowest) represents the 
IoT 
physical 
sensors 
and 
actuators, 
performing 
functionalities such as querying location, temperature, 
weight, motion, vibration, acceleration, humidity, etc. The 
digitized data are transferred to the OAL through secure 
channels. 
 The Object Abstraction layer transfers abstracted data to 
the Service Management layer through secure channels. 
Traditional Layer 2 networking transfer functions are 
included here, based on technologies like RFID, GSM, 3G, 
4G, UMTS, WiFi, Bluetooth Low Energy, infrared, ZigBee, 
etc. Additionally, cloud computing capabilities are offered, 
and data management processes are handled at this layer.  
The Service Management layer plays a middleware role, 
by pairing a service with its requester based on addresses 
and names. The SML supports IoT application programmers 
to work with abstracted heterogeneous objects. It also 
32
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
processes received data, takes decisions, and delivers the 
required services over the network wire protocols.  
The Application layer provides to the customers the 
requested services (with appropriate quality). The AL 
covers different vertical markets (e.g., smart home, 
transportation, industrial automation, health care, etc.).  
The Business Layer manages all IoT system activities 
and services. Using data provided by AL, it creates a 
business model, graphs, flowcharts, etc.; it is related to 
design, analysis, implementation, evaluation, monitoring 
and management (of the lower layers), and developing IoT 
system related elements. Decisions can be taken following 
Big Data analysis. Security features are included. Note that 
the architecture described above is a high-level view only; 
further structuring can be made and mapping on various 
existing protocols. 
The work of Khan et al. [16] also proposes a five-layer 
architecture for IoT, which is similar to the previous one.   
1) Perception/Device Layer (PL): consists of the 
physical objects and sensors (RFID, 2D-barcode, etc.) and 
basically deals with the identification and collection of 
objects specific information by the sensor devices. The 
collected information is then passed to Network layer for its 
secure transmission to the information processing system. 
2) Network Layer (NL): securely transfers the 
information from sensor devices to the information 
processing system. The transmission technologies can be 3G, 
UMTS, Wifi, Bluetooth, infrared, ZigBee, etc. 
3) Middleware Layer (ML): is responsible for the service 
management and has links to the database. It processes 
information received from NL and store it in the database. It 
takes automatic decision based on the results. 
4) Application Layer (AL): provides global management 
of the vertical applications based on the objects information 
processed in the Middleware layer.  
5) Business Layer: manages the overall IoT system 
including the applications and services. It builds business 
models, graphs, flowcharts etc based on the data received 
from AL. 
III. 
IOV GENERIC LAYERED ARCHITECTURES  
Several IoV architectures have been recently proposed 
and discussed. A short critical overview and comparison are 
exposed below. 
Bonomi et al. [5] proposed a four - layered architecture 
for connected vehicles and transportation. The layers are 
also called “IoT key verticals”, suggesting that a given layer 
includes not only classical layer functions (i.e., L1, L2,) but 
rather groups of functions, which could be mapped on one 
or more classical layers. Also, the four layers are rather 
corresponding to different geo-locations of the subsystems 
(vehicles, networking infrastructure, cloud data centers, etc.).  
The bottom layer (end points) represents the vehicles, 
plus their communication protocols (basically for V2V 
communication, using the IEEE 802.11a/p).  
The 
layer 
two 
(infrastructure), 
represents 
communication technologies to interconnect the IoV actors 
(via WiFi, 802.11p, 3G/4G, etc.). 
 The third layer (operation) performs management 
actions; it verifies and ensures compliance with all 
applicable policies, to regulate the information management 
and flow.  
The fourth layer is called services/cloud (public, private 
or enterprise) based on a defined profile coupled with the 
possibility of receiving services (voice, enterprise video and 
data) on demand. Note that this architectural view is a 
mixed one and does not clearly separate the sets of functions 
of various levels.  
Note the partial similarity of the above architecture to 
those described in Section II. However, the cloud layer in 
the IoV is considered as the top layer in Bonomi’s case, 
including the applications and business functions of the 
previous IoT architectures. 
 Kayvartya et al. [6] have proposed a comprehensive 
IoV five-layer architecture, to support an enriched set of 
vehicular communications, in addition to traditional V2V, 
V2R/V2I, i.e., Vehicle-to-Personal devices (V2P) and 
Vehicle-to-Sensors (V2S). Each IoV communication type 
can be enabled using a different WAT, e.g., IEEE WAVE 
for V2V and V2R, Wi-Fi and 4G/LTE for V2I, 
CarPlay/NCF (Near Field Communications) for V2P and 
WiFi for V2S. The system includes vehicles and Road Side 
Units (RSU), but also other communication devices. 
Embedding such a large range of devices makes IoV more 
complex, (compared to VANET), but more powerful and 
market oriented.  
This architecture goes further than only proposing a 
generic overall model; separation in three architectural 
planes is defined:  management, operation and security.  
Such a split is important because it allows later to map 
various existing protocols and functions (e.g., taken from 
ITS) to be more easily mapped on architectural layers. The 
network model is composed of three functional entities: 
client, connection and cloud. The layers are (see Figure 1): 
perception, coordination, artificial intelligence, application 
and business.  
The perception layer (PL) functions generally include 
those of the traditional physical layer but have also some 
additional functions related to sensing and actuating actions.  
The PL is instantiated by sensors and actuators attached to 
vehicles, RSUs, smart-phones and other personal devices. 
The PL main task is to gather information on vehicle, traffic 
environment and devices (including movement–related 
parameters). 
The coordination layer (CL) represents a virtual universal 
network coordination entity for heterogeneous network 
technologies (WAVE, Wi-Fi, 4G/LTE, etc.). It creates a 
unified communication structure for the terminal devices.  
The artificial intelligence layer (AIL) is represented by a 
generic virtual cloud infrastructure, working as an 
information processing and management centre. It stores, 
processes and analyses the information received from the 
lower layer and then takes decisions. Its major components 
are: Vehicular Cloud Computing (VCC), Big Data Analysis 
(BDA) and Expert System. The AIL should meet the 
requirement of applications and services working on top of 
it. 
33
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
   
       
   
 
Business : Graphs, Tables, Diagrams, Flowcharts 
Application : Applications for vehicles and vehicular dynamics 
Artificial Intelligence:  Cloud computing, big data analysis, expert systems 
Coordination:  Heterogeneous networks-WAVE, WiFi, LTE, etc. 
Perception:  Sensors and actuators of vehicles, RSU, personal devices 
 Figure 1. Five-layer IoV architecture (adapted from [6]). 
 
The application layer (AL) contains smart applications 
(e.g., for traffic safety and efficiency, multimedia-based 
infotainment and web-based utility). The AL includes safety 
and efficiency applications (VANET legacy) and provides 
smart services to End Users (EU) based on intelligent 
analysis done by AIL. The AL efficiently discovers the 
services provided by AIL and manage their combinations. It 
also provides EU application usage data to the business 
layer. Currently, it is recognized that these smart 
applications constitute a major driving force to further 
develop IoV. 
The business layer (BL) includes IoV operational 
management functions, basically related to business aspects: 
to foresight strategies for the development of business 
models based on the application usage data and statistical 
analysis of the data; analysis tools including graphs, 
flowcharts, comparison tables, use case diagrams, etc.; 
decision making - related to economic investment and usage 
of resources; pricing, overall budget preparation for 
operation and management;  aggregate data management. 
The architecture is split in three parallel planes:  
operation, management and security. The work [6] also 
proposed a possible mapping between the five layers and 
different 
protocols 
already 
developed 
in 
vehicular 
communications by ITS, VANET, IEEE, etc. The operation 
plane basically contains traditional data plane functions but 
still has some control and management role.  
At perception layer, current network technologies can be 
used for access in ITS and VANET (see Figure 2).  
The coordination layer includes not only TCP/IP 
transport and network protocols but also different solutions 
(with no IP usage). Examples are: IEEE 1609.4 along with a 
Global Handoff Manager (GHM-open research) and other 
protocols proposed at network layer in projects like CALM, 
WAVE. For instance, in the stack there exist WSMP - Short 
Message Protocol and FAST -Fast Application and 
Communication Enabler.  
In the Artificial Intelligence layer, cloud capabilities are 
seen as major contributors, working on top of lower sub-
layer: CALM Service Layer (CALM-SL) and WAVE-
1609.6 service related protocols. The upper sub-layer 
consists in Vehicular Cloud Computing (VCC) and Big 
Data Analysis (BDA) related protocols. They can offer 
cloud services of type “X as a Service”: Storage (STaaS), 
Infrastructure (INaaS), Network (NaaS), Cooperation 
(CaaS), Entertainment (ENaaS), Gateway (GaaS), Picture 
(PICaaS) and Computing (COMaaS). 
Still further research work is necessary, given the 
current unavailability of enough suitable protocols for VCC 
and BDA. Another open issue is that VANETs projects, 
generally, do not have clear definitions of the upper sub-
layer, while some IoT projects are recently working towards 
these. 
The Application layer includes two sets of applications: 
Smart Safety and Efficiency (SSE) and Smart Business 
Oriented (SBO). The current WAVE resource handler 
protocol 1609.1 can be used on the top of these applications, 
to manage the resources among smart applications. The 
Business Layer (BL) in [6] proposes various business 
models like Insurance (INS), Sale (SAL), Service (SER) and 
Advertisement (ADV). The set of these functionalities could 
be further enriched in the future. 
The architecture has the merit to integrate in the 
management and security planes some existing functional 
blocks and protocols (see Figure 2), already developed in 
WAVE (P1609.x), CALM and C2C projects. 
However, the mentioned 5-layer architecture does not 
touch some important and recent aspects in developing IoV 
architecture, e.g., how to distribute computation intelligence 
between a central cloud and fog/edge units (placed at the 
network edge) while cloud-fog/edge combination seem to be 
an efficient and attractive solution for a distributed system 
like IoV. Also, SDN-like control and NFV implementation 
possibilities are not discussed in this architecture. 
F.Yang et al. work [7] proposes a more comprehensive 
view on IoV architecture, based on functional requirements 
and proposed goals, by considering the driver-vehicle-
environment coordination. IoV is defined as an open 
converged network system (controllable, manageable, 
operational, and trustable) based on multi-human, multi-
machine, multi-vehicle, and environment coordination. It 
senses, recognizes, transmits, and computes the large-scale 
complex static/dynamic information of human, vehicle, 
network communication and road traffic infrastructure, 
using advanced ICT technology. 
The architecture [7] defines four layers: the environment 
sensing and control layer, network access and transport 
layer, coordinative computing control layer, and application 
layer (see Figure 3). The work also summarizes the core 
technologies of each layer. In the environment sensing and 
control layer, vehicle control and environment sensing 
technologies are introduced. The network access and 
transport layer use the current technologies available for 
vehicle access and communication (access and core 
networks). 
 
  
34
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
   
 
   
 
AL 
 
 
BL 
 
Vehicular Cloud Computing, Big Data Analysis 
WAVE 1609.6 
(Facilities) 
CALM Service Layer 
FAST 
PL 
IEEE 802.11p, 802.11a/b/g, WiMAX, Eth, 4G/LTE .. 
G-HoM 
MAC- 802.11p, 802.11, 1609.4 
Logical Link Control 
 
WAVE Layer 
Manager 
1609.5 (Comm. 
Mgmt) 
 
CALM App. 
Manager 
C2C Info 
Connector 
Channel 
coordinator 
 
Management  
Plane 
WAVE 
Security 
1609.2 
C2C 
S-IC 
Interface 
Manager 
AIL 
CALM 
 
Smart Safety and 
Efficiency 
Resource Handler/Manager 1609.1 
Smart Business 
Oriented 
TCP 
UDP 
IP 
CL 
WSMP 
IPv6 
C2Cnet 
Network 
Manager 
INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; SER Service ; ADV Advertisement 
 
S-MIB 
HSM 
Operation 
Plane 
Security 
Plane 
 
Figure 2. Five-layer IoV architecture mapped on particular protocols (adapted from [6]) 
 
PL Perception layer; CL Coordination layer; AIL Artificial Intelligence layer; AL Application layer;  BL Business layer;  C2C Car to Car; CALM 
Communication Architecture for Land Mobile; DSRC Dedicated Short Range Communication; WAVE Wireless Access in Vehicular Environment; FAST 
Fast Application and Communication Enabler; LLC Logical Link Control;  G-HoM Global Handoff Manager; WSMP WAVE Short Messages Protocol;  
BDA Big Data Analysis; VCC Vehicular Cloud Computing;  SSE Smart Safety and Efficiency;  SBO Smart Business Oriented;  INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; 
SER Service ; ADV Advertisement; HSM Hardware Security Manager;  S-IC Security Information Connector;   
S-MIB Security Management Information Base 
 
A special layer (differently defined w.r.t. other IoV 
architectural proposals) is introduced, i.e., the coordinative 
computing control layer. Here, the coordination among 
human-vehicle-environment in IoV is considered as a main 
goal. The application layer splits the services in two classes: 
close and open. 
The coordination concept in [7] is based/divided on/in 
two models and, correspondingly, two objects:  
         a. individual coordination model- dealing with the 
capabilities of the pair human-vehicle and assuring 
coordinative computing control in the IoV environment. It 
solves the coordination problems between human and 
vehicle, and between individual object and swarm object. 
The in-vehicle network is involved here. 
       b. swarm coordination model; the swarm object 
consists of all objects of IoV except the individual object. 
The environment network is involved here. 
The vehicle network environment sensing and control 
layer offers the basis for IoV services, including those for 
autonomous vehicle. The environment sensing is the 
recognition basis for IoV services, such as services of 
autonomous 
vehicle, intelligent traffic, and 
vehicle 
information. 
From 
the 
perspective 
of 
vehicles, 
they 
sense 
environment information around these vehicles via autopilot 
system, traffic jam auxiliary system, and sensor system for 
achieving auxiliary driving.  In terms of environment, this 
layer monitors and extracts various dynamic information of 
human, vehicles, and environment through sensing 
technology. It receives and executes coordinative control 
instructions and then feedback result to cooperative control. 
It contributes to the implementations of swarm sensing in 
swarm model. 
The network access and transport layer mainly realize 
the network access, data processing, data analysis, and data 
transmission, remote monitoring and nodes management. It 
implements the inter-connection and information exchange, 
between entities, manages the connectivity resources and 
35
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
balances information load. When it is the case, it can offer a 
stable 
and 
quality-guaranteed 
information 
and 
communication transport. 
The coordination computing control layer performs 
network-wide coordinative computing and control for 
human-vehicle-environment (data processing, resource 
allocation and swarm intelligence computing). This layer 
should include both capabilities to solve the individual 
model 
(human-vehicle) 
related 
functions 
and 
also 
capabilities 
for 
the 
multi-human 
and 
multi-vehicle 
coordinative computing control and service coordinative 
management, to support the swarm intelligence computation 
and various services. This layer should also provide the 
capability of communication coordinated management. 
The application layer is defined to provide various types 
of services. It should be open in the sense that could support 
novel services and business operating modes. The 
application layer can be classified into closed services 
(related to the specific industry applications) and open 
services (i.e., various existing open applications, such as 
real-time traffic services provided by Internet service 
providers or to third party providers). 
The architecture [7] presents (see Figure 3) in a generic 
way, the four layers and their internal components. 
However, the criteria of splitting the entities/functions of the 
components included in the coordination computing layer 
are not very visible, e.g., between the two blocks: swarm 
intelligent coordinative computing and interaction of 
cognitive computing capabilities.  
The homogeneity of sub-layers is low in terms of their 
components. The separation of the overall architecture in 
different architectural planes is not discussed; therefore, is 
rather difficult to see the mapping of different already 
developed functions and protocols (ITS, WAVE, etc.)  to the 
layers of this architecture. This seems to be still an open 
issue of this architecture. 
No consideration about using technologies like SDN, 
NFV, Fog/edge computing (except a proposal of a virtual 
vehicle -VV) are mentioned. A refinement of this 
architecture and more precise structuring would be needed.  
Contreras-Castillo et al. [8] propose a seven-layer 
architecture, supporting the functionalities, interactions, 
representations and information exchanges among all the 
devices inside an IoV ecosystem. The authors claim that this 
architecture (having more than five layers) has as objective 
to reduce the complexity of each layer and better 
standardize the interfaces and protocols used in each layer. 
 
 
 
IoV service: open/close 
Application 
layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordination 
computing  
control layer 
 
 
Transmission and control network 
- 
2G/3G/4G/5G, WLAN, DSRC 
- 
Enterprise/Private network 
- 
Internet 
Network  
access and 
 transport 
layer 
Vehicles sensing and monitoring 
Driver/pasenger 
Information monitoring 
Environment control, Related third party 
 
Environment sense  
and control layer 
vehicle,  
driver/passenger 
third  party 
 
Swarm intelligence coordinative 
computing capability 
     
 
 
   Cooperative control 
         Communication, Service, 
        Vehicle-road, human-vehicle 
Interaction of cognitive  
computing capability 
     
 
 
Traffic status,  
Environment, Social,  
Mobile aggregation,  
Trip structure 
Common service 
support 
         M2M, GIS,  
         Cloud computing,  
         Big data/AI 
   Computing environment 
         Human-vehicle 
                Intelligent 
                Hybrid model 
         Swarm interactions (cloud/edge) 
F
Figure 3. Four-layer IoV architecture (adapted from [7]). 
 
 
  
36
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The interaction model considers the following entities, 
which can communicate to each other: vehicle (V), person 
(P), personal device (PD), network infrastructure (I), sensors 
(S), any device (D) and roadside device (R). Consequently, 
the communications types might be: V2V, V2R, V2I, V2D, 
V2P, V2S, D2D. 
The network model should support collaboration 
between multi-users, multi-vehicles, multi-devices (sensors, 
actuators, 
mobile 
devices, 
access 
points), 
multi-
communication models (point to point, multi-point, 
broadcast, geo-cast) and multi-networks (wireless or wire 
networks with various technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth, 
WiMAX, 3G, 4G/LTE, etc. 
The layers defined in [8] are (bottom-up list):  
1 
User interaction (lowest layer) 
2 
Data acquisition  
3 
Data filtering and pre-processing 
4 
Communication 
5 
Control and management 
6 
Business (highest layer) 
An additional layer is named Security; however, it is 
actually a cross layer entity. 
Note that this “layered”- named architecture does not 
follow the principles of a layered stack architecture (where 
each layer traditionally offers some services to the above 
one). For instance, the Control and management layer and 
Security layer seem to be rather architectural “planes “and 
not traditional layers; they have to interact with all other 
five layers.  
The 
User 
interaction 
layer 
contains 
in-vehicle 
computing systems including:  
a. information-based systems to provide information 
(e.g., on routes, traffic conditions, car parking availability 
and warning/advice regarding risks) to components of the 
driving environment, i.e., the vehicle or the driver;   
b. control-based systems to monitor changes in driving 
habits and experiences and operational elements of the 
driving task (e.g., adaptive cruise control, speed control, 
lane keeping and collision avoidance).  
It is stated in [8] that designing user interfaces for in-
vehicle systems is still raising many new research 
challenges. Note also that this “layer” actually contains 
functions of several layers defined in other architectures 
(e.g., some structured in a similar way as classic TCP/IP 
stack). 
The Data acquisition layer has tasks covering all three 
traditional 
architectural 
planes 
(data, 
control 
and 
management). Generally, it has functions similar to 
traditional Layer 2. It gathers data (for safety, traffic 
information, infotainment), from a given area of interest, 
from all the sources (vehicle’s internal sensors, GPS, inter-
vehicle communication, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), 
or devices such as cellular phones, sensors and actuators, 
traffic lights and road signals located on streets and 
highways. Intra- and inter-vehicular interactions are within 
the scope of this layer. Various access technologies and 
associated protocols are supposed to perform the tasks. For 
intra-vehicle communication, the proposals are:  Bluetooth 
(2.4 GHz), ZigBee (868 MHz, 915 MHz and 2.4 GHz), Wi-
Fi HaLow (Low power, long range Wi-Fi, 900 MHz), Ultra-
wideband (3.1–10.6 GHz), with data rates up to 480 Mbps 
and coverage distances up 1000m. For inter-vehicles 
communication technologies can be: IEEE WAVE/DSRC 
with IEEE 802.11p for PHY and MAC layers and the IEEE 
1609 family for upper layers; 4G/LTE (1700 and 2100 
MHz). 
The Data filtering and pre-processing layer is necessary, 
given that IoV, may generate huge amounts of data, while 
not all are relevant for all entities of the system. This layer 
analyses and filters the collected information, to avoid the 
dissemination of irrelevant information and therefore 
reduces the overall network traffic. Examples of protocols to 
be used in this layer are:  
• 
Xtensible Messaging and Presentation Protocol 
(XMPP) 
• 
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) 
• 
HTTP Representational State Transfer (HTTP 
REST) 
• 
Message Queuing Telematic Transport (MQTT) 
• 
Lightweight Local Automation Protocol (LLAP).  
Several data filtering approaches are referenced in [8], 
but novel intelligent and efficient data mining techniques 
are considered to be necessary. 
The Communication layer performs both data and 
control function at the networking level, given the set of 
protocols suggested as: 6LoWPAN, IPv4, IPv6, Routing 
Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks (RPL), etc. 
This layer should select the best network to send the 
information, based on several selection parameters (e.g., 
congestion level, QoS level capabilities over the different 
available networks, information relevance, privacy and 
security, cost, etc.). Apparently, the traditional networking 
functions are split between this layer and Acquisition layer. 
The Control and management layer is the global 
coordinator that manages different network service 
providers within the IoV environment. Its functions are: to 
manage the data exchange among the various services; to 
manage the information generated by devices: in-vehicle or 
around sensors, roadside infrastructure and user devices in 
the environment; apply different suitable policies (e.g., 
traffic management and engineering, packet inspection, 
etc.). It is not yet clear what intra and inter-domain 
management tasks has this entity. The protocols proposed 
for this layer are:  CALM Service Layer, WAVE 1609.6, 
TR-069, Open Mobile Alliance Device Management (OMA-
DM). 
The Business layer processes information using various 
types of cloud computing infrastructures available locally 
and remotely. Typical functions are:  storing, processing and 
analysing info received from the other layers; making 
decisions based on data statistical analysis and identifying 
strategies that help in applying business models based on the 
usage of data in applications and the statistical analysis. 
(tools such as graphs, flowchart, critical analysis, etc.).  
The Security layer (despite of its name - “layer”) is an 
architectural plane, which communicates directly with the 
rest of the layers. It implements security functions (data 
37
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
authentication, 
integrity, 
non-repudiation 
and 
confidentiality, access control, availability, etc.) to exchange 
data among sensors, actuators, user’s devices through secure 
networks and service providers. The protocols envisaged are 
similar to those presented in Figure 2. 
The work [8] proposes a split of the architecture in two 
planes: operational – containing six layers and the security 
plane, aiming to define the structure to include some of the 
current protocols in the different layers.  
Considering the protocols proposed in [8] to be mapped 
on different layers it is apparent that the Acquisition layer is 
playing the role of access - given that access technology 
protocols are proposed there: Wi-Fi, 2G/3G/4G//LTE, 
Bluetooth, IEEE 1609/WAVE, IEEE 802.11p, WiMAX, etc. 
On the other side the Communication layer includes 
networking protocols like IPv4/IPv6RPL, ROLL, etc. 
Therefore, the two layers could have been merged as a 
Access and Core Network layer.  
The cloud services are located at business level (as 
vehicular cloud computing) while we believe that a more 
natural placement could be as in Figure 2, i.e., under 
application layer.  
Some mixture of “layers” and “plane” notions is 
apparent; there is a lack of enough orthogonality of 
different “layers”. The architecture does not touch the 
integration of SDN/NFV approach. 
Table I shows a comparison of the layered architectures 
exposed in this section.  
TABLE I.  
LAYERED ARCHITECTURE COMPARISON 
Layered Architecture 
Criteria of comparison 
No. of 
(macro) 
layers 
Target 
domain 
Split in  
architectural  
planes  
Mapping of 
protocols  
on architectural 
stack  
Cloud 
computing 
included 
SDN/NFV 
approach 
introduced 
Edge/Fog 
computing 
approach 
introduced 
Bonomi et al. [5]  
 4 
IoT/IoV 
No 
No 
Yes 
(highest 
layer) 
No 
Yes 
 Kayvartya et al. [6]  
5 
IoV 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
(middle 
layer) 
No 
No 
F.Yang et al.  [7]  
4 
IoV 
No 
No 
Yes 
(middle 
layer) 
No 
Edge-only 
summary 
Contreras-Castillo et al. [8]  
6+1 
IoV 
Partial 
Yes 
Yes 
(highest 
layer) 
No 
No 
 
 
IV. 
SDN CONTROLLED IOV ARCHITECTURES 
Recent works emphasize the benefit of using novel 
technologies like SDN, NFV, cloud/fog/edge in the context 
of IoV. This section shortly presents samples of related 
work dedicated to VANET/IoV with SDN control. 
Y.Lu et al. [17] apply SDN control to VANET, to get 
more flexibility, programmability and support for new 
services. The architectural components are:   
• 
SDN controller 
• 
SDN wireless nodes and 
• 
SDN-enabled RSUs.  
The SDN controller is a single entity performing the 
overall control of the system. The SDN wireless nodes are 
vehicles, considered as architectural Data plane elements 
(equivalent to SDN - forwarders). The SDN RSUs are also 
treated as Data plane elements, but they are stationary.  The 
benefits of the approach are proved by simulation, while 
considering some specific use cases (e.g., routing). 
However, a complete layered functional IoV architecture is 
not discussed. 
K.Zeng et al. [18] propose an IoV architecture called 
software-defined 
heterogeneous 
vehicular 
network 
(SERVICE), based on Cloud-RAN technology [15], able to 
support the dynamic nature of heterogeneous VANET 
functions and various applications. A multi-layer Cloud-
RAN multi-domain is introduced, where resources can be 
exploited as needed for vehicle users. The system is 
hierarchically organized (three levels of clouds are defined: 
remote, local and micro clouds) and virtualization 
techniques 
(offering 
flexibility) 
are 
considered 
for 
implementation. The high-level design of the soft-defined 
HetVNET is presented. The SDN control is organized on 
two levels (one primary controller and several secondary 
controllers; each one of the latter controls a given service 
area). A definition of a complete layered functional IoV 
architecture is not in the paper scope. 
A Fog-SDN architecture called FSDN is proposed for 
advanced VANET by Truong et al. [12], for V2V, V2I and 
Vehicle-to-Base 
Station 
communications. 
The 
Fog 
computing brings more capabilities for delay-sensitive and 
location-aware 
services. 
The 
SDN 
components 
(hierarchically top-down listed) are:   
• SDN Controller (it controls the overall network 
behavior via OpenFlow –interfaces; it also performs 
Orchestration and Resource Management activities 
for the Fog nodes); 
• SDN RSU Controller (RSUC) (controlled by the 
central SDN controller; each RSUC controls a cluster 
38
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
of RSUs connected to it through broadband 
connections. The RSUC can forward data, and store 
local road system information or perform emergency 
services. From Fog perspective RSUCs are fog 
devices);  
• SDN RSU (it is also a Fog device); 
• SDN Wireless Nodes (vehicles acting as end-users 
and forwarding elements, equipped with OBU);  
The system also contains Cellular Base Station (BS) 
performing traditional functions (they are also SDN-
controlled via OpenFlow protocol and can also offer Fog 
services). This study does not discuss a full functional 
layered IoV architecture. 
Kai et al. [19] present an overview of Fog–SDN solution 
for VANET and discuss several scenarios and issues. It is 
shown that a mixed architecture Fog-SDN (similar to that 
proposed in [12]) can be powerful and flexible enough, to 
serve future needs of IoV. Again, we note that this study 
does not discuss a full functional layered IoV architecture. 
Chen et al. [20] discuss an IoV architecture and 
solutions based on SDN control. An SDN switched network 
is considered as a core network, controlled by SDN 
controllers. The vehicles are placed at the edges connected 
to the core via wireless data and control paths. The 
architectural planes are similar to those defined in SDN: 
data plane, control plane and application plane. To these a 
knowledge plane is added. However, a full functional 
layered architecture with mapping of different protocols on 
this architecture is not discussed. Also, a fog/edge approach 
is missing. 
V. 
A SDN-FOG ENABLED IOV FUNCTIONAL 
ARCHITECTURE 
 This section proposes a layered functional IoV 
architecture of a heterogeneous network including SDN 
control and Fog computing capabilities. We propose a 
possible infrastructure (Figure 4), which could be a 
horizontal extension of that proposed in [12] for large 
network configurations (based on definition of regional 
service areas). Also, an enrichment of the five-layered 
architecture of [6] is proposed to introduce the functions of 
SDN control and also Fog computing. 
The Data plane includes: mobile units (vehicles) 
equipped with OBUs; advanced RSUs, which could have 
enough resources (computing, storage) as to play also Fog 
node role (F-RSU) or could be regular RSU like in 
traditional 
VANETs; 
base 
stations 
(BS) 
of 
type 
WiMAX/3G/4G-LTE. Note that the BSes could also have 
fog-node capabilities (F-BS notation is used for such cases) 
A fixed network (partial mesh) can interconnect the RSUs.  
 
 
 
 
  
       
 
V2V 
Cloud/Internet 
V2I 
F-RSU 
V2R 
V2V- e.g. Wave(802.11p)/LTE(D2D) 
F-BS 
Service 
area  
V2R- e.g. Wave(802.11p) 
V2I- e.g. WiMAX/3G/4G-LTE 
V2V 
F-RSU 
SDN Control Plane 
Broadband 
communication 
RSU 
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
Service 
area  
P-SDNC 
Gateway 
S-SDNC 
 
Figure 4. Generic IoV system architecture proposed in this paper. 
F-BS - Fog-capable Base Station; F-RSU Fog-capable Remote Side Unit; P-SDNC- Primary SDN Controller;   
S-SDNC Secondary-SDN Controller; D2D- device to device communication 
 
39
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
   
 
   
 
AL 
 
 
BL 
 
Vehicular Cloud Computing, Big Data Analysis, Fog Computing 
WAVE 1609.6 
(Facilities) 
CALM Service Layer 
FAST 
PL 
IEEE 802.11p, 802.11a/b/g, WiMAX, Eth, 4G/LTE .. 
( SDN Data plane forwarders) 
G-HoM 
MAC- 802.11p, 802.11, 1609.4 
Logical Link Control 
 
WAVE Layer 
Manager 
1609.5 (Comm. 
Mgmt) 
 
CALM App. 
Manager 
C2C Info 
Connector 
Channel 
coordinator 
 
Management  
Plane 
WAVE 
Security 
1609.2 
C2C 
S-IC 
Interface 
Manager 
AIL 
CALM 
 
Smart Safety and 
Efficiency 
Resource Handler/Manager 1609.1 
Smart Business 
Oriented 
TCP 
UDP 
IP 
NTL 
WSMP 
IPv6 
C2Cnet 
Network 
Manager 
 
 
INS Insurance; SAL Sale ; SER Service ; ADV Advertisement 
 
S-MIB 
HSM 
Control and Data 
Plane 
Security 
Plane 
P-SDNC 
(policies
) 
S-SDNC 
(regional 
control) 
S-SDNC 
(Fog control) 
 
Figure 5. Functional IoV five-layer architecture enriched with SDN control and Fog computing capabilities 
(extended  architecture of [6]) 
 
The SDN Data plane contains the forwarding nodes and 
can be geographically organized in several service areas.  
The SDN Control plane is organized on two hierarchical 
levels: primary SDN controller (P-SDNC) controlling the 
overall behavior of the network and secondary controllers 
(S-SDNC), one for each service area. The S-SDNC can also 
contain the resource management functions of the Fog 
infrastructure. The P-SDNC is logically connected to each 
S-SDNC via the Control plane overlay-type or physical 
links. The SDN south interfaces between the controllers and 
the lower level can be supported by OpenFlow protocol or 
some other similar protocol. This infrastructure is enough 
general as to be considered as a candidate or IoV.  
Figure 5 shows a proposal to enrich the layered 
functional architecture introduced by Kaiwartya et al. in [6], 
by adding SDN and Fog functionalities, supposing that the 
infrastructure is that of Figure 4. The second layer of the 
architecture is renamed in Network and Transport Layer 
(NTL), showing in a more explicit way the role of this layer. 
The Operation Plane is renamed in Control and Data Plane. 
The functionalities of the P-SDNC can be embedded in 
the management plane, given that its role is to govern the 
overall network behavior (e.g., some overall policies can be 
coordinated by this module). The regional SDN control is 
placed naturally at NTL level as to control the SDN 
forwarders and also the functions of Fog nodes located in 
the access area. Additionally, S-SDNC functions can be 
included in the AIL, to serve this layer needs in terms of 
Fog AI resource control.  
In a complete system the cloud-based services could be 
split between centralized Cloud computing and Fog nodes. 
How to manage this in an efficient way is not solved in this 
paper; it is for further study. 
Note that a complete architectural definition for the 
above proposal is also for further study. While it can be 
mapped onto five-layer architecture described in Section III, 
no details are developed here on how the virtualization will 
be managed and how the off-loading actions are performed 
in order to preserve the service continuity when the vehicles 
are moving. 
 
 
 
40
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
VI. 
MOBILE EDGE COMPUTING - BASED IOV 
ARCHITECTURE 
Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) technology is an edge-
oriented computing technology exposing all advantages of 
edge computing:  low latency/response time, high 
bandwidth, location and context awareness, reduction in 
amount of data transferred from a terminal device to a 
centralized cloud data center and back, reduced round-trip 
time, etc. [21] [22]. The MEC cloud computing resources 
and storage spaces are placed at the edge of the vehicular 
access network (usually in Radio Access Netwok - RAN) 
and are in close proximity to the mobile terminal. 
MEC is a distributed computing environment where 
applications can benefit from real-time radio and network 
information and can offer a personalized and contextualized 
experience to the mobile subscriber. The mobile-broadband 
experience is more responsive and opens up new 
monetization opportunities. This creates an ecosystem 
where new services are developed in and around the Base 
Station.  
The key element is MEC application server, usually 
integrated in RAN, which can provide computing resources, 
storage capacity, connectivity, and access to user traffic and 
radio and network information. MEC offers an open radio 
network edge platform, supporting multi-service and multi-
tenancy. Authorized third-parties may also to make use of 
the storage and processing capabilities, introducing new 
businesses on-demand and in a flexible manner. 
The main standardization organization involved in 
MEEC is ETSI, which established in 2014 the Mobile Edge 
Computing Industry Specification Group. Recently, in 2017, 
the name MEC has been changed into Multi-access Edge 
Computing [23] - to better reflect non-cellular operator’s 
requirements and fixed access case. 
The general MEC architecture is presented in Figure 6 
[22]. The mobile edge host level is the main MEC sub-
system consisting   of two main parts: the mobile edge host 
and the mobile edge host level management. The mobile 
edge host provides the virtualization infrastructure (based on 
Network Function Virtualisation Infrastructure –NFVI- 
coming from ETSI Network Function Virtualization -NFV 
framework) and the mobile edge platform, supporting the 
execution of mobile edge applications. 
MEC has a good perspective as a supportive technology 
for vehicular communication (V2V, V2I, etc.) and IoV [24] 
[25]. Vehicles connected to the distributed edges may 
send/receive information from other vehicles or through the 
network almost in real-time. The mobility of vehicles is 
naturally supported by the RAN. However, not many 
publications in this area exist yet. 
K.Zhang, et al., [24] developed a MEC-based model of a 
vehicular network. Their architecture comprises several 
levels: Virtual Computation Resource Pool- incorporating 
the network and cloud resources outside the MEC; MEC 
level – implemented as MEC servers placed in the RAN; 
RSUs units placed on the roads and mobile unites 
(vehicles). This study does not offer a detailed layered 
architecture, neither aspect of implementation using SDN, 
NFV technologies, except the implicit use of NFV 
management and NFVI to realize the MEC architectural 
stack.  
The main focus of this work is on the computation off-
loading process, to preserve the service continuity in the 
MEC environment. Due to their high mobility, vehicles in 
transit may pass through several RSUs and MEC servers 
during the task-off-loading process, and they can off-load 
their computation task to any MEC servers that they can 
access. Two methods are possible: selection of the target 
MEC servers or selecting (for a while) of a new path from 
the mobile vehicle to the same MEC server (keeping as 
much as possible the same serving MEC server in order to 
avoid too frequent moving of virtual machines).  
J.Liu et al. [25] propose an SDN-enabled network 
architecture assisted by MEC, while integrating different 
types of access technologies. 
The architectural components of the overall system are 
(top-down hierarchical list): Remote Data Center; Backbone 
network, Regions (MEC server + SDN controller, BS and 
mobiles organized in VANETs). The MEC servers can 
inter-communicate via a mesh of fixed network links. 
The layered architecture [25] is less elaborated than that 
proposed in [6]. This one is SDN-like comprising three 
planes (Data, Control and Application) each including 
typical functions: 
Data Plane (DPl): SDN- “switches” (VANET, BS, 
Ethernet); lower layer technologies (IEEE 802.11p, 
LTE/5G, Wire NIC, etc.). 
Control Plane (CPl) 
- 
lower sub-layer: Position/Channel sensing, Flow 
table management, Forwarding strategy; 
- 
upper sublayer: Trajectory prediction, Interface 
sensing, 
Radio 
Resource 
control, 
Traffic 
redirection.  
Application Plane (APl) (in the SDN semantics): 
Topology management, Resource Management, Traffic 
Offload, SDN controller. 
 
 
Figure 6. Simplified MEC architecture (ETSI) 
41
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The interface between CPl and DPl is based on extended 
OpenFlow or other similar protocol. The limitation of this 
architectural proposal is that no mapping on SDN/NFV/ 
and fog/edge approach is discussed. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a comparative critical view of 
several IoV architectures proposed in the literature, focused 
on functional layering aspects.  
Among several proposals, we selected a five-layer 
multiple-plane architecture, considering this model as a 
good and orthogonal approach, which consistently include 
the major IoV functionalities and is giving the possibility to 
clearly define interfaces between layers and architectural 
planes. Another advantage is that the architecture is 
consistent with IoT architectural vision. Several examples 
based on SDN/Fog/Edge approaches are comparatively 
discussed, mainly from the point of view of layering the 
architecture and map different protocols on it.   
In Section V, a modified Fog-SDN based IoV 
infrastructure is proposed by the authors, where the 
associated layered architecture is enriched by considering 
the additional Fog-based approach and SDN distributed 
control. This work could be a contribution towards an IoV 
reference architecture.  
Section VI shortly present some MEC-based IoV 
systems, as an alternative to Fog-based approach. The 
comparative study of MEC/Fog alternatives also are topics 
for further work. 
Future work should be done to allocate and map 
different functions of the general functional layered 
architecture to specific entities of a complete IoV system. 
This should be done based on their different roles and 
placement: terminals (vehicles), RSUs, Fog/Edge Nodes, 
BS, core network, cloud data centers, etc. The virtualization 
challenges and their impact on the architecture are not yet 
discussed in this study. This is also subject for further work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Borcoci, S.G. Obreja, M. Vochin, “Internet of Vehicles 
Functional Architectures - Comparative Critical Study”, The 
Ninth International Conference on Advances in Future 
Internet, AFIN 2017, September 10 - 14, 2017 - Rome, Italy, 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2017/ProgramAFIN17.html, 
[Retrieved: December, 2017]. 
[2] ETSI 
EN 
302 
665 
V1.1.0 
European 
Standard  
Telecommunications series, "Intelligent Transport Systems 
(ITS);Communications Architecture" (2010-07). 
[3] Y. Li, “An Overview of the DSRC/WAVE Technology”, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288643779, 
2012, 
[Retrieved: May, 2017]. 
[4] S. Sultan, M. Moath Al-Doori, A.H. Al-Bayatti, and  H. 
Zedan “A comprehensive survey on vehicular Ad Hoc 
Network”, J.of Network and Computer Applications, Jan. 
2014, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259520963, 
[Retrieved: December, 2016]. 
[5] F. Bonomi, “The smart and connected vehicle and the Internet 
of 
Things”, 
 
San 
José, 
CA: 
WSTS, 
2013, 
https://tf.nist.gov/seminars/WSTS/PDFs/1- 
0_Cisco_FBonomi_ConnectedVehicles.pdf, 
 
[Retrieved: 
December, 2016].   
[6] O. Kaiwartya, A.H. Abdullah, Y. Cao, A. Altameem, and M. 
Prasad, 
“Internet 
of 
Vehicles: 
Motivation, 
Layered 
Architecture, Network Model, Challenges, and Future 
Aspects”  IEEE Access, Special Section on Future Networks, 
Architectures, Protocols and Applications, Vol. 4, pp.5536-
5372, September 2016. 
[7] F.Yang, J.Li, T. Lei, S. Wang, “Architecture and key 
technologies for Internet of Vehicles: a survey”, Journal of 
Communications and Information Networks, Vol.2, No.2, 
Jun. 2017, DOI: 10.1007/s41650-017-0018-6 
[8] J.C. Contreras-Castillo, et al., “A seven-layered model 
architecture for Internet of Vehicles”,Journal of Information 
and Telecommunications , Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 4–22, 2017. 
[9] Y. Fangchun, W. Shangguang, L. Jinglin,  L. Zhihan, and S. 
Qibo, “An overview of Internet of Vehicles”, China 
Commun., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 115, October 2014. 
[10] A. Al-Fuqaha,  M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, 
and M. Ayyash,   "Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling  
Technologies, 
Protocols, 
and 
Applications”, 
 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys &Tutorials Vol. 17, No. 4, pp.2347-
2376, 2015. 
[11] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and Sateesh Addepalli, “Fog 
Computing and Its Role in the Internet of Things”, August  
2012, 
http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2012/paper/mcc/p1
3.pdf, [Retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[12] N.N. Truong, G.M. Lee, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Software 
defined networking-based vehicular ad hoc network with fog 
Computing”, 
 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2015 
IFIP/IEEE 
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management 
(IM’15), May 2015, Ottawa, Canada. Piscataway, NJ, USA: 
IEEE, , pp. 12021207, 2015. 
[13] B. N. Astuto, M. Mendonca, X.N. Nguyen, K. Obraczka, and 
T. Turletti, “A Survey of Software-Defined Networking: Past, 
Present, 
and 
Future 
of 
Programmable 
Networks”, 
Communications 
Surveys 
and 
Tutorials, 
IEEE 
Communications Society, (IEEE), 16 (3), pp. 1617 – 1634, 
2014.  
[14] B. Han, V. Gopalakrishnan, L. Ji, and S. Lee,  “Network 
Function Virtualisation: Challenges and Opportunities for 
Innovations”. IEEE Communications Magazine,  pp. 90-97, 
February 2015.  
[15] M. Peng, Y. Li, J. Jiang, J. Li,  and C. Wang,  “Heterogeneous 
cloud radio access networks: a new perspective for enhancing 
spectral 
and 
energy 
efficiencies”, 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications, pp.126-135, December 2014.    
[16] R. Khan, R. Zaheer, S. Khan, “Future Internet: The Internet 
of Things Architecture, Possible Applications, and Key 
Challenges”, 10th International Conference, on Frontiers 
of 
Information 
Technology, 
2012, 
https://www.academia.edu/35984783/Future_Internet_T
he_Internet_of_Things_Architecture_Possible_Applications
_and_Key_Challenges?auto=download 
 
[Retrieved 
: 
Dec.2017] 
[17] Y. Lu, M. Gerla, R. Gomes, and E. Cerqueira,  “Towards 
software-defined 
VANET: 
Architecture 
and 
services”,  
MedHocNet.2014.6849111, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/271472780, 
[Retrieved:April, 2017]. 
[18] K. Zeng, L. Hou, H. Meng, Q. Zheng, and N. Lu,   “Soft-
Defined Heterogeneous Vehicular Network: Architecture and 
Challenges”, IEEE Network, vol. 30,  pp.72-79, July/August 
2016.  
[19] K. Kai, W. Cong, and L. Tao, "Fog computing for vehicular 
Ad-hoc networks:paradigms, scenarios, and issues", The 
Journal 
of 
China 
Universities 
of 
Posts 
and 
42
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Telecommunications, 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/10058885, 
http://jcupt.bupt.edu.cn, 
23(2), 
pp.56–65, 
April 
2016, 
[Retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[20] J. Chen, H. Zhou, N. Zhang, P. Yang, L. Gui, and X. 
Shen, ”Software defined Internet of vehicles: architecture, 
challenges and solutions”, Journal of Communications and 
Information Networks Vol. 1, Issue (1): pp.14-26,    2016, 
DOI: 10.11959/j.issn.2096-1081.2016.002. 
[21] M. Patel et al., “Mobile-Edge Computing – Introductory 
Technical 
White 
Paper”, 
https://portal.etsi.org/Portals/0/TBpages/MEC/Docs/Mobile-
edge_Computing_-
Introductory_Technical_White_Paper_V1%2018-09-
14.pdf/01.01.01_60/gs_MEC001v010101p.pdf  [Retrieved: 
December, 2017].   
[22] “Mobile edge computing (MEC); Framework and reference 
architecture,” ETSI, Sophia Antipolis, France, Mar. 2016. 
Available: 
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/MEC/001_099/003/01.01.
01_60/gs_MEC003v010101p.pdf  [Retrieved: January , 
2018]. 
[23] T. Taleb,K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and 
Dario Sabella, "On Multi-Access Edge Computing: A Survey 
of the Emerging 5G Network Edge Cloud Architecture and 
Orchestration", IEEE Comm. Surveys &Tutorials, Vol19, 
No.3, pp.1657-1681, 2017 
[24] K. Zhang, Y. Mao, S. Leng,Y. He, and Y. Zhang, "Mobile-
Edge Computing for Vehicular Networks- A Promising 
Network Paradigm with Predictive Off-Loading", IEEE 
vehicular technology magazine, pp.36-44, June 2017. 
[25] J. Liu, J. Wan, B. Zeng, Q. Wang, H. Song, and M. Qiu, "A 
Scalable and Quick-Response Software Defined Vehicular 
Network Assisted by Mobile Edge Computing", IEEE 
Communications Magazine, pp.94-100, July 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

