47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Holistic Stress Intervention Online System 
- Designing for Self-help through Multiple Help
Åsa Smedberg 
The Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
asasmed@dsv.su.se 
Hélène Sandmark 
School of Health, Care and Social Welfare 
Division of Public Health Sciences 
Mälardalen University 
Västerås, Sweden 
helene.sandmark@mdh.se 
 
 
Abstract—E-health has undergone many changes during the 
years. One is the development of web-based self-help services for 
patients and citizens with health concerns. This article presents 
design ideas of a web-based stress intervention system that takes 
the development of self-help services further. The aim of the 
system is to help people with mild to intermediate levels of stress 
change patterns of behavior and take control of their stressful life 
situations. The system includes not only self-help through 
individual 
work 
with 
stress-related 
issues, 
but 
it 
also 
complements the individual efforts with help from peers and 
medical professionals. The system then becomes a platform for 
combining multiple help online. The system design ideas have 
resulted from research studies and practical experiences of stress 
management and web-based self-help systems. The article also 
presents a map of the system structure and a couple of scenarios 
to illustrate in what ways the system usage can be characterized 
by multiple help online and a holistic approach to stress 
intervention. The article ends with reflections on how to evaluate 
this type of intervention system. 
Keywords-stress intervention; web-based; intervention online; 
self-help; 
multiple 
help; 
holistic; 
complementary 
support; 
communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-health systems have evolved in many different health 
areas. Both patients with physical and mental conditions and 
citizens with health concerns, such as unhealthy lifestyles, use 
the Internet to search for information and seek help from 
medical professionals and peers. One area is self-help for 
people who experience unhealthy levels of stress and high 
stress responses. This article discusses the topic from a holistic 
perspective. Based on recent work [1], it demonstrates the 
design of a web-based system for stress intervention that 
integrates different complementary functions and actors. 
Studies have shown that many people in working life are 
on sick leaves due to high levels of stress [2] [3]. In Sweden, 
stress related dysfunctions have become the second most 
common reason behind sickness absence [4]-[6]. By changing 
unhealthy lifestyles, people can reduce the risk of getting 
severe illnesses. Preventive healthcare and early interventions 
are therefore recognized as important in order to help groups 
of people from becoming patients of the healthcare system and 
from being forced to sick leaves and long-term sickness 
absence.   
Stress research has since a long time been oriented toward 
studies involving the physiological response (= the body's 
reaction) to stress and the cognitive processes that influence 
the perception of stress. However, the social perspective of the 
stress response has established that people with similar life 
conditions are not necessarily affected in the same way, which 
indicates that stress is caused, at least in part, by a person's 
mind or way of thinking. To change a certain way of thinking 
and to tackle an unhealthy behavior includes promotive and 
preventive interventions and an ongoing support [7] [8]. This 
is where the Internet and web-based systems can play an 
important role through available information of different kinds 
and continuous communication with others. Intervention 
systems need flexibility and to allow people to find their own 
ways through the system.     
The use of self-management intervention systems on the 
Internet today is characterized by information management, 
interactivity and communication. However, the use of the 
different 
online 
health 
services 
for 
information 
and 
communication with experts and peers has not yet reached the 
level of integration and holistic thinking. The article addresses 
this gap. It introduces the design of a new type of web-based 
stress intervention system that considers integration, flexibility 
and individual differences. It includes different ways to 
approach stress, both from a stressor perspective (triggers) and 
a response perspective (stress reactions). However, the main 
focus is on the individual intervention. It also includes different 
sources of help, from research findings to real life stories, 
communication with peers and practical tools and counseling.  
The article sections are organized as follows. To start with, 
background knowledge and understanding of stress, stress 
interventions and Internet self-help services will be presented. 
Thereafter, we will introduce our design of a new web-based 
stress intervention system based on a holistic approach using 
multiple help online. Examples of ways to use the system are 
illustrated through two scenarios. At the end, reflections on 
how to evaluate this type of intervention system will be 
presented. 

48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH AND KNOWLEDGE 
A. Stress 
The concept of stress is somewhat complicated as it is 
defined both as a stimulus, a life event, or a set of 
circumstances, as well as the physiologic and mental reactions. 
For the stimulus part, the exposure, the term stressor is often 
used, and the reactions are the stress response.   
Hans Selye developed the concept of stress in a three-stage 
model of the body's response to stress [9]. He called this the 
General Adaptation Syndrome (GAS). The first phase is an 
alarm reaction, the second stage is resistance or adaptation, 
and the final stage is exhaustion. During the alarm stage the 
body responds to a stressor, which could be physical or mental. 
First the heart begins to beat fast and the release of adrenaline 
makes the individual alert and prepared to take precautions. 
Another response might include reactions in the stomach, a rise 
in the blood pressure, frequent breathing, dilation of the eyes, 
and a dry mouth. To help to meet the sudden danger (the 
stressor), the blood flows away from the organs that are not 
needed to confront the danger, to organs and tissues which are 
involved, for example, the heart, the eyes, and the muscles.  
In the resistance stage of the stress reaction, the body is still 
ready to meet the stressful situation. If this part of the GAS is 
prolonged, the immune system might be heavily affected, and 
attenuated. In the final stage, the exhaustion stage, the body 
readjusts, and hormones are released to help bring the body 
back to normal, to a state of balance called homeostasis. Until 
this balance is reached, the release of hormones continues, 
ultimately suppressing the immune system. 
According to the bio-psychosocial model of stress, it is 
stated that biological, psychological and social factors are 
linked in the progress of promoting health or causing disease 
[10]. In this model, the mind and the body are well connected 
and 
interdependent, 
which 
means 
that 
biological, 
psychological, and social issues operate together to affect the 
health status. The model is somewhat more comprehensive and 
could be considered a development of Selye’s original model 
[9]. The stress response is elicited by a many different 
psychosocial stimuli which can threat the homeostasis, which is 
the ability to maintain internal equilibrium by adjusting its 
physiological processes.  Stress is experienced negatively when 
this imbalance occurs between the individual’s perceived 
demands and the ability to respond to these demands. In 
today´s life the psychosocial stressors are the most common. 
To let a thought or an event be appraised as a stressor, there is a 
perceived mismatch between the demands and the individual’s 
resources to cope with it [11]. 
B. Work Stress 
Stress among employees is a public health issue in modern 
working life. In the western world, there has been an increase 
in stress-related disorders and sleeping problems since the 
1990-ties. It has been shown in scientific studies that the 
number of hours of overtime worked has increased. Work-
related 
stress 
and 
overtime 
work 
has 
demonstrated 
associations with altered physiological arousal, increased risk 
for stress related ill-health, lack of sleep, fatigue and impaired 
performance.  
Also, intense lifestyles with job and also domestic 
demands let people experience high levels of long term stress 
exposures. Persistent ill-health, sometimes leading to long-
term sickness and absence from work, can be a consequence 
of too high stress exposure during a long period of time.  
Overcommitment at work could entail increased risk to 
experience work issues as stressful [12] [13]. Exposure to 
stressful job conditions such as very high workload, infrequent 
rest breaks, long work hours, shift work, and demanding 
interpersonal relationships, can certainly have a direct influence 
on workers’ health. 
C. Stress Intervention 
A healthy job situation is when the pressures on employees 
are appropriate in relation to their abilities and resources. It is 
also about control over one´s work, and enough support. As 
health is not merely the absence of disease, but a positive state 
of physical, mental and social well-being [14], a healthy 
working environment is where there is not only an absence of 
harmful conditions but also health-promoting circumstances. 
The concept of the health promoting workplace can ensure a 
flexible and dynamic balance between the co-workers’ 
expectations and the organizational targets and also the 
employees’ skills and health improvements. 
In stress intervention, empowerment is a central concept. 
The strategies can be concluded as the processes leading to 
increased stress management and better health in different 
populations and groups of people. Empowerment helps people 
to increase control and manage their lives according to their 
needs and preferences. The key question is how to build on and 
reinforce authentic participation ensuring autonomy, feelings of 
value and sense of mastery in decision-making. Learning and 
problem solving abilities are important assets for any 
organization or work site wishing to reach its full potential, and 
empowerment within the individual stimulates job satisfaction. 
The educational approach to stress management is concerned to 
enable people to make informed choices, set limits, and 
increase coping ability. The preventive and promotive 
approach are aimed to achieve behavior changes: Internal locus 
of control is a key factor in efforts to create empowered 
environments and empowered individuals able to meet 
stressors at work and in private life [15] [16].  
D. Evidence for Behavior Change Methods 
The management of health-related problems is a question of 
behavioral change, whether it is via the Internet or face-to-face 
appointments. Individuals usually have to engage in changing 
their lifestyles for example, to be more physically active or use 
self-management to improve their health problems.  
There are many behavior modification methods [17] [18]. 
In a meta-analysis of changing health behaviors via the 
Internet, it was concluded that included studies reported a 
large number of behavior change methods [19]. The mostly 

49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
used behavior modification methods were to provide 
information of the consequences of a behavior in general 
terms, self-monitoring of behavior, and identification of 
barriers and facilitators for behavior. Methods that yielded the 
largest treatment effect sizes were stress management and 
training of communication skills. Observational learning, 
relapse prevention and problem-solving plan, goal setting, 
action planning and feedback all had significant positive 
effects [19]. It has been concluded that treatment including 
self-monitoring of the behavior with techniques including 
intention 
formulation, 
goal-setting, 
feedback 
on 
the 
performance, and review of goals, was at least partially more 
effective than behavior modification treatment without these 
techniques. This was concluded in a meta-regression analysis 
of behavioral change studies to increase healthy eating and 
physical activity [20]. 
E. Self-Help and Different Actors Online 
There are different types of self-help services on the 
Internet today for people with lifestyle issues such as stressful 
lives. One is the Ask-the-Expert service that lets users post 
questions directly to the system to be answered by an expert, 
and the users can also choose to browse the system for stored 
questions and answers [21]. This function in the e-health area 
is believed to offer value to people who need to gain new 
health knowledge and guidance [22]. The users can get health 
recommendations and advice from medical experts [23], 
health service that is also recognized to offer a new type of 
continuous relationships with medical experts [24].  
Another self-help service on the Internet is the community 
forum systems for peers. These community forums on health 
issues have become popular lately and are used regularly by 
patients and citizens with different physical and mental 
conditions [25]. These systems let people share experiences 
and offer each other advice on how to cope with different 
health concerns [26] [27]. Research shows that patients online 
tend to be well informed today, and that they act both as 
producers and consumers of health information [28]. This blur 
between being a producer and a consumer of health 
information and services is also named ‘prosumption’ and the 
user a ‘prosumer’ (e.g., [29] [30]). The online self-help groups 
have also shown to enhance decision-making skills for people 
who are in distress, and to foster well-being, a sense of control 
and self-confidence to manage situations [31]. 
When web-based community conversations for peers have 
been compared to published questions and answers in the Ask-
the-Expert service on lifestyle problems, the two types of help 
services were shown to offer the users complementary 
contents and knowledge [32] [33]. Advice and information 
given in the two types of systems were seen to be of different 
characteristics, allowing people with lifestyle problems to get 
diverse and complementary views of their problems. While 
answers from health experts were characterized by detailed 
descriptions of health subjects, the peer conversations 
emphasized personal experiences and more practically 
oriented advice. By linking the different answers – the ones 
from health experts and the ones from peers in community 
conversations – the users are assumed to benefit more [32]. 
This leads us to believe that a combination of different types 
of health services and actors in the stress management area 
would help people with mild to intermediate levels of stress 
problems change patterns of behavior and take control of their 
stressful lives. To integrate knowledge and experiences of 
medical professionals and peers is believed to make an 
advantage. 
Many people who suffer from stress related disorders 
prefer to get interventions through the Internet, and studies 
have also shown positive effects on health outcomes. There is 
evidence that Internet-based treatment with CBT (cognitive 
behavioral therapy) for depression and panic disorders in 
psychiatric care can be efficient. The Internet treatment is 
effective in reducing symptoms of depression and panic 
disorders [34]. It also makes psychological treatment more 
accessible.  
A systematic review was done of 12 studies in which 
cognitive behavioral therapy for different health problems was 
administered via the Internet [35]. The quality of the studies 
was variable as well as the content of treatment program. 
Advice for self-care with or without telephone or e-mail 
support was used. Most treatments included education and 
training on specific health problem, restructuring of thoughts, 
relaxation techniques, and training of social skills. The studies 
showed a limited to large effect compared with the control 
group that often consisted of patients on a waiting list [35]. 
However, there are probably high rates of drop-outs [36] 
[37]. There is also little known about the participants’ use of 
the web-based stress intervention programs, what the 
communication patterns are like, and what support the 
participants take advantage of. How to make use of 
technological possibilities and human resources in this field 
needs to be further explored. 
III. 
DESIGNING A HOLISTIC STRESS INTERVENTION SYSTEM 
A. Multiple Help Online – Five Types of Help 
The system for stress intervention online that we propose is 
designed as to form a whole of different help services and 
actors who contribute together. The system consists of five 
types of help: Ask-the-Expert, Counseling room, Community 
forum, Exercise programs and Stories told & research results. 
Below, the basic characteristics of each of these five are 
described. 
1) 
Ask-the-Expert 
Ask-the-Expert is where the user can ask medical 
professionals for help and advice on different stress related 
concerns. This type of help can be used both for direct 
questions and also for browsing for previously popped 
questions and their answers (FAQs). This part of the system is 
based on textual communication between one user and a 
medical expert. The user gets a personal answer to his or her 
question through e-mail. When making both question and 
answer (FAQ) public, the question is made anonymous, and 
any personal information is reduced. The process of making 

50
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
them public is handled by the health expert, who also ensures 
that necessary editorial changes are made. 
2) 
Counseling Room 
The counseling room is a chat area in which users and 
medical professionals can meet in smaller group sessions. The 
counseling room is based on synchronous communication 
among the participants. Different predefined topics related to 
stress management can be addressed during these sessions. 
Cognitive behavioral therapy for stress management addresses 
topics such as excessive job involvement, low self-esteem, lack 
of recuperation, work-family imbalance, job mobility and 
competence matching. 
If the user clicks on one of the scheduled counseling 
sessions, information about the counseling session is shown, 
such as time of session, theme of the session, health 
moderator, and if there is room left for more participants. The 
user can choose to sign up for the session, if the group limit is 
not exceeded. At the time of session, the user joins the session 
chat. 
3) 
Community Forum 
Communication between peers is also important for 
keeping up with ongoing stress interventions. Community 
forum lets the users have conversations together on current 
topics in their daily lives, related to sleep, work situation or 
balance between work and family, for example. The forum is 
based on asynchronous communication, and communication 
can therefore take place whenever the users have the need for 
it. The community normally needs a moderator, but the role of 
the moderator differs from the one in the counseling room. The 
community conversations will not be steered by the moderator 
in the same way; instead the main role of the moderator will be 
to monitor the conversations and interfere only if negative 
online behavior occurs or if advice is given that is believed to 
cause harm to the user. 
The web communication with peers can help people get 
new insights and encouragement to develop and maintain new 
habits. It supports the idea of ongoing social support as an 
important means for dealing with new habits. 
4) 
Exercise Programs 
The fourth help service of the system is the exercise 
programs. Depending on the stress issue, there are different 
available exercises that the users can do on their own. 
Reflection exercises on work or study situation, relaxation 
techniques and abdominal breathing exercises to ease physical 
tensions are examples. The exercises are presented in textual, 
audio and video format, depending on the purpose of the 
exercise. 
Below is an example of video demonstration of a relaxation 
exercise (see Fig. 1). The video demonstration illustrates how 
one can perform the exercise while sitting on one’s office chair 
at work. The exercise in the example takes only a few minutes.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a video-demonstrated exercise 
5) 
Stories Told & Research Results 
The last function of the system is about giving the users 
access to stress-related research results and real-life stories told 
by others who are, or have been, in similar situations. This part 
of the system is mainly based on storage and retrieval of textual 
information, but can also be illustrated in the form of audio 
recordings. By letting the users access other people’s real-life 
stories together with the comments and advice from medical 
professionals, the users can learn to see their own situations 
clearer. It also aims at helping to reduce stigmatization.  
B. Stress Intervention Areas 
The holistic design is also based on a set of interrelated 
stress intervention areas. There are different areas that need to 
be addressed in order to ease the stress levels of the users. The 
system’s multiple help is therefore structured in accordance 
with four main stress intervention areas: sleep, work/studies, 
balance in life and physical wellbeing. A mockup design of 
this structure is seen on next page (see Fig. 2). The stress 
intervention areas are introduced in the following sub sections. 
1) 
Sleep 
It has been concluded that stress is strongly linked to 
disturbed sleep, insomnia and impaired awakening. The 
inability to relax and to let work issues act as stressors is 
probably an important link in the relation between stress and 
sleep. The quality of sleep has thus shown to be of great 
importance for the onset of stress-related dysfunctions as well 
as the recovery. It is therefore an impending risk that a person 
with high levels of stress ends up in a negative loop of 
increased sleeping disturbances and high level of stress. 
Assessments of sleeping quality and insomnia and exposure to 
stress as well as the effects of interventions need to be further 
investigated.  
2) 
Work/Studies 
An overcommitment at work could entail increased risk to 
experience work issues as stressful [12] [13]. Exposure to 
stressful job conditions such as heavy workload, infrequent rest 
breaks, long work hours, shift work, and interpersonal 
relationships, can certainly have a direct influence on workers’ 
health. 
Overcommitted 
co-workers 
often 
suffer 
from 
inappropriate perceptions of demands and fail in their coping  

51
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2.  Mockup design of the stress intervention system showing the multiple help functions and stress intervention areas. 
ability. Also, perfectionists have been described as people who 
are highly responsive to stress, and they tend to generate 
extensive stress for themselves [38]. Concern over mistakes 
and automatic thoughts of perfectionism are examples of things 
that can increase the level of stress. 
Both work and studies nowadays include a great amount of 
flexibility and ability to stay connected independently of time 
and space. In general, this is a positive development since it 
allows for distance work and studies. But at the same time it 
increases the risk of having more people ending up in active 
work and study lives without boundaries. To be able to 
negotiate about expectations regarding availability, and to set 
limits, are important for a healthy work and study life [39]. 
3) 
Balance in Life 
Stressors related to occupational work such as a frustrating 
work situation or a work-family imbalance are often major 
causes of strain, and mental ill-health, as well as psychosomatic 
conditions [5] [40]. Especially job strain with exposure to 
stressful job conditions could certainly be a health hazard to 
those who have additional strain from family life.  Perceptual 
distortion can prevent people from accurately assess cost–gain 
relations and to set limits [12]. 
4) 
Physical Wellbeing 
Responses to stress are often manifested in body tension. 
Regarding individual interventions in the area of dysfunction 
due to negative stress exposure, progressive muscle relaxation 
was originally designed by Jacobson to guide people through 
successive tensing and relaxation of the body muscle groups 
from toe to head to achieve overall body relaxation [41]. This 
process is easy to learn and teach, safe, non-threatening and 
non-competitive. Since then it has been concluded that the 
effectiveness of the interventions varied according to the 
health-outcome measure used. Cognitive-behavioral skills 
were more effective for psychological outcomes, whereas 
muscle relaxation techniques were more effective for 
physiological outcomes. Using a combination of techniques; 
muscle relaxation and cognitive-behavioral skills seemed to be 
more effective across outcome measures than using a single 
technique. Deep, diaphragmatic breathing is known to 
counteract the fight or flight response symptoms that are often 
associated with anxiety and negative reactions on stress 
exposure. Also meditation can be used to counteract stressful 
situations, as it is a technique to develop concentration and 
awareness to produce a calming effect. Here, diaphragmatic 
breathing is central to any meditation practice. It has been 
found that there could be a lowering of blood pressure during 
deep breathing, which is interesting to consider in stress 
management [41]-[44]. 
C. A Holistic Design with Multiple Help Integration 
The stress intervention system proposed in this article 
applies the concept of multiple help online for different stress 
intervention 
areas. 
From 
this, 
it 
follows 
that 
peer 
conversations, questions to as well as answers from medical 
experts, counseling sessions, research results, life stories and 
exercises are available in each of the stress intervention areas. 
The system also focuses on keeping it together, allowing the 

52
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
different parts to be linked together. This idea is rooted in 
systems thinking.  
In systems thinking, not only the separate objects of the 
system but also the relations between the objects play an 
important role for the system [45]. Even though we cannot 
determine the output from a certain input in complex systems, 
there are certainly connections that make the subsystems affect 
the performance of each other. The holistic properties of a 
system are based on the subsystems working together as to 
form a whole [45] [46]. A way to categorize relations is to 
look at the way they affect the involved subsystems. 
Symbiotic relationships are necessary for either one or both of 
the 
connected 
subsystems 
to 
function. 
Synergistic 
relationships are not functionally crucial, but they increase the 
levels of performance for the involved subsystems. Without 
the connection between the subsystems, the sum of their 
individual performances would not reach the same level as if 
they work together in combined actions, i.e., the whole is 
larger than the sum of the separated parts. There are also 
redundant relations, a sort of relations used to improve 
reliability of a system. 
The web-based stress intervention system proposed in this 
article takes a stand point in holistic and systems thinking. The 
different stress intervention areas aim at letting the user 
choose his or her way into the system based on what is 
believed to be the most urgent stress-related concern. At the 
same time, it is important to offer easy ways to navigate 
between the different intervention areas. The technical system 
can assist in this through links and navigation menus, but also 
the medical professionals engaged in the online system, as 
well as the peers, can support this by referring to other 
intervention areas. In a conversation on sleep, for example, 
there could be references to related conversations on work 
issues within the work/studies intervention area. 
The same idea is applied to the five types of help in the 
multiple help concept. The different help services are linked 
together so that the users can navigate easy between them, but 
also the medical professionals can encourage the users to take 
advantage of other help services for complementary support 
and knowledge. In the Ask-the-Expert answers, there can be 
references to relevant peer conversations that the user could 
join, for example. This is implemented manually to start with, 
by having the medical expert suggesting peer conversations in 
his or her answer. In a future setting, it is also possible to 
implement automatic matching techniques in order to generate 
links to similar stress-related topics in different parts of the 
system.  
All the links that are created between stress intervention 
areas and types of help contribute to the idea of holistic and 
systems thinking. 
D. System Structure and Navigation 
The system is structured in a way as to make navigation 
easy. When entering the system, the four stress intervention 
areas are seen. For each one of these areas, the five help 
services are displayed and accessible. The user can then choose 
to focus on one stress intervention area and activate the 
different help services to learn about the specific area from 
different perspectives and from different online actors. An 
illustration of the structure of the system can be seen in the 
figure below (see Fig. 3). 
 
• Start page
• Stress intervention areas
– Sleep
– Balance in life
– Physical wellbeing
– Work/studies
• Ask-the-Expert
• Exercise Programs
• Community Forum
• CounselingRoom
• Stories told & Research results
• About
– Contact
– Site map
 
Figure 3.  Map of the stress intervention system when the intervention 
area Work/studies has been expanded. 
The system structure aims to let the users navigate easily 
between the different help services. It also supports navigation 
between the stress intervention areas. When activating a help 
service, such as the Ask-the-Expert in the area of 
work/studies, FAQs can be searched for and new questions to 
the medical professionals posted. What is also possible for the 
user to do is to navigate from here to FAQs in other stress 
intervention areas. Figure 4 illustrates this. 
 
Work/Studies –Ask‐the‐Expert
Experts are ready to answer your questions 
on stress related to work/studies.  You can 
simply ask your question here. You can also view 
past questions and answers from experts (FAQs). 
Perhaps you will find answers to your specific questions 
here.
Sleep
Balancein life
Physicalwellbeing
Ask‐the‐Expertin otherareas
 
Figure 4.  Example of design for navigation: Connecting Ask-the-Expert 
services. 
IV. 
SCENARIOS 
Below, there are two short examples of scenarios aiming to 
illustrate in what ways the web-based stress intervention 
system can be used to let the different stress areas, information 
sources, tools and actors work together. 
A. Scenario 1: Chain of Complementary Support  
Eve, 52 years, is a middle manager in a company. She is 
ambitious and has always felt that people around her have high 
demands on her. Today, her employees and family take almost 
all her time, which has led to a stressful life situation with too 
little sleep and unhealthy food and exercise habits.  
Eve enters the stress intervention system by visiting the 
stress intervention area for balance in life and its community 

53
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
forum for peers. She finds a conversation that is ongoing, on a 
theme close to her own situation. She reads the conversation 
for a while, and then adds a posting telling the others that she 
finds it difficult to make room for herself and her needs. The 
conversation continues with the problem of saying no and to 
delegate responsibilities. One peer recommends Eve and the 
others to sign up for an online counseling session on how to set 
limits. Eve signs up, and later she joins the counseling session 
together with a handful of peers, moderated by a medical 
professional. During the session, the medical professional 
refers to an exercise on how to practice limit settings present in 
the help service for exercise programs. When Eve has practiced 
some of the exercises on setting limits, she wants to spend 
some time doing physical training exercises. Therefore, she 
visits the exercise programs in the stress intervention area for 
physical wellbeing. She also starts to participate in the online 
conversations on physical wellbeing, to get advice from peers 
regarding where to buy price worthy shoes and other 
equipment for training activities. 
The combination of different help services as described in 
the scenario can contribute to a better understanding of the 
current situation, and what to do, than if only one of the help 
services was used. Since the different types of services offer 
different knowledge and advice, they complement each other. 
In the scenario described, the expert contributes with medical 
insights and knowledge of what exercises that could be 
beneficiary to perform and the peers contribute with their own 
experiences and practical advice regarding sports equipment, 
for example.  
The described scenario path through the system can also be 
seen in the figure below (see Fig. 5). 
 
Intervention     
Area
Help Service
Sleep
Work/studies
Balance in life
Physical 
wellbeing
Ask-the-expert
Counseling room
Community forum
Exercise Programs
Stories told & 
Research results
 
Figure 5.  Example of scenario path (scenario1) 
B. Scenario 2:  Complementary Stress Intervention Areas 
Johan is a 37-year old man who works with systems 
analysis at a big IT-company. He works very long hours in 
front of his computer. His back has started to hurt, and his body 
is stiff and his eyes dry. Recently, his sleep has been affected as 
well. He finds it difficult to fall asleep and he often wakes up at 
night. 
The first thing Johan does when entering the stress 
intervention system is to open the intervention area for issues 
about sleep. He starts to search for similar issues among the 
FAQs in the Ask-the-Expert service to find out about what he 
can do to ease his sleeping problems. Eventually, he posts a 
question. The medical expert who answers the question from 
Johan presents some practical advice on how to relax before 
going to bed. The expert recommends Johan to have a look at 
the video instructions for relaxation available in the system’s 
exercise programs service. But, since Johan has several 
concerns, the expert also recommends exercises that Johan can 
do at work, both to increase the variety of physical work 
activities when using the computer and to reduce strain on the 
eyes. These exercises are found in the stress intervention area 
for work/studies. The medical expert also recommends Johan 
to visit the stress intervention area for issues related to balance 
in life, to read about research results and to join conversations 
with peers on how to make room for other activities besides 
work. 
This scenario had its focus on the complementary stress 
intervention areas. It showed how the three areas, “sleep” 
“work/studies” and “balance in life”, worked together to help 
Johan gain new insights into how to handle his upcoming 
health problems. 
This scenario path of complementary stress intervention 
areas can also be seen in the figure below (see Fig. 6). 
 
Intervention     
Area
Help Service
Sleep
Work/studies
Balance in life
Physical 
wellbeing
Ask-the-expert
Counseling room
Community forum
Exercise Programs
Stories told & 
Research results
 
Figure 6.  Example of scenario path (scenario2) 
V. 
EVALUATION OF THE STRESS INTERVENTION SYSTEM 
The web-based stress intervention system proposed in this 
article is flexible and uses present human resources for the 
stress interventions; both the users with stress symptoms and 
the medical expertise contribute with their knowledge and 
experiences. In what ways they contribute depends to a large 
extent on their communication about stress-related issues. We 
have also discussed the individual approach to the system by 
illustrating how the users with stress-related symptoms are 
encouraged to move between the different system parts based 
on their individual needs.  
From these characteristics of the web-based system follows 
that the contents of the system is dynamic, and so are also the 
online interventions. To evaluate this kind of system demands 
for a new way of thinking.  
Evaluation has to be based on established evaluation 
questionnaires for self-evaluation of participants’ health status 
(e.g., [47] [48]), but, it needs also to target the actual usage of 

54
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the system and the individual opinions and experiences of 
using the system. The actual usage of the system can be 
evaluated through observations and analyses of logged online 
activities, such as the social activities in terms of number of 
answers to posted questions and answers expressing empathy 
[27]. Different analyses of patterns of posted questions and 
answers will give valuable information about online activities. 
Furthermore, we need to learn what kind of questions the users 
with stress symptoms ask, the way they respond to each other 
by giving advice and different opinions, the contents of their 
advice, etc. [32] [33] [49]. In addition, the evaluation 
questionnaire about the participants’ health status needs to be 
complemented by a questionnaire about their experiences of 
the system.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article has outlined some basic foundation of a new 
and holistic web-based system for stress intervention. The 
novelty of the system lies in the holistic approach considering 
both different aspects of stress and stress intervention and also 
different supportive roles and functions. Not only have 
attention been drawn to self-help through information access 
and exercises, but also to the necessity of having support and 
guidance from peers and medical professionals to ease the 
individual struggle for sustainable new habits and improved 
health. To make the system holistic, web links between the 
different intervention areas and also between the different 
kinds of help are considered. Additionally, the medical 
professionals and other actors in the system can amplify the 
holistic view of the system by making references to different 
system parts. This will let the user navigate more easily 
between the different parts of the system and to use different 
kinds of help in combination.  
Next step is to have the system design fully implemented 
and tested. It is to be evaluated by a test group of white-collar 
workers with stress symptoms. Research studies will be 
conducted on their system usage, such as their online 
communication behaviors, their experiences of the system and 
their health status at different times during and after the 
intervention.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Å. Smedberg and H. Sandmark, “Stress intervention online - designing 
for self-help through multiple help”,  Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2011), 2011, pp. 120-125 , ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9. 
[2] 
M. Henderson, N. Glozier, and E. K. Holland, ”Long term sickness 
absence is caused by common conditions and needs managing”, BMJ. 
2005; 330:802–3.   
[3] 
P. M. Dekkers-Sánchez, J. L. Hoving, J. K. Sluiter, and M. H. Frings-
Dresen, “Factors associated with long-term sick leave in sick-listed 
employees: a systematic review”, Occup Environ Med. 2008, 65, pp. 
153–157. 
[4] 
K. Holmgren, S. Dahlin-Ivanoff, C. Björkelund, and G. Hensing. ”The 
prevalence of work-related stress, and its association with self-perceived 
health and sick-leave, in a population of employed Swedish women”, 
BMC Public Health. 2009; 2;9:73.  
[5] 
H. Sandmark, “Work and family: associations with long term sick-listing 
in Swedish women”, BMC Public Health 2007, 7:287. 
[6] 
Försäkringskassan 
[The 
Swedish 
Social 
Insurance 
Agency].            
Social insurance statistics. Available at (accessed 10 October 2010): 
http://statistik.forsakringskassan.se/portal/page?_pageid=93,1&_dad=po
rtal&_schema=PORTAL. 
[7] 
K. Baughman, E. Logue., K. Sutton, C. Capers, D. Jarjoura, and W. 
Smucker, “Biopsychosocial characteristics of overweight and obese 
primary care patients: do psychosocial and behavior factors mediate 
sociodemographic effects?”, Preventive Medicine, No. 37,  2003, pp. 
129-137, Academic Press. 
[8] 
G. J. Norman, ”A review of ehealth interventions for physical activity 
and dietary behavior change”, Am J  Prev Med., 33(4), 2007, pp. 336-
345. 
[9] 
H. Selye, “History and present status of the stress concept”, In A. Monat 
and R.S. Lazarus, eds. Stress and Coping, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia 
University, 1985. 
[10] G. Engel, “The need for a new medical model: a challenge for 
biomedicine”, Science 1977; 196, pp.129–136. 
[11] J. Siegrist, “Psychosocial factors and stress”, In Encyclopedia of stress, 
Edited by Fink G. London, Academic Press, 2000. 
[12] D. Preckel, R. von Känel, B. M. Kudielka, and J. E. Fischer, “Over 
commitment to work is associated with vital exhaustion”, Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health 2005, 78, pp.117–122. 
[13] J. Siegrist and M. Marmot, ”Health inequalities and the psychosocial 
environment—two scientific challenges”, Soc Sci Med, 58, 2004. pp. 
1463–1473.  
[14] WHO, Ottawa charter for health promotion, 1986, Copenhagen: WHO 
Europe. 
[15] K. Tones and J. Green, Health promotion : planning and strategies, Sage 
Publications, 2003.  
[16] I. Rootman, M. Goodstadt, L. Potvin, and J. Springett, “A framework for 
health promotion evaluation”, In Rootman, I. (ed.), Evaluation in Health 
Promotion: Principles and Perspectives. WHO, Regional Office for 
Europe, Copenhagen, 2001(92):7-38. 
[17] C. Abraham C and S. Michie S, “A taxonomy of behavior change 
techniques used in interventions”, Health Psychology. 2007;27: 379-87. 
[18] S. Michie and A. Prestwich, “Are interventions theory-based? 
Development of a theory coding scheme”, Health Psychology. 
2010;29(1):1-8. 
[19] P. Kraft, R. Botelho, T. Webb, J. Joseph , L. Yardley and S. Michie, 
“Using the Internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, use of 
behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy”, Journal 
of Medical Internet Research. 2010;12(1):e4. 
[20] S. Michie, C. Abraham, C. Whittington, J. McAteer and S. Gupta, 
“Effective techniques in healthy eating and physical activity 
interventions: a meta-regression”, Health Psychology. 2009;28(6):690-
701. 
[21] J. Budzik and K. Hammond, “Q&A: A system for the capture, 
organization and reuse of expertise”, Proceedings of the sixty-second 
annual meeting of the American Society for Information Science, 
Information Today, Inc., Medford N, 1999. 
[22] S. Marine, P. J. Embi, M. McCuistion, D. Haag, and J. R. Guard, 
“NetWellness 1995-2005: ten years of experience and growth as a non-
profit consumer health information and Ask-an-Expert service”, AMIA 
2005 Symposium proceedings, 2005. 
[23] R. Bromme, R. Jucks,  and T. Wagner, “How to refer to ‘diabetes’? 
language in online health advice”, Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(5), 
2005, pp. 569-586. 
[24] J. Marco, R. Barba, J. E. Losa, C.M. De la Serna, M. Sainz, I. F. 
Lantigua, and J. L. de la Serna, ”Advice from a medical expert through 
the Internet on queries about AIDS and hepatitis: analysis of a pilot 
experiment”, PLoS Medicine, Public Library of Science, 3 (7), 2006, pp. 
1041-1047. 
[25] S. Fox and D. Fallows, “Internet health resources”, Pew Internet & 
American Life Project, July 16, 2003. 
[26] D. Maloney-Krichmar and J. Preece, “A multilevel analysis of 
sociability, usability and community dynamics in an online health 

55
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
community”, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 
12(2), 2005, pp. 201-232. 
[27] J. Preece, Online communities – designing usability, supporting 
sociability, Wiley & Sons, 2000. 
[28] U. Josefsson, “Coping online – patients’ use of the Internet”. Doctoral 
thesis, Report 37, Dep. of Applied Information Technology, IT-
University of Göteborg, Sweden, ISBN 978-91-628-7080-5, 2007. 
[29] E. Riessman, “Restructuring help: a human services paradigm for the 
1990's”, American Journal of Community Psychology, 18, 1990. pp. 
221-230. 
[30] M. S. Salzer, “Consumer empowerment in mental health organizations: 
Concept, benefits and impediments”, Administration and Policy in 
Mental Health, Vol. 24, No. 5, 1997. pp. 425-434. 
[31] A. Barak, M. Boniel-Nissim and J. Suler, “Fostering empowerment in 
online support groups”. Computers in Human Behavior. 24(5), 2008. pp. 
1867-1883. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.004.  
[32] Å. Smedberg, “To design holistic health service systems on the 
Internet”, Proceedings of World Academy of Science, Engineering and 
Technology, November 2007, pp. 311-317.  
[33] Å. Smedberg, "How to combine the online community with Ask the 
Expert system in a health care site", Proceedings of the first International 
Conference on the Digital Society, IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007. 
[34] J. Bergström, “Internet-based treatment for depression and panic 
disorder”. From Development to Deployment, Thesis. Karolinska 
Institutet, 2010. 
[35] P. Cuijpers and A. vanStraten, “Internet-administered cognitive behavior 
therapy for health problems: a systematic review”. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine. 2008;31:169-77. 
[36] K. Cavanagh and D. Shapiro, “Computer treatment for common mental 
health problems”, J Clin Psychol, 2004, 60, pp. 239–251. 
[37] T. L. Bessell, S. McDonald, C. A. Silagy, J. N. Anderson, J. E. Hiller, 
and L. N. Sansom, ”Do Internet interventions for consumers cause more 
harm than good? A systematic review”. Health Expect, 2002, 5, pp. 28–
37. 
[38] A. A-C. Chantal, J. Irvine, P. Ritvo, R.  A. Cribbie, G. L. Flett,  and P. L. 
Hewitt, ”Perfectionism and psychological distress: a modeling approach 
to understanding their therapeutic relationship”, J Rat-Emo Cognitive-
Behav Ther, 2008, 26, pp. 151–167. 
[39] R. A. Karasek and T. Theorell, “Healthy work: stress, productivity, and 
the reconstruction of working life”, New York: Basic Books; 1990. 
[40] H. Sandmark, “Job mismatching, unequal opportunities and long-term 
sickness absence in female white collar workers in Sweden”, Scand J 
Public Health 2009, 37, pp. 43-49. 
[41] E. Jacobson, Progressive relaxation (2nd ed.), University of Chicago, 
Chicago, 1938. 
[42] L. R. Murphy, “Stress management in work settings: a critical review of 
the health effects”, American Journal of Health Promotion, 1996, 11, pp. 
112–135. 
[43] M. C Jones and  D. W. Johnston, “Reducing distress in first level and 
student nurses: a review of the applied stress management literature”, 
Journal of Adv Nursing, 2000, 32, pp. 66–74. 
[44] B. Seaward, Managing stress, Boston: Jones and Bartlett, 2002. 
[45] P. P. Schoderbek, C. G. Schoderbek and A. G. Kefalas, Management 
systems – Conceptual considerations, 1990, Richard D. Irwin, Inc. 
[46] C. W. Churchman, The systems approach, 1968, Delacorte Press. 
[47] Karolinska fatigue questionnaire [Karolinska utmattingsformulär]. 
http://www.stressmottagningen.nu/wp-
content/uploads/dokument/utmattningsform.pdf 
[48] T. Åkerstedt, A. Knutsson, P. Westerholm, T. Theorell, L. Alfredsson 
and G. Kecklund,  “Sleep disturbances, work stress and work hours—a 
cross-sectional study”. J Psychosom Res., 2002, 53:741–48. 
[49] Å. Smedberg, “Learning conversations for people with established bad 
habits: A study of four health-communities”, International Journal of 
Healthcare Technology and Management, 9(2), 2008, pp. 143-154.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

