243
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Structuring the EPRs; The National development of Archetypes for Core 
Functionallity 
 
Gro-Hilde Ulriksen 
Norwegian Center for E-health Research – University 
hospital North Norway 
Telemedicine and eHealth Research Group, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø 
e-mail: Gro-Hilde.Ulriksen@ehealthresearch.no 
Rune Pedersen 
University Hospital of North Norway, Section for E-health 
administration 
Norwegian Center for E-health Research – University 
hospital North Norway 
Telemedicine and eHealth Research Group, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø 
e-mail: Rune.Pedersen@unn.no
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to highlight the 
importance of introducing a set of core archetypes to succeed 
with the national consensus work on archetypes in Norway. This 
is illustrated by emphasizing on four important challenges 
identified through the national work with archetypes in Norway 
from 2012-2016.  First, the process of establishing a well-
functioning national archetype organization, including a 
network of competent healthcare personnel to participate in the 
consensus process. This comprises how to increase the pace of 
developing 
these 
national 
archetype. 
Second, 
the 
interdependence between the archetypes and the new electronic 
patient record system (EPR), focusing on the need for 
archetypes to enable developing an EPR system, at the same 
time as an EPR system is required to develop and test out high 
quality archetypes. Third, the development of local archetypes 
at a specialized hospital clinic, including the first attempts of 
using archetypes for clinical practice, and useful lessons learned 
for the national archetype work. Fourth, the need to define the 
number of archetypes to plan the future archetype work, 
including estimating resources for the work, and the challenges 
of governing archetypes in relation to who is responsible for 
what aspects of the archetypes. Establishing a prototype of an 
EPR system based on generic core archetypes may increase 
clinicians understanding of structured EPR. Our research 
questions are therefore: What has been the challenges in the 
national archetype process so far, and how could these 
challenges be met through developing a set of core archetypes? 
Empirically the paper focuses on the national archetype work, 
and the regional archetype organization in the North Norwegian 
health authority. Our qualitative case also includes other 
archetype initiatives in Norway like for instance the use of 
archetypes for clinical practice at the small clinic in the 
Southern and Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority. 
Except from being a status report on national archetype 
development, this paper also contributes to a longitudinal 
interpretive study, related to the development of a large-scale 
EPR system by the North Norwegian Health Authority.  
Keywords-electronic patient records; archetypes; openEHR;  
semantic interoperability; core archetypes.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
There has been an increased focus in Norwegian 
healthcare to improve the role of the electronic patient record 
system (EPR) [1]. This has been an important part of national 
strategies and visions for healthcare since the 1990’s [2][3], 
due to the augmented focus to enable sharing and integrating 
healthcare, as well as organizing information in a more 
structured manner [4]. The increased emphasis on cost 
savings, patient safety, and efficiency in healthcare practices, 
has raised the focus on seamless integration and 
standardization, both within as well as across professional, 
departmental, 
and 
institutional 
boundaries 
[2][3][5]. 
Considerable amounts of resources have been directed 
towards 
establishing 
fully 
integrated 
healthcare 
infrastructures, both from the government, and healthcare 
providers [6].  A central element in achieving such goals are 
interconnected 
and 
interoperable 
EPR 
systems 
[6]. 
Significant improvements of the EPR have been necessary 
for these systems to evolve from being tools for information 
storage, into structured work tools supporting patient 
pathways and decision support [7]. EPR systems have been 
required to be flexible enough for representing specific 
medical knowledge, at the same time as ensuring the need for 
interoperability with other systems [8]. The EPR has been 
essential for coordinating hospital work processes, and there 
has been an extensive need for standardizing the EPR 
content, to facilitate sharing and comparing health data within 
and across health care practices, to reach semantic 
interoperability. This has been a key requirement for 
improving EPR communication [9], to ensure that both 
senders and recipients understand information and standards 
the same way [10]. Semantic interoperability: requires that 
the 
information 
system 
understands 
both 
requests 
information and the information sources. Semantics are 
defined as the meanings of different terms and expressions 
[11]. Hence, semantic interoperability is the way information 
systems exchange information on the terms of shared, pre-
established and negotiated meanings of language and 
expressions [11]. 

244
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Standards in hospitals are useful both to specify 
workpractices, and to define how technologies interact [12]. 
However, standardizing clinical workpractices and routines 
have been difficult to accomplish [13][14][15].  This paper 
builds on two important standardization processes in 
Norwegian healthcare, one regional and one national. In 2012 
the North Norwegian Health Authority established a large 
information and communication technology (ICT) project 
named standardization of the regional ICT portfolio (FIKS), 
to standardize the regional ICT portfolio. One of FIKS’s most 
important roles was to collaborate closely with the largest 
EPR vendor in Norway, on developing a new open Integrated 
Care Electronic Health Record (EHR) based EPR system, 
using archetypes as core elements for standardizing the 
clinical content. Archetypes are structured data elements of 
clinical concepts, envisioned to ensure technology-
independent interoperability, easy reuse of information and 
efficient decision support [16]. They are clinical information 
models used to standardize the clinical content of an EPR 
system. The archetypes contain a maximum dataset, 
including evidence about knowledge objects, and relevant 
attributes [8]  They also need to include rules, measurement 
intervals, 
data 
types, 
presentation 
formats, 
data 
representation conditions (codes, terminologies), etc. [8]. It is 
possible to combine archetypes into templates to create 
documents, messages, specific forms and reports, including 
referrals, radiology reports and discharge forms. Templates 
are often locally made, based on three things: the 
requirements for the form, available archetypes, and the local 
use of terminologies. 
The openEHR framework built on a two-level modelling 
approach separating the clinical and technical development 
of the EPR system. The intention of the first level, the 
technical reference model, was to increase semantic 
interoperability, and secure a reuse of data [11][17][18]. The 
reference model is generic enough to store any type of 
clinical information, and it is a stable object model to build 
software and data on. These are used to specify how to 
organize and group clinical information, capture contextual 
information, query and update the EPR and so on  
[19]. The second level, contained archetypes and templates, 
as standards for the clinical content. This makes it possible 
for clinicians to be in charge of designing and defining the 
archetype standards, hence the clinical content of the EPR 
system. There are some important issues related to allocating 
the right resources for the national archetype work, recruiting 
participants for this work and the role clinical competence 
play in the future archetype development, these are not 
however addressed in this paper. The two-level model 
enabled making changes only to the clinical content of the 
archetypes, without having to alter the underlying open EHR 
information model. The openEHR framework allowed for 
archetype 
design 
at 
different 
levels 
of 
healthcare 
organizations.  
The other standardization process we have focused on 
was the national standardization of archetypes as the clinical 
content of the EPR system.  In Norway the primarily work 
with archetypes was conducted at a national level, 
coordinated by NRUA (National Editorial group for 
Archetype development in Norway) established by National 
ICT in 2013, National ICT is responsible for coordinating 
ICT-related initiatives in the Norwegian specialized health 
care service [20]. To design optimal archetypes to standardize 
the clinical content of EPR systems, it was necessary for 
clinicians to have a key role in both developing and 
approving the national archetypes. Therefore, one of the most 
important tasks for NRUA was to recruit enough clinicians to 
participate in standardizing archetypes. The clinical content 
of an archetype based EPR system had to contain numerous 
archetypes, to encompass all clinical practice. There were 42 
nationally approved archetypes by May 2016, and even if  
more than 100 were in the process, this was not nearly enough 
to comprehend the total clinical content of an EPR system. 
One important question to address was how many archetypes 
standardizing the clinical content of an EPR system required? 
The absence of necessary archetypes complicated and 
delayed the development of the new archetype-based EPR 
system. Hence, this raised a question of when to start using 
archetypes for clinical practice, and the consequences of 
using archetypes before reaching national consensus.  
In addition, it was challenging for the users included in 
developing the new EPR, to grasp the potential of this system 
based on the close relation between the archetypes and the 
technology in this entirely new technological solution. These 
factors might contribute to explain why the development 
process took much longer than expected. The aim of this 
paper is to highlight the importance of introducing a set of 
core archetypes to succeed with the national consensus work 
on archetypes in Norway. Establishing a prototype of an EPR 
system, based on generic core archetypes, is a promising way 
to increase the pace of the national archetype work. In 
addition, such prototype might provide clinicians with a 
better understanding of this new way of developing and using 
the EPR, at the same time as it is possible to test the 
archetypes in a production like environment. One important 
dilemma to solve before establishing such prototype is 
however, how many archetypes would such solution require? 
Our focus is on how to use a set of core archetypes to keep 
up and escalation the pace of the national archetype work in 
Norway, and to evaluate the establishment of this core set of 
archetypes through interaction with projects essential to the 
ongoing process. Our research question is therefore: What 
has been the challenges in the national archetype process so 
far, and how could these challenges be met through 
developing a set of core archetypes? 
 We followed different aspects of the archetype work in 
Norway describing how the development have progressed 
over time. In the paper some important experiences with, 
testing out archetypes and implementing them to clinical 
practice are addressed, in addition to how this has 
contributing to speeding up the work with archetypes in 
Norway. Being able to estimate the number of core 

245
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
archetypes needed for establishing such prototype would ease 
planning the future work with archetypes in Norway related 
to how estimating the number of resources the work requires 
and predicting when to expect having a complete set of 
clinical standards for an EPR system. Defining a set of core 
archetypes 
would 
contribute 
to 
increased 
clinical 
understanding of the archetype concept and the potentials 
openEHR system have for improving the clinical practice. 
The rest of the paper has the following structure: Section 
two, has a presentation of the method. In section three, there 
is a description of the four aspects of working with archetypes 
in Norway. The discussion in the fourth section focuses on 
when to start using archetypes, the use of core archetypes for 
a prototype of a basic EPR system and how to plan the future 
archetype work. The fifth section concludes the paper. 
II. 
METHOD 
The work with archetypes in Norway is mainly conducted 
on a national level, however, also regional archetype 
organizations has gained increasing foothold over the last two 
years. Our site of research is therefore both NRUA, and the 
regional archetype organization in the North Norwegian 
health authority. Our qualitative case also includes other 
archetype initiatives in Norway like for instance the use of 
archetypes for clinical practice at the small clinic in the 
Southern and Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority 
(described in section C). Except from being a status report on 
national archetype development, this paper also contributes 
to a longitudinal interpretive study, related to the 
development of a large-scale EPR system by the North 
Norwegian 
Health 
Authority. 
The 
methodologically 
positioning of the study is within a qualitative interpretive 
paradigm. The focus is on evolving and improving the 
understanding of a studied phenomenon, by looking at it from 
different viewpoints, within a context [21][22]. An advantage 
of using a qualitative interpretive approach is enabling 
complex textual descriptions of how people experience a 
particular matter, by providing information about the human 
side of a given process [22]. 
The fieldwork draws on the first author’s role working in 
FIKS for two years and afterwards continuing to follow 
activities in the project, by participating in workshops and 
meetings connected to the development of the new EPR 
systems. This author have also been an observer and 
participant in both the regional and national work with 
archetypes in Norway, participating in meetings, workshops 
and discussions. The second author has contributed in the 
regional and national work with the new EPR and archetypes 
for the last seven years, participating in meetings, discussions 
and observations. He has represented the North Norwegian 
health region in NRUA, and been the leader of the regional 
archetype organization. He has also recently become the 
leader of NRUA. The personal information protection 
commissionaire for research in the health region, and the 
Norwegian social science data service (NSD), approved the 
data collection for this study. All informants provided written 
consents for the interviews by e-mail.  
The data analysis was accomplished in several stages with 
data and citations from numerous sources. A document study 
including different iterations and negotiations of several 
archetypes like problem/diagnosis, had a key role during the 
ﬁeld work, and provided contextual and historical insight into 
the process of establishing archetypes in Norway. The 
Norwegian CKM repository consists of nationally approved 
archetypes including the documents from each review 
iteration, where clinicians discuss and approve the content of 
each part of the archetype in what they refer to as “consensus” 
processes. We have read all the logs several times, both 
separately and combined with the interview data as a whole, 
to enable extracting the most important topics. Interesting 
citations from the different participants, related to each of the 
topics, were translated into English. Second, we conducted 
participatory observations in NRUA meetings and workshops 
as well as vendor meetings and workshops over several years. 
We also observed a reviewer while he used the CKM to 
review an archetype, to understand better, how it was for 
clinicians to use this web-based tool. There was a 
highlighting of events and milestones from the observations, 
these became the starting point for questions in the interview 
guide. This part of the analysis was also an iterative process 
in, which analysed and transcribed data led to new questions 
in the next interview, and so on. Third, the authors conducted 
30 open-ended interviews with participants in the consensus 
process, initially while guiding them to become users of the 
CKM, then after they had used it to work with archetypes for 
a while, related to the development of the new EPR, and the 
national work with archetypes. Some participants in the 
archetype work were interviewed more than once, based on 
their specific roles in terms of being identified as key 
informants. The purpose of using open-ended interviews is 
enabling informants to tell their story, without the author’s 
pre-perceptions getting in the way. The interviewers still 
prepared some questions for the interviews, to make sure the 
interviews covered the topics they wanted to focus on. In 
addition, new interesting issues to include emerged in several 
interviews. The interviews were transcribed and analyzed 
both separately, and as a part of a whole [22].  Information 
infrastructure and infrastructuring theory were used to 
transcribe and analyzed the interviews. This was done to put 
it all together as a whole, to complement different 
perspectives of the situation.  
In addition to interview data from key personnel of the 
processes and documents from the CKM, we used official 
reports from organizations such as the National ICT Health 
Trust, and other websites such as the official site of the 
openEHR organization. We have aimed at obtaining a 
historical and contextual understanding of the work involved 
in the development of archetypes. Table I describes the 
details of the data collection. 
 

246
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. THE DATA COLLECTION 
 
Number of  
persons 
Duration 
Period 
Interviews 
 
 
 
Archetype 
reviewers 
17 
30-90 min 
2014-2016 
NRUA members 
5 
60-90 min 
2014-2015 
Persons involved in 
the EPR 
development 
8 
60-120 min 
2013-2015 
Observations 
 
 
 
NRUA/regional 
resource group 
 
200 hours 
2014-2016 
Development of 
EPR system 
 
80 hours 
2012-2016 
Archetype review 
and CKM use 
 
5 hours 
2014-2015 
Discussions 
 
100 hours 
2012-2016 
Document studies 
 
 
 
 
 
240 hours 
2015-2016 
 
III. 
DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF NORWEGIAN ARCHETYPE 
WORK 
We have focused on four different aspects of working 
with national archetypes for Norwegian healthcare in the 
period 2012-2016. First, the process of establishing a well-
functioning national archetype organization (NRUA), 
including a network of competent healthcare personnel to 
participate in the consensus process. Second, the relation 
between the archetypes and the new EPR system focusing on 
development of a new openEHR based EPR system using 
archetypes as standards for the clinical content. Third, the 
development of local archetypes at a specialized hospital 
clinic, including the first attempts of using archetypes for 
clinical practice and useful lessons learned for the national 
archetype work. Fourth the need to define the number of 
archetypes to plan the future archetype work, including 
estimating resources for the work, and the challenges of 
governing archetypes in relation to who is responsible for 
what aspects of the archetypes. 
A. Organizing the National Archetype Work in Norway.  
In Norway, one system vendor had gained more than 70% 
of the EPR marked [23]. This vendor was developing a new 
openEHR based EPR system, which three of the four health 
regions had committed themselves to use. Consequentially it 
made sense to organize the construction of the archetype 
standards for the new EPR system at a national level. Hence, 
National ICT instigated a national organization to work with 
archetypes in Norway. The established NRUA in 2013, to 
form a national archetype repository – a clinical knowledge 
manager (CKM). The overall goal of NRUA was to 
coordinate development and use of archetypes on a national 
level, both handling the national consensus process of 
reviewing and approving archetypes, as well as supporting 
local initiatives for archetype design and usage in Norway. 
NRUA had five part-time engaged employees, working with 
governing and modeling archetypes. In addition, 2-3 
representatives from each of the four Regional Health 
Authorities in Norway, and representatives from the 
Norwegian directorate of health were members of NRUA.  
NRUA established an editorial group to initiate archetype 
reviews, these reviews were highly depended on clinicians 
participating in standardizing the clinical content of 
healthcare practice, and organizing these standards as 
archetypes. Therefore, recruiting clinicians and activating 
them as archetype reviewers for the national consensus 
process, was an essential part of NRUA’s work. In the 
consensus process clinicians used the web based CKM to 
review 
and 
approve 
archetypes, 
enabling 
flexible 
asynchronous 
communication 
between 
the 
different 
contributors. The archetype reviewers only communicated 
through the online CKM without participating in any face-to-
face meetings. The first year NRUA focused primarily on 
establishing a well-functioning organization prepared to 
handle coordinating hundreds of participants from different 
professions, including a large network of clinicians, working 
with archetypes. They offered training and support for new 
CKM users, and established relations with the international 
CKM run by the openEHR foundation.  In addition, NRUA 
imported existing archetypes from the international CKM, 
and translated them into Norwegian, for clinicians to review. 
One of the archetype reviewers stated: “NRUA has members 
with a genuine interest in archetypes, and they have worked 
very hard to get this organization up and running.” The 
organizational work also included defining the steps of the 
consensus process, and forming a priority scheme for how to 
organize working with the national archetypes. Prioritizing 
launching a well-functioning organization, the actual 
consensus work moved slowly the first year. 
However, they still managed to approve the first national 
archetype as early as in June 2014, only six months after 
NRUA was established. Investing a considerable amount of 
time on the organizational concerns initially, enabled NRUA 
to increase the pace of the archetype development the next 
two years. In May 2016, there were 42 nationally approved 
archetypes in Norway. The population of archetypes 
approved was considered complex and essential for EPR 
functionality. In addition, more than 100 had started the 
consensus process. The goal was to have 200 archetypes 
approved by the end of 2016. In addition, NRUA gained 

247
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
valuable knowledge along the way, both on how to structure 
archetypes, and on how to run a national organization. Hence, 
NRUA has gradually become an accomplished organization 
for supporting and supervising local and regional archetype 
projects. They have also become competent to arrange 
information and modelling courses to expand the competence 
on archetypes within Norwegian healthcare. 
It was yet challenging to recruit reviewers for the national 
consensus process, especially clinicians. This was a rather 
extensive process to participate in, and the reviewers were not 
in any way compensated for contributing to the national 
archetype work. When they first started as reviewers, it was 
also time consuming to learn how to use the CKM work tool. 
Several reviewers said that it took quite some time to 
understand the complex relation between the clinical and 
technical components of the archetypes, and to get used to the 
concept of archetypes as clinical standards. In addition, many 
archetypes went through more than one review iteration 
before being nationally approved, the average number was 2 
iterations, however, one of the archetypes had as many as 
seven without reaching national consensus. Each review 
iteration took a considerable amount of time for the clinicians 
to finish and some reviewers had more than one archetype to 
review simultaneously. One clinician stated: “A review 
iteration can take between 15min and 1,5 hour or even longer 
to finish, depending on the complexity of the archetype and 
whether I need to look things up, or consult with colleagues.” 
The time-consuming review process done at the clinician’s 
free time, and the loosely committed online work process, 
both led to several dropouts from the archetype work, 
especially among clinicians. Since National ICT had 
recommended archetypes as standards for the clinical content 
of the EPR, it was important for clinicians to have an essential 
role in defining and designing these standards since they were 
the main users of the standards in the EPR system. Also the 
two-level model of openEHR related on domain experts 
(clinicians) as the main developers of the clinical content of 
the archetypes. One clinician said: “It is crucial to include 
clinicians in this work; they have the clinical knowledge and 
know what is important to focus on, for the archetypes to be 
useful standards for clinical practice.” He also commented, 
“If the archetypes are not designed by clinicians it will be 
very difficult to get clinicians to accept and use them.”  
Though it was difficult for NRUA to plan the work with 
archetypes ahead, included estimating the number of 
clinicians needed for the national work, what archetypes to 
prioritize working with, and how many archetypes the 
Norwegian CKM needed. It was also problematic to ensure 
that the archetypes fit the clinical requirements of Norwegian 
healthcare, since they did not have any way of testing then 
out in clinical practice.  
B. Relations between Archetype Standards and the EPR 
System 
National ICT gained an interest for archetypes as clinical 
standards several years, before the vendor started working 
with the openEHR based EPR system in 2011. In 2008, 
National ICT run an internal project translating variables for 
electronic medical charts into archetypes. However, deciding 
to purchase the new EPR system for most of Norwegian 
hospitals, the interest for archetypes expanded to several parts 
of Norwegian healthcare. 
The vendor started developing the new EPR system in 
close collaboration with the North Norwegian Health 
Authority.  After a bid for tender process in 2012, this health 
region decided to regionalize their new ICT portfolio. To 
complete this process, they established a regional project, 
FIKS, to run from 2012-2016. FIKS was one of the largest 
ICT investments in Norwegian healthcare, with a total cost 
expected to exceed €100 million [24]. The main goal of FIKS 
was to establish a regional ICT portfolio, as a foundation for 
regionally standardized patient pathways, decision support, 
and integrations between clinical ICT systems. 
A 
regionalization, including standardizing EPR work practice, 
was a necessary requirement to reach such goal, enabling the 
Health Authorities to better administrate and compare 
information from the hospitals in the region. The FIKS 
project run in close collaboration with system users from the 
hospitals and the EPR vendor. One of the most important 
goals of FIKS was to collaborate with the EPR vendor on 
developing the openEHR based EPR system for Norwegian 
healthcare. This new EPR was designed to improve the user’s 
workdays, providing structured data including predefined 
content elements and schemes for documentation, enabling 
better overview and reuse of patient information.  In addition, 
the possibilities to include patient pathways and increase the 
semantic interoperability were important to improving the 
EPR. This was enabled by using the international openEHR 
architecture, standardized by CEN/ISO [25]. The openEHR 
architecture built on standardized information models, open 
source components, and highly structured clinical content, 
with archetypes as core building blocks. Archetypes were 
structured data elements of clinical concepts, where 
observations, evaluations, instructions, and actions, formed 
the ongoing process of treatment and care [16]. Archetypes 
were used to define how clinical data was structured, 
seamlessly stored, and transferred between EPR systems 
[26]. The intention was for archetypes to contain a maximum 
dataset, including evidence about knowledge objects, and 
relevant attributes [8][27]. It was possible to design both 
widely reusable generic archetypes securing interoperability 
within and across healthcare institutions, as well as 
specialized ones intended for a distinct local setting 
[9][27][28][29][30]. 
In 
figure 
1. 
the 
archetype 
problem/diagnosis is used as an example of an archetype 

248
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1. The archetype problem/diagnosis 
The new EPR system required archetypes, as standards 
for structuring the clinical content it was necessary to have a 
common language to raise the semantic interoperability. 
According to the two-level model the openEHR architecture 
built on, it was possible to develop the archetypes standards 
and the reference model of the EPR system separately [16]. 
Still, splitting the development processes for the new EPR 
systems and the archetypes, turned out to be more complex 
and challenging than expected, due to close interrelations 
between these two processes. The vendor first became aware 
of this in 2012, when they started to develop functionality for 
the openEHR based EPR system. The development of the 
new EPR system included an extensive process of designing 
necessary functionality. They also decided to develop the 
new EPR module by module, to prevent a “big bang” 
implementation for the healthcare practice. This required 
including clinicians and other domain experts in the 
development process. More than 100 system users, from all 
the hospitals in the North Norwegian Health Authority, 
participated in an attempt of user centered system design, 
where an agile method - scrum was practiced. System users 
participated in workshops suggesting and prioritizing 
requirements for the new system. The vendor developed 
functionality based on the needs and requests identified by 
the end-users and domain experts. The users mainly based 
their requests on challenges, flaws, and limitations they had 
identified from using the existing EPR system. It was difficult 
to understand the potential and possibilities of the new system 
since it was based on a very different architecture from what 
they were used to. One clinician stated: “When you ask 
clinicians, they will most likely point out the needs for 
changes based on their current workpractice. Their starting 
point is the more than 20 years old EPR system they use 
today. They are more likely to think small steps ahead to 
improve their current work, rather than focusing on large 
revolutionary changes, necessary for exploiting the potential 
of archetypes and openEHR.” It was very difficult for the 
system users to grasp the potential of the forthcoming EPR 
system, and the new type of clinical standards, as neither the 
archetypes nor the EPR system functionality was finished. 
Consequently, developing the EPR based on this approach 
was time consuming, and inefficient with a risk of ending up 
with a system unable to exploit the potential of openEHR 
based EPR systems. The original strategy was for the vendor 
to import a set of generic archetypes from the international 
CKM to have some basic ones to start working with. Then 
the system users themselves would continue developing 
archetypes necessary for their clinical practice, for example 
clinical observations such as blood pressure, body weight, 
clinical scorings, and schemes for procedures. One member 
of FIKS said: “At first it seemed possible for clinicians to 
design archetype based schemes on the fly, I don’t however 
think this will be the case.” 
It seemed rather straightforward to import already 
existing archetypes, and adjust them to Norwegian 
conditions.  According to the openEHR organization, the 
archetypes were system independent and could be 
downloaded and used freely for any purpose. However, after 
trying to implement archetypes for a year, without achieving 
the desired results, it became evident that this work was more 
complex than anticipated. Thus, developing and testing 
functionality for the EPR system became unmanageable 
without being able to include the necessary archetypes related 
to the modules of the EPR system developed.  
Based on both the archetype initiative and the vendors 
experiences it was decided to establish one technological 
solutions for storing and reusing archetypes a Norwegian 
clinical knowledge manager (CKM) containing archetypes 
designed to fit Norwegian conditions, the CKM also 
including standardized methods for developing and 
maintaining national archetypes.  
One example illustrating the relation between system 
development and the archetypes is the ongoing work with the 
pre-surgical planning module. FIKS started working with this 
module in 2012, yet, in May 2016, this module still was not 
implemented in clinical practice. One of the reasons was the 
lack of necessary archetypes to support the functionality. 
They started working with this module before the national 
archetype work had even started, and the definitions of the 
requirements for working with archetypes at a national level 
were not yet made.   After including NRUA in the work with 
the necessary archetype requirements for this module it was 
possible to gradually increase the pace of the development 
process of the pre surgical planning module. The project 
defined together with NRUA the need for 18 national 
archetypes for this module. There is an ongoing process of 
finishing the necessary archetypes, six of them had reached 
national consensus in May 2016, and more of them had 
started the consensus process. The North Norwegian Health 
Authority had defined a principle of only using nationally 
approved archetypes. However, as time went by, this 
principle was severely challenges by the need to complete the 
pre surgical planning module. There was a dilemma whether 
to wait for the rest of the archetypes to reach national 
consensus, and further delay the implementation of the new 
EPR, or begin to use archetypes not yet nationally approved, 

249
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
enabling implementing the pre surgical planning module at 
the hospital, however risking the need for changing the 
archetypes later on.  
 In addition to defining when to start using the archetypes, 
another important question to address was if all archetypes 
had to be national. When they worked with the pre surgical 
planning module defining the necessary archetypes, they 
defined some national ones. Others were more system 
specific for this particular EPR system, and were possible for 
the vendors to develop themselves. It seemed unnecessary to 
approve archetypes only useful for this particular EPR system 
at a national level. Another issue might be how much of the 
EPR system to structure as archetypes. Was it only possible 
to use the archetypes to standardize the clinical content, or 
could they also be used for structuring other parts of the EPR 
system, like workflows and administrative routines. It was 
important to include NRUA in assessing archetype requests, 
due to the extensive competence on archetypes they had 
gained over the years. These questions might have been 
easier to answer if there were a way of testing out archetypes 
for clinical practice. Accordingly, some local projects have 
lately been trying out archetypes for real time use, for very 
small and restricted parts of clinical practice. The following 
section describes one such example. 
C. Using the Archetypes for Clinical Practice 
Based on the notion of archetypes being the currently 
used standards for communication within Norwegian 
healthcare, many projects eager to start using them. Since the 
national archetype design of archetypes used several years to 
gain foothold, some local initiatives began to develop and 
implement archetypes for clinical practice, before they had 
reached national consensus. Some even started developing 
local archetypes themselves. One member of NRUA stated: 
“Systems that use archetypes today are not designed on 
nationally approved archetypes, or even international ones. 
They are mainly constructed by system users themselves.”  
One example was a hospital clinic in the Southern and 
Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority were they 
developed a “self-check” registration form for patients to fill 
out when entering the clinic. This form built on the new 
openEHR based EPR system, and needed a number of highly 
specialized archetypes to meet the clinical requirements. The 
clinic worked with this registration form as a project between 
February and November 2015. When the clinic started 
working with structuring their EPR content, the Norwegian 
CKM only contained a few nationally approved archetypes 
(even if they had started the consensus process of several 
other archetypes as well), and NRUA was still a rather 
immature organization. Therefore, the project had to develop 
most of the necessary archetypes themselves, in close 
collaboration with the system vendor, and Ocean informatics 
(the international CKM community). They searched the 
international CKM and CKM’s from other countries to find 
relevant archetypes for their practice, without any luck. They 
identified a need for 58 archetypes, in total, and they ended 
up with using six nationally approved archetypes in addition 
to developing 52 themselves. However, due to NRUA being 
a newly established organization they had not yet defined the 
final modelling patterns for national archetypes. The project 
had to start using an immature modelling pattern, which 
consequentially led to needs for structural changes to the 
archetypes after implemented them to the EPR system, 
generating extra work and interoperability problems for the 
project and the clinic using the archetypes.  
This clinic had a clearly defined focus area, working 
within a very narrow clinical field, and thought they mainly 
needed specialized archetypes designed especially for their 
field of expertise. Still, while developing and implementing 
the archetypes, they became more and more aware that some 
of the archetypes they thought were suitable only for this 
particular practice, also were applicable for other specialties. 
Having to include the needs of other potential users made the 
development of the archetypes, more complex than first 
expected. After implementing the archetypes, they also 
identified a need for some of the locally developed archetypes 
to be included into already existing national archetypes 
instead of being stand-alone archetypes.   
Developing archetypes locally became a time-consuming 
and challenging process for the project, in addition to the lack 
of modelling patterns, there were no national guidelines for 
developing national archetypes in Norway. It was very 
challenging for the system vendor to create high quality 
archetypes without having national procedures to follow, 
since the archetypes were complex data elements that could 
be potentially structure in numbers of different ways. One 
member from NRUA said: “It is not difficult to create an 
archetype, though it is very demanding to construct high 
quality archetypes.” Comprehending the complexity of 
archetypes and the interrelation between different archetypes 
is a maturity process that takes time to grasp. Another 
challenge potentially leading to interoperability issues, were 
the problems related to versioning the archetypes. The local 
and the national archetypes were versioned the same way 
creating a risk of mixing up the different sorts of archetypes. 
IT was necessary to convert the locally designed archetypes 
to national ones at some point. By doing this there was a risk 
of changing the local archetypes so much that the two 
versions (local and national) were no longer compatible, 
hence there were a risk of losing historical data and having to 
spend lots of money to convert data to the national archetype.    
Another challenge identified in this project related to the 
involved clinical resources. They had two clinicians working 
20%, one nurse working 80% and one mercantile resource 
working 20 % in the project, this turned out to not be enough 
clinical resources for developing the 52 archetypes within the 
deadline of the project. This consequentially compromised 
the quality of the archetypes they developed, and 
representatives from the project underlined the importance of 
including enough clinicians to enable making them the main 
developers of archetype standards for the EPR system. In 
addition, the project experienced that creating local 

250
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
archetypes based on schemes from the old EPR were 
unpractical to use. There was a need for a new way of 
thinking to utilize the potential of the openEHR architecture. 
It took time to adjust the clinician’s way of thinking to fit the 
openEHR and archetype based systems. The clinic still, six 
months after implementing the archetypes in the registration 
form, use a lot of  time and resources on adjusting the 
archetypes and including them in the national consensus 
processes. 
When this clinic started using the new EPR system 
including archetypes for clinical practice, this was one of the 
first attempts in Norway to try out archetypes in a clinical 
setting, and one of the first times using the new EPR, 
including archetypes, for a clinical setting. This provided the 
clinic, NRUA, system users, and the vendor, with important 
insight on the usability of archetypes at different levels of the 
system, especially compositions, evaluations, and cluster 
archetypes. Testing archetypes in an actual clinical setting 
enabled identifying necessary requirements for improving, 
not only the local, but also the national archetypes, to make 
them useful for both small and large-scale clinical usage. 
Gaining this important experience further underlined the 
need for NRUA to assist in similar future projects better 
enabling the local archetypes to conform to the national ones, 
and prevent projects from ending up with the extensive 
challenges this clinic experienced related to both developing 
the archetypes using them and adjusting them to the national 
ones after they were implemented.  
This clinic creating a “self-check” registration form ended 
up needing 58 archetypes, and even if some of them were 
included as parts of existing archetypes and others were 
expanded to cover other specialties, this was a quite high 
number. It became important to try estimating the total 
number of archetypes needed for an EPR system. 
D. Coordination and Distribution of Consensus Based 
Archetypes 
Establishing NRUA for coordinating the national work 
with archetypes in Norway was an important step towards 
archetypes being a successful way of standardizing the 
clinical content of an EPR system. Defining the interrelation 
between the archetypes and the openEHR based EPR system, 
and trying out archetypes for clinical practice, also 
contributed to moving this process forward. However, there 
were still some important question to address in order for this 
work to continue expanding. One of them was to try 
estimating how many archetypes this standardization process 
required. This directly related to defining the number of 
resources needed to standardize all necessary clinical content. 
Another issue was governing the archetypes in relation to 
distributing the responsibilities and different aspects of 
archetypes and the CKM, including defining the borders 
between NRUA – developing archetypes, and system 
vendors – using the archetypes for openEHR based EPR 
systems.  
Defining how many archetypes to develop and estimating 
the need for resources, turned out to be difficult, since the 
archetype work in Norway were quite immature and still 
mainly conducted at a theoretical level. To estimate the 
forthcoming work, what archetypes to prioritize, and estimate 
the number and specialties of necessary reviewers, it was 
important to try to predict the total archetype number. NRUA 
partially addressed this by defined a synthesis of using core 
archetypes. This was an attempt of defining what archetypes 
to prioritize working with [28]: “90% of the journal functions 
in the electronic patient record including non-specialized 
examinations and procedures can be represented by using 30 
core archetypes [28].” The synthesis underlined that the core 
archetypes did not include data from any clinical specialties, 
just the basic structured data of an EPR system. An even 
though one member of NRUA made some modifications to 
the synthesis, expanding it to include between 30-50 
archetypes, due to extended experience with establishing and 
modelling archetypes, this number was quite low, and should 
be possible to accomplish if the national work was structured 
around these archetypes. Prioritizing archetypes for the 
national consensus process, to get an overview of the basic 
structure of an openEHR base EPR system, seemed like a 
clever strategy for the archetype development. If NRUA had 
prioritized finishing the national consensus work on the core 
archetypes, it would have been possible to design a prototype 
of an EPR system including the necessary archetypes. This 
prototype would have enabled testing the clinical usability of 
the archetypes, and the relation between the clinical 
archetype standards and the reference model of the EPR 
system. Consequentially such prototype would contribute to 
increase the pace also of the national consensus work.  One 
clinician stated: “Having a prototype would ensure that the 
archetypes cover the necessary clinical content for the 
modules of the new EPR.” Another reviewer said:  “It is 
difficult for clinicians to imagine the possibilities of new EPR 
and not base their requirements on today’s needs.”  Moving 
the development from a theoretical to a practical level were 
the clinicians were able to test out archetypes in relation with 
functionality, would potentially make it easier to detect the 
possibilities and advantages of using a structured archetype 
base EPR system. Thus, we had to question why they did not 
prioritize the core archetypes for the national consensus 
process, enabling designing such prototype. Until May 2016, 
20 of the original 30 core archetypes were nationally 
approved, and 4 more were in the consensus process, the last 
6 had not yet started the process. One member of NRUA said: 
“We started out prioritizing the defined core archetypes. 
However, the work with core archetypes takes time since 
these are very generic and extensive concept archetypes.” 
NRUA also had a policy to start the consensus work on an 
archetype only on request from the healthcare organization. 
This was partly bases on the lack of available resources to 
work with archetypes. The requested archetypes are often 
specialized ones covering specific areas of the EPR, there are 
rarely requests for generic archetypes, covering basic 

251
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
elements of the EPR system.  Another reason why they did 
not prioritize the core archetypes was probably the 
uncertainty about the validity of the core archetype synthesis, 
since NRUA had already started to modify it by including 
more archetypes than originally intended. The reason for this 
was the fact that archetype development was very complex 
process due to both the archetypes themselves being 
complicated standards demanding extensive technical and 
clinical knowledge. In addition, there was a closer 
interrelation between the archetypes and the reference model 
established than first expected. As a result, in a national 
forum in May 2016 the leader of NRUA stated that it would 
most likely be necessary to include about 200 archetypes to 
cover 80% of the clinical content of an EPR system. This was 
extensively more than the original core archetype synthesis 
from 2013. This indicated that a successive awareness and 
increased knowledge about archetype standards have 
required the hypothesis of core archetypes to change over 
time.  Standardizing an EPR system by using archetypes was 
more complex than firs expected, by both NRUA and the 
system vendor. The further the work with archetypes in 
Norway evolved, and the more experienced NRUS got, the 
more archetypes seems necessary to include, even for 
covering the basics of an EPR system. Another statement 
underlining the assumption that increased knowledge raises 
the number of archetypes required for standardizing the 
clinical content, was made by one of the members of Ocean 
informatics, a partner in the international openEHR 
community working with archetypes since 1999 [31]. The 
international CKM is a repository including about 500 
archetypes. She said that between 1000-2000 archetypes 
were necessary for covering all the content of the EPR 
system. These diverging numbers made estimating resources 
and a timeline for the future work with archetypes very 
demanding. 
In addition, it was important to outline some borders 
between the archetypes and the systems they were included 
in. It was a fine balance since the system vendor was included 
in the consensus work, (which is open for all vendors to 
participate in). In addition, this new EPR system was the only 
one conforming to openEHR and archetype standards, 
meaning that if the standards developed were not useful for 
this system, it was no other large-scale system in Norway to 
use them in. One dilemma was therefore how to get system 
independent standards that still were useful for the only EPR 
system using archetypes.  The Western Norway Regional 
Health Authority recently brought a request to NRUA for 
changing 
the 
nationally 
approved 
archetype 
Observation.nutritional_risk_screening. After implementing 
the archetype to the EPR system, the health region realized 
that the modelling pattern was not optimal for clinical use. 
The request included altering some of the variables in the 
archetypes. The 15 members of NRUA discussed this request 
by email and members from all health regions were involved 
in the discussion. One of NRUA’s main concerns was 
whether this change request really related to the quality of the 
archetype itself, or to limitations in the EPR system were the 
archetype was implemented. In the following discussion, 
members of NRUA underlined the need to address the 
dilemma of altering archetypes to fit systems requirements. 
Making such adjustments to fit system requests increase the 
risk of archetypes becoming too system specific. Several 
NRUA members advised against this, since it was against the 
intention of creating flexible and system independent 
archetypes useful for different purposes. Members from three 
of the four health regions participated in this discussion, in 
addition to NRUA’s editorial board, indicating that the 
archetype work was a national initiative were the health 
regions were included in all important decision-making.  It 
was important to conduct the important dependency 
discussion concerning the national archetypes and that all 
health regions agreed before making such requested changes. 
Another important issue to address was how to define 
governance standards based on archetypes (such as schemes, 
scorings, clinical processes) and how to distribute these 
between system vendors using different clinical Information 
Models (CIM). NRUA and the regional archetype 
organizations contributes to this, but the government, the 
regional health authorities have to be active decision makers 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The four examples described in part III, all indicates a 
need for improving and speeding up the national archetype 
process in Norway. The main issues to discuss are 1) the 
question of consensus and/or the clinical value of archetypes: 
When to start using the archetypes? The balance between 
only using nationally approved archetypes and the need for 
speeding up the process by using unapproved archetypes to 
test the archetypes in a production environment (the EPR). 2) 
The importance of testing the archetypes for clinical practice.  
A. The Temporal Evolvement of the Archetype Work 
The archetype strategy of the North Norwegian Health 
Authority is to use only nationally consensus made 
archetypes. The overall goals are to secure high quality 
structured archetypes, in line with the national standard, 
confirming that the archetypes they include in the new EPR 
system are compatible with other archetypes in Norway. 
They adopted this strategy, due to the unknown consequences 
of using archetypes that has not reached national consensus. 
A project leader in FIKS stated: “Some of the consequences 
we dread from using unapproved archetypes are the lack of 
interoperability, the need for converting data, loss of 
historical data, all leading to increasing cost.” However, 
they did not want to stop developing the new EPR system 
completely, due to the lack of archetypes. “There is a risk 
that if we are too cautious with starting to use archetypes  it 
will make our development set to provide excessive profit 
related to reuse of data and clinical parameters fall way 
behind (project leader FIKS).” 
One problem is that they started working with the EPR 
system functionality in 2012 and the national archetype work 

252
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
did not start until 2014. The reason for this was the notion the 
vendor had of importing a basic set of archetypes, and letting 
the system users develop the specific ones themselves. When 
the vendor defined a need for working nationally with the 
archetypes due to both their complexity and the extensive use 
of the same openEHR based EPR system in Norway the 
process of developing functionality had already reached a 
stage where they needed archetypes for the system. One 
example is the pre surgical planning module, the vendor 
started working on this in collaboration with system users in 
2012, and still in May 2016, only six of the necessary 
archetypes were approved nationally. Thus, the strategy of 
waiting for nationally approved archetypes led to delays in 
the development process. At this point, the health region had 
to assess their strategy and consider using unapproved 
archetypes to prevent further delays. However, it is decided 
that all archetypes have to go through the national consensus 
process at some point, and before this has been complete, it 
is always a risk of having to change the archetype both 
technically and clinically after they are implemented, 
potentially costing the health region a lot of money.  
In the Southern and Eastern Norway Regional Health 
Authority, they have nearly the opposite archetype strategy. 
Their criteria for using archetypes is that the archetype have 
started the consensus process. Thus, occasionally, (as in the 
small clinic described in section C)), they use archetypes not 
yet included in the consensus process, and even developed 
new ones themselves. Starting to use unapproved archetypes 
in a clinical production environment provides the vendor, the 
clinicians, and NRUA with important insights on the actual 
usability of the national archetypes, as well as for how to 
implement them in and use them for an EPR system. The 
development initiated in the local clinic was important for the 
maturity of NRUA as an organization, the archetype 
development, as well as for the EPR vendors. If they had 
waited for the regional EPR project to have all their 
archetypes approved, for example for the surgical pre- 
planning module, before testing out archetypes in clinical  
practice, they would still not have this valuable knowledge 
gained on how the archetypes actually work in a clinical 
setting. The experiences achieved from this project, made it 
conceivable to improve the structure and content of the 
national archetypes.  
On the other hand, using archetypes for clinical practice 
before nationally approving them, leads to several challenges 
as described in section C) related to e.g., the structure of the 
archetypes and the interoperability of local and national 
archetypes. As an example, the local archetypes were 
versioned following the same standard NRUA used. This 
consequentially led to both local and a national archetype 
with the same version number. Firstly, if the possibility to 
create a new version disappears there is a risk of losing 
historical clinical data when converting to a consensus made 
archetype. Secondly, mixing up the local and the national 
archetypes might be a secondary problem, since the two 
definitely are comparable. Further, since the national 
archetypes are developed after the local ones are 
implemented, there is a risk of a dissimilar structure of the 
local and national archetypes modelling patterns. If the 
deviations are too extensive, the local and the national 
archetypes might not be compatible. One of the archetype 
reviewers with a technological background described this 
potential problem: “The local system will continue to work 
on its own, but if the structure of the archetypes is changed 
extensively to enable national consensus, they will no longer 
be able to communicate with the old version of the 
archetypes. Consequentially a system based on the local 
archetypes, cannot communicate with systems using national 
archetypes.”  Accordingly, this might lead to losing data, or 
having to spend an extensive amount of time and money on 
converting all existing data to the new national archetype 
format. This indicates a need for an improved overall 
structure for the national archetypes including a guiding 
manual for developing such, if there should be any local 
archetype development in the future. 
When to start using the archetypes and the consequences 
of using them before the consensus process is complete are 
not questions that are only relevant for this health region. This 
question is important to address at a national level of 
Norwegian healthcare. If the archetypes needed for a project 
or a system are not available nationally, is it better to wait for 
the potentially time consuming consensus process or is it 
necessary to develop some archetypes locally e.g., in 
collaboration with the vendor of the EPR? In addition, if local 
archetypes are developed, how is it possible to ensure the 
quality of these compared to national ones?  To solve these 
complex issues, instead of trying out the archetypes in local 
projects with potentially complicated and expensive 
consequences, another approach would be to create a test 
version, or a prototype of the new EPR system to test 
archetypes for clinical practice. 
B. Future Development of the National Archetype Work 
As the example in section D from the Western Norway 
Regional Health Authority describes, there is a need for 
emphasizing the interrelation between the archetypes and the 
systems using them. In addition, some of the lessons learned 
from the archetypes so far, and the need for defining the 
extent of the future work includes estimating how many 
archetypes to make, how much resources this work requires 
and how long establishing archetype standards for an EPR 
system will take.  
First, the work with developing archetypes has over the 
last years enabled the system vendor and NRUA to approach 
each other, since they both have experienced that this are two 
interrelated processes that cannot fully be separated the way 
the two level model of openEHR describes. Testing out 
archetypes for clinical practice and working with developing 
the EPR system have enabled both organizations to gain 
evidence based knowledge and experience of this work. 
However, these two development processes have been 
unsynchronized from the start. Establishing a national 

253
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
archetype organization and the work with national archetypes 
started almost two years after the development of the new 
EPR system. The reason for this was mainly the original 
notion that archetypes was easy both to implement from other 
CKM’s, and to develop by the system users themselves.  
After both National ICT and the vendor had worked with 
archetypes for a while, it became clear that establishing a 
Norwegian CKM was necessary to develop archetypes that 
fit the conditions of Norwegian healthcare. Since nobody had 
experience from working with archetype standards and 
openEHR based EPR systems in Norway, a maturity process 
where necessary for both organizations, before establishing 
an organized way of working with these issues. Working with 
archetypes and the system as separate processes provided a 
risk for challenges when trying to combine them. That 
brought on the question of how close the archetypes and the 
system needed to be. There was an example in Norway 
described in section D were the Western Norway Regional 
Health Authority requested a change in one archetype after 
trying to implement it to the EPR system. When discussing 
the need for changing the archetype the main question was 
how to relate to such changes, and if the archetypes should be 
adjusted to fit specific systems vendor’s requirements, or if 
the vendors should rather adjust their systems to fit the 
archetype standards.  OpenEHR archetypes are systems 
independent, which is one of the great advantages of using 
archetypes as standards for the clinical content of EPR 
systems. Therefore, it is not expedient to change the structure 
or content of the archetypes to fit one particular vendor’s 
needs. Adjusting to the requirements of one vendor risk 
compromise the archetype and there is a possibility that they 
end up as system dependent standards that just fits with the 
needs and requirements of one particular vendor. The 
previous leader of NRUA stated “National archetypes should 
not be modelled from limitations in the software of the vendor 
using them” However, the archetypes in the  Norwegian 
CKM are very new, and have mostly not been used for  
clinical settings. Implementing them to clinical environments 
might therefore require some changes due to the structure and 
content of the archetypes. In addition, if the Norwegian 
archetypes do not fit the requirements of the only large-scale 
EPR system conforming to openEHR architecture in Norway, 
who will then use them?  In addition, in the national 
consensus work with archetypes, the EPR vendor is strongly 
involved in establishing the national standards influencing 
both their content and structure. It is however possible for all 
vendors to join the national archetype work and it might even 
be positive that the vendors participates of this process. This 
way they can follow and participate in the national 
discussions related to archetypes and contribute to detect 
challenges related to archetypes. They may also understand 
the concept and construction of archetypes better, and how to 
create their EPR system to fit the requirements of these 
standards.  
Due to the archetypes and the EPR system being closely 
interrelated, there is a need for defining some borders 
between them and what part of archetype governance NRUA, 
and what part the vendor are responsible for related to 
establishing and changing archetypes. For example if one 
nationally approved archetype is changed after it has been 
implemented in the EPR system who is responsible for 
ensuring that all relevant data  is interoperable, and all 
relevant systems, schemes and templates using this archetype 
gets updated? There are different degrees of changing 
archetypes.  Minor problems related to for instance data 
storage only requires a new version of the archetype without 
compromising the interoperability between the new and the 
old version. A major change in the data structure will require 
a new archetype and this may not be compatible with the old 
one.  
Another important question for planning the future work 
with archetypes is how to define the number of archetypes 
needed for the EPR system and how many would be 
necessary for creating a prototype of a basic EPR system? 
Are the 30-50 core archetypes defined by NRUA [28] a 
sufficient basis for covering 90% of the clinical content of an 
EPR system, and thereby create a general prototype of the 
system, or does this require a more extensive set of clinical 
standards? It seems to be diverging opinions related to this 
matter. This was illustrated on the national forum in May 
2016 the leader of NRUA said that it is likely that 200 
archetypes are enough to cover 80% of the EPR systems 
clinical content.  This might be why NRUA has set a goal of 
nationally approving 200 archetypes by the end of 2016. The 
question is however if the archetypes approved by then are 
generic enough to actually cover 80% of the EPR content, or 
if the practice of working only with archetypes requested by 
the healthcare practice leads to ending up with working with 
less generic archetypes more specified for one particular use 
like the core journal or “the patient security program.” It 
might be necessary for NRUA to adjust the current strategy, 
if the goal is to develop archetypes to cover as much of an 
EPR system as quickly as possible. At the same forum, a 
representative from Ocean informatics stated that between 
1000-2000 archetypes are necessary to have a complete set of 
standards for an EPR system.  Is there a need for 30-50 
archetypes to cover 90% of the EPR, 200 to cover 80% of the 
EPR or 2000 to cover all of the EPR that is correct? There is 
a vast different between these estimates, and it seems rather 
uncertain at this moment what the total requirements of 
archetypes really are. The difference in the estimates makes 
planning the future work, and assessing the necessary 
resources for participating in the work very challenging. One 
of the reasons why this is difficult is probably the absence of 
archetypes used in clinical practice. According to this, 
establishing a prototype of a basic EPR system based on the 
core archetypes would be a good way of testing how much of 
the EPR content the core archetypes really cover. This way it 
may be easier to estimate the total number of archetypes 
required and plan the future work with archetypes in more 
detail due to the time and resources needed.  The progress in 
the national archetype work have increased the competence 

254
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of all the involved actors, this has been necessary for 
increasing the pace of this work. As the national archetype 
work progress, the hypothesis of core archetypes also evolves 
including more archetypes than first predicted covering less 
of the EPR system that expected. Realizing this is a result of 
the clinical and technical development processes approaching 
each other, NRUA being an important part of the vendor’s 
development projects, and the vendor being a significant 
contributor to the archetype work and national consensus 
process. They have both gained experience and competence 
from trying out the archetypes for clinical practice. In the 
project in the Southern and Eastern Norway Regional Health 
Authority the vendor got to experience the challenges related 
to developing archetypes and they were able to test how well 
the system was equipped to implement archetypes. NRUA 
gained experience on how the archetypes fit clinical practice 
moving the development of archetypes from a theoretical to 
a practical level. The system users also experienced 
archetypes for real clinical use, helping them better 
understand the potential of archetypes and the new structured 
EPR system. 
In addition to presenting how much of the clinical content 
the core archetypes cover, creating a prototype would be very 
useful for the clinicians, enabling them to see and try out 
archetypes in a practice like environment. This could enable 
them to better grasp the potential of the new EPR, and 
identify what the necessary requirements for continuing the 
development process are. Such prototype might also provide 
useful information for the vendor on how to include the 
archetypes technically in their new system, and gain 
knowledge that is missing today on how to create and import 
templates into the EPR system based on archetypes. 
However, this would require reaching national consensus on 
the defined core archetypes. The reason for not having 
prioritized the core archetypes for the consensus process were 
many: Establishing generic archetypes within an immature 
organization was time consuming, since there were no 
experienced archetype designers, neither clinicians nor 
technical personnel in Norway. Hence, trying and failing was 
part of the process. In addition, the requests for archetypes 
from different parts of the healthcare sector like the core 
journal project and the “patient security program” led to 
down prioritizing the more general core archetypes. NRUA 
was an organization with few persons, set to do most of this 
national archetype work and several issues like prioritizing 
their time, how many clinicians to include, how to structure 
the archetypes, whether to translate international archetypes, 
or establish new ones from scratch, what type of archetypes 
to prioritize, had to be considered. As a result of more and 
more focus on archetypes in the healthcare sector, the last two 
years of working with archetypes in Norway on different 
levels of healthcare, NRUA has gained the necessary level of 
competence to fulfill their role as an organization that 
coordinate the national work with archetypes, as well as 
supporting local initiatives. On the other hand, the lack of 
organizational and clinical resources in the governance 
organization is slowing down a positive development. 
Having such competent organization to coordinate the 
archetype work might necessitate reconsidering how to work 
with archetypes in Norway. In the example of implementing 
archetypes for clinical use described in part C, this project 
developed in collaboration with the system vendor 52 
archetypes in 9 months. This illustrates that intensifying the 
archetype work by defining a set of archetypes requested for 
a smaller part of the health care service, and work 
systematically with these in a project is a way of speeding up 
the archetype development. Maybe a similar approach would 
have been beneficial for the pre surgical planning project, to 
complete the necessary archetypes for this module, or for 
completing the core archetypes, to enable developing a 
prototype of a basic EPR system. There is of course a 
difference in developing archetypes locally in collaboration 
with a system vendor and establishing nationally approved 
archetypes, however it do not necessarily need to be 
impossible to establish projects to work with national 
archetypes as well. This way there would be a set of clinicians 
and other necessary reviewers working with a particular set 
of archetypes as a part of their workday. This way reviewing 
archetypes could be included in the project preventing the 
reviewers from having to do this at their free time. 
Consequentially the group of clinicians involved would have 
been more dependable, however, including all of them in the 
project would either require a very large project or review 
processes with fewer participants with the risk of 
compromising the notion of a maximum dataset for the 
archetypes. NRUA is however currently working towards the 
goal of having 200 consensus made archetypes by the end of 
2016. The question is however, if the archetypes they are 
working with are the core archetypes requested to fulfill the 
basics of an EPR system or if the development of archetypes 
so far includes too many specialized archetypes requested by 
part of the healthcare service.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Working with archetypes in Norway has been a gradually 
expanding process starting with a project in National ICT in 
2008. The work gained national focus when the largest EPR 
vendor decided to develop an openEHR based EPR system 
based on archetypes as clinical standards. Since then, three of 
four health regions in Norway conformed to this system 
vendor, hence they decided to work with the OpenEHR 
standards to standardize clinical information at a national 
level. It has been challenging to increase the pace of the 
national archetype work in Norway due to several factors. It 
is however essential for the progress of the archetype work 
and the new EPR system that the development of archetypes 
continues to gain momentum. One important factor to 
accomplish this, is to develop a set of core archetypes to 
cover the basics of the clinical information in the EPR 
system.  These archetypes are set to cover 80-90% of the EPR 
content leaving only the most specific ones out. To 
accomplish this there are several issues to address  

255
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
First, how to organize the national archetype work in 
Norway, and the need for a solid organization to coordinate 
this work including hundreds of system users participating in 
the review process. Second, the relations between the 
archetype standards and the EPR system. There turned out to 
be a closer interconnection between the two levels of the 
openEHR model than first expected. It was difficult  to 
develop the system before the archetypes were finished, as 
well as it was challenging to develop high standard 
archetypes without having a system to test them in, leaving 
the development at a theoretical level. Third, using the 
archetypes for clinical practice, and the balance between 
establishing national archetypes and developing local ones. 
To have some practical experience related to archetypes in 
clinical use is important for NRUA, the system vendor and 
for the system users to get an impression of how the new 
archetype based openEHR EPR system will be, and the 
potential of this new way of structuring clinical information. 
There also have to be a balance between only using nationally 
approved archetypes and the need for speeding up the process 
by using unapproved archetypes to test the archetypes in a 
production environment (use in the EPR). Fourth, how to 
coordinate and distribute the consensus based archetypes. 
This relates to versioning the archetypes, how to relate them 
to the existing national archetypes and the general complexity 
of developing archetypes. 
A need for defining a set of core archetypes to develop a 
prototype of a basic EPR to solve some of these challenges 
have been addressed including the difficulties related to 
define the number of archetypes required for such prototype.   
Planning the future work with archetypes including defining 
how many archetypes an EPR system need for standardizing 
the clinical content, in relation to how many resources the 
work requires, and when it can be possible to have a complete 
set of archetypes, covering the necessary clinical content of 
the EPR system. Another important issue is how to distribute 
the governance of the archetypes between NRUA and system 
vendors using them in relation to establishing and changing 
archetypes to ensure that the archetypes keeps as high quality 
as possible.  
Using the core archetype as a basis is a promising tool for 
future accomplishments in standardization, and speeding up 
the development of the new EPR. Still the process described, 
and the following maturation of the national environment has 
been a necessary process. Now, NRUA and the national 
consensus work have reached the required maturity level, to 
exploit the possibilities that constructing a prototype/model 
by using core archetypes can provide for the future work with 
archetypes, and the new EPR system in Norwegian 
healthcare. Establishing archetypes as standards for the 
clinical content of an EPR system is a way of establishing a 
national governance of clinical standards in Norway.  It is 
important to share the responsibility for maintaining this 
between the 4 health authorities, since they all have to 
contribute   to this work to reach the goal of archetypes being 
reusable standards enabling process and decision support as 
well as interoperability between the EPR systems and the rest 
of the ICT portfolio.
REFERENCES 
[1] G. H. Ulriksen and R. Pedersen, "Core Archetypes, The 
Means to Build Confidence Around the Power of Structured 
EPR Systems?" The Eighth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED), 
April 2016, Venice. 
[2] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services: White 
Paper, Report 9, “One citizent one journal,”2012. 
[3] National ICT: Action 41, Use of archetype methodology for 
the definition, availabiliy and use of clinical information 
models in health-based Information Systems, 2012. 
[4] T. Meum, G. Ellingsen, E. Monteiro, G. Wangensteen, and 
H. Igesund, "The interplay between global standards and 
local practice in nursing," International journal of medical 
informatics vol. 82, no. 12, pp. 364-74, 2013. 
[5] National ICT: Action 48, Clinical documentation for 
overview and learning,  2012. 
[6] M. Aanestad and T. Jensen, "Building nation-wide 
information infrastructures in healthcare through modular 
implementation strategies," The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 161-176, 2011. 
[7] The office of the Auditor General: The office of the Auditor 
General’s investigation of the ICT in hospitals and electronic 
interaction in health services, 2008. 
[8] M.R. Santos, M.P. Bax, and D. Kalra, “Dealing with the 
archetypes development process for a regional EHR 
system,” Appl Clin Inform, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 258-275, 2012. 
[9] C. Rinner et al., “Creating ISO/EN 13606 archetypes based 
on clinical information needs.” Proceedings of EFMI Special 
Topic Conference" e-Health, Across Borders Without 
Boundaries; pp. 14-15, 2011. 
[10] P. 
Gibbons 
et 
al., 
“Coming 
to 
terms: 
Scoping 
interoperability for health care,” Health level seven, 2007. 
[11] S. Garde, P. Knaup, E. Hovenga, and S. Heard, “Towards 
semantic interoperability for electronic health records,” 
Methods Inf Med, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 332-343, 2007. 
[12] S. Timmermans and M. Berg, The Gold Standard: The 
challenge of evidence based medicine and standardization in 
health care. Philadelphia, Temple University Press, 2003. 
[13] S. Timmermans and M. Berg, “Standardization in Action: 
Achieving Local Universality through Medical Protocols,” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 27, no. 2, pp.  273-305, 1997. 
[14] R. Pedersen and G. Ellingsen, "Standardizing nursing work: 
works in practice but not in theory?" Studies in health 
technology and informatics, vol. 157, pp. 91-96,  2010. 
[15] G. 
Ellingsen, 
E. 
Monteiro, 
and 
 
G. 
Munkvold, 
“Standardization of work: Co-constructive practice,” The 
Information Society, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 309–26, 2007. 
[16] R. 
Chen, P. 
Georgii-Hemming, 
and 
H. 
Åhlfeldt, 
“Representing a Chemotherapy Guideline Using openEHR 

256
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and Rules,” Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 
vol. 150, pp. 653–657, 2009. 
[17] R. Chen et al., “An archetype-based testing framework,” 
Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 136, pp. 
401-406, 2008. 
[18] T. Beale and S. Heard, “Open EHR Release 1.0.2,” 
Architecture Overview.  London, 2008. 
[19] L. Bird, A. Goodchild, and Z. Tun, “Experiences with a 
Two-Level Modelling Approach to Electronic Health 
Records,” Journal of Research and Practice in Information  
Technology,  vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 121-138, 2003. 
[20] National ICT: Welcome to national ICT. [Online] Available 
from:http://www.nasjonalikt.no/no/om_nasjonal_ikt/ 2011 
accessed 2016.02.01. 
[21] H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, “A set of principles for 
conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in 
information systems,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 67-
94, 1999. 
[22] G. Walsham, “Interpretiv case studies in IS research: nature 
and methode,” European Journal of information systems, 
vol. 4, pp. 74-81, 1995. 
[23] DIPS-ASA: 
About 
us, 
Available 
from: 
http://dips.com/eng/about-us.2015, accessed: 2015.10.16. 
[24] B. Christensen  and G. Ellingsen, editors, “Standardizing 
Clinical Pathways for Surgery Patients through ICT,” 
European Workshop on Practical Aspects of Health 
Informatics (PAHI), Edinburgh, Scotland. http://ceur-ws.org 
http://ceur-ws.org. 2013. 
[25] ISO: Health informatics - Electronic health record 
communication, Part 1 Reference model CEN. Available 
from: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=40
784.European comitte for  standardization, 2007, accessed: 
2015.12.07. 
[26] A. Moreno-Conde et al., “Clinical information modeling 
processes for semantic interoperability of electronic health 
records: systematic review and inductive analysis,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, pp. 925-
934, 2015. 
[27] M. Marcos, JA. Maldonado, B. Martínez-Salvador, D. 
Boscá, and M. Robles, “Interoperability of clinical decision-
support systems and electronic health records using 
archetypes: a case study in clinical trial eligibility,” Journal 
of biomedical informatics, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 676-689, 2013. 
[28] National editorial board for archetypes (NRUA): Core 
archetypes. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://wiki.arketyper.no/wiki/Kjernearketyper, 
2015, 
accessed: 2015.12.09. 
[29] E. Hovenga, S. Garde, T. Carr, and C. Hullin, “Innovative 
approaches and processes for capturing expert aged care 
knowledge for multiple purposes,” Electronic Journal of 
Health Informatics, vol. 2, no. 1, 2007. 
[30] H. Leslie and S. Heard, Archetypes 101, Ocean Informatics 
2006. 
[31] D. Ingram, Origins of openEHR, [Online]. Available from: 
http://openehr.org/about/origins, 
2002, 
accessed: 
2016.09.05. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

