176
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Blended Learning Improves Physical Assessment by Nursing Students 
Machiko Saeki Yagi  
School of Nursing  
Jichi Medical University  
Shimotsuke, Japan 
email: mati-s@umin.ac.jp 
Shigeki Tsuzuku  
Research Center for Instructional Systems 
Kumamoto University 
Kumamoto, Japan 
email: tsuzuku@kumamoto-u.ac.jp
Natsuko Miura 
School of Nursing  
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
email: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Alan Kawarai Lefor 
School of Medicine 
Jichi Medical University 
Shimotsuke, Japan 
email: alefor@jichi.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—The ability to perform accurate physical assessment 
is an essential skill, which also contributes to developing the 
nursing process, and providing appropriate care. However, 
patient safety initiatives in some institutions limit opportunities 
for nursing students to receive adequate training. A blended 
learning system combining e-learning with simulation may 
provide the necessary training. However, learning outcomes 
for these methods have not yet been reported. We undertook 
this study to explore learning outcomes using a blended system 
to improve physical assessment skills of nursing students in 
Japan. The contribution of e-learning to improved physical 
assessment skills was evaluated in depth, as well as outcomes 
after training and the influence of blended learning on the 
desire to learn. From 82 junior nursing students who had 
completed physical assessment training, we recruited 46 
students for this study. Each was assigned to one of two 
groups: a blended learning group or a simulation-only group. 
Objective assessment and subjective evaluation of the e-
learning experience was performed during the study including 
a checklist by a proctor, and assessment at skill stations. All 
participants were able to greet the patient upon entering room 
and exit the room after a polite goodbye. All participants in the 
blended learning group were able to measure the patients’ vital 
signs and interpret the results. Scores of those in the 
simulation-only testing the ability to perform skills for 
assessment of side-effects of chemotherapy and excretion 
condition were lower than the blended group (88% vs 17% 
and 74% vs 17%). Participants in the blended group were 
more likely to make recommendations around "lack of 
balanced nutrition" and "risk for infection", as "consultation 
can help ensure that a diet plan is enacted", "Proposal to have 
an antiemetic administered", " Initiate hand washing", 
"Wearing mask", and " Initiate mouth washing ", while those 
in the simulation-only group were more likely to make 
recommendations 
regarding 
"Anxiety" 
and 
"follow-up 
examination". These results suggest that e-learning improves 
the ability of nursing students to evaluate vital signs and 
information gathering skills. Simulation training was effective 
because e-learning stimulated participants’ imagination of the 
simulation content. However, e-learning itself had no 
significant learning effect and simulation training enabled 
participants to perform the actual skills. Blended learning 
helped participants recognize the relevance of learning content 
to their professional practice. E-learning is effective in the 
study of assessment skills but must be combined with 
simulation to improve actual physical assessment, as a blended 
learning program. 
Keywords- nursing students; physical assessment; nurse 
education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nurses are increasingly expected to advance their skills 
of patient assessment, particularly the ability to provide 
advanced and accurate physical assessment [1][2]. This 
change is prompted in part by changes in the healthcare 
environment, such as advancements in medical technology, 
increased age and disease severity of patients, shortening of 
the average length of hospital stay, and an increasing 
transition to home care. Thus, nurses must begin physical 
assessment training that is suitably adapted to clinical 
practice (e.g., simulation education using simulators, and 
simulated patients) as early as possible, ideally in their basic 
nursing education. However, simulation and clinical practice 
require more practice materials, more instructors, and extra 
time which increases instructor hours per student [3]. As 
physical 
assessment 
relies 
on 
nurses 
appropriately 
integrating knowledge and technique, such as conducting an 
accurate physical examination and judging a situation based 
on available information, learning to perform these skills is 
challenging [4]. Optimal methods for teaching integrative 
content to large groups of people need to be examined to 
improve physical assessment education.  
E-learning may be effective to ensure optimal learning 
for each individual in group learning situations. In the 
context of continuing education for physicians, e-learning 
has been demonstrated to be as effective as conventional 
teacher-led education [5].  
E-learning appears to be an effective method of 
instruction, which is not limited by the learning environment 
or time for learning, at least for knowledge-level content. We 
hypothesized that e-learning would be appropriate for 

177
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
teaching physical assessment skills, and in particular the 
knowledge-level component of such skills, to nurses. 
In recent years, the utilization of e-learning in medical 
education has been expanding, marking a shift from passive 
knowledge transmission to active, self-motivated (i.e., 
lifelong) learning [6]. Self-motivated learning using e-
learning tools has become a critical feature of nursing 
education. Learning which effectively utilizes information 
and communication technology needs to be implemented at 
the early stages of nursing education. Students receiving 
basic nursing education are considered “digital natives”. 
They are from a generation for whom the internet has existed 
since birth [7], indicating that their information literacy is 
higher than that of past generations. They have a high 
likelihood of readily embracing e-learning in their education.  
Although e-learning affords numerous benefits to 
learners, it also presents a number of challenges. First, e-
learning relies on a learners’ ability to self-manage the 
learning process, and second, e-learning methods must 
possess features to maintain the desire to learn [8]. For 
example, massive open online courses (MOOCs) [9] can 
theoretically provide instruction to an extremely large 
number of participants, but they do not encourage learners to 
self-manage learning, and students tend to drop out of these 
programs due to diminished motivation. A strategy proposed 
to resolve these problems in MOOCs is “blended learning,” 
which combines face-to-face and e-learning methods. We 
hypothesized that a blended learning approach may help 
overcome the challenges of e-learning.  This aim of this 
study is to investigate the effects and influence on motivation 
of a blended learning system to improve physical assessment 
skills by nursing students. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as follows. Section II presents the methods. 
Section III provides an overview of the results. Section IV 
discusses implications and limitations. Finally, conclusions 
and future work are detailed in Section V. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants and Data Collection 
From 82 junior nursing students who had already 
completed physical assessment training, we recruited 46 
students who consented to participate (45 females and 1 male 
aged 20 to 22 years). Each participant was assigned to one of 
two groups: a blended learning group or a simulation-only 
group (Figure 1). Preliminary evaluation of participants’ 
computer literacy revealed that they were able to connect to 
the Internet and could effectively use mobile devices (e.g., 
laptop, smartphones), but had no previous e-learning 
experience. Additionally, they either did not have any 
experience with simulation training or had undergone it only 
once or twice. Data collection was conducted through 
objective assessment (i.e., correct answer rate on an e-
learning pre-test, a checklist evaluating simulation results, 
correct answer rate on an e-learning post-test) and subjective 
evaluation of the e-learning experience (questionnaire and 
interview). Training was conducted from September to 
October 2013. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Study Flow 
 
B. Design of Physical Assessment Training Using E-
learning and Simulation 
Learning 
Objectives: 
The 
objective 
of 
physical 
assessment training was to be “able to visit the patient’s 
bedside and assess their condition.” We created a checklist of 
skills that participants should be able to perform at the end of 
the training, including visual inspection, performing a 
medical interview, measuring vital signs, and performing 
auscultation and palpation. We created a simulation scenario 
wherein they conducted physical assessment of a patient 
with breast cancer receiving chemotherapy. This blended 
learning scenario was designed to create suitable educational 
materials to help nursing students understand real-world 
clinical situations, by using stories to help them better 
anticipate the realities of clinical practice. The characteristic 
points of the materials were the use of Japan’s national 
nursing examination, modified using scenarios and actual 
clinical cases, and story-type e-learning that included 
learning opportunities for assessment, clinical reasoning, 
patient safety, and communications. 
 
E-learning 
Design: 
The 
open-source 
learning 
management system, Moodle [8], was used to design the e-
learning system (Figure 2). To eliminate differences 
according to usage environment, the e-learning system 
presented learning materials in a text format and images 
using Japanese manga comics only (i.e., no video) so that the 
system could run smoothly on PCs as well as mobile devices 
such as smartphones and tablets. The purpose of using 
manga in this study is to help participants imagine the 
patient’s condition and the situation in a simulated hospital 
room. Participants were tested first to evaluate their baseline 
ability. The e-learning system presented a simulated patient, 
and the participant was expected to perform a physical 
assessment using the displayed data. The system also 
included a test on content related to the medical interview, 
physical assessment, and communication about findings, 
interventions, and patients' status to a supervising nurse. The 
test was conducted before simulation training to confirm if 
they possessed the knowledge necessary to take part in the 
simulation. As in previous research [11], the structure of the 
e-learning system involved solving problems in a format 
similar to the simulation, thus serving as an introduction to 

178
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the simulation environment. The e-learning covered the 
entire nurse-patient interaction including entry to the 
patient’s room, conduct of physical assessment, and exit 
from the room. It was configured such that participants 
answered 14 multiple choice questions and two short-answer 
questions, for a total of 16 questions (Figure 3 and Table I). 
Patients' vital signs in the e-learning post-test were different 
from the pre-test to discourage learning vital signs by rote. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  (a,b,c,d) e-learning interface (Japanese)  
 
TABLE I.  
E-LEARNING TEST CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  E-learning Flow 
     Simulation Design: The simulation was conducted in a 
simulated hospital room (Figure 4). An advanced simulator 
that enables the measurement of patients’ blood pressure, 
pulse, respiratory rate, pupil size as well as auscultation of 
lung and bowel sounds was used (ALS Simulator, Laerdal 
Medical Japan Co., Ltd.). The simulator included skin 
moulage consistent with the appearance of a patient who 
underwent breast-conserving surgery. In the medical 
interview, the patient’s verbal responses were produced by 
an instructor with a microphone and the voice came from a 
Number 
Contents 
Methods 
1 
The rule of entering a hospital room 
Multiple choice 
question 
2 
Explaination of implementation 
Free coments 
3 
Correct site of measurment of body 
temperature 
Multiple choice 
question 
4 
Nomal range of body temperature 
Multiple choice 
question 
5 
Correct site of measurment of pulse 
Multiple choice 
question 
6 
Nomal range of pluse rate 
Multiple choice 
question 
7 
Correct position for post-ope patient 
about breast cancer 
Multiple choice 
question 
8 
Measurement methods of blood pressure 
Multiple choice 
question 
9 
Nomal range of blood pressure 
Multiple choice 
question 
10 
Nomal range of respiratory rate 
Multiple choice 
question 
11 
Side effect of chemotherapy 
Multiple choice 
question 
12 
Communication with patient feels 
vomiting 
Multiple choice 
question 
13 
Check point for patient during 
chemotherapy 
Multiple choice 
question 
14 
Communication with constipation patient 
Multiple choice 
question 
15 
Physical examination about abdomen 
Multiple choice 
question 
16 
Explaination about physical findngs and 
diagnostics releted to patient condition 
Free coments 

179
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
loudspeaker built into the simulator in order to impart a 
feeling of realism, as if the subject was speaking with the 
simulator directly. The procedure for the simulation was 
explained beforehand and an orientation was conducted, 
wherein subjects touched the simulator, measured its blood 
pressure, etc. in the simulated hospital room to eliminate 
unnecessary stress due to lack of familiarity with the 
simulation process [12]. Simulation training was conducted 
for 10 minutes per person. Participants then used the 
simulation training to assess the patients' condition and 
reported using the SBAR (situation, background, assessment, 
and recommendation) method to the instructor. [13]. 
During the simulation, performance was evaluated using the 
simulation checklist. Feedback was given to participants and 
participants took an e-learning post-test to assess their 
knowledge after the program (Figure 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  (a) The instructor watches participants' performance via video to 
ensure a safe learning environment  (b)Simulated hospital room  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Simulation training flow. (a)Explanation of the simulated 
hospital room and instructor. (b,c) Participant observes the simluated 
patient to assess their condition. (10min/person)  (d) Report patient 
condition using SBAR to the instructor (3-5min/person) 

180
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Survey tool 
      The survey tool assessed participants’ opinions of the e-
learning system (including amount of learning material, 
difficulty of questions, visibility, and ease of operation) and 
its effect on their desire to learn using a five-point Likert 
scale (extremely dissatisfied, slightly unsatisfied, neither 
satisfied nor dissatisfied, slightly satisfied, and extremely 
satisfied) and a free-comment section.   
Desire to learn and factors influencing the successful 
implementation of learning were assessed using the four-
subscale Instructional Materials Motivation Survey (IMMS), 
which was created based on the ARCS model [14]. This 
model contains four components: attention, relevance, 
confidence, and satisfaction. The IMMS, comprising 36 
items, was designed to measure individuals’ reactions to 
self-driven teaching materials, such as e-learning. A five-
point Likert scale was used to rate each item, with higher 
scores indicating a more positive opinion. The IMMS 
includes items expressed negatively, which are reverse 
scored. In other words, before adding these answers to the 
total score, items given a rating of 5 were converted to have 
a rating of 1, with 4 being converted to 2, 3 remaining the 
same, 2 to 4, and 1 to 5. 
After completing the entire training sequence, 
participants who gave consent were interviewed to express 
their thoughts regarding e-learning and simulation, and to 
determine the influence of simulation training on learning 
effectiveness and the desire to learn. All participants were 
given feedback about their performance after the simulation. 
D. Study Design 
     Participants were divided into two groups by random 
assignment. The first group was simulation-only. After 
undergoing a brief orientation, participants completed a 
simulated patient visit according to the plan above. The 
clinical interaction was recorded on videotape and the video 
reviewed and scored according to a checklist.  
Participants in the blended learning group, started with a 
pre-test to evaluate their approach to clinical evaluation of a 
patient. The pre-test was conducted as an integral part of the 
e-learning program using Moodle. Following the e-learning 
component, blended learning group then did the simulation, 
in the same manner as the simulation group. Following 
simulation training, participants in blended learning group 
completed a post-test using Moodle. 
E. Statistical analysis 
     Test scores, times, and times of simulation are expressed 
as means ± standard deviations. The Wilcoxon signed rank 
test was used to assess differences in test scores before 
simulation and after. Differences in test scores were 
evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U test. For the 
questionnaire, scores are expressed as means and median 
values (quartile range). The free-response descriptions are 
listed as written by participants. All statistical analyses were 
performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 22 (IBM Corp., 
Armonk, 
NY). 
Analysis 
p-value<.05 
is 
considered 
significant. 
F. Ethical Considerations 
     This study was conducted with the approval of the 
medical ethics committee of Nagoya University, Japan. The 
survey was approved in June 2013 (No. 2013-0049). 
Subjects’ freedom to withdraw from the study and 
protection of anonymity were explained both verbally and in 
writing. Written informed consent for this study was 
obtained from each participants. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Research Participation 
A total of 46 junior nursing students participated in the 
study. Of these, 34 completed blended learning, e-learning 
and simulation, and 25 completed the questionnaire. The e-
learning post-test was completed by 17. Interviews were 
completed for four participants. Simulation training only was 
completed by 12 participants who lacked the time to 
complete the e-learning. 
B. E-learning 
Correct answers on the e-learning pre-test were given by 
was 91% ± 8.5%. The correct answer rate for the measuring 
site of temperature and pulse, and the side effects of 
chemotherapy were 74%, 69%, and 74%, respectively. 
Participants took a mean of 22 ± 9 min to complete the e-
learning.  
Among the post-test participation group (n=17), the 
correct answer rate on the e-learning post-test was 99% ± 
1.2%, which is significantly higher than the correct answer 
rate on the e-learning pre-test (87%±5.2%, p<.05), and 
reflects the effectiveness of e-learning. Participants who 
wrote ‘free-form’ comments often said that the e-learning 
was more likely to contain lists of words or wrong answers. 
In the e-learning post-test, the comments typically reflected 
the main points to be learned and described specific content, 
such as physical findings and diagnostic tests. Assessment 
of the patients' condition was also mentioned, in addition to 
recommendations about implementation of interventions 
based on patient care needs and priorities, and relevant 
patient education and teaching. The time needed for the e-
learning post-test was 14 ± 4 min, significantly shorter than 
the time needed for the pre-test. The patients' vital signs in 
the e-learning post-test were different from those in the pre-
test (Table II). The correct answer rates according to content 
are shown in Table III. Participants answered almost 
questions correctly and the answer rates are higher than on 
the pre-test. 
 
 
 
 
 

181
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
 PRE- AND POST-TEST ANSWER RATE AND TIME (N=17) 
 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF E-LEARNING PRE-TEST (N=17) 
Number 
Contents 
Pre-test 
Post test 
1 
The rules for entering a hospital 
room 
100% 
100% 
2 
Explanation of implementation 
92% 
100% 
3 
Correct site to measure 
temperature 
74% 
100% 
4 
Nomal range of body 
temperature 
97% 
100% 
5 
Correct site to measure pulse 
69% 
94% 
6 
Nomal range of pluse rate 
95% 
100% 
7 
Correct position for 
measurement of blood pressure 
for post- breast cancer 
operation patient 
74% 
97% 
8 
Methods for blood pressure 
measurement 
92% 
100% 
9 
Nomal range of blood pressure 
92% 
100% 
10 
Nomal range of respiratory rate 
97% 
97% 
11 
Side effects of chemotherapy 
74% 
74% 
12 
Communication with a 
vomiting patient 
92% 
100% 
13 
Check points for patient 
receiving chemotherapy 
74% 
100% 
14 
Communication with a 
constipated patient 
92% 
100% 
15 
Physical examination of the 
abdomen 
92% 
100% 
16 
Explaination of findngs releted 
to the patient’s condition 
91% 
97% 
 
C. Simulation 
      According to the checklists, all participants in the 
blended learning group were able to greet the patient upon 
entering the room, measure the patient’s pulse, blood 
pressure, respiratory rate, and temperature, interpret the 
measured values, and exit the room after a polite goodbye. 
Confirmation of oral intake, sleeping condition, excretion 
condition, and side effects of chemotherapy were performed 
by 28, 21, 25, and 30 participants (n=34), respectively. Only 
two participants used information obtained from actually 
touching the patient, such as auscultation and palpation. 
Comparatively, participants in the simulation group were 
able to greet the patient upon entering room and exit the 
room after a polite goodbye. However, performance of other 
skills such as the side effects of chemotherapy and excretion 
condition were lower than for participants in the blended 
learning group. No participant in this group performed 
auscultation or palpation (Table IV). After feedback about 
simulation from the instructor, all participants understand 
the importance of physical examination such as auscultation 
and palpation, and included these modalities after the 
feedback.  
The results of SBAR communication were different 
between the two groups. Participants in the blended learning 
group were more likely to make recommendations regarding 
“lack of balanced nutrition” and "risk for infection”, as 
"consultation can help ensure that a diet plan is enacted", 
"proposal to have an antiemetic administered", " Initiate 
hand washing", "Wearing mask", and " Initiate mouth 
washing ", while participants in the simulation group were 
more likely to suggest issues such as “Anxiety” and 
"follow-up examination". 
 
TABLE IV.  
SIMULATION CHECK LIST RESULTS  
Contents 
Number (%) 
Blended 
learning group 
(n=34) 
Simulation 
group (n=12) 
-Greet the patient upon entering 
the room 
n=34(100%) 
n=12(100%) 
-Measure the patient’s pulse, 
blood pressure,   
respiratory rate, and temperature, 
and then  
interpret the measured values 
n=34(100%) 
n=7(58%) 
-Exit the room after a polite 
goodbye 
n=34(100%) 
n=12(100%) 
-Side effects of chemotherapy 
n=30 (88%) 
n=2 (17%) 
-Confirmation of oral intake 
n=28 (82%) 
n=3 (25%) 
-Excretion condition 
n=25 (74%) 
n=2 (17%) 
-Sleeping condition 
n=21 (62%) 
n=3 (25%) 
-Auscultation and palpation. 
n=2 (5.9%) 
n=0 (0.0%) 
 
D. Questionnaire and Interview Results 
Evaluation of e-learning and simulation: The results of 
the questionnaire assessing the e-learning characteristics are 
shown in Table V. Participants scored a value of 3 for all 
questionnaire items. In the free-response answers, one 
participant reported that the number of questions and 
difficulty of the e-learning was “exactly the right number and 
difficulty.” Another reported that it was “a little too much to 
do in my spare time.” Regarding visibility and operability, 
which had the most free-response answers, participants listed 
various concrete problems, such as “difficult to see,” 
“difficult to use on a cellphone,” “froze mid-answer,” and 
“difficult to enter sentences on a smart phone.” 
In the interviews, participants reported the following on 
the simulation: “It was interesting, so I would like to use 
this method in classes as well”; “Because it was done in the 
e-learning, I could imagine it”; and “because I knew what 
Contents 
Pre-test 
Post-test 
Correct answers 
(mean ± standard deviation) 
87% ± 5.2% 
99% ± 1.2% 
Time (min) 
(mean ± standard deviation ) 
24 ± 6 
14± 4 

182
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
was going to be implemented beforehand [owing to the e- 
learning], I was able to do it.” One participant reported, 
“Although I understood the content, I became nervous and 
forgot it [during the simulation].” Additionally, participants 
reported contrasting views, such as “I was able to reconfirm 
my knowledge with the test” and “It was unnecessary 
because I was able to understand from the feedback during 
the simulation. 
Influence on the desire to learn: Table VI shows the 
results for responses to all IMMS items. Item 15, “The pages 
of this lesson look dry and unappealing (reverse)”, 33 “The 
content of this lesson will be useful to me” and 34 “I could 
not really understand quite a bit of the material in this 
lesson” (included in the Attention, Relevance and 
Confidence components), were scored at more than 4.5 
points. In contrast, items 1 “When I first looked at this lesson, 
I had the impression that it would be easy for me” and 9 
“There were stories, pictures, or examples that showed me 
how this material could be important to some people” 
(included in the Confidence and Relevance components), 
had a low median score (3 points). In the free-response 
answers, a number of participants expressed wanting more 
developmental content included in the e-learning. The 
participants’ comments suggested a desire to use the e-
learning system in the future, such as “In practice, I felt like I 
would be able to use it”; “I want to do normal exercises as 
well as e-learning and simulation”; and “As long as you 
know how it works, I think you could practice simulation 
similar to this with a classmate.” 
  
TABLE V.  
QUESTIONNAIRE ASSESSING E-LEARNING 
CHARACTERISTICS (N=34) 
Contents 
Mean, Median; Quartile 
range 
Number of questions 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
Time taken 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
Difficulty 
2.8, 3; 3-3 
Readability 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
Character size 
3.4, 3; 3-4 
Screen design 
3.7, 3; 3-3 
Operability 
3.0, 3; 3-3 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Effects of Blended Learning 
Although simulation is an effective learning method and 
typically provides a greater sense of understanding, it can 
cause significant mental strain, which requires learning 
support. We developed a pre-simulation e-learning system to 
provide such support. The results showed that all participants 
performed the greeting, even if it was their first experience 
with simulation. Compared to the results of the simulation 
only group, using the e-learning system helped participants 
to assess vital signs, and complete physical assessment based 
on clinical data. This success can be attributed to 
participants’ completion of the skill building and mock 
training exercises via e-learning system before the simulation. 
The e-learning program enabled participants to imagine the 
content of the simulation and thus integrate relevant 
knowledge and skills into their simulation experience. 
However, participants did not completely master 
auscultation and palpation, according to information 
obtained from the interviews [15]. Therefore, the e-learning 
items related to this content may need to be modified. 
Specifically, the e-learning system can be modified such that, 
when repeatedly used, items that have been completely 
learned are excluded, enabling users to focus on items that 
were not completely mastered. Such a modification allows 
for the delivery of deliberate and effective training aligned 
with the learning objectives of nurse education, referred to as 
deliberate practice [16] [17]. In this study, students’ ability to 
explain the side effects of chemotherapy did not increase the 
correct answer rate. Thus, the contents should be revised to 
be more effective. Learning self-management has been 
identified as a key factor for continued education via e-
learning [7]. To succeed in remote self-learning, participants 
may need to receive explanations of the necessity of post-
training tests in acquiring knowledge related to medical 
interviews, auscultation, and palpation, which are areas that 
remained challenging after the simulation training. 
    The results of SBAR communication were different in 
the two groups, and suggest that participants using e-learning 
decided on a recommendation based on information gathered 
from reading the patient’s expressions and other situational 
and specific factors, while participants in the simulation 
group made their decisions based on general information. 
B. Effects of E-learning and Training on Motivation to 
Learn 
The ARCS model is a method of organizing factors that 
influence the motivation to learn [18], described by Suzuki 
as follows: A) Attention is captured. ‘This looks 
interesting—there’s something to this”, R) Next, one realizes 
the relationship to themselves; knowing the learning task and 
realizing that ‘it looks rewarding and it is related to my 
values.’ Not only is the future value of the task significant, 
but also enjoying the learning process is valued. However, 
even if one finds significance in their learning, one can lose 
motivation when one recognizes that there is low possibility 
to accomplish the learning goal. C) On the contrary, if one 
has successful experiences in the first learning stages and can 
associate the experience with the endeavor, leading to the 
perception that ‘I can manage it,’ confidence is facilitated. S) 
Satisfaction: If one can feel fulfillment after looking back on 
the learning process and its accomplishment, it then leads to 
motivation to learn.” In the present study, participants 
recognized e-learning as “having an important relationship to 
themselves,” and they utilized this recognition as motivation 
to learn. To improve learners’ confidence, we propose the 
following strategies: 1) Share evaluation criteria and allow 
learners to tackle tasks with a prediction of their possibility 
for success in mind; 2) adjust the difficulty of the system so 
that they can have a meaningful and successful experience;  

183
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
TABLE VI.  
RESULTS OF THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS MOTIVATION SURVEY (N=34) 
Items 
Contents 
ARCS 
reverse 
Mean, 
Median; 
Quartile 
2 
There was something interesting at the beginning of this lesson that got my attention. 
A 
 
3.5, 4; 4-4 
8 
These materials are eye-catching. 
A 
 
3.7, 3; 3-5 
11 
The quality of the writing helped to hold my attention. 
A 
 
3.5, 3; 3-4 
12 
This lesson is so abstract that it was hard to keep my attention on it. 
A 
○ 
4.2, 4; 4-5 
15 
The pages of this lesson look dry and unappealing. 
A 
○ 
4.5, 5; 5-5 
17 
The way the information is arranged on the pages helped keep my attention. 
A 
 
3.7, 3; 3-4 
20 
This lesson has things that stimulated my curiosity. 
A 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
22 
The amount of repetition in this lesson caused me to get bored sometimes. 
A 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
24 
I learned some things that were surprising or unexpected. 
A 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
28 
The variety of reading passages, exercises, illustrations, etc., helped keep my attention on the lesson. 
A 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
29 
The style of writing is boring. 
A 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
31 
There are so many words on each page that it is irritating. 
A 
○ 
4.4, 5; 5-5 
6 
It is clear to me how the content of this material is related to things I already know. 
R 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
9 
There were stories, pictures, or examples that showed me how this material could be important to 
some people. 
R 
 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
10 
Completing this lesson successfully was important to me. 
R 
 
4.3, 4; 4-5 
16 
The content of this material is relevant to my interests. 
R 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
18 
There are explanations or examples of how people use the knowledge in this lesson. 
R 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
23 
The content and style of writing in this lesson convey the impression that its content is worth 
knowing. 
R 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
26 
This lesson was not relevant to my needs because I already knew most of it. 
R 
○ 
4.2, 4; 4-5 
30 
I could relate the content of this lesson to things I have seen, done, or thought about in my own life. 
R 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
33 
The content of this lesson will be useful to me. 
R 
 
4.6, 5; 5-5 
1 
When I first looked at this lesson, I had the impression that it would be easy for me. 
C 
 
 
2.8, 3; 3-3 
3 
This material was more difficult to understand than I would like for it to be. 
C 
 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
4 
After reading the introductory information, I felt confident that I knew what I was supposed to learn 
from this lesson. 
C 
 
3.4, 3; 3-4 
7 
Many of the pages had so much information that it was hard to pick out and remember the important 
points. 
C 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
13 
As I worked on this lesson, I was confident that I could learn the content. 
C 
 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
19 
The exercises in this lesson were too difficult. 
C 
○ 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
25 
After working on this lesson for awhile, I was confident that I would be able to pass a test on it. 
C 
 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
34 
I could not really understand quite a bit of the material in this lesson. 
C 
○ 
4.6, 5; 5-5 
35 
The good organization of the content helped me be confident that I would learn this material. 
C 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
5 
Completing the exercises in this lesson gave me a satisfying feeling of accomplish¬ment. 
S 
 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
14 
I enjoyed this lesson so much that I would like to know more about this topic. 
S 
 
3.8, 4; 4-4 
21 
I really enjoyed studying this lesson. 
S 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
27 
The wording of feedback after the exercises, or of other comments in this lesson, helped me feel 
rewarded for my effort. 
S 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
32 
It felt good to successfully complete this lesson. 
S 
○ 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
36 
It was a pleasure to work on such a well-designed lesson. 
S 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 

184
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
and 3) provide opportunities and feedback that regulate 
learning, thus encouraging them to be aware that they can 
achieve their goal by themselves [19]. A number of 
participants commented that the training could be 
implemented as peer training and skill review. Repetitive 
practice through sharing stories with peers and skill review 
have been shown to help learners acquire self-confidence 
[20]. Further consideration of task difficulty will also 
facilitate continuous learning in this context. 
C.  Determinants of Successful E-learning 
E-learning relies on independent learning, which means 
that there is an inherent risk of dropouts. Learning 
objectives were designed to help foster learning motivation 
and created teaching materials relevant to real-world clinical 
settings. In this study, the item “The content of this lesson 
will be useful to me” was rrated by a mean of 4.6 points, 
indicating that blended learning sustained participants’ 
motivation. Additionally, the item “I could not really 
understand quite a bit of the material in this lesson” was 
reverse scored, also a mean of 4.6 points. The difficulty of 
blended learning and acquisition of confidence through 
simulation may be factors that influenced participants’ 
motivation. The structure of the blended learning needs to 
be improved such that it can help participants gain 
confidence in their ability to perform the learning exercises 
and promote self-learning through repetitive practice and 
detailed explanations for items identified as weaknesses. 
1) Operability is another factor that may have 
influenced participation. We expected this tendency in 
designing the system, and had tested the teaching material 
on smartphones prior to the survey. However, the interview 
results showed that when smartphones were used, the 
participants reported longer working time and poorer 
operability. This finding coincides with previous reports that 
the physical environment for online learning, such as 
Internet and terminal devices, influences compliance with e-
learning [21]. For example, poor video teaching materials 
can reduce the motivation to learn [22]. Future research is 
needed to investigate additional factors related to operability, 
the differential effects of computers and smartphones, and 
the effects of the tendency to use smartphones for mobile 
learning, which is common among nursing students. 
2) An interactive digital simulator for problem solving 
and clinical reasoning, both of which require physical 
assessment skills, was developed in Europe [23]. The digital 
simulator was developed for medical students and clinicians 
and uses virtual patients. Problem solving and clinical 
reasoning are needed in clinical nursing practice [24]. 
Future studies are needed to develop learning materials for 
nurses to acquire these required competencies. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
       These results show that e-learning was partially 
effective to improving physical assessment by nursing 
students. Additionally, e-learning helped participants 
recognize the relevance of learning content to their 
professional practice. It is necessary to combine e-learning 
and simulation to improve physical assessment ability in a 
blended learning program. However, the results also suggest 
that e-learning is insufficient for augmenting skills of 
auscultation and palpation, suggesting that teaching 
materials related to these skills must be improved using 
simulation training. Further development of e-learning, to 
make it more functional and to ensure that it sustains 
motivation to learn will be necessary, and requires 
continued study and evaluation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Part of this research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for 
Young Scientists (B), 25862108, from Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS), JAPAN. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.S. Yagi, N. Miura, and S. Tsuzuku, “Effects of a Blended 
Learning System on Improving the Physical Assessment 
Ability of Nursing Students,” in Proc. eTELEMED 2017, 
Nice, France. 
[2] J. K. Hayden, R. A. Smiley, M. Alexander, S. Kardong-
Edgren, and P. R. Jeffries, “The NCSBN National Simulation 
Study: A longitudinal, randomized, controlled study replacing 
clinical hours with simulation in prelicensure nursing 
education,” J. Nurs. Regul., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. S1–S64, 2014. 
[3] P. Moreno-Ger, J. Torrente, J. Bustamante, C. Fernández-
Galaz, B. Fernández-Manjón, and M. D. Comas-Rengifo, 
“Application of a low-cost web-based simulation to improve 
students’ 
practical 
skills 
in 
medical 
education, 
”   
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 79, no. 6, 
pp. 459-467, 2010. 
[4] L. Bickley and P. G. Szilagyi, Bates’ guide to physical 
examination and history-taking. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.  
[5] M. Fordis, J. E. King, C. M. Ballantyne, P. H. Jones, K. H. 
Schneider, S. J. Spann, et al., “Comparison of the 
instructional efficacy of Internet-based CME with live 
interactive CME workshops: a randomized controlled trial,” 
JAMA, vol. 294, no. 9, pp. 1043–1051, 2005.  
[6] J. G. Ruiz, M. J. Mintzer, and R. M. Leipzig, “The impact of 
e-learning in medical education,” Acad. Med., vol. 81, no. 3, 
pp. 207–212, 2006. 
[7] C. Jones, R. Ramanau, S. Cross, and G. Healing, “Net 
generation or Digital Natives: Is there a distinct new 
generation entering university?,” Comput. Educ., vol. 54, no. 
3, pp. 722–732, 2010. 
[8] J. Keller and K. Suzuki, “Learner motivation and e-learning 
design: A multinationally validated process,” J. Educ. Media., 
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 229–239, 2004. 
[9] J. Daniel, “Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of 
myth, paradox and possibility,” J. Interac. Media Educ., vol. 
2012, no. 3, 2012. 

185
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[10] M. Dougiamas and P. Taylor, “Moodle: Using learning 
communities to create an open source course management 
system,” World Conference on Educational Media and 
Technology, vol. 1, pp. 171–178, 2003. 
[11] M. S. Yagi, K. Ikegami, Y. Shibata, S. Shiba, and M. Miyoshi, 
“The design of the story-based learning materials to imagine 
realistic clinical practice using goal-based scenario theory,” 
Japan Journal of Health Professional Development, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 69–76, 2015.  
[12] C. Arthur, T. Levett-Jones, A. Kable, "Quality indicators for 
the design and implementation of simulation experiences: a 
Delphi study," Nurse Education Today vol. 33, no.11, 
pp.1357-1361, 2013. 
[13] M. Leonard, S. Graham, D. Bonacum, "The human factor: the 
critical importance of effective teamwork and communication 
in providing safe care," Quality and Safety in Health Care, vol. 
13, suppl 1, pp. i85-i90, 2004. 
[14] J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and  
performance: The  ARCS model approach. New York City: 
Springer Science & Business Media,  2009. 
[15] J. H. Barsuk, W. C.McGaghie, E. R.Cohen, K. J.O’Leary, and 
D. B. Wayne, “Simulation-based mastery learning reduces 
complications during central venous catheter insertion in a 
medical intensive care unit,” Crit. Care Med., vol. 37, no. 10, 
pp. 2697–2701, 2009. 
[16] K. A. Ericsson, K. Nandagopal, and R. W. Roring, “Toward a 
science of exceptional achievement,” Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, vol. 1172, no. 1, pp. 199–217, 2009. 
[17] M. H. Oermann, S. Kardong-Edgren, T. Odom-Maryon, B. F 
Hallmark, D. Hurd, N. Rogers, et al., “Deliberate practice of 
motor skills in nursing education: CPR as exemplar,” Nurs. 
Educ. Perspec., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 311–315, 2011. 
[18] J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and 
performance: The ARCS model approach. New York City: 
Springer Science & Business Media,  2009.  
[19] K. Suzuki, “On the Framework of Designing and Developing 
‘appealing instruction’: The ARCS Motivation Model,” The 
Japan Association for Educational Media Study, vol. 1, no. 1, 
pp. 50–61, 1995. 
[20] K. M. Lundberg, “Promoting self-confidence in clinical 
nursing students,” Nurse Educ., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 86–89, 
2008. 
[21] C. Power, H. Petrie, V. Sakharov, and D. Swallow, “Virtual 
learning environments: another barrier to blended and e-
learning,” in International Conference on Computers for 
Handicapped Persons, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 
519–526, 2010. 
[22] M. S. Yagi, N. Kumagai, C. Funakoshi, and M. Masuda, 
“Development of e-learning material for sophomore nursing 
students to simulate clinical practice,” The Association for 
Medical Education in Europe, 270, #4JJ16 (126905), 2016. 
[23] Body Interact. http://bodyinteract.com/ [retrieved: February, 
2017] 
[24] P. E. Benner, P. L. Hooper-Kyriakidis, and D. Stannard,  
Clinical wisdom and interventions in acute and critical care: 
A thinking-in-action approach. New York City: Springer 
Publishing Company, pp. 10–11, 2011G. Eason, B. Noble, 
and I. N. Sneddon, “On certain integrals of Lipschitz-Hankel 
type involving products of Bessel functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. London, vol. A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955. 
 

