Business Process Evaluation in 
Agile Business Process Management Using Quality Models
Michael Gebhart 
iteratec GmbH 
Stuttgart, Germany 
michael.gebhart@iteratec.de 
 
Marco Mevius, Peter Wiedmann 
HTWG Konstanz 
Constance, Germany 
mmevius/pewiedma@htwg-konstanz.de
 
 
Abstract—Agile business process management is an adaptation 
of the agile methodology, which is well-known in the area of 
software development. It supports the tight and efficient 
collaboration between customer and process analysts when 
designing processes. However, this methodology requires a 
governance approach that ensures the high quality of the 
processes. This article shows the usage of quality models to 
evaluate 
business processes 
in 
agile 
business 
process 
management environments and its specific challenges. To 
illustrate the approach, an existing quality model is reused and 
formalized. Afterwards, a business process in the context of 
offer management is captured and evaluated by means of this 
quality model.  
Keywords-business process; design; quality; agile; business 
process management; ISO 25000. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article is an extended version of [1]. Fast and 
efficient adaptability to business processes becomes an 
increasingly important competitive factor for organization 
[2]. For that reason, high business process flexibility is an 
important 
requirement 
for 
organizations, 
such 
as 
administration sections within companies, to counter current 
challenges. Among other things, explicit knowledge about 
the structure and functionality of business processes is 
essential for the understanding of organizational sequences 
[3]. For example, business processes, in which citizens and 
experts of public administration participate together, should 
be accessible for both sides easily. For that purpose, a 
targeted enhancement of Business Process Management 
(BPM) with the help of agile advantages generates new 
significant 
potential 
for 
the 
automation, 
modeling, 
interaction, and optimization of business processes. The idea 
of agility is described as the ability to balance flexibility and 
structure [4] and to minimize risks for instance by 
conforming project changes rapidly [5].  
In the past, different (agile) approaches have been 
developed. One approach that is also chosen in this article is 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 [6][7]. It describes a combination of Business 
Process Management and Business Process Model and 
Notation (BPMN) with the ambition of making BPM easier. 
In reference to the agile software engineering, which is 
already well-known and used in a lot of organizations and 
projects, the agile BPM method adapts aspects from it. The 
approach extents and supports the interaction between every 
participant with focus on more coherency without 
confronting them with unneeded complexity. Furthermore, 
it follows an empirical, incremental and iterative concept to 
increase predictability of the process quality and to reduce 
project risks [6]. For instance, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of capturing a business process can be 
enhanced significantly. 
However, within the prediction and control phase of the 
business process quality, the participants have to know what 
constitutes a good process and how to evaluate processes 
[8]. Today, there are no general rules, which define what a 
good business process is. The literature suggests aspects, 
such as the customer value, process standardization, and the 
employee well-being to measure quality [9]. But this 
information is not sufficient to perform a systematic or even 
automatic 
quality 
analysis 
of 
business 
processes. 
Aggravating this situation, contradictory constraints and 
needs – for instance speed and quality – generate the need to 
focus on the delivering value [10].  
To enable a systematic quality assurance in agile BPM 
from a functional point of view, this article introduces the 
application of quality gates and quality models. Quality 
gates define a specific point within a project to evaluate 
determined maturity and sustainability [11]. These quality 
gates appear frequently during the application of an agile 
BPM approach, such as BPM(N)Easy1.2 and ensure the 
synchronization and acceptance of all participants. For 
instance, an automated business process has to correspond 
with all predefined requirements and expectations. The 
quality gates considered in this article are supposed to close 
the gap especially at the beginning and during the business 
process modeling step. The requirements and expectations 
are represented by quality models that enable a systematic 
evaluation of business processes. In this article, existing 
work in the context of business process evaluation is reused. 
I.e., existing quality models are evaluated and the preferred 
one is adapted [12] for applying and measuring it in BPM 
environments. Especially agile environments with short 
iterations and high interaction are suited for the continuous 
monitoring and improving of the business process quality. 
279
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The article is organized as follows: Section II analyses 
relevant literature regarding business process modeling. 
Furthermore, quality models for BPM and their application 
for agile BPM are discussed. Section III introduces the 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 method and demonstrates where and how 
quality models can be applied within an agile approach.  In 
Section IV, the application of a certain business process 
quality model in agile BPM is evaluated by means of a 
scenario from offer management. Section V introduces the 
tools, which have been applied during the evaluation. 
Especially, the internals of the quality analysis tool are 
revealed. Section VI presents the conclusion and discusses 
future research work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section describes the fundamental terms and existing 
work in the context of modeling and evaluating business 
processes. Regarding the quality of business processes, work 
that targets the quality from both a functional and a technical 
point of view is considered. Furthermore, this work is 
examined in detail regarding its applicability in agile BPM 
environments. As the approach chosen in this article was 
already applied in related disciplines, the according results 
are presented. 
A. Modeling of Business Processes 
In the following, work in the context of modeling 
business processes with focus on agile BPM is presented. 
The 
introduced 
approaches 
address 
especially 
the 
involvement of all participants within modeling business 
processes.  
The process of continuous improvement and involvement 
of stakeholders is well-known in the area of quality 
management. Total cycle time or Six Sigma are examples cf. 
[13]. A variant of Six Sigma, the Lean Sigma approach, 
represents the combination of Lean and Six Sigma. This 
approach helps to improve the product and process quality 
on the one hand, and on the other hand it increases process 
performance. Audits, which are conducted internally or 
externally, are used to interview the user directly and to draw 
from the interview results conclusions about possible 
improvements in quality. These improvements lead not only 
to, e.g., an increased quality of business process activities 
execution, 
moreover, 
through 
the 
interviews 
the 
understanding of business processes can be enhanced.  
In the context of BPM, Cheng et al. describe [14] the 
problem, which exists between the connection of business 
rules and business models. For instance, business rules can 
have compulsory possibilities of a sequence. These 
possibilities depend on business rules, which in the first step 
are often formulated in common language, e.g., “The 
customer is not allowed to order articles without logging in”. 
Cheng et al. suggest a framework, which supports the 
mapping of business rules and business processes and assists 
the stakeholders in identifying inconsistencies. Hereby, the 
usage of this framework simplifies the “connections” of 
business rules and models, but takes not account of their 
quality itself explicitly.   
Antunes et al. [15] focus on the integration of end users. 
They developed an approach and tool to support business 
process modeling from the perspective of end-users. For this 
purpose, Antunes et al. use concepts of representation and 
visual composition. In contrast to other approaches, there is 
not only a common language support, e.g., by adding 
annotations to a business process activity. The approach 
extends these annotations by adding pictures to a business 
process element. This additional illustration leads to a higher 
understanding of the modeled business processes. 
The approach of Bittmann [16] adds additional 
information as natural language artefacts to business 
processes. Every business process activity can be described 
more in detail by adding a written text. Within this text, the 
identifier label of a business process activity, such as 
“entering data”, has to be mentioned and linked. The 
approach fosters the higher integration of employees, 
especially of the operative business (non IT specialists). 
B. Quality of Business Processes 
In this section, work regarding the quality of business 
processes is introduced. This work is considered from both a 
functional and technical point of view. Furthermore, the 
applicability in agile BPM as introduced in the section before 
is examined. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
and the International Electro technical Commission (IEC) 
have created standards regarding the quality of software 
products. Both ISO/IEC 9126 [17] and the successor 
ISO/IEC 25000 ff. [18] define relevant terms for software 
product 
quality. 
Furthermore, 
they 
describe 
quality 
characteristics, their subcharacteristics, and their final quality 
measure elements. They hereby provide a wide overview of 
measuring the quality of software products. In order to apply 
these standards on business processes, the term “business 
process” has to be distinguished from “business process 
model”. As the standards refer to software products, they can 
only be directly applied on business process models as 
software artifacts. Also, in this case, only a subset of 
described characteristics is applicable. Heinrich et al. [19], 
Sánchez-González et al. [20], and YeongSeok et al. [21] 
show the adaptation of these standards on business process 
models. However, according to the introduction, we focus on 
the quality of business processes and their content instead of 
the models as software artifacts and their syntactical 
correctness etc. For that reason, the standards cannot be 
applied. Nevertheless, they give hints about characteristics 
that might be important for business processes as well.  
Further standards regarding quality management focus on 
quality management systems. Examples are ISO 9000 ff. 
[22], or branch-specific manifestations, such as the European 
Norm (EN) 9100 for aerospace. There also exist standards 
for the quality management in projects, such as ISO 10006. 
Even though they consider the quality in business domains 
and in some cases also describe business processes, the 
quality of the business processes themselves is not explained 
in detail. This is also the case when choosing Capability 
Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) or IT Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL).  
280
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In [9], Krogstie describes criteria for so-called good 
processes. He introduces dimensions of value that is valid for 
most customer groups. Furthermore, he summarizes 
heuristics for good business processes. Even though no 
metrics are provided, these heuristics can be good starting 
points to derive more concrete quality aspects that again 
enable a systematic and automatic evaluation of business 
processes. In addition, this work helps to understand the 
purpose of business processes and why it is important to 
have good processes. Thus, it forms the framework for a 
quality model as it focuses on the motivation and strategic 
goals of business processes.  
In order to enable a more systematic quality analysis of 
business processes, Kneuper created the quality model 
Gokyo Ri based on existing standards, such as ISO 9000, 
CMMI, and ITIL [23]. It refines the quality of business 
processes so that their quality can be determined. Even 
though this quality model focuses on business processes and 
their content, the quality model is still too abstract to be used 
in agile business process management environments. In agile 
projects the quality has to be determined in short intervals 
best automated based on modeled business processes. Thus, 
Gokyo Ri has to be further refined until at least a subset of 
the quality attributes can be determined automatically or with 
short user interaction intervals. 
Similarly, Lohrmann et al. introduce quality attributes for 
business processes [8]. Also, in this case the quality 
attributes are derived from business-related quality concerns 
and focus on the content of the business process and not the 
artifact. Lohrmann et al. distinguish between the efficacy and 
efficiency of business processes that can be either 
determined on basis of business process models and running 
instances. Former is called business process design and 
implement efficacy and efficiency. Latter is called business 
process enactment efficacy and efficiency. Even though 
Lohrmann et al. do not describe an entire quality model, they 
introduce quality attributes that are relevant for the business 
process quality as considered in this article. Nevertheless, 
similar to the quality model introduced by Kneuper the 
quality attributes are still too abstract to be applied in an 
agile environment. They first have to be refined so that they 
can be determined either based on business process models 
or by answering simple questions. 
Regarding a more technical point of view, Suarez et al. 
[24] describe best practices for modeling business processes 
using certain languages, such as the Business Process Model 
and Notation (BPMN). Even though this article also focuses 
on BPMN as modeling language, these best practices mostly 
consider syntactical correctness of created models or related 
issues. The content of the processes and their quality from a 
functional point of view is not considered. The described 
best practices are also not aligned with a holistic quality 
model. So, the impact of these best practices on abstract 
quality characteristics is not obvious. The best practices can 
increase the quality of modeled business processes. They are 
also applicable in agile BPM environments as they can be 
easily determined or can be even measured automatically by 
tools. Nevertheless, they do not target the kind of business 
process quality considered in this article. 
C. Related Application in Service-Oriented Architectures 
The approach chosen in this article has already been 
successfully applied in other areas. One example is the 
evaluation of web services in service-oriented architectures: 
Today, a lot of best practices exist that describe how to 
design web services so that they fulfill wide-spread quality 
attributes, such as loose coupling and autonomy. For 
example, Erl [25][26], Cohen [27], and Josuttis [28] describe 
such best practices. Whenever the IT architect or a developer 
has to decide, how to design a web service, these best 
practices should be considered. However, due to the 
increasing complexity of architectures, it is nearly impossible 
to consider them all without mistakes. Sometimes, the best 
practices require an understanding of the entire architecture 
of the considered system. And in addition, in some cases, 
they refer to technical details that have to be completely 
understood to apply the best practices successfully. 
Furthermore, similar to the quality models for business 
processes, these best practices are described informally and 
require interpretation effort. This hampers their efficient 
application in real-world projects. IT architects and 
developers have to map the textually described best practices 
onto the technology used in the concrete project. This again 
may result in wrong applications of the best practices.  
For that reason, in [28], Gebhart et al. introduced metrics 
that reuse the mentioned work of Erl et al. to evaluate web 
services regarding the introduced best practices in a 
comprehensible and repeatable manner. These metrics are 
formalized so that they can be systematically measured on 
web services described using the Service oriented 
architecture Modeling Language (SoaML) [29] as profile for 
the Unified Modeling Language (UML) [30]. By means of 
these metrics, IT architects and developers know exactly, 
what elements of the modeled architecture have to be 
considered to evaluate a service. Based on mapping rules 
introduced by Gebhart et al. in [31], the metrics could be 
mapped to concrete implementation artifacts. This enables 
the systematic evaluation of implemented web services using 
Web Services Description Language (WSDL) [32] to 
describe the service interface, XML Schema Definition 
(XSD) [33] for the data types, and Service Component 
Architecture (SCA) [34] to implement the internal logic. The 
application of the metrics is demonstrated for a geographical 
information system by Gebhart et al. in [35]. Also, in this 
case, existing abstract quality attributes were refined to 
enable a fully or partially automated quality assurance. As 
result, a solution was created to ensure the systematical 
creation of a flexible and maintainable architecture [36].  
D. Summary and Need for Action 
The overview shows that there exists a lot of work in the 
context of modeling and evaluating business processes as 
required in this article. However, some work focuses on best 
practices or quality attributes from a functional point of view 
that are too abstract to be measured directly and especially 
too heavyweight to be determined in agile environments. 
Other work considers fine-grained quality aspects, such as 
syntactical correctness that can be easily determined, 
however does not provide value for the quality of business 
281
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

process from a functional point of view. This article shows 
how to fill this gap by reusing existing quality models that 
focus on quality attributes from a functional point of view 
and breaking these quality attributes down into aspects that 
can be either directly measured on business process models 
or easily answered by process analysts. The approach has 
already been successfully applied in the context of service-
oriented architectures. For that reason, the methodology to 
derive measurable quality aspects from quality models was 
reused. Furthermore, when evaluating the approach, the 
same quality analysis has been applied. 
III. 
BUSINESS PROCESS EVALUATION IN AGILE BUSINESS 
PROCESS MANAGEMENT USING QUALITY MODELS 
In order to evaluate business processes in an agile BPM 
project, on the one hand, the point of time when an 
evaluation of the business process is possible and useful has 
to be determined. For that purpose, the approach of agile 
BPM has to be examined in detail. On the other hand, an 
appropriate quality model has to be identified and adapted so 
that the quality of the business process can be determined in 
a systematic and repeatable manner. 
A. Agile BPM  
As mentioned before, there exist different approaches of 
agile BPM. To identify the point of time, when to apply a 
quality model in an agile BPM project, these approaches 
have to be analyzed in detail. For instance, Meziani [37] 
introduces a method called AGILIPO. This method 
describes an approach, which focuses especially on the 
integration 
of 
software 
systems 
and 
organizational 
knowledge. To automate business processes, the method 
uses concepts as used in agile software engineering. In 
addition, AGILIPO suggests the usage of social media tools 
to interact with all stakeholders. For example, the 
stakeholders can write comments (common language) on 
existing business process models. This feedback can be used 
to optimize current models in a next iteration.  
Another approach is provided by Schnabel et al. [38]. 
They outline the Lightweight Process Modelling process 
and the Language for Lightweight Process Modelling 
(LLPM). The formal semantic of LLPM is focused on a 
simple graphical form. LLPM “introduces goals as unbound 
activities that are bound to a particular service either at 
design time or at runtime by composition tools” [38]. As a 
result, business process models can be maintained more 
flexible and agile. 
In the following, the agile approach BPM(N)Easy1.2 [6] is 
used to show when (time of application) during the 
methodology the quality model is expected to be applied. 
This approach has been chosen, because of this holistic 
concept behind. BPM(N)Easy1.2 enables highly sophisticated 
agile BPM. It covers all aspects of BPM – from process 
design and process execution to process controlling with 
focus on the integration of all process participants. The 
following Fig. 1 provides an overview of the approach and 
the including quality gates. Latter are displayed as stars: 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of the BPM(N)Easy1.2 approach. 
The approach consists of two connected cycles. One 
cycle is used to capture new BPMNEasy1.2 models and short 
user stories. BPMNEasy1.2 represents the modeling language 
of BPM(N)Easy1.2 and a subset of BPMN. Both BPMNEasy1.2 
models and short user stories formulate the requirements of 
the activities within a business process. The models are used 
to design the flow in general and set up a first model very 
easily. The short user stories describe further information, 
e.g., additional business rules. The formulated requirements 
are the basis for the modeling and implementation of an 
enriched BPMN 2.0 business process. For the enrichment, a 
BPMNEasy1.2 model and a number of user stories are selected 
to work on. Furthermore, the business process is modeled 
on the business user’s point of view. In addition, in 
consultation with a business user, an IT expert is able to use 
the business process model to automate the process. Once 
the modeling and implementation stages are completed, the 
resulting BPMN 2.0 models are transferred to a final 
control. Within this control all participants assure that the 
result, e.g., an automated business process corresponds with 
the BPMNEasy1.2 models and formulated short user stories 
(synchronization and acceptance).  
Immediately after the acceptance, new requirements can 
be taken and transformed into a business process model or 
implementation. If defined key performance indicators show 
optimization potential (analysis and optimizing cycle), new 
BPMNEasy1.2 models or short user stories will be generated. 
The several iteration and high collaboration between every 
participant allows the continuous monitoring of the business 
process quality [6].  
However, in general there are still different weak points 
in agile methods. Mohammad [39] says that short response 
times and high interaction during the agile development do 
not require the writing of documents which can lead to a 
reduced quality of documentation. Furthermore, Mohammad 
[39] mentions the increased collaboration time of the 
participants. But in fact, in some circumstances there is not 
enough time for the required coordination or the participants 
are not at the same (physical) location [39]. In [40], agile 
methods are described as a risk of large or complex projects. 
The magnitude of uncertainty is increased. Therefore, agile 
282
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

methods are mistrusted in most organizations. To counteract 
these disadvantages and related lack of quality, it is required 
to introduce quality checks during the application of an agile 
approach. In [41], quality checks are suggested to be applied 
to different steps of agile approaches.  
According to [41] and with the assumption that software 
engineering has the same goals as BPM, e.g., cost reduction 
and collaboration enhancement, the quality gates listed in 
Table I are suggested for agile BPM approaches: 
TABLE I. QUALITY GATES 
Quality Gate 
Time of Application 
Comment 
1 
Formulation of user 
stories 
Continuous feedback and 
collaboration between 
every participant  
2 
Modeling of business 
process 
 
3 
Automation of 
business process 
Test of process application 
4 
Acceptance testing 
 
 
Today, some of the quality gates have already been 
implemented to assure the determined quality. For instance, 
the quality gate 1 can be applied by a continuous feedback 
process between every participant or by means of standard 
assurance tests of the process application [42]. For quality 
gates 1, 3 and 4, methods already exist, which can be used 
to assess the quality, e.g., real tests of a process applications. 
Therefore, in this article, the quality gate number 2 that 
is applied during the modeling of business process is 
considered to improve and guarantee the expected quality. 
B. Quality Model Choice and Adaptation 
In the previous section, quality gates during an agile 
methodology have been identified. One quality gate 
considers the quality of modeled business process. This 
section shows how this quality gate can be supported by IT. 
In order to support this quality assurance, an appropriate 
quality model has to be prepared. For that purpose, first the 
most appropriate existing quality model has to be identified. 
Afterwards, its direct applicability has to be verified. As 
described in Section II, appropriate quality models are those 
introduced by Lohrmann et al. [8] and Kneuper [23]. 
However, in both cases, the introduced quality attributes 
have to be adapted for requirements in agile environments: 
As mentioned before, the quality of business processes has to 
be determined in short intervals, which again requires a 
quality analysis to be easy and lightweight. This requirement 
cannot be fulfilled by these existing quality models and the 
contained quality attributes. They are not formalized using 
metrics which hampers their automatic determination based 
on business process models. Furthermore, the informal 
description requires interpretation effort that can result in 
misunderstandings and wrong measures. This is a typical 
issue when performing quality analyses and has already been 
identified for other domains, such as the quality analysis of 
service-oriented architectures by Gebhart et al. [43].  
Thus, after choosing a certain quality model, the quality 
attributes have to be refined if necessary until more fine-
grained and comprehensible quality attributes are identified 
so that no interpretation is necessary any longer. They are 
called quality indicators, formalized as metric, and return a 
measure. It is not necessary that a quality indicator can be 
fully automatically measured on process models. If this is not 
possible as they require further knowledge, such as domain 
knowledge, the only condition is that it is possible to 
formulate unambiguous questions that can be answered by 
experts and do not require interpretation. Summarized, for 
every function and variable used within a metric, the criteria 
listed in Table II have to be fulfilled. 
TABLE II. CRITERIA FOR FUNCTIONS AND VARIABLES IN METRICS 
Criterion 
Description 
Technology 
Representation 
for variables and 
functions 
A variable or function represents a certain aspect 
within the considered technologies, i.e., business 
process models in this case. This enables an 
automatic measurement.  
Comprehensible 
Question  
for variables and 
functions 
If Technology Reflection is not fulfilled, for 
example if expert knowledge is necessary, a 
comprehensible and unamabigious question can be 
formulated that can be answered by experts and 
does not require interpretation. 
Composition  
for functions 
If the previous criteria are not fulfilled, the 
considered function is composed of other 
functions using automatically measurable 
operators. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
In this section, the methodology introduced in the 
previous section is applied and evaluated by means of a real-
world example. For that purpose, first, the scenario is 
introduced. Afterwards, the quality criteria for business 
processes are exemplarily derived from a quality model. 
They constitute the basis for the business process analysis. In 
a next step, the business process is modeled. Finally, this 
business process is analyzed and revised using the criteria 
established before. The approach is shown in Fig. 2.  
 
 
Figure 2: Quality gate and evaluation approach. 
283
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Scenario 
The considered scenario “offer creation” originates from 
one of our industry partners. The activities in this scenario 
describe how to create a new offer. Participating roles are 
Sales, Accounting, and Calculation.  
The corresponding business process is expected to be 
modeled with BPMNEasy1.2. Besides the agile BPM 
methodology 
BPM(N)Easy1., 
BPMNEasy1.2 
is 
also 
an 
appropriate business process modeling language which uses 
BPMN 2.0 [44] but reduces its complexity so that it fits an 
agile BPM approach. After modeling the process using 
BPMNEasy1.2, the resulting model can be enhanced, e.g., to 
create a model for business process automation.  
To verify the correctness of the business process model, 
participants interacted with each other closely. All 
definitions were moderated and monitored by a BPM expert. 
If for example the IT experts had some understanding issues, 
these could be dealt with by direct dialog with the other 
participants. 
B. Quality Criteria 
To ensure the high quality of the business process model 
that is expected to be created for the scenario, first, the 
quality criteria have to be defined. These criteria constitute 
the basis for the evaluation. As described before, an existing 
quality model should be reused when possible. Based on this 
model, quality indicators should be derived as exactly 
formalized measures. Furthermore, for each quality indicator 
the expected target value has to be determined. The 
combination of quality indicators and target values represent 
the quality criteria. 
In this article, the quality model and its attributes 
introduced by Lohrmann et al. [8] are chosen. In the 
following, two quality attributes and their correlating quality 
predicates are refined to derive quality indicators and target 
values.  
1) Controlled resource consumption in activities: 
According to Lohrmann et al. [8], a business process fulfills 
this predicate when activities within the process are 
designed to avoid materials waste and capacity waste. This 
information is too abstract to be comprehensible on a certain 
business process model as it is not explained how this waste 
is reflected in process design. For that reason, the predicate 
and its quality attribute have to be refined into quality 
indicators.  
For this purpose, best practices that could be identified 
in earlier projects are tested for their suitability to represent 
the considered predicate and its quality attribute. One best 
practice suitable in this case is that for each role at least two 
persons have to be available. This ensures that in case of a 
person being absent still another person can continue the 
work and other persons do not have to wait and to be idle, 
which represents a capacity waste. As the predicate refers to 
the business process as a whole, also the refinement has to 
be measured on the entire process. Thus, the indicator 
measures the degree to which the participating roles have 
more than one person assigned. This indicator can be 
formalized as metric (1) similar to the ones introduced by 
Gebhart et al. in [45]. Table III describes the used elements. 
𝑃𝐴𝑅(𝑏𝑝) = 
| 𝐹(𝑅(𝑏𝑝),𝑟,𝐻𝑆𝑃(𝑟))  |
| 𝑅(𝑏𝑝) |
                 (1) 
 
TABLE III. VARIABLES AND FUNCTIONS USED FOR PAR (1) 
Element 
Description 
PAR(bp) 
Person Availability of Roles: Degree to which roles in 
business process bp have more than one person assigned 
R(bp)  
 
Role of Business Process: roles used in business process 
bp 
F(e, v, c)  
 
Filter: filter the elements e by condition c that uses the 
variable v as iterator 
HSP(r) 
Role Has Several Persons: true if role r has more than 
one person 
 
TABLE IV. FULFILLED CRITERIA FOR PAR (1) 
Element 
Fulfilled Criteria 
bp 
Technology Representation: The considered business 
process is represented by the BPMN process file 
PAR(bp) 
Composition: This function is composed of other 
functions and all operations can be automated. 
R(bp) 
 
Technology Representation: The roles are represented by 
the pools and lanes within the BPMN business process 
model 
F(e, v, c) 
 
Composition: This function is requires other functions as 
input and the filter operation can be automatically 
performed.  
HSP(r) 
Comprehensible Question: This aspect is not measurable 
on standard BPMN 2.0 artifacts. Thus, it has to be 
answered by an expert, but the question is easily to 
understand, unambigious and comprehensible: “Are 
more than one person assigned to role r?” As input, a 
boolean value is expected. 
 
Based on the quality indicator, Table V can be derived, 
which shows the possible values of the quality indicators and 
their interpretation. The value 1 is the desired one as it 
represents the case that all roles within the business process 
are filled with at least two persons. Thus, 1 is the target value 
for the quality indicator PAR. 
TABLE V. INTERPRETATION OF VALUES FOR PAR (1) 
Value 
Interpretation 
0 
No role within the business process is filled with at least 
two persons 
Between 0 
and 1 
Some roles are filled with less than two persons 
1 
All roles within the business process are filled with at 
least two persons 
 
In order to prove the suitability of this quality indicator as 
quality indicator in an agile environment, in Table IV for 
each element used in the formalization the criteria introduced 
in Table II are checked. The table shows that for each 
element the criteria are fulfilled. Thus, the quality indicator is 
a valid indicator for an agile environment. As mentioned 
before, we assume business process models using BPMN 2.0 
[44], respectively the reduced language BPMNEasy1.2. 
284
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Another best practice mentioned by Lohrmann et al. [8] 
that influences the controlled resource consumption is the 
usage of work item lists for all user groups. We assume that 
the user groups are represented by the roles participating in 
the business process. Therefore, the variables and functions 
applied for the previous metric PAR (1) can be partially 
reused. For each participating role, the usage of work item 
lists has to be requested. In a modeled business process, this 
cannot be recognized. This is the reason, why this 
information has to be answered by an expert.  
 
𝑊𝐼𝐿𝑈(𝑏𝑝) = 
| 𝐹(𝑅(𝑏𝑝),𝑟,𝑈𝑊𝐼𝐿(𝑟))  |
| 𝑅(𝑏𝑝) |
 
     (2) 
TABLE VI. VARIABLES AND FUNCTIONS USED FOR WILU (2) 
Element 
Description 
WILU(bp) 
Work Item List Usage: Degree to which roles within the 
business process bp use work item lists 
UWIL(r)  
 
Role Uses Work Item List: true if role r uses work item 
list 
 
The used functions fulfill the criteria described in Table 
II as WILU is a composition of other functions and UWIL 
can be answered by a business analyst. Based on this quality 
indicator, Table VII shows the interpretation of values for 
WILU. According to this table, a value of 1 represents the 
case that all roles within the business process use work item 
lists. Thus, this value is the desired one. 
TABLE VII. INTERPRETATION OF VALUES FOR WILU (2) 
Value 
Interpretation 
0 
No role within the business process uses work item lists 
Between 0 
and 1 
Some roles use work item lists 
1 
All roles within the business process use work item lists 
 
2) Controlled skill employment: A business process can 
only be efficiently performed when skill employment is 
controlled. According to Lohrmann et al. [8], this quality 
attribute or predicate is fulfilled when all activities are 
documented and trained. This refinement can be used as 
measurement. In BPMN, these activities are represented by 
manual tasks or tasks that are not further specified yet. 
 
𝐶𝑆𝐸(𝑏𝑝) = 
𝐷𝑇(𝑏𝑝)+𝑇𝑇(𝑏𝑝)
2
 
 
 (3) 
 
𝐷𝑇(𝑏𝑝) = 
| 𝐹(𝑀𝑇(𝑏𝑝),𝑡,𝐷(𝑡))  |
| 𝑀𝑇(𝑏𝑝) |
 
 
 (4) 
 
𝑇𝑇(𝑏𝑝) = 
| 𝐹(𝑀𝑇(𝑏𝑝),𝑡,𝑇(𝑡))  |
| 𝑀𝑇(𝑏𝑝) |
 
 
 (5) 
 
Also, in this case, all used functions and variables are 
described in Table VIII. They fulfill the required criteria 
defined in Table II as the manual tasks represent certain 
aspects within the technology and the other functions are 
either composed of others or comprehensible questions can 
be formulated as for D(t) and T(t).   
TABLE VIII. VARIABLES AND FUNCTIONS USED FOR CSE (3, 4, 5) 
Element 
Description 
CSE(bp) 
Controlled Skill Employment: Degree to which skill 
employment is controlled in business process bp 
DT(bp)  
 
Documentation of Tasks: Degree to which manual tasks 
in business process bp are documented 
D(t) 
Documentation: true if task t is documented 
TT(bp)  
 
Training of Tasks: Degree to which manual tasks in 
business process bp are trained 
T(t) 
Training: true if task t is trained 
 
According to Table IX, all manual tasks within the 
business process are documented and trained, when CSE (3) 
returns the value 1. Thus, this value is the desired and 
expected one.  
TABLE IX. INTERPRETATION OF VALUES FOR CSE (3) 
Value 
Interpretation 
0 
No manual task within the business process is 
documented or trained 
Between 0 
and 1 
Some manual tasks within the business process are 
documented and trained 
1 
All manual tasks within the business process are 
documented and trained. 
 
In this article, we focus on this best practice as solely 
quality indicator for the considered predicate. If further best 
practices, standards, or guidelines can be identified as 
influencing quality indicators, they can be added later and 
have to be weighted.  
Thus, in this article, four quality indicators with 
appropriate quality criteria are exemplarily identified. These 
concrete and partially automatically measurable quality 
indicators again influence more abstract quality attributes. 
Fig. 3 shows the derived quality model. 
 
 
Figure 3. Derived quality model. 
Business Process Design
and Implementation
Efficiency
Controlled Skill
Employment
Controlled Resource
Consumption
Person
Availability
of Roles (PAR)
Work Item
List Usage
(WILU)
Documentation
of Tasks
(DT)
Training
of Tasks
(TT)
Business Process Quality
285
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Business Process Modeling 
After defining the quality criteria for the business 
process, in a next step, the business process can be modeled.  
The business process has been captured using the mobile 
application BPM Touch [46] (see more details in Section V). 
The mobile application supports agile BPM approaches by 
help of new information input concepts, e.g., the capturing of 
business process activities such as “Enter Offering” (c.f. fig. 
4) can be done by audio recording instead of losing time 
writing this information down. The core of the user interface 
paradigm focuses on a simple touch technique. The modeling 
of business processes is carried out exclusively by touching a 
mobile device such as smartphone or tablet. For recording 
audio files participants can use built-in features such as the 
camera function or microphone of their mobile devices. 
Applying this mobile tool, a first draft of the business 
process has been modeled from the start event to end event. 
Fig. 4 shows the business process model. 
 
Figure 4. Offer creation business process. 
The business process requires three roles: Sales, Calculation 
and Accounting and follows two different paths. In case of a 
successful credit check, the Sales can finalize the offer 
otherwise the business process will be aborted. During the 
scenario, the first draft of the business process model has 
been designed. BPMNEasy1.2 provides three different activity 
types: manual (green form), semi-automated (blue form) and 
automated (red form). For instance, the “Enter Offering” 
activity is computer-aided and can be defined as a semi-
automated activity. In addition, the required user stories have 
been described according to an agile methodology.  
D. Analysis 
When the business process is modeled, it can be analyzed 
regarding the prior defined quality criteria. For that purpose, 
the identified quality indicators are applied on the business 
process model and the results are compared to the expected 
and desired target values. To analyze the business processes, 
we adapted and applied the QA82 Analyzer to calculate the 
metrics. Furthermore, this tool enables to create questions for 
metrics that cannot be calculation but have to be answered by 
business analysts. Details about this analysis tool are 
provided in Section V.  
 
1) Controlled resource consumption in activities: 
Applied on the modeled business process, the metric PAR 
(1) returns a value less than 1 as we realized by means of 
interviews that not every role is filled by at least two persons 
yet, i.e., HSP(r) is not true for all roles. Table V shows how 
to interpret this value. In order to fulfill the predicate of 
controlled resource consumption in activities, the metric is 
expected to return 1 as desired value. Thus, the business 
analyst is made aware to ensure that some further persons 
have to be assigned to roles with only one person. Even 
though if this is not possible, the business analyst gets the 
information that this fact represents a critical point for the 
efficiency of the business process.  
Furthermore, in our scenario, only the Accounting uses 
with work item lists. This is the reason, why the second 
quality indicator WILU also returns a value less than 1. As 
described before, a value of 1 is the desired one. Thus, the 
business analyst is also made aware, how the controlled 
resource consumption and thus the business process design 
and implementation efficiency as part of the business process 
quality can be increased.  
2) Controlled skill employment: In our scenario, all tasks 
represent manual tasks as automation has not been specified 
yet. When the metric is calculated, the business analyst has 
to answer, whether all of these tasks are documented and 
trained. In our scenario, the business analyst realized that this 
is not the case. Only some tasks are documented and trained. 
Thus, the metric returns a value less than 1. The 
interpretation of this value is shown in Table IX.  
By applying the refined metrics, the business analyst is 
made aware that the documentation and training is important 
for the efficiency of the business process. If the metric 
returns a value less than 1, the analyst gets the information 
that further documentation and training effort is necessary. 
E. Revision 
Based on the analysis results, the business analyst can 
revise the business process. In our scenario, the business 
analyst was made aware that in some cases only one person 
is responsible for a certain task, that more work item lists 
should be used, and that not all tasks are documented and 
trained. By means of this information, the business analyst 
can revise the business process and the organization of the 
company.  
In our scenario, the application of formalized quality 
indicators enabled the business analyst to systematically 
increase the quality of the business process. Furthermore, by 
means of the exact formalization, misunderstandings and 
interpretation effort could be avoided. The time for 
evaluating the business process could be reduced and the 
analysis is repeatable which enables a comparison of results 
over time. By applying appropriate tools, the efficiency of 
the evaluation could be further increased. The business 
process could be modeled in a lightweight manner and the 
analysis tool guided the business process through the entire 
evaluation by asking necessary questions. For that reason, in 
the next section, the applied tools are further described. 
Displaying
Abort
Closing
Offer
Check
Enter
Offering
Executing
Credit
Check
Start
Credit Check
Started
Calculation
Started
Credit-Worthiness ok?
no
yes
Entering
Result of
Calculation
Sales
Calculation
Accounting
Accounting
Sales
286
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
TOOL SUPPORT 
This section describes the functionality of the used tools 
in detail. During the evaluation two tools have been applied: 
BPM Touch [46] and QA82 Analyzer [47]. 
A. Modeling Business Processes 
Existing solutions mainly represent a transformation of 
existing desktop BPM tools on mobile devices. In contrast, 
the described mobile application implements innovative 
concepts. The application implements user-friendly features 
and potentials of mobile devices were consistently 
emphasized.  
Fig. 5 shows the main screen for modeling a BPMNEasy1.2 
business process. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. BPM Touch to model business process mobile 
 
After a business process has been selected by a simple 
click on the sidebar, the business process model appears on 
the screen. The sidebar (on the left) contains all stored 
processes and allows a quick navigation between the 
business processes. The menu bar on the top provides basic 
functions to, for instance, create or save a new business 
process. In addition, a “share”-button allows the direct 
distribution of BPMNEasy1.2 models to other participants. For 
example, business process models can be shared via e-mail, 
cloud service or automatically generated PowerPoint slides. 
The menu bar changes automatically in an “edit mode” if a 
business process item is touched. Furthermore, the handling 
of the canvas is very intuitive. For example, the start of each 
business process is already defined by a default start event. 
In addition, a "long touch" calls a highly innovative pie 
menu. This menu offers all possible elements of 
BPMNEasy1.2.  
All these functions of the mobile application address and 
support every activity during the agile BPM approach. For 
instance, BPMNEasy1.2 models can be modeled directly from 
every participant without losing a great deal of time on 
training or coaching. 
B. Quality of Business Processes 
In order to increase the efficiency of quality analyses 
especially in agile environments, an appropriate tool support 
is necessary. For that purpose the already existing QA82 
Analyzer [47] (Fig. 6) was applied.  It is suited for agile 
environments and hybrid quality indicators that combine 
full-automated analyses and questions that have to be 
answered by the user for the following reasons: First, it 
supports the integration of custom quality models and 
combines the measure of model elements with questions that 
can be answered by experts, i.e., process analysts in this 
case. Second, the QA82 Analyzer can be integrated in 
business process modeling tools, such as BPMNEasy1.2, using 
web services. This enables the display of quality analysis 
results directly in existing environments. Finally, the QA82 
Analyzer allows the provisions of advices about how to 
improve the quality. As result, process analysts can model 
business processes using their modeling tool and directly get 
hints about how to design the process to improve their 
quality based on the custom quality model. 
 
 
Figure 6. QA82 Analyzer to analyze business process. 
To adapt the QA82 Analyzer for the evaluation of 
business processes in agile BPM, the quality model based on 
the quality attributes of Lohrmann et al. and the derived 
quality indicators were formalized and integrated into the 
QA82 Analyzer. This includes the mapping of functions to 
technology, i.e., to BPMN 2.0 artifacts, and the formulation 
of appropriate questions if necessary.  
The QA82 Analyzer uses the concept of a query-based 
static analysis introduced by Gebhart in [48]. For that 
purpose, so-called information providers are utilized. When 
the user wants to query the quality of a certain business 
process, this information need is sent to the Analyzer 
component of the QA82 Analyzer. This component then tries 
to satisfy this information need. For that purpose, it looks up 
and queries available information providers. An information 
provider is a software component that is able to receive and 
to possibly answer a query. The concept of an information 
287
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

provider is further refined into technology providers and 
refinement providers. A technology provider on the one hand 
is able to answer the query directly by means of technical 
information. For example, a BPMN technology provider is 
able to answer queries like “Return the number of tasks 
within the business process” or “Return all manual tasks 
within the business process”. There might further technology 
providers exist. In the context of the evaluation of services in 
service-oriented architectures, a WSDL technology provider 
and SCA technology provider have been developed. These 
information providers are able to answer queries like “Return 
all provided operations of a certain service”. A refinement 
provider on the other hand is able to refine a query into 
several sub-queries and to compose the answers of the sub-
queries to the answer for the original query. For example, 
when the roles performing manual tasks are required, first, 
the manual tasks of the business process are queried. 
Afterwards, for each manual task returned by the BPMN 
technology provider, the performing roles are queried. This 
is again answered by the BPMN technology provider. The 
approach is illustrated in Fig. 7  
 
 
Figure 7. Query-based analysis approach. 
The advantage of this approach is that with minimal 
effort new technologies and queries can be supported. To 
support the quality model introduced in this article, a BPMN 
technology provider was developed. Furthermore, to 
implement the quality model, a BPM refinement provider 
was developed that represents the quality attributes of the 
quality model. For example, the quality indicator Controlled 
Skill Employment (CSE) described in Table VI is contained 
by this refinement provider. If the Controlled Skill 
Employment is queried for a certain business process, the 
Analyzer sends the query to all information providers. The 
information providers try to answer the query, but there is 
only the refinement provider representing the quality model 
that is able to answer it. The refinement provider knows that 
to answer the query it first has to get the results for 
Documentation of Tasks and Trainings of Tasks for the 
considered business process. Thus, it sends these queries 
sequentially to the Analyzer component. The Analyzer 
component again tries to answer the queries by sending it to 
all available information providers. In this case, again the 
refinement provider is able to understand and answer the 
query. For Documentation of Tasks it knows that it has to 
find out how many of the manual tasks within the business 
process have been documented. For that purpose, the 
refinement provider first sends a query to the Analyzer 
component to receive all manual tasks in the business 
process. The Analyzer component tries to answer this query 
by asking all available information providers. In this case, 
the BPMN technology provider is able to answer the query. 
It returns all manual tasks in the process. Next, the Analyzer 
component returns this result to the refinement provider. 
Now, the refinement provider tries to answer the 
Documentation for each returned manual task. Thus, for each 
of the manual tasks, a query is sent to the Analyzer 
component. Once again, this component tries to answer the 
queries. However, in this case, there is no information 
provider able to answer the query. If this is the case, the 
Analyzer component does something special: It creates a 
question for the analyst to answer this query manually. Thus, 
in this case, for each manual task, the analyst is asked 
whether this one is documented or not. The same happens to 
the query about the training of the manual tasks. For each 
task, a question is generated and the analyst has to answer 
whether the task is trained or not. When the analyst has 
answered these questions, the analysis can be started again. 
This time, the answers are considered within the analysis. 
This means, when the Analyzer component tries to answer 
the queries Documentation and Training for each manual 
task, the answers of the analyst are returned as result. These 
results are used by the refinement provider to create the 
answer for the original query Controlled Skill Employment. 
Fig. 8 illustrates the interaction between the Analyzer 
component and the BPM information provider. 
 
 
Figure 8. Interaction between Analyzer and BPM refinement provider. 
Refinement
Provider
Information
Provider
Technology
Provider
Artifacts
Satisfied by
Examines
Information
Need
Artifacts
Artifact
Elements of architecture metrics 
comparison with specification etc.
BPMN processes,
WSDL documents,
SCA artifacts,
source code,
architecture model etc.
Analyzer
Information
Provider
Repository
Queries
Looks up
Refines
Query
Information
Need
Analyzer
Instance
BPM Refinement
Provider Instance
Analyzer
Instance
Analyzer
Instance
Refined
Information Need
Refined
Information Need
…
CSE
Knowledge
TT(bp)
DT(bp)
Further Information
Provider Instance
Further Information
Provider Instance
288
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As result, the QA82 Analyzer can be used to apply the 
identified quality indicators on any BPMN 2.0 or 
BPMNEasy1.2 compliant business process. The concept of 
business process quality is step-by-step refined until 
information can be automatically measured on concrete 
business process elements, such as BPMN tasks, or a 
concrete question can be asked. The answers for these 
questions are stored and considered during the next quality 
analysis iteration. By this means, the business analyst does 
not have to answer the questions again and again. Only the 
first time certain information has to be added manually, the 
question has to be answered. This increases the efficiency of 
the evaluation and reduces the effort. Furthermore, the QA82 
Analyzer stores the analysis results. This enables a 
comparison of results over time as previous results are 
accessible.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this article, we demonstrated the application of 
business process quality models to support agile business 
process management (BPM) and to assure a high quality of 
created business process (applications). For that purpose, we 
provided a literature overview and described the general 
connections between quality assurance and agile BPM. 
Furthermore, we chose the agile BPM method BPM(N)Easy1.2 
and the quality model introduced by Lohrmann et al. [8] 
exemplarily. After the identification of the challenges, e.g., 
the degree of employee skills, we have shown how to 
address them.  
First, the application of business quality models was 
aligned with an agile methodology. As essential deficit, the 
abstraction of available quality attributes was identified. To 
solve this issue, we demonstrated how these quality 
attributes can be refined to be applicable in agile 
environments. Hereby, we focused on the end users mainly 
and explicated how common language can be used to 
generate higher quality easily. Finally, we illustrated 
necessary tool support to increase the efficiency of quality 
analyses. 
To illustrate our work, an evaluation in the context of a 
real business process was chosen. We described the scenario, 
the specification of quality criteria, the modeling of the 
business process, and finally the analysis and revision of the 
created business process model. The refined quality 
attributes enabled the systematic analysis of this process and 
the results helped the process analysts to revise the process 
and its environment in a quality-oriented manner. Even 
though the quality of a business process includes a lot of 
further aspects not covered in this article, the application of a 
fine-grained quality model increases the awareness of 
relevant aspects and supports the creation of high-quality 
business processes. 
Thus, our approach enables companies and their analysts 
to increase the quality of created business processes whilst 
reducing at the same time effort and costs for quality 
assurance. All participants, such as business analysts, can 
create business process models using their preferred 
modeling tool and manually analyze created models in a 
systematic manner. When integrating the quality model and 
appropriate quality analysis methods into the tools, the 
analysts can even receive feedback about the quality of 
created models directly. Finally, derived advices could be 
shown and help the analysts to improve the created business 
models with regard to quality attributes that influence 
business-related goals. 
Next, we will consider further quality attributes and 
derive appropriate quality indicators to enhance the created 
quality model. As described in this article, we will focus on 
reuse of existing quality attributes. In addition, we will 
investigate how all participants can communicate and 
interact more efficiently to increase the quality continuously 
during the entire business process lifecycle. 
Also, the used tools will be investigated more in detail 
focusing on improving and extending the tools itself. For 
instance, the integration with existing modeling tools has to 
be enhanced. Finally, the approach is expected to be applied 
in further business process management projects to identify 
advantages and also weaknesses that have to be examined.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Gebhart, M. Mevius, and P. Wiedmann, “Application of business 
process quality models in agile business process management,” The 
Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management (eKNOW), 2014, pp. 152-158, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-329-2. 
[2] T.M. Bekele and Z. Weihua, “Towards collaborative business process 
management development current and future approaches,” in 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference, 2011, pp. 458-462. 
[3] J. Eder and H.Pichler, “Business Process Modeling and Workflow 
Design,” in D.W. Embley and B. Thalheim (eds), Handbook of 
Conceptual Modeling, Springer, 2011, pp. 259-286. 
[4] J. Highsmith, “Agile software development ecosystems,” Pearson 
Education, 2002, pp. 26-34. 
[5] Agile Manifesto, http://agilemanifesto.org. [accessed: May 21, 2013] 
[6] M. Mevius, R. Stephan, and P. Wiedmann, “Innovative approach for 
agile bpm,” The Fifth International Conference on Information, 
Process, and Knowledge Management (eKNOW), 2013, ISBN 978-1-
61208-254-7.  
[7] M. Mevius and P. Wiedmann, „BPM(N)Easy1.2 – Gebrauchssprachliche 
gestaltung IT-basierter prozesse,“ 8. Workshop „Bewertungsaspekte 
service- 
und 
cloudbasierter 
Achitekturen 
(BSOA)“ 
der 
GI 
Fachgruppe „Software-Messung und -Bewertung“, 2013, pp. 31-46. 
[8] M. Lohrmann and M. Reichert, “Understanding business process 
quality,” in Business Process Management - Theory and Applications, 
Springer, 2013, pp. 41-73. 
[9] J. Krogstie, “Model-Based development and evolution of information 
systems – a quality approach,” Springer-Verlag, London, 2012. 
[10] J. Highsmith, “Agile project management – creating innovative 
products,” Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009, pp. 15-16. 
[11] F. 
Salger, 
M. 
Bennicke, 
G. 
Engels, 
and 
C. 
Lewerentz, 
“Comprehensive architecture evaluation and management in large 
software-systems,“ Fourth International Conference on the Quality of 
Software Architectures, 2008, pp. 205-219.  
[12] E. Mnkandla and B. Dwolatzky, “Defining agile software quality 
assurance,” International Conference on Software Engineering 
Advances, IEEE 0-7695-2703-5/06, 2006. 
[13] J. vom Brocke and M. Rossmann, “Handbook on business process 
management 1: introduction, methods, and information systems“, 
Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 2010. 
[14] R. Cheng, S. Sadiq, and M. Indulska, “Framework for business 
process and rule integration: a case of BPMN and SBVR,” Business 
289
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Information Systems Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing Volume 87, 2011, pp. 13-24. 
[15] P. Antunes, D. Simões, L. Carriço, and J. A. Pino, “An end-user 
approach to business process modeling,” Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications 36 (2013), pp. 1466 -1479, 2013. 
[16] S. Bittmann, D. Metzger, M. Fellmann, and O. Thomas, “Additional 
information in business processes: a pattern-based integration of 
natural 
language 
artefacts,“ 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Informatics, 
Modellierung 2014, ISBN 978-388579-619-0, pp. 137-152. 
[17] International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), ISO/IEC Standard No. 9126: 
Software Engineering – Product Quality; Parts 1-4. 
[18] International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), ISO/IEC Standard No. 25000: 
Software Engineering – Software Product Quality Requirements and 
Evaluation (SQuaRE) - Guide to SQuaRE. 
[19] R. Heinrich and B. Paech, “Defining the quality of business 
processes,“ in Lecture Notes in Informatics Vol. P-161, 2010, pp. 
133-148. 
[20] L. Sánchez-González, F. Ruiz, F. García, and M. Piattini, “Improving 
quality of business process models,” in Evaluation of Novel 
Approaches to Software Engineering, 2013, pp. 130-144. 
[21] L. YeongSeok, B. JungHyun, and S. Seokkoo, “Development of 
quality evaluation metrics for BPM (business process management) 
system,” in Proceedings of the Fourth Annual ACIS International 
Conference on Computer and Information Science, 2005, pp. 424-
429. 
[22] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), ISO Standard 
No. 9000: Quality Management Systems – Fundamentals and 
Vocabulary.  
[23] R. Kneuper, „Gokyo ri: messung und bewertung der qualität von 
entwicklungsprozessen am beispiel des v-modell xt,“ in O. Linssen, 
M. Kuhrmann (Eds.): Qualitätsmanagement und Vorgehensmodelle, 
Shaker, 2012, pp. 25-34. 
[24] G. N. Suarez, J. Freund, and M. Schrepfer, “Best practice guidelines 
for BPMN 2.0,” in BPMN 2.0 Handbook, 2011, pp. 153-165. 
[25] T. Erl, SOA – Principles of Service Design, Prentice Hall, 2008. 
ISBN 978-0-13-234482-1. 
[26] T. 
Erl, 
“SOA 
– 
Design 
Patterns”, 
Prentice 
Hall, 
2008.  
ISBN 978-0-13-613516-6. 
[27] S. Cohen, “Ontology and Taxonomy of Services in a Service-
Oriented Architecture,” Microsoft Architecture Journal, 2007. 
[28] N. Josuttis, SOA in Practice – The Art of Distributed System Design, 
O'Reilly & Associates, 2007. ISBN 978-0-596-52955-0.  
[29] OMG, “Service oriented architecture modeling language (SoaML) – 
specification for the uml profile and metamodel for services 
(UPMS),” Version 1.0.1, 2012. 
[30] OMG, “Unified modeling language (UML), superstructure,” Version 
2.4.1, 2011. 
[31] M. Gebhart and J. Bouras, “Derivation of web service implementation 
artifacts from service designs based on soaml,“ International Journal 
on Advances in Software, 6(1&2), 2013, pp. 170-180. 
[32] W3C, “Web Services Description Language (WSDL),” Version 1.1, 
2001. 
[33] W3C, “XML Schema Part 0: Primer Second Edition,” 2004. 
[34] Open SOA (OSOA), “Service component architecture (SCA), SCA 
assembly model V1.00,” http://osoa.org/download/attachments/35/ 
SCA_AssemblyModel_V100.pdf, 2009. [accessed: January 04, 2011] 
[35] M. Gebhart and S. Sejdovic, “Quality-oriented design of software 
services in geographical information systems,” International Journal 
on Advances in Software, 5(3&4), 2012, pp. 293-307. 
[36] M. Gebhart, “Service identification and specification with SoaML,” 
in Migrating Legacy Applications: Challenges in Service Oriented 
Architecture and Cloud Computing Environments, Vol. I, A. D. 
Ionita, M. Litoiu, and G. Lewis, Eds. 2012. IGI Global.  
ISBN 978-1-46662488-7. 
[37] R. Meziani and I. Saleh, “Towards a collaborative business process 
management methodology,” International Conference on Multimedia 
Computing and Systems (ICMCS), 2011. 
[38] F. Schnabel, Y. Gorronogoitia, M. Radzimski, F. Lecue, N. 
Mehandjiev, and G. Ripa, “Empowering business users to model and 
execute business processes,” BPM 2010 Workshops, Springer, 2011, 
pp. 433-448. 
[39] A. H. Mohammad, T. Alwada’n, and J. Adabneh, “Agile software 
methodologies: strength and weakness,” International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Technology, 2013, ISSN : 0975-5462, pp. 
455-459. 
[40] J. Barlow, J. Giboney, M. Keith, D. Wilson, R. Schuetzler, P. Lowry, 
and A. Vance, “Overview and guidance on agile development in large 
organization,” Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, Vol. 29, No. 2, 2011, pp. 25-44. 
[41] M. Huo, J. Verner, L. Zhu, and M. Babar, “Software quality and agile 
methods,“ 28th Annual International Computer Software and 
Applications Conference, IEEE 0730-3157/04, 2004. 
[42] A. Janus, A. Schmietendorf, R. Dumke, and J. Jäger, “The 3C 
approach for agile quality assurance,” Emerging Trends in Software 
Metrics (WETSoM), 2012 3rd International Workshop, 2012. 
[43] M. Gebhart and S. Abeck, “Quality-oriented design of services,” 
International Journal on Advances in Software, 4(1&2), 2011, pp. 
144-157. 
[44] OMG, “Business process model and notation (BPMN)”, Version 2.0, 
2011. 
[45] M. Gebhart and S. Abeck, “Metrics for evaluating service designs 
based on soaml,” International Journal on Advances in Software, 
4(1&2), 2011, pp. 61-75. 
[46] bamero 
AG, 
“BPM 
Touch® 
- 
The 
Revolution,” 
http://www.bamero.de., accessed on 08/05/2014. 
[47] Gebhart Quality Analysis (QA) 82 GmbH, QA82 Analyzer, 
http://www.qa82.com.  [accessed: May 21, 2013] 
[48] M. Gebhart, “Query-based static analysis of web services in service-
oriented architectures,” International Journal on Advances in 
Software, 7(1&2), 2014, pp. 136-147. 
290
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

