82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Implementation of OpenEHR in Combination with Clinical Terminologies: 
Experiences from Norway 
 
Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Telemedicine- and eHealth  
University of Tromsø 
Rune.pedersen@unn.no 
Conceição Granja, Luis Marco Ruiz 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
{conceicao.granja, luis.marco.ruiz}@ehealthresearch.no
 
 
Abstract—Norway is currently involved in several initiatives to 
adopt clinical information standards and terminologies. This 
paper aims to identify and discuss challenges and experiences 
for large-scale national implementation projects when working 
towards structured Electronic Health Records systems, process 
and decision support, and secondary use of clinical data. This 
paper reports from the national strategy for OpenEHR adop-
tion in Northern Norway Regional Health Authority encour-
aged by the development of a national repository for OpenEHR 
archetypes and a national initiative to integrate clinical termi-
nologies. The paper contributes to a qualitative longitudinal in-
terpretive study with an effort to increase the possibility to ob-
tain semantic interoperability (towards integrated care) and dis-
cusses Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine - Clinical Terms 
and other relevant clinical terminology and Clinical Infor-
mation Models such as OpenEHR archetypes. Terminology and 
archetypes are used to structure the EHR two-folded, and we 
discuss a general use of information models to increase interop-
erability extensively. A two-folded use of terminology where ter-
minology is integrated in archetypes, or where terminology is 
used to structure the Electronic Health Record system while us-
ing the hierarchical model of the terminology is discussed. Sec-
ondly, we discuss for what purpose OpenEHR is the choice of 
Clinical Information Model to succeed in Norwegian healthcare. 
We have identified some challenges and lessons learned. 
Keywords-eHealth medical records; electronic health records; 
web technology; e-health; interoperability; semantics; integrated 
care; OpenEHR; terminology; classification systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Currently, the healthcare system is involved in a transfor-
mation process [1][2] in an attempt to overcome some of its 
challenges [3][4]. Researchers, governments, and interna-
tional organizations, recognize the need to advance towards a 
healthcare system capable of integrating the different islands 
of expertise that conform different components of healthcare 
[5], accelerate the access to latest evidence [6][7][8], and use 
the data generated during the care process to elicit new 
knowledge that allows the whole system to learn from its own 
experiences [6][9]. Achieving this vision requires an exten-
sive but also sound use of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) in order to allow healthcare information 
to seamlessly flow across healthcare levels [6][8]. Achieving 
this holist healthcare system capable of learning from its own 
operation needs not only efficient technologies but also the 
ability of these technologies to exchange information without 
any ambiguity or loss of meaning, i.e., interoperate at a se-
mantic level [10]. 
Enabling 
semantic 
interoperability 
(SIOp) 
across 
healthcare technological platforms is needed in order to guar-
antee that different stakeholders will derive the same conclu-
sions from the same data set [10]. If SIOp is not granted across 
organizational boundaries, the lack of precision in specifying 
the meaning of the information shared may lead to misinter-
pretations of healthcare data jeopardizing the quality of care 
and hampering research outcomes. SIOp is a keystone for ho-
listic healthcare systems that aim to integrate different areas 
of expertise (and, therefore, the technologies that support 
them), and reuse their data to generate new knowledge. Dur-
ing the last decades many initiatives have advanced in the de-
velopment of different standards to enable SIOp [11][12][13]. 
However, despite the heavy investment performed, standardi-
sation in health care has proven to be a cumbersome and dif-
ficult process [14][15]. 
In Norway, several projects are currently working towards 
realizing that vision [7][13][16]. For more than a decade, Na-
tional initiatives towards shared and integrated care have been 
a focus area for the Norwegian health authorities [17][18]. 
More recently, several initiatives to enable the secondary use 
of clinical information were also considered strategic by the 
Norwegian Health authorities [7][16]. These initiatives espe-
cially emphasize the need to apply clinical information stand-
ards and terminologies for enabling interoperability across 
heterogeneous health information systems. However, optimal 
leverage of all the components needed to enable SIOp is not a 
trivial task, and it is currently a matter of discussion among 
academia, implementers, and the Norwegian health authori-
ties. 
Three main components are necessary to enable SIOp: a) 
reference models; b) clinical information models (CIMs) 
(a.k.a. Detailed Clinical Models), and c) biomedical terminol-
ogies [10]. In 2012, Norway opted for the adoption of 
openEHR as standard for specifying EHR information. The 
objective was twofold: a) providing a set of robust clinical in-
formation models (CIMs) (a.k.a. archetypes) to build the na-
tional EHR upon; b) enabling SIOp across different health in-
formation systems based on these archetypes. 

83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The adoption of openEHR has been an effort involving 
many stakeholders at different health trusts and healthcare lev-
els. After 9 years, the number of CIMs defined with openEHR 
is increasing creating a robust set of information models to 
build the EHR upon [19]. Regarding the adoption of terminol-
ogies, the national strategy has focused on ICD-10 for medical 
diagnosis and reimbursement, together with a more frag-
mented use of nursing classifications in different EHR sys-
tems for clinical purposes. In 2016, Norway joined the 
IHTSDO acquiring systematized nomenclature of medicine - 
clinical terms (SNOMED-CT). When it comes to the adoption 
of SNOMED-CT the first evaluations performed in collabora-
tion with the committees involved in archetypes definition has 
already unveiled challenges that need to be overcome in order 
to fully exploit the potential of the terminology.  
This paper describes the national work accomplished to 
support the openEHR modelling of EHR, and the evolution of 
systems with focus on the development of clinical value. We 
describe the work performed in: a) CIMs definition as arche-
types by multidisciplinary teams of information architects and 
clinicians; b) experiences regarding the adoption of different 
terminologies; and c) the evaluation of the adequacy of adopt-
ing SNOMED-CT as reference terminology to annotate CIMs. 
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. The 
background section introduces the use of CIM and terminolo-
gies to enable SIOp, the method section describes the data 
gathering and synthesis performed through interviews, meet-
ings and active participation with the national comities in-
volved in SIOp technologies adoption. The results section 
shows first the status and accomplishments of the national in-
itiatives in the definition of CIMs (openEHR archetypes). The 
second section is devoted to report on efforts in terminologies 
adoption and the current evaluation of the feasibility in adopt-
ing SNOMED-CT. The discussion explains the future chal-
lenges and raises important areas that have been identified to 
be critical in the success for adopting openEHR in combina-
tion with clinical terminologies for enabling SIOp. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Clinical Information Models 
CIMs [20] are models specified in some clinical infor-
mation standard to express the schema of clinical information 
entities processed by Health Information Systems (HIS). 
CIMs are used to appropriately maintain the consistency of 
clinical information structures inside a HIS, and to enable se-
mantic interoperability across different systems and organiza-
tions. This makes CIMs a basic component for the appropriate 
management of patient data [10]. Moreover, with recent ad-
vances in data reuse strategies, CIMs are also playing an im-
portant role in defining the clinical information structures 
needed for architectures oriented to secondary use of data 
[21][22][23] and the integration of genetic reports in the EHR 
[24].  
In the last decade, the work of different initiatives to model 
CIMs is leading to the definition of an extensive catalogue of 
models publically available. These models can be used to 
drive the development of HIS. Nowadays, there is a consider-
able diversity in the standards and approaches available to de-
fine CIMs. Examples are openEHR, CIMI, HL7 CDA and 
HL7 FHIR. Although most editorial teams follow similar 
steps, there exists no unified methodology or guideline for 
their definition [20]. The scope of modelling initiatives varies 
significantly from the local to the international level. For ex-
ample, the international Clinical Knowledge Managers 
(CKM) and the Clinical Information Model Initiative (CIMI) 
define CIMs at an international level; the Norwegian CKM 
defines them at a national level; and the Intermountain Clini-
cal Element Models (CEMs), were defined at intra-organiza-
tional level. The work in parallel of different initiatives has led 
to semantically equivalent models expressed in different in-
formation standards, a.k.a. iso-semantic models. In Norway, 
the openEHR open standard has been the one adopted by 3 of 
the 4 health regions. OpenEHR relies on a meta-model (i.e., 
reference model) and a constraint language (i.e., cADL) to de-
fine CIMs (referred to as archetypes in openEHR jargon) [25]. 
The consistent use of archetypes enables interoperability be-
tween different openEHR-based EHRs, as well as efficient re-
use of data across different contexts [10][26]. Since arche-
types represent a consensus over the data structures to repre-
sent clinical information, they need to be defined among the 
different stakeholders that will rely on the archetype to in-
teroperate. Therefore, their definition must be carried out as a 
collaborative process among multidisciplinary teams of clini-
cians and information architects [23][27]. This collaborative 
definition of archetypes is achieved in web platforms where 
experts review and publish the archetypes that will be used to 
define the EHR. These platforms are known as CKMs 
[28][29][30][31]. 
In Norway, since 2012, several projects have evaluated the 
adoption of openEHR as standard for enabling SIOp in sec-
ondary healthcare [32]. At the moment, 3 of the 4 existing 
health regions rely on openEHR to enable SIOp in secondary 
healthcare. The national initiative that deals with archetypes 
definition has gradually gained a foothold in the Norwegian e-
Health scene. The openEHR architecture has been used to 
build a national CKM. Archetypes are defined collaboratively 
in the CKM in order to provide vendors a library of common 
formal models to build their clinical information systems on. 
The national CKM archives information about how new ar-
chetypes are translated, modelled, and shared, and is planned 
to contain between 1000 to 2000 archetypes. The final aim is 
to build an open source repository of clinical content, based 
on the OpenEHR clinical information model. A precondition 
for success is that clinicians agree on the content of each ar-
chetype in the CKM consensus processes. Clinicians from the 
four Regional Health Authorities are active contributors in the 
process for developing archetypes. The national editorial 
group, and the National Administration Office of Archetypes 
(NRUA, from the Norwegian nasjonalt redaksjonsutvalg for 
arketyper) have coordinated this process. 
The national CKM in Norway is responsible for the defi-
nition of reference archetypes that vendors will use to build 
the EHR information model on. The definition of CIMs typi-
cally encompasses two main tasks: a) the specification of the 
information structure in a clinical information standard such 
as OpenEHR; and b) the binding of the meaningful sections 

84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of the CIM to a terminology to attach unambiguous standard 
descriptions to them. 
Archetype sections can be bound to concepts provided by 
standard terminologies, thus endowing archetype elements 
with semantics provided by standard terminologies such as 
ICD 10, LOINC or SNOMED-CT. This enables semantic in-
teroperability among those HIS that rely on the same set of 
archetypes and terminology [33]. At present, the binding of 
the archetypes in the National CKM to SNOMED-CT is under 
evaluation. The results section reports some of the challenges 
found to coordinate the use of SNOMED-CT in combination 
with archetypes. 
B. Biomedical terminologies 
Clinical terminologies offer a common vocabulary for na-
tional health authorities, local researchers, and quality regis-
ters [34]. This means that in addition to being a storing device 
for free text data, EHRs are capable of encoding commonly 
occurring data using fixed lists of multiple choices for certain 
purposes. Thus, data becomes more comparable and comput-
able than free text would be. 
There is a wide spectrum of clinical terminologies. In 
nursing, the International Classification of Nursing Practice 
(ICNP) or Nursing Intervention Classification (NIC) and The 
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association (NANDA) 
are widely used [27][35]. Other examples are the International 
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Prob-
lems (ICD), the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) or 
even general-purpose terminologies such as SNOMED-CT. 
There are also terminological standards for more specific do-
mains, such as the International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF) for rehabilitation. These terminol-
ogies have been developed, and used, to ensure consistency of 
meaning across time and place. On one level, nursing classifi-
cations enable day-to-day planning for local users (primary 
use) where clinical terminology is used to structure infor-
mation (standardized care-plans) using diagnosis and inter-
ventions from NIC and NANDA, for example. In practice, the 
adoption of standard terminologies will enable a consistent 
vocabulary to describe information that is sent and received 
between different systems or health care deliverers. Although 
SIOp is the main objective, other areas benefit from the con-
sistent use of terminologies and CIMs. The increased focus on 
process-oriented systems across different health care organi-
sations presumes standardization in the form of shared termi-
nologies and information models to enable SIOp. However, 
leveraging the use of CIMs and terminologies optimally with 
CIMs involves challenges that information architects must 
face at design time [36]. Examples of these challenges include 
decisions about what to represent as CIMs or terminology, 
which sections of the archetype to annotate, whether or not to 
use post-coordination to express clinical concepts, among oth-
ers.  
Archetypes can be tagged with SNOMED-CT codes add-
ing a standard term to each of the sections and nodes of the 
archetype. This allows specifying the sections and contents of 
the archetype in a standard terminology so it can be interpreted 
over organisational or even trans-national borders. In this way, 
the information becomes interoperable for multiple purposes. 
Thus, it is essential that standardized terminologies for differ-
ent domains can be integrated either in the archetype or in the 
EHR system. The use of a terminology such as SNOMED-
CT, which is widely exploited, increases the semantic interop-
erability at several levels, both for primary and for secondary 
use. For example, the use of terminologies such as SNOMED-
CT facilitates the integration of disparate systems by provid-
ing a common definition of clinical terms that can be used to 
determine when sections of different information models rep-
resent the same entity. The integration with co-existing EHR 
systems is especially important. Medication, laboratory re-
sults, and the care plan have to be integrated in the same view 
to visualize the pathway. The chart systems have a CIM for 
structured data elements that differs from the OpenEHR/ar-
chetype CIM intended to be used in Norway, and mapping be-
tween them demands unknown resources. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The research presented herein has mainly been developed 
in the North Norwegian Regional Health Authority in coordi-
nation with NRUA, and the Norwegian Directorate of Health. 
Interpretive and ethnographically oriented qualitative meth-
ods have been applied, grounded in the participation and con-
tribution to the work accomplished [19]. The fieldwork has 
focus on the regional/national work accomplished, and, sec-
ondarily, on the forthcoming process where numerous arche-
types will be tested as structured elements in the new process 
oriented EHR system. A mind map of the archetype prob-
lem/diagnosis is shown in Figure 1. During the last seven 
years several meetings, courses, and workshops with focus on 
archetypes and terminology have been covered by observa-
tions, document analysis, and interviews. Conversations, dis-
cussions, reflections, and debates from these meetings are the 
foundation of this work. The observations and description of 
on-going work have been followed by interviews with mem-
bers of the regional and national initiatives. This includes six 
interviews on the archetype governance, 10 interviews and 
180 hours of observations on the use of clinical terminology, 
conversations with end users of the CKM while guiding them 
to become users, and participants in national discussions on 
the consensus of archetypes. The interviews includes physi-
cians and nurses that are active users of the CKM. The process 
of educating them to become CKM users has provided valua-
ble knowledge on how to develop the learning and recruitment 
strategies. A summary of the data collection for the qualitative 
research process is presented in TABLE I.  
TABLE I.  
AN OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTION. TIME USED, 
AND THE NUMBER FOR INTERVIEWS OF THE QUALITATIVE RESEARCH 
PROCESS. 
Data source 
 
Interviews with contributors to the work with ar-
chetypes, and the development of new EPR. 
18 
open 
ended 
interviews  
Participatory observation 
180 hours 
Participation in meetings, workshops, and infor-
mal discussions. 
300 hours 
Research on SNOMED compared to CIM 
200 hours 
Document studies: Documents from the CKM, 
concerning archetypes in general. 
 

85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Illustration of the archetype Problem/Diagnosis in the form of a 
mind map. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Definition and governance of archetypes 
During the last three years, the use of OpenEHR arche-
types has grown with focus on a national anchorage in Nor-
wegian healthcare. The initiative has developed through Na-
tional ICT, and an EHR vendor that holds more than 80 % of 
the secondary healthcare EHR systems. From the outset, a na-
tional collaborating group is working, in coordination with the 
aforementioned vendor, to build a national repository of ar-
chetypes. 
The National ICT, with the goal of producing high quality 
archetypes, established NRUA in 2013. NRUA has assigned 
six full/part time associates with an increasing number of col-
laborators in the Regional Health Authorities. There are be-
tween two and three members from each of the four regions. 
As an example, there is an increasing number of members 
from the North Norwegian Health Authority, one physician 
with special interest in health informatics, one nurse with a 
PhD in Information Systems, one ICT-advisor, two PhD stu-
dents in part time positions and one project manager from the 
regional ICT development program where the new process 
oriented EHR is developed. NRUA also cooperates closely 
with global connections such as the international openEHR 
CKM [28], and vendors that cooperate with the Norwegian 
vendor. The vendors are important contributors with a mutual 
interdependency. In all, the governance work is important in 
local, national, and global environments. The overall goal 
with NRUA is to coordinate the development, and use of ar-
chetypes, on a national level, both handling translations of in-
ternational archetypes as well as handling local initiatives. 
The reviews are initiated by the Editorial Group, which 
also covers the recruitment of the reviewers to the national 
CKM. The Editorial Group does the further approval if the re-
quirements are met. 
The number of review iterations varies depending if the 
archetype was mature when imported into the Norwegian 
CKM, or it had to be developed from scratch. 
The collaboration and coordination between the national 
and international CKMs is crucial and, as shown before, helps 
to reduce the number of review iterations needed to publish an 
archetype. In some cases, archetypes are imported from the 
international CKM into the national and published there; 
while in other cases, the national CKM develops an archetype 
needed by Norwegian implementers and later it is adopted by 
the international CKM. Weather archetypes are approved first 
on international or national CKM depends on the priories of 
each editorial team. The priority scale is provided in TABLE 
II.  The scale gives an total score for each information element 
with a total score to coordinate the consensus work. After pub-
lication, the results of the review are collated and taken to the 
other CKM to accelerate the review process. One of the lead-
ers of the international CKM stated, “the collaboration be-
tween the international and the Norwegian CKM is one of a 
kind based on the national consensus process, and all activi-
ties with archetypes in Norway are followed by the interna-
tional society and vice versa”. Nevertheless, since archetypes 
publication involves the consensus of many stakeholders with 
very different backgrounds, there are challenges in the coor-
dination of reviews, and final agreement on the published ar-
chetype. She continued by saying, “neither the CKM nor the 
consensus process is perfect and adjustments will be neces-
sary along the way. Changes can be related to open-source and 
Web based CKM/process where everything is stored open and 
is constantly evolving”. In relation to these challenges, Chris-
tensen and Ellingsen [32] performed an evaluation in the 
openEHR adoption process between 2015 and 2016 identify-
ing several organizational problems. In their study, they found 
that the fact of establishing the archetype editorial team 
(NRUA) at the same time as the implementation of the 
openEHR-based system that had to use those archetype origi-
nated problems. The reason is that the archetypes need to be 
in a published state when the EHR development starts. Other-
wise, the vendor does not count on the real use case models 
during the implementation. One of the causes for this overlap 
of activities was the time needed to build a consolidated edi-
torial team with representative reviewers had been underesti-
mated. 
TABLE II.  
PRIORITY SCALE FOR ARCHETYPES [37]. A SCORE MADE TO DIFFERENTIATE ARCHETYPES IN PROCESS TOWARDS CONSENSUS. THE SCORE 4-
15 IS A MEANS TO PRIORITIZE. WIKI.ARKETYPER.NO (12.01.2016) 
Reuse (0-3) 
Diffusion 
(1-3) 
Time for 
testing (1-5) 
Functional 
dependencies (1-2) 
Semantic 
dependencies (1-2) 
Total score (4-15) 
Search, 
presentation, 
reuse, 
aggregation 
Process 
support 
Decision 
support 
1 
1 
1 
3 
5 
2 
1 
14 

86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Clinicians are willing to participate in the review of arche-
types but often they require that some of their working hours 
are reallocated for this task [32]. However, these hours are of-
ten difficult to be released since they do not depend on NRUA. 
A clear alignment with local leaders becomes paramount so 
they understand the benefits of openEHR adoption and they 
provide some resources in the form of review hours. In the 
initial stages these organizational factors caused the publica-
tion of archetypes to be slow, in fact only one archetype had 
been published in the first year of work of the Norwegian 
CKM [32]. Despite these challenges, the following years be-
come more fruitful. During 2015, 2016 and 2017 the review 
process has become more mature and effective in the publica-
tion of archetypes [19]. At present, it counts on a good pool of 
reviewers and collaborators that have contributed to accelerate 
the publication of archetypes, see TABLE III. While at the be-
ginning of 2014, NRUA first had focus on the translation of 
already existing archetypes and observation-archetypes such 
as blood pressure, body weight, nutritional risk, height, and 
temperature, at the time of writing, national consensus has 
been reached for 57 archetypes and more than 100 are in pro-
cess of approval. Examples are the archetypes: 
 
 openEHR-EHR-OBSERVATION.nutritional_risk_screening.v1; 
 openEHR-EHR-OBSERVATION.blood_pressure.v1: 
 openEHR-EHR-OBSERVATION.body_weight.v1. 
During 2015 and 2017 more complex archetypes were de-
fined such as: 
 
 openEHR-EHR-INSTRUCTION.medication_order.v1; 
 openEHR-EHR-EVALUATION.adverse_reaction_risk.v1. 
 
Clinicians have been invited to participate through the na-
tional CKM after coordination between the regional groups 
and the secretariat at NRUA. The CKM is, as showed in Fig-
ure 2. , where the clinicians state there opinion in the text box 
on the right hand side. Archetypes are used as standards for 
the clinical content of the EHR and it was important for clini-
cians to have an essential role in defining and designing them. 
One clinician said: “It is crucial to include clinicians in this 
work; they have the clinical knowledge and know what is im-
portant to focus on, for the archetypes to be useful standards 
for clinical work.” The same clinician commented, “If others 
than clinicians design the archetypes, it will be troublesome to 
get clinicians to accept and use them”. However, as reported 
by Christensen and Ellingsen [32], it was not only enough to 
count on clinical reviewers, those reviewers needed to be 
trained to review archetypes using the Norwegian CKM.  
TABLE III.  
DISTRIBUTION OF ARCHETYPES IN EACH OF THE DIFFERENT 
LIFECYCLES: PUBLISHED, IN REVIEW OR DRAFT.  
Draft 
149 
Review 
26 
Published 
58 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Screenshot of the Clinical Knowlwdge Manager where clinicians cooperate towards the consensus of archetypes. 

87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. The use of terminology to standardize local practice 
In parallel to the adoption of openEHR as information 
standard, the Norwegian Directorate of Health has put focus 
on clinical terminology, and has engaged clinicians nation-
wide to explore the integration of several terminologies in the 
existing ICT portfolio. 
Since 2005, one of the largest hospitals in Norway, 
Akershus University Hospital, has used an EHR that includes 
a module for nursing. Along the lines of standardization, the 
nursing care plan, including nursing classification systems 
were regarded as a mean for making nursing work more ef-
fectively and offering quality assurance. The classification 
systems are ICT-based standards integrated with the care 
plan. The diagnoses are represented by the international clas-
sification system NANDA, consisting of 206 nursing diagno-
ses [38]. The interventions are represented by the NIC sys-
tem, consisting of 486 interventions. Care plans are increas-
ingly made to replace the use of free text in the documenta-
tion, foremost to establish a common, formalized language 
based on the best practices. Free text documentation is what-
ever information nurses share about the patient in the EHR in 
addition to, or without, writing formalized care plans. How-
ever, the implementation of the EHR led to a systematic use 
of standardized care plans that gave more efficacy, transpar-
ency, and quality of documentation. The care plan has been 
organized in such a manner that each diagnosis, dimension, 
and action is firmly attached to the plan with a start and a stop 
date. When standardizing these plans, the nurse can easily 
choose several actions from a predefined list for the applica-
ble diagnosis. By doing this, the nurse saves time, while the 
standardized sentences work as a quality indicator. The pur-
pose of using terminology as a primarily means to standard-
ized EHR systems is challenging, still terminology has been 
used to structure an unstructured EHR system with success. 
C. The national strategy  for clinical terminologies 
At a national level several terminologies have been 
adopted and integrated in EHR systems. In the case of ICD-9 
and ICD-10, they have been used in Norwegian healthcare 
systems from their origin with the target of coding medical 
diagnosis both for clinical and economical benefit. One clini-
cal IT manager stated that the primary target behind the adop-
tion of terminologies could have been achieved if the clini-
cians had used the diagnosis codes from ICD-10 to categorize 
the patients in the EHR. However, clinicians found it difficult 
to be explicit and specific early in the trajectory of the patient, 
since diagnosis change throughout the patient pathway. Diag-
nosis change and the IT systems in use need to track and cat-
egorize these changes logically to support the activity coding 
of clinical work. The coding of activities reflects the focus of 
the clinical pathway, not the diagnosis of the patient. In this 
sense, the adoption of archetypes becomes valuable: as a qual-
ity assurance of the completeness of the clinical terminology, 
to direct the clinical content of the EHR systems and other in-
tegrated systems, and to identify relevant information and give 
the clinicians access to this information. However, in opposi-
tion to local level, patient pathways fixed to clinical ICD di-
agnosis probably need to be determined on a national level, 
and based on national directives. This led to discussions on 
how to use different terminologies in combination with arche-
types. A member of the regional archetype group stated: “The 
archetype is not annotated but this is a subset of the SNOMED 
concepts available for severities. As a maximum data set, the 
archetype should not restrict the "standard" set of terms 
agreed in terminologies. However, before doing so, I think 
that the implications in terms of SNOMED licenses should be 
considered very carefully.” 
The use of standard terminologies is also considered para-
mount for the standardization of clinical processes. For in-
stance, clinical pathways for cancer diagnosis are today orga-
nized from national cancer groups that have resulted in na-
tional guidelines that easily could be followed and connected 
to already existing patient pathway processes, standardized 
packages to monitor that cancer patients receive the right 
treatment at the applicable time. Large-scale Infrastructure 
projects, with increasingly more focus on integrated care, put 
pressure on the Norwegian Directorate of Health to focus on 
clinical terminologies and archetypes. Recently, there has 
been a growing activity in the section of e-health towards in-
creased focus on general-purpose terminologies such as 
SNOMED-CT, and the International Classification of Func-
tioning, Disability and Health (ICF). This has motivated stud-
ies on how terminologies and archetypes fit together. A se-
lected number of experts have, through the last 6 months, re-
cruited evaluators from all over the country. These are clini-
cians and information architects with special interest in the use 
of clinical terminology. The work started in November 2015 
with the purpose to map SNOMED-CT towards the most 
commonly used EHR functions. At the same time ICNP will 
be piloted in the primary healthcare services, this has been or-
ganised by the Norwegian Nursing Association that has trans-
lated the terminology, and the Norwegian Directorate of 
Health acknowledges it. SNOMED-CT and ICNP are both 
discussed in the new national project.  Other Scandinavian 
countries such as Sweden and Denmark have earlier allocated 
significant resources both to translate and get SNOMED-CT 
operational for clinical practice.  
The national projects have focus on SNOMED-CT and at-
tempt to advise the Ministry of Health in questions such as: 
should Norway become an organized users of SNOMED? 
How is the coverage of SNOMED-CT for the content of the 
clinical pathway? How is the integration of SNOMED-CT 
solved technically? The last question includes the use of ar-
chetypes, but also the possibility to use SNOMED directly to 
represent EHR content? 
A national project coordinated by the Norwegian direc-
torate of Health in 2016 had the purpose to map the clinical 
patient pathway with SNOMED-CT codes. A standardized 
breast cancer process was used with the purpose to categorize 
the coverage of SNOMED-CT for all the relevant clinical var-
iables. The study revealed that despite the total number of 
codes in the SNOMED-CT hierarchies, more than 30 % of the 
breast cancer process values had no SNOMED-CT code. 

88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
D. Terminology binding of archetypes 
A key aspect of archetypes is that they allow the binding 
of their elements to codes from an external terminology. Since 
the objective in Norway is to cover most clinical areas in sec-
ondary healthcare using archetypes, the adoption of 
SNOMED-CT as general-purpose terminology for their ter-
minology binding has been explored. The binding of arche-
types to SNOMED-CT endows them with the semantics pro-
vided by the standard terminology. This allows those systems 
relying on the same archetypes and SNOMED-CT to interop-
erate at a semantic level. Concerning the secondary use of 
clinical information, the adoption of SNOMED-CT facilitates 
the representation of clinical content with rich semantics ena-
bling expressive queries required for phenotyping in clinical 
research. 
In collaboration with NRUA, the combination of 
SNOMED-CT with archetypes has been evaluated finding 
several challenges [39]. At a technical level archetypes can be 
bound to any terminology and it is up to the archetype de-
signer what elements of it to annotate. However, in our expe-
riences assessing archetypes binding to SNOMED-CT, sev-
eral challenges were found. Archetypes are generic data sche-
mas to be used at a national level, however their binding to 
terminologies is very influenced by the different scenarios 
where they is used. For example, sharing the patient summary 
across different health platforms would require the annotation 
of some main sections of the archetype with SNOMED-CT. 
Guidelines for terminology binding can be followed at that 
level [36][40][41]. However, if a higher level of expressivity 
is needed, for example to be able to use the archetype to per-
form semantic queries applying reasoning over the terminol-
ogy, more sections of the archetype would need to be linked 
to SNOMED-CT. It would be required to represent some con-
textual properties at a terminological level for dealing with 
contextual aspects such as time intervals, parties involved in 
an observation etc. For example, if one needs to perform a 
query for identifying patients diagnosed with some kind of 
malignant epitherial neoplasms in the last 10 years, any patient 
diagnosed with a subtype of such disorder should be retrieved, 
i.e. patients diagnosed in the last decade with adenocarcinoma 
of nasopharynx, carcinoma of lingual tonsil, carcinoma of the 
uvula etc. To enable this kind of expressive queries, first, it is 
required to annotate archetypes and their instances properly 
with an ontology-based terminology; second, it is necessary to 
rely on a technical infrastructure that explores the SNOMED-
CT concept hierarchy; and, third, timing aspects expressed at 
an archetype level need to be also be considered in the query 
processing. SNOMED-CT covers the first two requirements 
but, as domain ontology, specifying precise contextual aspects 
such as time is out of its scope [42]. This involves that two 
different models (the archetype and the terminology) need to 
be analysed to answer such a query. The terminology can pro-
vide subsumptive (i.e. class- subclass) reasoning to identify 
subtypes of the disorder and the archetype query language 
(AQL) can help in filtering contextual aspects. However, this 
means operating at two different levels as proposed in [43] 
thus making more complex and less dynamic the definition of 
queries over clinical information. This challenge is not only 
present when querying the EHR for research purposes. In fact, 
the presence of iso-semantic models (CIMs defined in differ-
ent standards) requires the use of semantic web architectures 
to guarantee that the meaning of health information is pre-
served across organizational boundaries to provide access de-
cision support systems [44]. How to leverage archetypes and 
biomedical ontologies such as SNOMED-CT guaranteeing 
scalability and viability of health information architectures is 
currently a matter of concern for the Norwegian e-Health Di-
rectorate.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Adoption clinical information model 
Terminology standards are used on a daily basis in health 
care work. The combination of health information standards 
and terminologies is currently the preferred option to enable 
SIOp for sharing clinical data both for care delivery and for 
secondary uses (e.g., clinical research) [3]. In Norway, the 
availability of a structured EHR model based on archetypes is 
opening the door for clinicians to categorize variables for 
building meaningful reports, extracting data for quality regis-
ters, and performing clinical research. Structured data ele-
ments will also make it possible to organize information that 
supports processes and decision support inside an integrated 
EHR portfolio and the use of OpenEHR will provide clini-
cians with a more open, adaptive, and collaborative system. 
OpenEHR compliant data tagged with clinical terminology 
codes allows the interoperation of different HIS, thus enabling 
integrated care. In the near future, the implementation of the 
archetype-based system will elevate the possibilities to use the 
standardized information models in clinical settings. The im-
plementation program for the new EHR has focus on clinical 
decision support, and mapping of CIM between different in-
tegrated systems. 
B. Primary use of terminology 
The integration of clinical terminology for use in EHR sys-
tems to support clinical practice has proven difficult to accom-
plish. With the use of archetypes, and a national governance 
of clinical variables through a common repository for struc-
tured data elements, there are future advantages of both se-
mantic and interoperable character. Earlier research elaborates 
on how the categorical use of clinical terminology to structure 
nursing diagnosis and interventions in standardized nursing 
plans has been a success for increased quality and efficiency. 
However, the use of clinical terminology to categorized clini-
cal documentation for enabling process- and decision support 
in the EHR portfolio is limited. The use of standardized nurs-
ing plans at a large scale in a Norwegian hospital showed clear 
advantages for both quality and efficiency [45]. Furthermore, 
when information is tagged with the purpose to categorize 
such as with ICD-10 and medical diagnosis, the same infor-
mation becomes available for secondary purposes. On the next 
level, any of these tagged nodes of information could be recir-
culated. Archetype based elements such as blood pressure, 
pulse, temperature, and laboratory data can also be used for 
primary purposes. Different national and regional initiatives 
will in a close future be piloted in different implementation 

89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
processes such as Helseplattformen that is a pilot for One- cit-
izens one Journal, and the new FIKS program in the North 
Norwegian Health Authority [46]. 
C. Secondary use of terminology 
At the same time, as the primary information becomes in-
teroperable, both as single archetype/terminology or inter-
vened, the information becomes semantically interoperable 
for use in secondary settings. As an illustration, all infor-
mation that is tagged with the nursing classification ICNP, 
both diagnosis and interventions, becomes sharable for sec-
ondary use. All the nursing diagnosis and interventions would 
be an object for clinical research on a national or global level, 
which is a relatively unexploited research arena. The care plan 
is intended to be an interdisciplinary tool for categorizing doc-
umentation in the EHR. For this to become a success, it is im-
portant that structured information from other applications is 
used in the care plan. A regional implementation program will 
soon have focus on the integration of information models be-
tween the EHR and the EMR [46]. 
In the end, an increasing number of archetypes, a so far 
unknown number, is expected to be accessible in an open re-
pository, and each archetype that is translated or modelled will 
be compared or reviewed with the purpose of being added to 
the global repository. For instance, the process of getting con-
sensus on the observation archetype blood pressure started 
with a translation of the global standard, and ended with a new 
version that also is planned for the global or international re-
pository. The increasing number of archetypes increases the 
possibility to use the structured data elements to extract data 
for other secondary purposes. The national quality registers is 
an example where physicians use time on extracting data form 
the HER manually. The same implementation program will 
focus on possibilities to make these processes automated us-
ing archetypes.  
D. Adoption clinical information model 
The diversity in standards, scope and methodology com-
plicates the decision about adopting one standard or another 
for the definition of CIMs since it will influence the systems 
that can be deployed in the health network. Standards availa-
ble are openEHR, ISO 13606, HL7 CDA, HL7 FHIR, to name 
a few. In Norway, although 3 of the 4 health regions rely on 
openEHR for secondary care. Nevertheless, many other HIS 
rely on different standards or no information standard at all. 
Therefore, in the near future it is expected to find an ecosys-
tem where implementations based on different information 
models will coexist. This may add a burden for those imple-
menters that need to adapt from one standard to another. How-
ever, it is important to notice that the most valuable resource 
of a CIM is not the technical specification, but the conceptual 
model that it contains. CIMs, beyond providing a format to 
express clinical information, define a way of combining clin-
ical concepts together to build more complex conceptual 
structures. For example, the archetype OpenEHR-EHR-
CLUSTER.symptom_sign.v1 aggregates several granular 
concepts such as Body site, Episodicity, Impact, etc., to build 
the more complex entity Symptom/Sign. This aggregation of 
concepts is more evident when the CIM is annotated with an 
international terminology. Reaching a consensus about the 
conceptual model of the CIM is the task that consumes most 
of the efforts of editorial teams since they need to coordinate 
professionals from different domains. Nevertheless, if the 
modelling work is appropriately performed, the conceptual 
model will be equivalent in most iso-semantic models. Con-
sequently, once CIMs are defined in a particular standard, the 
conceptual model is clear and can be transformed to other rep-
resentations/standards. In fact, that is the approach of the 
opencimi.org initiative, which pursues the definition of CIMs 
that can be expressed in several formats such as CEMs, HL7 
CDA or OWL by defining transformation functions among 
them. These transformations, although complex, are technical 
tasks that can be accomplished with much less effort than the 
definition of stable conceptual models. The EU project Se-
manticHealthNet has provided insights to define an ontology 
based on the CIM conceptual model that allows the access to 
equivalent information hosted in repositories expressed with 
disparate information standards [47]. In the case of Norway, 
we expect several standards to be implemented in different re-
gions and HIS. In such scenario, we believe that the common 
repository of published CIMs expressed as archetypes will be 
of paramount importance to provide the set of models ap-
proved at a national level that can drive the development of 
interoperable infrastructures across disparate HIS. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Currently several standards and terminologies are availa-
ble for the specification and annotation of CIMs, respectively. 
openEHR, HL7 CDA and ISO 13606 are examples of stand-
ards to define CIMs, which in most cases are annotated with 
standard terminologies to enable their interoperability across 
systems.  
With the parallel national initiatives running at this time in 
different countries, it is starting to become visible how the or-
ganization and size of countries influences their standardiza-
tion efforts. On one hand, large countries with very heteroge-
neous health networks are aiming for the adoption of stand-
ards that allow sharing EHR information documents extracts 
That is the case of Spain with ISO 13606 [48] or the US with 
HL7 CDA [12][49].  
On the other hand, Norway is heading to the adoption of a 
nationwide EHR information architecture with openEHR that 
defines not only some relevant CIMs but also the whole EHR 
information structure. Three factors have influenced this di-
rection of work. The first is the homogeneity in the market 
since only one vendor represents 80% of the market share in 
hospital. The second is the close collaboration between ven-
dors and health authorities; this allows coordinating the defi-
nition of the whole information model of new systems. The 
third, and most determinant, is the body of knowledge already 
available in the international CKM that has fed the national 
CIMs definition pipeline with existing archetypes. This has 
accelerated their validation at a national level avoiding their 
definition from scratch. 
At the moment, the Norwegian eHealth strategy has estab-
lished a multidisciplinary community of vendors, governmen-
tal agencies and health organizations collaborating in order to 
define a nation-wide EHR information architecture. The 

90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
knowledge management framework of OpenEHR supports to 
manage the national CKM. The OpenEHR governance model 
and the collaboration between the international and Norwe-
gian CKM teams are proving to be effective to manage the 
definition of CIMs for the national eHealth strategy. On the 
technical side, the rich reference model provided by 
OpenEHR acts as a powerful modelling tool for the definition 
of CIMs. On the organizational side, the collaborative envi-
ronment provided by the CKM is allowing to ensure the va-
lidity of the CIMs generated. As a result, the National eHealth 
Department is providing the health informatics community a 
body of standard clinical models, which allows implementers 
and researchers to define standard interoperable implementa-
tions on them. 
The semantic interoperability gained from the use of both 
terminology and OpenEHR archetypes separately is a highly 
valuable asset. For instance, earlier studies in Norway have 
showed that clinical terminology has the potential to structure 
information of unstructured EHR systems.  The ongoing na-
tional work also suggests that the combined use of archetypes 
and terminology further increases the semantic interoperabil-
ity for connecting EHR systems on different layers of 
healthcare. Using for instance SNOMED “non-hierarchical” 
to tag the nodes of archetypes is interesting, and could be an 
integration advantage for vendors. It is a fact that both subjects 
complement each other’s capacity to reach semantic interop-
erable.  
Another “feature” that could increase the semantic in-
teroperability is the growing possibility to use different Clini-
cal Information Models to extract and share information from 
the National repository of archetypes/ clinical variables and 
content. The Government and the National e-health admin-
istration has decided to use different ICT systems in the pri-
marily and specialist healthcare for several years to come. 
This requires a possibility to use clinical content from the na-
tional repository using another CIM specification standard 
than OpenEHR to extract and use semantic interoperable in-
formation. In this sense, the clinical model defined by an ar-
chetype can be represented in another standard by defining 
transformation rules among OpenEHR and the other standard. 
This way, the archetype-based repository becomes the refer-
ence common information ‘ontology’ or conceptual model 
used by different vendors regardless the standard, classes, and 
model they implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Thanks to the people at North Norwegian Health Author-
ity, the NRUA, and the National ICT for contributing with vi-
tal information to the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Pedersen, C. Granja, and L. M. Ruis, "The Value of Clinical 
Information Models and Terminology for Sharing Clinical," The 
Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine (eTELEMED 2016), Venice, Italy, IARIA, 2016, pp. 153-
159. 
[2] 
C. P. Friedman, A. K. Wong, and D. Blumenthal, "Achieving a 
Nationwide Learning Health System," Science translational medicine, 
vol. 2, pp. 57cm29-57cm29, 2010. 
[3] 
T. Greenhalgh, J. Howick, and N. Maskrey, "Evidence Based 
Medicine: A Movement in Crisis?," Bmj, vol. 348, p. g3725, 2014. 
[4] 
B. Djulbegovic, G. H. Guyatt, and R. E. Ashcroft, "Epistemologic 
Inquiries in Evidence-Based Medicine," Cancer control: journal of the 
Moffitt Cancer Center, vol. 16, pp. 158-168, 2009. 
[5] 
M. Rigby, P. Hill, S. Koch, and D. Keeling, "Social Care Informatics 
as an Essential Part of Holistic Health Care: A Call for Action," 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 80, pp. 544-554, 
2011. 
[6] 
C. Friedman and M. Rigby, "Conceptualising and Creating a Global 
Learning Health System," International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 82, pp. e63-e71, 2013. 
[7] 
A. Budrionis, L. Marco-Ruiz, K. Y. Yigzaw, and J. G. Bellika, 
"Building a Learning Healthcare System in North Norway," 
Proceedings from The 14th Scandinavian Conference on Health 
Informatics 2016, Gothenburg, Sweden, April 6-7 2016, Linköping 
University Electronic Press, 2016, pp. 1-5. 
[8] 
M. Rigby, S. Koch, D. I. Keeling, and P. Hill, "Developing a New 
Understanding of Enabling Health and Wellbeing in Europe: 
Harmonising Health and Social Care Delivery and Informatics Support 
to Ensure Holistic Care," European Science Foundation 2013. 
[9] 
A. Budrionis and J. G. Bellika, "The Learning Healthcare System: 
Where Are We Now? A Systematic Review," Journal of biomedical 
informatics, vol. 64, pp. 87-92, 2016. 
[10] V. Stroetman, D. Kalra, P. Lewalle, A. Rector, J. Rodrigues, K. 
Stroetman, G. Surjan, B. Ustun, M. Virtanen, and P. Zanstra, "Semantic 
Interoperability for Better Health and Safer Healthcare: Deployment 
and Research Roadmap for Europe," European Comission 2009 
[11] Epsos: Home N.D. Available: http://epsos.eu/ November 2014 
[12] D. Blumenthal  and M. Tavenner "The “Meaningful Use” Regulation 
for Electronic Health Records," New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 
363, pp. 501-504, 2010. 
[13] Mission and Goals. Available: www.opencimi.org October 2015 
[14] G. Fitzpatrick and G. Ellingsen, "A Review of 25 Years of Cscw 
Research in Healthcare: Contributions, Challenges and Future 
Agendas," Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 22, 
pp. 609-665, 2013. 
[15] S. Timmermans and M. Berg, "Standardization in Action: Achieving 
Local Universality through Medical Protocols," Social studies of 
science, vol. 27, pp. 273-305, 1997. 
[16] S. Van de Velde, P. Roshanov, T. Kortteisto, I. Kunnamo, B. 
Aertgeerts, P. O. Vandvik, and S. Flottorp, "Tailoring Implementation 
Strategies for Evidence-Based Recommendations Using Computerised 
Clinical Decision Support Systems: Protocol for the Development of 
the Guides Tools," Implementation Science, vol. 11, p. 29, 2016. 
[17] Stortingsmelding 9, "En Innbygger, En Journal," Helse- og 
Omsorgsdepatementet, 
Available: 
http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/hod/dok/regpubl/stmeld/2012-
2013/meld-st-9-20122013.html?id=708609 November 2014. 
[18] Nasjonal IKT, "Tiltak 48 (2012). Klinisk Dokumentasjon for Oversikt 
Og Læring," ed, 2009. 
[19] H. Lærum, S. L. Bakke, R. Pedersen, and J. T. Valand, "An Update on 
Openehr Archetypes in Norway: Response to Article Christensen B & 
Ellingsen G:" Evaluating Model-Driven Development for Large-Scale 
Ehrs through the Openehr Approach" Ijmi May 2016, Volume 89, 
Pages 43-54," International journal of medical informatics, vol. 93, p. 
1, 2016. 
[20] A. Moreno-Conde, D. Moner, W. D. da Cruz, M. R. Santos, J. A. 
Maldonado, M. Robles, and D. Kalra, "Clinical Information Modeling 
Processes for Semantic Interoperability of Electronic Health Records: 
Systematic Review and Inductive Analysis," Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, pp. 925-934, 2015. 
[21] L. Marco-Ruiz, D. Moner, J. A. Maldonado, N. Kolstrup, and J. G. 
Bellika, "Archetype-Based Data Warehouse Environment to Enable 
the Reuse of Electronic Health Record Data," International journal of 
medical informatics, vol. 84, pp. 702-714, 2015. 

91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[22] J. Pathak, K. R. Bailey, C. E. Beebe, S. Bethard, D. S. Carrell, P. J. 
Chen, D. Dligach, C. M. Endle, L. A. Hart, and P. J. Haug, 
"Normalization and Standardization of Electronic Health Records for 
High-Throughput Phenotyping: The Sharpn Consortium," Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, pp. e341-e348, 
2013. 
[23] L. Marco-Ruiz, J. A. Maldonado, R. Karlsen, and J. G. Bellika, 
"Multidisciplinary Modelling of Symptoms and Signs with Archetypes 
and Snomed-Ct for Clinical Decision Support," Medical Informatics 
Europe - MIE 2015, 2015, pp. 125-129. 
[24] D. Boscá, L. Marco, V. Burriel, T. Jaijo, J. M. Millán, A. M. Levin, O. 
Pastor, M. Robles, and J. A. Maldonado, "Genetic Testing Information 
Standardization in Hl7 Cda and Iso13606," MedInfo, 2013, pp. 338-
342. 
[25] R. Chen, P. Georgii-Hemming, and H. Åhlfeldt, "Representing a 
Chemotherapy Guideline Using Openehr and Rules," The XXII 
International Congress of the European Federation for Medical 
Informatics (MIE 2009), IOS Press, 2009, pp. 653-657. 
[26] M. A. Hailemichael, L. Marco-Ruiz, and J. G. Bellika, "Privacy-
Preserving Statistical Query and Processing on Distributed Openehr 
Data," Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 210, pp. 766-
770, 2015. 
[27] S. Garde, R. Chen, H. Leslie, T. Beale, I. McNicoll, and S. Heard, 
"Archetype-Based 
Knowledge 
Management 
for 
Semantic 
Interoperability of Electronic Health Records," The XXII International 
Congress of the European Federation for Medical Informatics (MIE 
2009), IOS Press, 2009, pp. 1007-1011. 
[28] Ocean Informatics. Clininical Knowledge Manager. Openehr Clinical 
Knowledge Manager N.D. Available: http://openehr.org/ckm April 
2014 
[29] Ocean 
Informatics. 
Nasjonal 
Ikt 
N.D. 
Available: 
http://78.47.196.39/ckm/# April 2014 
[30] Nehta. Nehta Clinical Knowledge Manager N.D. Available: 
http://www.digitalhealth.gov.au/news-and-events/news/1057-nehta-s-
clinical-knowledge-manager-ckm-featured-in-health-it-to-lead-or-be-
led-seminars November 2013 
[31] Stuba. Ezdravje Clinical Knowledge Manager N.D. Available: 
http://ukz.ezdrav.si/ckm/OKM.html November 2013 
[32] B. Christensen and G. Ellingsen, "Evaluating Model-Driven 
Development for Large-Scale Ehrs through the Openehr Approach," 
International journal of medical informatics, vol. 89, pp. 43-54, 2016. 
[33] T. Beale and S. Heard, "Openehr Architecture Overview. Openehr 
Foundation," London, UK, 2008. 
[34] G. C. Bowker and S. L. Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its 
Consequences: MIT press, 2000. 
[35] SNOMED-CT. Ihtsdo, Snomed-Ct®, the Organization. Available: 
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/ 
[36] D. Markwell, L. Sato, and E. Cheetham, "Representing Clinical 
Information Using Snomed Clinical Terms with Different Structural 
Information Models," KR-MED, 2008, pp. 72-79. 
[37] Klinisk 
Informasjonsmodellering. 
Available: 
wiki.arketyper.no 
January 2016 (in Norwegian). 
[38] N. R. Hardiker, D. Hoy, and A. Casey, "Standards for Nursing 
Terminology," Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 7, pp. 523-528, 2000. 
[39] L. Marco-Ruiz and R. Pedersen, "Challenges in Archetypes 
Terminology Binding Using Snomed-Ct Compositional Grammar: The 
Norwegian Patient Summary Case," 16th World Congress on Medical 
and Health Informatics (MedInfo2017), Hangzhou, China, IOS Press, 
2017, p. In Press. 
[40] Technical Implementation Guide - Technical Implementation Guide - 
Snomed 
Confluence 
N.D. 
Available: 
https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCTIG March 2017 
[41] Hl7 
Terminfo 
Project 
N.D. 
Available: 
http://wiki.hl7.org/index.php?title=TermInfo_Project# July 2017 
[42] A. Rector and D. Sottara, Chap. 20 "Formal Representations and 
Semantic Web Technologies," in Clinical Decision Support: The Road 
to Broad Adoption, R. A. Greenes, Second Edition. Oxford: Academic 
Press, 2014, pp. 551-598. 
[43] Clinical Models and Snomed Kaiser Perspective - Cimi N.D. 
Available: 
http://informatics.mayo.edu/CIMI/index.php/Clinical_Models_and_S
NOMED_Kaiser_Perspective July 2017 
[44] L. Marco-Ruiz, C. Pedrinaci, J. A. Maldonado, L. Panziera, R. Chen, 
and J. G. Bellika, "Publication, Discovery and Interoperability of 
Clinical Decision Support Systems: A Linked Data Approach," Journal 
of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 62, pp. 243-264, 2016/08/01/ 2016. 
[45] R. Pedersen, G. Ellingsen, and E. Monteiro, "The Standardized Nurse: 
Mission Impossible?," Researching the future in information systems, 
pp. 163-178, 2011. 
[46] Helse Nord Fiks – Én Journal I Nord. Available: https://helse-
nord.no/helse-nord-fiks-n-journal-i-nord 
January 
2016 
(in 
Norwegian). 
[47] C. Martínez-Costa, R. Cornet, D. Karlsson, S. Schulz, and D. Kalra, 
"Semantic Enrichment of Clinical Models Towards Semantic 
Interoperability. The Heart Failure Summary Use Case," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, pp. 565-576, 
2015. 
[48] J. E. Huerta, C. A. Villar, M. C. Fernández, G. M. Cuenca, and I. A. 
Acebedo, "Nhs Electronic Health Record," Ministerio de Sanidad y 
Politica 
Social, 
Available: 
http://www.msssi.gob.es/organizacion/sns/planCalidadSNS/docs/HC
DSNS_English.pdf March 2014. 
[49] Health Level Seven. Hl7 Standards Product Brief - Cda® Release 2. 
Available: 
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?product_i
d=7 March 2015 
 

