52
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Critical Insight into the Evaluation of e-
Government Policies: Reflections on the Concept of 
Public Interest 
Dalibor Stanimirovic and Mirko Vintar 
Institute for Informatization of Administration 
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Administration 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
dalibor.stanimirovic@fu.uni-lj.si, mirko.vintar@fu.uni-lj.si 
 
 
Abstract–The concept of e-government was expected to support 
the development of the new public sector paradigm and the 
emerging 
socio-political 
trends, 
endorsing 
efforts 
for 
deliberative and democratic decision-making processes, and 
advocating 
the 
effective, 
accountable 
and 
transparent 
management of public affairs. In reality, very little of the 
above-mentioned was achieved, indicating that the current 
policy-making in the e-government field is inadequate, whereas 
lacking comprehensive and objective evaluation methodologies 
consequently 
results 
in 
poor 
quality 
planning 
and 
implementation of e-government policies. Despite the growing 
research interest in the last decade or so, the existing 
evaluation methodologies have been often only marginally and 
superficially targeting and evaluating the notion of the public 
interest articulated and addressed by the e-government 
policies. Moreover, the evaluation of the public interest 
dimensions is frequently rendered particularly with the 
evaluation of financial benefits of the e-government policies, 
additionally reducing the applicability of the evaluation 
methodologies and undermining the legitimacy of the 
evaluation results used for strategic planning. Paper provides 
an analysis of more than 50 methodologies for the evaluation of 
e-government policies, exploring their capacity and extent to 
which they facilitate the evaluation of the public interest 
implemented by the e-government policies. Analysis offers an 
insight into the current evaluation practice enabling detection 
of its deficiencies, and could facilitate a significant contribution 
to the inclusion of the public interest concept in the future 
design of the evaluation methodologies and provide support to 
more evidence-based policy-making in the e-government field.    
Keywords-e-government policy; evaluation methodology; 
analysis; evaluation levels; public interest 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The paper is an extended version of the conference paper 
entitled “Evaluation of e-Government Policies: Overlooked 
Aspect of Public Interest” presented at the SOTICS 2012: 
The Second International Conference on Social Eco-
Informatics, October 21 - 26, 2012 - Venice, Italy [1]. In 
this extended version, we provide a substantially revised 
paper including a review of the recent developments in the 
e-government research field, more elaborate description of 
the public interest concept, and a comprehensive analysis of 
the methodologies for the evaluation of e-government 
policies regarding their maturity, evaluation focus and 
ultimately the extent to which they facilitate the evaluation 
of the public interest concept implemented by the e-
government policies. The paper at hand additionally features 
a discussion of the research results and future trends in the 
design and implementation of e-government policies. 
The research of the e-government phenomenon, being 
generically defined as the continuous redefinition of the 
government operations based on the use of Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) and other internet-
related applications in its everyday internal and external 
transactions, has expanded heavily in the short development 
era. In the field of business informatics, the attention of 
researchers has moved from purely technological solutions 
and perspectives, to business processes, organizational and 
economic viewpoints of ICT integration, and the similar 
shift can be noticed in the case of e-government. Namely, 
until the first half of the previous decade, technological 
aspects of e-government research have been prevalent. 
However, later on, the attention has started moving rapidly 
towards questions related to usability and usage of e-
government services, and in the last years, issues related to 
successful planning and implementation of e-government 
policies on different levels (national, regional, local) and in 
different sectors (e-health, e-education, e-social affairs, etc.) 
are becoming increasingly important. This shift in research 
focus is understandable; since various studies indicate that 
further e-government development is one of the most 
important factors of public sector rationalization [2][3][4], 
as well as faster countries' development [5][6][7]. Despite 
considerable investments in e-government in recent years 
(European 
Union 
(EU) 
countries 
are 
investing 
approximately 2.2% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 
ICT in the field of public sector [8][9][10]) the expected 
effects in terms of reducing costs and increasing the 
effectiveness of public sector are still rather ambiguous, 
while user acceptance of e-government services is far below 
government anticipations. Disclosed issues and present 

53
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
public finance situation along with increasingly stringent 
austerity measures require careful direction of further e-
government investments, particularly focusing on the 
proficient evaluation of e-government policies and their 
effects – be it on national, local or sectoral level.    
Past experience in the field necessitates the development 
of the methodologies for the evaluation of e-government 
policies (the collective term “methodologies” will be used 
hereinafter, denoting different approaches, indicator models, 
benchmarking measurements, assessment frameworks and 
similar undertakings for the evaluation of e-government 
policies), which could enable e-government decision-
makers 
to 
conduct 
more 
qualified 
and 
quantified 
preparation, execution and evaluation of e-government 
policies including their broader societal implications. 
Considering e-government development so far, we have 
been witnessing a big gap between supply and demand of 
public e-services in most countries, which can be 
prevailingly attributed to “politically driven” development 
rather than “evidence based” evaluation and selection of e-
government policies [11][12][13]. Earlier research has 
shown that some countries [14][15][16] have been 
accomplishing much better results in evaluation and 
implementation of e-government policies  compared to 
several other countries with much higher investments. Past 
experience in the field and public finance trends evidently 
require the development of the methodologies for the 
evaluation of e-government policies which could enable e-
government decision-makers to conduct more qualified and 
quantified preparation, execution and evaluation of e-
government policies – be it before or after their 
implementation (ex-ante or ex-post).  
The existing methodologies for the evaluation of e-
government policies lack a unified and clear theoretical 
framework [13], implying they are mostly arbitrarily 
designed, and aimed at specific evaluation needs and 
objectives. The latter arise from various reasons: different 
(EU, UN, Brown University, Economist Intelligence Unit, 
etc.) and heterogeneous promoters (international, national, 
consulting, research institutions, etc.), diverse environments, 
various rationales and contextual background as well as the 
number and selection of indicators. Significant differences 
between the evaluation methodologies are reflected within 
their main evaluation focus and evolving stage. Namely, the 
evaluation methodologies vary widely depending on the 
evaluation levels within e-government policies they are 
predominantly focused on (infrastructural level, project 
level, organizational level, etc.), and the development levels 
they achieved, describing the degree of their application in 
practice (conceptual framework, pilot application, practical 
application). 
Notwithstanding the increasing number of the different 
evaluation methodologies emerging in the last years 
[14][15][16], some aspects of the evaluation of e-
government policies have been largely disregarded, 
particularly public interest, as one of the foundations of 
public policy-making. This rather unsatisfactory state of 
affairs has led to growing calls for a reassessment and 
rebalancing of the rationalizations in the evaluation of e-
government policies, and in particular for a greater weight 
to be given to the public interest [17]. 
The paper discusses the main features of the existing 
methodologies for the evaluation of e-government policies 
and analyzes their evaluation foci trying to establish the 
extent to which the existing methodologies facilitate the 
evaluation of the public interest. Deriving from the 
aforementioned research objectives, the paper is focusing 
primarily on the following interrelated research questions: 
1) Overview and study of the existing methodologies for 
the evaluation of e-government policies and summary 
of their characteristics.  
2) Analysis of the existing methodologies for the 
evaluation of e-government policies regarding the 
aspect of public interest.  
From the methodological point of view, research 
represents an in-depth analysis, while research activities are 
embedded 
in 
two-phase 
incremental 
methodological 
framework. Combining different techniques of qualitative 
research methods [18], the initial part of the study has 
focused on the analysis of primary and secondary sources, 
whereas deriving from obtained research results, the 
conclusive part of the research is striving to integrate 
theoretical and practical aspects regarding the research 
subject. Selection of research methods was adapted to the 
research field [18][19] given the complexity of e-
government evaluation initiatives. 
Following the introduction, the second section of the 
paper presents the concept of public interest and an 
overview of the relevant literature while outlining various 
directions in the evaluation of e-government policies, key 
evaluation levels within the existing evaluation practice, and 
related issues and barriers. The third section provides an 
analysis of the existing methodologies for the evaluation of 
e-government policies and summary of their general 
characteristics. The fourth section explores the presence of 
the public interest aspect and sketches the research findings 
regarding the representation of the public interest 
dimensions in the existing evaluation methodologies. The 
discussion of the research results emphasizing the future 
trends in conceptualization and implementation of e-
government policies is contained in the fifth section. The 
last section outlines the limitations and applications of the 
proposed research, and subsequently submits the final 
arguments and observations regarding the research results 
and future work. 
II. 
CONCEPT OF PUBLIC INTEREST AND METHODOLOGIES 
FOR THE EVALUATION OF E-GOVERNMENT POLICIES – STATE 
OF THE ART 
The public interest is not a unitary concept: different 
public interests are relevant in different scenarios and need 
to be weighted differently depending on the circumstances 
[16]. Public policy makers, expert public and citizens have 
to find the appropriate balance of the numerous public 
interests that may exist in any given situation. Finding this 
balance will not only involve comparing the relative 
importance of one public interest to another but also involve 
the contemplation of the interconnection of public interests 

54
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and considering the broader impact that these may have in 
turn on other public interest networks [20]. 
Although there are different conceptions of public 
interest inaugurating different research perspectives, most 
frequently, public interest is viewed as a set of substantive 
ideals against which all policy proposals should be judged. 
The concept is thus recognized as a symbol to which all 
agree (few people are opposed to the public interest) and to 
which special interests appeal in order to rationalize their 
policy desires [21]. Regarding the contextual platform 
consisted of political and cultural framework of a particular 
society and the economic resources at its disposal, the 
public interest is defined as the aggregate of the 
fundamental goals that the society seeks to achieve for all of 
its members – not for a majority of its members or for any 
large and powerful group, but for all of the people within 
the society. Considered separately, a society’s goals are 
often in conflict with one another, and in that case there 
must be a balancing. Thus, the art of government consists of 
achieving a harmonious rather than a destructive balance 
among conflicting goals [22]. Some authors have studied 
the public interest concept from the aspect of substantive 
truths or principles. These truths or principals are not formal 
tests that any public policy must meet; however, general 
they may be and however, much skill may be required to 
apply them in particular cases, they provide substantive 
guidance to the proper content of public policy [23]. While 
others consider public interest and its dimensions primarily 
as a process of public action, primarily bargaining and 
competition between different interest groups, resulting in 
the overall social consensus [24]. Summarizing numerous 
and occasionally complex definitions of the public interest 
concept, it can be generally regarded as a set of commonly 
agreed goals arising from the inclusive and transparent 
deliberating procedure, based on compromise and shared 
values of well-defined social community.   
 Despite its complexity and diversity of research 
approaches and perspectives, the public interest concept is 
elaborated relatively well in theory, whereas it has failed to 
gain significant attention in the majority of e-government 
evaluation undertakings. Consideration of the public interest 
concept in methodologies for the evaluation of e-
government policies is often inadequate and superficial 
covering prevailingly financial factors and omitting all other 
societal aspects while reducing the potential of the 
evaluation process for objective and comprehensive 
evaluation.  
A. Methodologies for the evaluation of e-government 
policies 
In parallel to e-government development, there have 
emerged numerous methodologies, trying to evaluate its 
development and effects on different parameters of 
government operation. According to their characteristics and 
subject of the evaluation, these methodologies could be 
classified in typical groups presented below. 
1) Front-office maturity and readiness  
The most known benchmark measurements on the EU 
level have been conducted by Capgemini [8][9][10], while 
the most renowned benchmark measurements on the global 
scale have been carried out by the UN [15][25], Accenture 
[26] and Brown University [27]. While focusing primarily 
on the web site analysis, these methodologies used 
completely different indicators (from measuring 20 specific 
e-government services to web-based analysis of national 
portals, particular ministry portal, etc.). Indicators from 
these methodologies are not precise enough to ensure the 
comprehensive evaluation and validation of e-government 
policies on the national level (see critical analysis of such 
benchmark measurements from [13][28][29], etc.). On the 
other hand, some important benchmark measurements 
dealing with e-readiness or so-called e-government 
readiness, which could form the basis for planning of the 
necessary infrastructure for e-government development are: 
The Global Information Technology Report [16], Digital 
economy rankings [30] and United Nations e-Government 
Survey [15][25]. These benchmark measurements deploy 
different sets of indicators for benchmarking e-readiness and 
information society in general. Being predominantly 
focused 
on 
front-office 
change 
and 
infrastructural 
requirements 
during 
the 
conceptualization 
and 
implementation of e-government policies, these rather 
extensive methodologies are hardly providing the evaluation 
of the public interest, incapacitating its incorporation in the 
process of further e-government development. 
2) Effects and impacts of e-government policies 
Within a number of methodologies focusing on ex-ante 
and ex-post evaluation of e-government policies we could 
highlight: MAREVA [31], eGEP [32], WiBe 4.0 [33] and 
Australian AGIMO [34]. MAREVA and accompanying 
tools are dealing with the ex-ante and ex-post evaluations of 
e-government policies on the basis of parameters such as 
profitability, risks, benefits to external users and civil 
servants, services and project necessity; similar aspects are 
evaluated by WiBe 4.0. Main purpose of eGEP is to identify 
and analyze costs of establishment, provision and 
maintenance of e-government services on the EU level, as 
well as to develop methodology for the evaluation of their 
performance, and conduct an economic analysis of e-
government impacts. AGIMO has additionally developed 
the demand and value assessment methodology. In general, 
we could find these methodologies very exhaustive in terms 
of the large number of indicators; however, they rarely 
address the concept of public interest comprehensively, 
while particular narrow dimensions of public interest are 
normally amalgamated with financial benefits.   
Implementation of e-government policies significantly 
affects public sector organizations. Focusing on different 
organizational dimensions Klievink and Janssen [35] 
analyze joined-up e-government model, Fleur van Veenstra 
et al. [36] explore organizational changes in the direction of 
network government, Schedler and Schmidt [37] analyze 
management, organizational culture and external factors, 
which affect e-government development, Scholl [38][39] 
studies business process change, information management 
capacity and organizational capabilities, while Leitner and 
Kreuzeder [40] highlight organizational culture aspect as 
being the one most affected by the e-government initiatives. 

55
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An overview of related methodologies reveals there is no 
clear consensus on organizational changes caused by e-
government 
implementation, 
and 
consequently 
no 
comprehensible 
methodology 
to 
measure 
significant 
implications of transformed public sector organizations for 
the various social aspects and implementation of public 
interest. 
3) National-level development 
External factors have very significant impact on e-
government development; surveys often highlight political 
and sociological factors as the most important external 
factors. This aspect is partially discussed in United Nations 
e-Government Survey [15][25] through indicators such as e-
participation, 
e-inclusion, 
e-consultations, 
e-decision-
making. Study of Martin and Byrne [41] focused on critical 
factors of information society development and analyzed 
components of this concept. Their survey provides a set of 
political and sociological indicators for the evaluation of e-
government such as accessibility, digital divide, north-south 
divide, human rights, social welfare, social inclusion, 
economic sustainability and life-long learning. However, we 
can see that such indicators are very general and it is hard to 
incorporate them in a national context and determine their 
actual 
impact 
and 
correlation 
with 
e-government 
development. Activities on national economic level could 
significantly affect e-government development in individual 
country [12], so national economic factors must not be 
neglected. Bavec and Vintar [42] developed a model in their 
study, which aimed to identify relationships between 
national economic indicators and e-government indicators 
on the national level and on the EU level. National 
economic indicators surveyed in presented study comprised: 
GDP per capita, competitiveness, economic performance, 
government efficiency, use of ICT in the private sector, 
innovation index and internet access. The study above is one 
of the few trying to define correlation between national 
economic 
indicators 
and 
e-government 
development 
indicators. Research work in this field is rather limited; Kim 
[12] and Singh et al. [43] are partially dealing with national 
economic indicators and their implications for e-government 
within their research work. The aspect of public interest 
within outlined methodologies is poorly elaborated and thus 
inadequately evaluated, while it appears that identification 
and formulation of vaguely indicated long-term public goals 
is hardly reached by public consensus. 
4) Evaluation of e-government policies – issues and 
barriers 
Evaluation of e-government policies is generally 
difficult [7][9][28][29], given the numerous obstacles to the 
evaluation (Table 1) [44], complexity of the public interest 
and frequent lack of clarity of objectives owing to the 
different and often competing views held by different 
stakeholders. In addition, overlapping initiatives and 
policies and their continuous fine-tuning related to volatile 
public opinion complicate monitoring and evaluation. The 
fact that e-government is relatively new is probably the 
main reason for fewer models and actual outcome 
experiences that can be used for benchmarking [44] and 
inclusion of public interest dimension. Problems addressed 
become aggravated trying to evaluate particular e-
government projects. ICT projects are hard to evaluate 
because of the pervasive nature of ICTs, the integration of 
ICT goals with public policy goals and the organizational 
changes 
that 
necessarily 
accompany 
e-government 
initiatives. In addition, evaluators are often faced with a lack 
of data caused by the piecemeal management of the project 
documentation. 
Although 
materially 
incomplete 
and 
discrepant to the actual data, the project documentation is 
usually tailored to the financial reporting standards, which 
additionally distorts the real picture and consequently 
prevents quality evaluation process. 
TABLE I.  
OBSTACLES TO E-GOVERNMENT EVALUATION 
Obstacle 
Example 
Lack of clarity of objectives - 
stated goals may not have 
associated measures of 
progress; there may be multiple 
objectives 
Hard to measure "quality of life". 
Hard to define success              
If people are spending more time 
online, is that good or bad? 
Easy to be too ambitious 
Several countries have set targets 
of "all services online" by specific 
dates. But not all services are 
appropriate to put online. 
Information paradox 
The benefits of ICT investment 
may not be visible for some time. 
Question of who are the clients; 
multiple clients 
Should one evaluate benefits for 
the users, the employees, the 
government at large, partners, etc.? 
Hard to measure shared 
benefits 
Shared infrastructure, multiple 
projects benefiting from shared 
portal, etc. 
Private sector tools may not 
work for governments 
Governments place importance on 
social values that are not 
incorporated into private sector 
tools and objectives. 
Available indicators may not be 
the good ones 
Current indicators (such as number 
of employees with internet 
connections) are helpful, but have 
limits. 
Government definitions and 
methodologies vary from one 
country to the next 
Collecting data is easier at the local 
level, but at that level 
administrations are highly 
decentralized. 
Incentives to misstate 
evaluation results 
If an organization succeeds in 
saving money, telling others may 
result in their losing that money. 
Challenge of sharing results 
Hard to get organizations to report 
unsatisfactory results. 
What you measure may 
become focus of organization 
If you measure number of services 
online, but not service quality, 
priority will be on putting services 
online but not on service quality. 
 

56
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The effective evaluation including the aspect of public 
interest requires good metrics, regular monitoring and 
reporting, disciplined and professional use of the robust 
evaluation frameworks, and use of the long-term evaluation 
practices. These qualities depend on a government’s overall 
evaluation culture [44]. E-government project failures could 
have been mitigated by appropriate and comprehensive 
evaluation in the course of their conceptualization and 
planning [13][45][46]. The identification and elimination of 
the main obstacles to e-government evaluation, which 
obviously extend to several areas, such as: institutional, 
political, social, and cultural area, will require a broad 
consensus and strong commitment of all stakeholders 
B. Key evaluation levels within e-government policies 
Besides categorization according to the subject of 
evaluation, 
overview 
of 
the 
existing 
evaluation 
methodologies reveals they can be applied on the different 
evaluation levels within e-government policies. Majority of 
the methodologies mentioned so far are partial and mostly 
focused on the particular evaluation level within e-
government policy. These evaluation levels are not 
explicitly defined, although a detailed analysis of the current 
evaluation practice facilitates the extraction and synthesis of 
the relatively stable and constant evaluation levels, which 
are covered by the existing evaluation methodologies. These 
evaluation levels are illustrated in Figure 1, and outlined 
below: 
 
Infrastructural level
Project level
Political-sociological level
E-government policy 1
E-government policy n
E-government policy 2
Inputs
Outcome
Outputs
Process
Organizational level
National level
Set of indicators
Set of indicators
Set of indicators
Set of indicators
Set of indicators
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Project n
 
Figure 1.  Evaluation levels within e-government policies. 
 
Evaluation of infrastructure investments: costs of 
ICT infrastructure, data infrastructure, human 
resources, legal framework (infrastructural level); 
 
Evaluation 
of 
inputs, 
processes, 
services, 
operational and maintenance costs, outputs and 
outcomes of e-government projects (project level); 
 
Evaluation of transformational effects: changes in 
back-office, the reduction of hierarchical levels, 
business 
process 
reengineering, 
outsourcing, 
reduction of administrative barriers, costs and 
burdens, etc. (organizational level); 
 
Evaluation of political and sociological effects: 
transparency, 
openness, 
corruption, 
user 
satisfaction, 
democratization, 
participation 
(political-sociological level); 
 
Evaluation of economic impacts: costs, public 
benefits, effects on GDP, competitiveness index, 
economic 
growth, 
sustainable 
development 
(national level). 
1) Infrastructural level  
Infrastructural level primarily refers to maturity or 
environmental readiness for e-government and e-commerce. 
Research in this area is focused either on the internal or 
external aspect of e-government. The internal aspect 
research is primarily engaged in [47][48]: strategies, 
policies and action plans for development of e-government, 
the legal frameworks for e-business, policies for ICT usage, 
the 
existence 
and 
use 
of 
appropriate 
information 
infrastructure, training of human resources 
for 
e-
government, knowledge management about the benefits and 
pitfalls of e-business, financial issues, motives and obstacles 
for the development of e-government. Research on the 
external aspect of the environment maturity is particularly 
concerned with [47][48]: ownership, user interest and 
degree of ICT infrastructure usage (including the digital 
divide), the obstacles and reasons for lack of e-government 
services usage and opinions related to the development of e-
government in general. Most studies of the environment 
maturity do not treat internal and external aspects 
separately. 
2) Project level 
Project level consists of the research primarily engaged 
in: 1) ex-ante evaluations of projects aiming to establish 
priorities for further development, 2) ex-post evaluations of 
projects aiming to evaluate the effects of projects, 3) 
decisions on the external and / or internal implementation of 
projects (in/outsourcing). Regarding the first two points, a 
review of research shows that methodologies of this type 
often underestimate public benefits (public value) and so-
called intangible (hidden) costs such as costs of 
organizational change. The third point notes significant 
advantages in outsourcing of ICT projects, however, 
outsourcing initiatives must be carefully scrutinized, while 
the impact of the short-term cost-effectiveness and its 
potential implications on the achievement of long-term 
goals of public sector organizations must be elaborated and 
evaluated. Studies [49][50][51] often reveal the hidden 
costs, vendor-lock in as well as loss of control and 
competencies as the most problematic segments of 
outsourcing. On the other hand, research is rarely dealing 
with the other negative consequences of outsourcing, which 
may pose a potential threat [52][53][54]. 
3) Organizational level 
E-government implementation initiates changes at the 
organizational and inter-organizational level. Previous 
research dealing with this field is primarily focused on: 
changes in the organizational structure, business process 

57
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reengineering and changes in organizational culture and 
human resources. Studies dealing with changes in the 
organizational structure are focusing on the reduction of 
hierarchical 
levels, 
decentralization 
of 
activities, 
standardization of procedures, coordination, control and 
transformation of the existing relations inside and outside 
the organization [35][55][56]. Research dealing with the 
business process reengineering is analyzing horizontal 
implementation of processes (integration of functions and 
services), vertical implementation of processes (integration 
of organizations), speed of information exchange, changes 
in process definition rules and changes in time and place of 
operation [38][57][58]. Research exploring the change in 
organizational culture is primarily dealing with: changes in 
the philosophy of employees and leaders, strengthening the 
sense of affiliation to the organization and enhancing 
confidence in organizations [37][59]. Changes in human 
resources refer to the new skills and knowledge that 
employees need to comprehend due to e-government 
implementation, while managers should be able to combine 
knowledge of ICT and understand the process dimension of 
the organization [40]. However, most of the studies address 
all of these organizational dimensions at least indirectly, 
suggesting that the analysis and evaluation of organizational 
changes when introducing e-government should be multi-
dimensional and requires a comprehensive strategic 
approach.  
4) Political-sociological level 
Proliferation 
of 
advanced 
ICT 
solutions 
and 
development of e-government have changed the social 
structure and political-sociological paradigm of the country 
as the widest social community [15][60]. Political-
sociological effects of ICT and e-government on the society 
in general are very complex. They have a significant impact 
on changes of the social environment, they are affecting old 
and creating new forms of work and mindsets, they are 
changing perception of the world and social relations  
[61][62][63][64]. Accordingly, the existing methodologies 
are converging on the following aspects of e-government 
evaluation:  accessibility [5][25][59], citizens’ trust and 
confidence  [26][65][66], digital divide [5][44][60][67], 
social stratification and cohesion, citizens’ rights and 
democratic participation [6][16][41], openness, transparency 
and corruption [10][15][25]. Notwithstanding that reliable 
and adequate evaluation of wide-ranging e-government 
impacts could provide key information to policy makers 
needed for steering the development of e-government and e-
services 
to 
the 
right 
direction 
[7][10], 
integrated 
methodologies 
covering 
comprehensively 
political-
sociological aspects of evaluating e-government policies, 
are rather scarce. 
5) National level  
Research on national level is focusing on a clear 
difference in the efficiency and effectiveness of different 
countries regarding the implementation of e-government 
policies and the evaluation of national economic indicators 
and their impacts on e-government policy. Namely, 
economic activities on the national level are significantly 
affecting the level of e-government development in each 
country. Up to date research considers the basic and most 
important economic indicator on the national level, affecting 
the development of e-government, to be GDP per capita 
[42][43]. Sing et al. [43] assume that GDP plays a crucial 
role in the development of e-government via three 
influential factors (technological infrastructure, human 
capital 
and 
management 
index). 
Other 
prospective 
indicators at national economic level are: competitiveness, 
economic performance, government efficiency, use of ICT 
in the private sector, innovation index [42], education and 
urbanization [12]. National level indicators are obviously 
overlapping with the political-sociological level indicators 
through political institutions, legal environment, tradition of 
governance, political culture, socio-cultural environment 
and civil liberties [68][69]. 
Numerous difficulties were encountered trying to 
delineate the above itemized evaluation levels covered by 
particular methodology, since the contained indicators are 
not clearly defined, enabling their speculative use on the 
different evaluation levels. Moreover, associated indicators 
are appearing in dozens of different methodologies, 
including a large number of overlapping. Definitions of the 
indicators vary widely, while the evaluations are carried out 
on completely different methodological basis. Consequently 
the results of the evaluations, even if they are 
methodologically quite objectively conducted, are very 
difficult to compare. 
Development of a comprehensive and practically 
applicable methodology for the evaluation of e-government 
policies is obviously a difficult task. Namely, the majority 
of methodologies, which have tried to cover several 
evaluation levels within e-government policies, are 
developed only up to the conceptual framework or 
maximum pilot application. The latter shows that covering 
larger number of evaluation levels usually means that the 
evaluation methodology has achieved a lower degree of 
sophistication, which consequently reduces the potential of 
the methodology for its practical application. This is not 
unexpected, since the focus on several evaluation levels 
means more complex methodology structure and a larger 
number of indicators, which exacerbates the transparency 
and complicates the use of the methodology itself. Research 
results indicate that achievement of the highest degree of 
sophistication 
and 
practical 
application 
of 
the 
methodologies for the evaluation of e-government policies 
is largely dependent on the number of evaluation levels the 
methodology is focused on, and vice versa, meaning that the 
comprehensiveness of the evaluation methodologies is to a 
large extent conversely related to their degree of 
sophistication. 
III. 
ANALYSIS OF THE EXISTING METHODOLOGIES FOR 
THE EVALUATION OF E-GOVERNMENT POLICIES  
The 
review 
and 
meta-analysis 
of 
the 
existing 
methodologies and various alternative approaches for the 
evaluation of e-government policies was conducted in the 
second half of 2011. During that time we conducted an 
analysis of primary and secondary online resources, policy 
papers, reports, books, strategic documents, action plans and 

58
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
other documents containing e-government related research. 
Due to the nature of the research problems, the inquiry 
included the sources that are freely available online as well 
as the sources, which are indexed in subscribable 
bibliographic databases such as Web of Science, Scopus and 
ScienceDirect. In the initial phase of the review, we used 
keywords 
of 
evaluation, 
assessment, 
measurement, 
monitoring, indicator models, e-government projects, e-
government policies and effects (impacts) of e-government 
policies (including the logical coordinating conjunctions 
“and”, “or” when appropriate). Using the specialized search 
engine we subsequently identified and retrieved 380 related 
references in total (Fig. 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Literature research sequence diagram. 
 The frequency of references is becoming much higher in 
the second half of the last decade, proving the field is 
evolving rapidly and the interest of both the research 
community as well as policy makers on national and 
international level is increasing. In the second phase of the 
review, the identified references were tested by the inclusion 
into the research framework containing two criteria, namely 
1) identified reference must be completed project where the 
evaluation of e-government policies is clearly outlined as the 
main research objective and 2) the reference must contain 
explicit indicators or benchmarks for the evaluation of e-
government policies. Duplicated references and references, 
which did not comply with both criteria as set out in the 
research framework, were eliminated. After substantive 
verification and filtration, the vast majority of the items were 
excluded, leaving only 52 valid references (Fig. 2). The 
identified methodologies and their publication types are 
catalogued in Table 2. 
TABLE II.  
IDENTIFIED METHODOLOGIES FOR THE EVALUATION OF E-
GOVERNMENT POLICIES  
Author(s) – Year  
Publication type 
[31] [32] [33] [34] [70] [71] [72] [73]     Handbook / Tool 
[10] [15] [25] [44] [74] [75] [76] 
Policy paper 
[12] [35] [36] [37] [39] [40] [41] [42] 
[43] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [65] 
[66] [68] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] 
[83] [84] [85] [86] [87] [88]  
Academic paper 
/ Book 
[14] [16] [89] [90] [91] [92] [93] 
Report 
 
Conducting our review we have identified basically 
three types of references dealing with our subject of 
discourse. Taking into account their development level we 
categorized the identified methodologies into three groups: 
1) purely theoretical papers aiming to develop some kind of 
conceptual framework for the evaluation of e-government 
policies, 2) research efforts developed up to the degree of 
pilot application, and 3) methodologies developed in the 
practice for the practice (practical application). 
Analyzing the diverse variety of the evaluation 
methodologies identified in this area, certain general 
characteristics were identified and summarized below: 
 
The majority of the identified methodologies (30) for 
the evaluation of e-government policies are 
presented in scholarly papers and books.  
 
Certain methodologies are rather abstract containing 
speculatively selected indicators often encompassing 
non evidence-based theoretical platforms, while their 
utilization does not facilitate the acquirement of 
quantifiable evaluation results. 
 
Accredited methodologies are to a large extent 
narrowly focused assessing predominantly one of the 
various evaluation aspects. 
 
More mature methodologies are consisted of a large 
number of indicators, which are normally aligned for 
the evaluation of e-government policies in the 
originating countries. 
Search engine 
Selected key words 
Primary and 
secondary sources 
Research papers, 
books, statistical 
data, interviews, 
legal documents, etc. 
Policy papers,  
reports, strategic 
documents, action 
plans, etc. 
380 identified 
references 
Inclusion criteria 
52 valid references 
254 references 
excluded 
74 duplicates  

59
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
The majority of the identified methodologies are not 
providing a comprehensive evaluation of complex e-
government policies impacts and their potential 
long-term outcomes.   
After general characterization of the identified evaluation 
methodologies we focused more closely on the most 
prominent ones, such as MAREVA [31], WiBe 4.0 [33] and 
AGIMO [34], which have been most extensively used in 
everyday evaluation practice. 
MAREVA methodology was launched in 2005 by the 
French eGovernment Agency (ADAE) and has already been 
applied in hundreds of e-government initiatives in various 
ministries and public sector organizations all over the 
country. MAREVA methodology was devised for ex-ante 
and ex-post evaluation of ICT projects, as well as monitoring 
of their progress. Whereas the evaluation methodologies in 
the field tend to be rather complicated and complex, 
MAREVA methodology has managed to keep the evaluation 
process relatively simple, by providing common and 
standard evaluation criteria, and generating the evaluation 
summary reports easily understandable by all actors in the 
ICT project (from decision-makers to project leaders and 
executives). MAREVA methodology provides the evaluation 
of ICT projects through 5 analysis grids and restores the 
value on a five-axis radar graph, containing the following 
dimensions: 1) state financial value (Net Present Value, 
Internal Rate of Return, break-even point), 2) public service 
social & operational value (state employees valorization, 
improvement in public services efficiency, help the 
decentralization implementation, additional financial value – 
public services without state), 3) direct customer value 
(number of users impacted, saved time/money, improvement 
in service quality, promotion of the information society, 
impact of an intermediary), 4) project necessity (necessity 
for other ICT projects, legal or political obligation, state’s 
policies efficiency), and 5) risk (project risk, technical risk, 
legal risk, and deployment risk). Deriving from the 
evaluation objectives, MAREVA methodology is expected to 
facilitate prioritization of e-government initiatives by 
evaluating 
and 
comparing 
different 
projects, 
early 
identification of project risks and pitfalls and adoption of 
appropriate 
measures, 
informed 
decision-making 
and 
knowledge building, evaluation of the project value by 
integrating financial categories and impacts, and monitoring 
of different stages of the project life cycle. MAREVA 
methodology has influenced many evaluation initiatives in 
France and other countries and has been acclaimed as an 
example of good practice.  
WiBe 4.0 methodology was introduced in 1992 by the 
German Federal Ministry of the Interior, and has been 
regularly tested, and extensively used and updated since. 
WiBe 4.0 methodology is focusing on four dimensions of the 
evaluation: 1) economic efficiency in a monetary sense – 
profitability, 2) urgency of the ICT measure, 3) qualitative 
and strategic importance of the ICT measure, and 4) external 
effects of the ICT measure. Each dimension represents a 
wide-ranging set of indicators, too exhaustive for inclusion 
in the text (see [33]). Pursuant to the general administrative 
regulation in Germany, the application of WIBE 4.0 
methodology 
is 
mandatory 
in 
all 
administrative 
organizations on the federal level, federal states, and 
municipal organizations when making budget planning and 
facing complex investment decisions on large-scale ICT 
projects. Although designed primarily for ex-ante evaluation 
and focused predominantly on the economic efficiency of the 
ICT investments, evaluation of monetary aspects, project 
costs and benefits (internal and external), and simulation of 
budget-relevant outcomes, WiBe 4.0 methodology also 
facilitates qualitative evaluation of designated non-monetary 
aspects and benefits analysis, reflecting the long-term effects 
of planned ICT investments. In addition, the technical 
concept of WiBe 4.0 methodology itself is transferable and 
usable in other public policy areas as well. On the other 
hand, WiBe 4.0 methodology does not contain a specific 
category of indicators for the evaluation of the potential risks 
and threats, which represent an important decision-making 
factor, especially in the context of larger and long-term 
oriented e-government projects. 
AGIMO methodology was introduced in 2004 and is 
derived from a number of previous documents of Australian 
government relating to the effective implementation and 
evaluation of e-government policies and projects. It has been 
widely used in Australian public sector and is considered one 
of the most comprehensive evaluation methodologies in the 
e-government field. AGIMO methodology [34] consists of 
five steps:  1) outline the business case (program 
identification: 
objectives, 
scope, 
outcomes, 
outputs, 
when/who applies), 2) define the business need (demand 
assessment: sources of demand, demand context, demand 
measurement, scope), 3) estimate the value (value 
assessment: social value, user financial value, governance 
value), 4) conduct a cost & benefit analysis (costs: agency 
financial value, capital expenditure, operating expenses, 
benefits, cash flow & ROI, summary charts; benefits: agency 
values/worth, strategic value, program summary), and 5) 
assess risk and review (impacts, likelihood & consequence of 
risk: 
risk 
assessment, 
strategy/alignment, 
architecture/integration, delivery capability, benefits and 
value). In accordance with an extensive range of indicators 
(listed are only the first level indicators) AGIMO 
methodology provides a framework for measuring social and 
financial benefits and cost, and a platform for the evaluation 
of project value, risks assessment, and related decision-
making. Adequate application of the AGIMO methodology 
should allow for articulation of the drivers of benefits and 
costs, comparison and ranking of alternative ICT projects, 
and alignment of individual public sector organization 
objectives with broader government strategies. 
All three methodologies are based on relatively simple 
software platform, which on the one hand simplifies their use 
and increases transparency, while on the other hand, it 
considerably limits a wide range of functionality such as 
simulation, visualization and sensitivity analysis, which 
could significantly assist decision-makers in adopting more 
sound decision. Analyzed methodologies are based on 
national characteristics of the administrative system and 
include material, procedural, legislative and other specifics 
of the public sector from which they originate. They are 

60
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
extremely detailed and extensive, containing a large number 
of indicators, which are specifically tailored for the 
evaluation of adequately documented e-government policies 
from the well-structured and organized administrative 
environment. These and similar particularities substantially 
restrain their transfer and application in environments such 
as Slovenia, where the evaluation efforts are still in the early 
stage, and similar projects are rather poorly documented, 
preventing the collection of necessary data for the detailed 
list of indicators, as required by the aforementioned 
methodologies.  
All 
of 
the 
above-mentioned 
methodologies 
are 
undoubtedly applicable to the certain extent and can improve 
the quality of decision-making processes in the e-
government field, however, they reveal important limitations 
and deficiencies, and consequently fail to facilitate the 
evaluation of e-government policies in an all-encompassing 
manner. Although all of the outlined methodologies have 
achieved a high level of maturity, some crucial aspects of the 
public policy evaluation, such as the public interest, are 
unreasonably understated and marginalized. Depending on 
the nature of public policies and their declared purpose, one 
would expect that evaluation of the public interest 
implementation, should take a more central place in all 
evaluation experiments, and given the current situation in the 
field, try to compel the policy-makers to reconsider the 
strategies for future development of e-government. 
IV. 
PRESENCE OF THE PUBLIC INTEREST ASPECT IN THE 
EXISTING EVALUATION METHODOLOGIES   
The concept of public interest, or public value as it is 
also referred to, is gradually becoming the innovative driver 
in modern e-government endeavors [94][95]. Regardless of 
their perception of e-government, the increasing number of 
authors [96][97] argue that the conceptualization and 
ensuing implementation of the public interest is one of the 
e-government explicit priorities. ICT-induced reform of the 
public sector organizations [98] should aim at producing 
public value for citizens [97], facilitation of their 
empowerment [99], and promote the use of e-government to 
increase the odds of the public interest implementation [96].  
Nevertheless, e-government is often described as simply 
the means of automation, without any broader societal 
considerations. Simultaneously and somewhat surprisingly, 
an up-to-date evaluation practice in the field has failed to 
provide compelling evidence of benefit that is required to 
make a real impact on mainstream policy debates. It is for 
these reasons that the use of the concept of public value in 
relation to e-government has much to commend it. As an 
analytical framework referring to the value created for 
citizens by government, public value can be used to aid 
decision making, to assess performance and, in the e-
government context, to provide a bridge between the 
technology and wider policy communities [98]. 
Quest for protection of the public interest, as presented 
in theory [17][23][24], should be at the heart of every e-
government policy-making process, while its various 
dimensions should be comprehensively covered in the 
setting of the long-term public goals. The latter assumption 
requires accountability of public policy makers and 
evidence-based decision making, which must be based on 
comprehensive and balanced methodologies facilitating the 
evaluation of various aspects of the designated e-
government policy, its effects and the potential far-reaching 
consequences. Deliberation between public stakeholders 
[69], transparent policy-making process and definitive 
public consensus will increase the viability of high 
investments in e-government and facilitate positive response 
to the e-government policy, and more beneficial acceptance 
of new e-services while allowing the pursuit of public 
interest and overall social development.  
Growing number of the evaluation methodologies and 
their substantial diversity regarding the evaluation focus and 
the degree of sophistication significantly complicate the 
establishment of a theoretical framework that would allow a 
detailed analysis of the public interest concept and its 
representation within the addressed evaluation attempts. As 
has been stated earlier, despite the importance of adequate 
evaluation of e-government policies and their impacts 
[7][10], integrated methodologies covering the aspect of 
public interest comprehensively, are rather scarce. Findings 
regarding the public interest aspect contained within the 
existing methodologies are categorized below: 
 
The aspect of public interest is assigned a peripheral 
role in most of the existing methodologies for the 
evaluation of e-government policies. 
 
The concept of public interest is not clearly 
elaborated 
and 
categorized 
in 
the 
existing 
methodologies, 
preventing 
its 
comprehensive 
inclusion in the actual evaluation undertakings.   
 
Methodologies are applying large number of 
indicators when focusing on the evaluation of the 
costs, benefits and risks (the most segments of public 
interest aspect are usually incorporated with 
benefits). However, the aspect of public interest in 
its individual form is usually allocated a very small 
number of indicators. 
 
Covering 
public 
interest 
in 
the 
existing 
methodologies is particularized, usually including 
arbitrarily selected dimension of public interest. 
 
Aspect of the public interest presented in the 
methodologies is often inadequate and superficial 
focusing predominantly on financial benefits and 
omitting all other societal aspects while reducing the 
potential of the evaluation process for objective and 
comprehensive evaluation. 
 
The existing examples of the integration of public 
interest aspect in the methodologies are speculative, 
since the segments of the public interest within the 
methodology were developed by policy makers 
without appropriate deliberation procedure and 
public consensus.  
Accordingly, inclusion of the public interest concept into 
the comprehensive methodology for the evaluation of e-
government policies should encompass the following 
activities:   

61
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Analyze the overall evaluation field and define the 
particular aspects of the evaluation within e-
government policy (e.g., infrastructural aspect, 
organizational aspect, political aspect, etc.). 
 
Define and clearly structure the notion of public 
interest and associated components. Constructs 
should not be too abstract, because it could prevent 
the acquisition of the required data, establishment of 
the indicators and their measurement in practice, 
decreasing the overall evaluation success.  
 
Concept of the public interest should constitute a 
relatively autonomous category, preventing the 
dissipation of its components between other aspects 
of the evaluation, which could significantly diminish 
its importance.     
 
Delineate the aspects of the evaluation as much as 
possible and prevent overlapping and transition of 
the indicators from different aspects of the 
evaluation.  
 
Conceptualize adequate and measurable indicators 
containing precisely specified object and unit of 
measurement, structure, context, etc.  
 
Indicators should be specifically focused on the 
evaluation of the long-term public interest and goals 
that have been set out in the designated e-
government policy. Evaluation of the public interest 
concept should be multidimensional including the 
demand side of e-government services (user 
preferences, needs and satisfaction, etc.), general 
value of e-government policy for all social groups, 
its contribution to sustainable and inclusive social 
development, 
human 
rights 
and 
liberties, 
development of democratic values, etc.   
 
Assign appropriate weight to the concept of public 
interest and its components in the final aggregation 
of the evaluation results.  
When trying to integrate the concept of public interest 
into the comprehensive methodology for the evaluation of e-
government policies, we need to consider that besides formal 
activities some other important substantive issues have to be 
catered for as well. Namely, the specificity of the public 
interest concept requires the utilization of the creative and 
applicable indicators, which must be focused on three 
important sources, which generate the public value, such as 
[98]: 1) quality of services, since the perceptions of services 
are driven by a series of factors such as their availability, the 
satisfaction of users, the perceived importance of the service 
and the fairness of its provision and finally its cost, 2) 
achievement of outcomes that are seen as desirable by the 
public such as improvements in health, reduced poverty or 
environmental improvements, and 3) trust in public 
institutions is an important source of public value, making 
citizens more likely both to accept government action and to 
feel a sense of association with it. 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
While the study of public policy began almost 100 years 
ago [100][101], the researchers are still trying to unravel the 
defining characteristics of this phenomenon and erect a 
theoretical framework for understanding the intricate effects 
and 
mechanisms 
of 
public 
policies. 
The 
general 
understanding of the public interest and especially the 
design of the public policies have undergone various stages 
during this period, while recently it is possible to identify 
the presumably three key factors that will determine the 
future trajectory of public policy-making: 1) progress in the 
field of social sciences and the development of policy 
analysis as an emerging social science discipline, which 
uses multiple research methods in order to generate the 
simulation and (ex-ante and/or ex-post) evaluation of the 
effects of public policies, and provide policy-makers with 
relevant and applicably clustered information, pertinent for 
decision-making in the designated field, 2) trends of 
democratization, growing public engagement of citizens and 
participation 
in 
decision-making 
on 
public 
issues, 
increasingly proactive role of the civil associations and non-
governmental organizations in policy-making processes and 
protection of the public interest in all phases of the policy-
making cycle, and 3) redefinition of socio-political priorities 
and conceptualization of public policies, which address the 
public issues as part of a comprehensive and long-term 
strategy, taking into account the requirements for protection 
of the public interest, on one hand, and budgetary 
capabilities in providing the conditions for balanced 
economic and sustainable development, on the other. 
Despite the conceptual divisions and differences in the 
perception of public policy notion, the definition and 
articulation of public interest issues, and transparent public 
policy-making procedures continue to be vital in addressing 
social concerns. 
Stemming from the general premises concerning the 
future trends in the field of public policy-making, which 
summarize the critical success factors and frame the 
boundaries of the public policy concept itself, trends in the 
development of e-government policies and services have 
been declaratively diverging in two directions: 1) 
transformation of the public sector organizations in terms of 
increased efficiency, effectiveness and provision of more 
user-oriented 
services, 
through 
business 
process 
reengineering and integration and reorganization of back-
office operations, transparent and accountable management 
of material and immaterial resources, extensive integration 
of data repositories and ensuring the interoperability of 
fragmented information systems, and 2) reconceptualization 
of e-government in terms of redefinition of content and 
delivery channels of e-services, increased focus on demand, 
rather than supply side, promotion of user acceptance and 
accessibility, reduction of administrative burdens and 
barriers 
(temporal 
and 
financial 
losses), 
improved 
performance and integration of customized e-services, 
citizen empowerment and inclusion of underprivileged 
groups, open access to information, and stimulation of the 
penetration and adoption of e-government services in the 
different spheres of society (health care, social welfare, 
environmental issues, education, justice, entrepreneurship, 
etc.).  

62
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, the current state of affairs concerning the 
improved conceptualization and implementation of e-
government policies is rather discouraging, as more and 
more evidence indicates a considerable gap between the 
declarative positions of e-government policies and everyday 
practice. According to many authors in the field, the concept 
of e-government has fallen short in an area where we 
expected the most, namely in promoting, implementing and 
protecting the public interest. There are many reasons for 
the present situation, which evidently depends on the 
complex socio-political dynamics in modern societies. 
However, all the facts suggest that one of the main reasons 
for the discrepancies between expectations and actual 
experiences (reality) is the inadequacy of current approaches 
used for the evaluation of e-government policies and related 
decision-making. Lacking formal procedures and reliable 
methodologies for the evaluation of e-government policies 
and their long-term effects consequently results in poor 
quality conceptualization, planning and implementation of 
e-government 
policies. 
While 
focusing 
on 
recent 
developments in the field and the analysis of identified 
methodologies for the evaluation of e-government policies, 
literature overview revealed a multitude of topic-related 
approaches, which have been used in previous research 
studies and the evaluation endeavors in this area, but still, 
their utilization in the process of the comprehensive 
evaluation of e-government policies is only conditionally 
exploitable. 
Given 
the 
existing 
political 
debate, 
focusing 
predominantly on economic issues and rigorous budgetary 
restrictions, 
and 
disregarding 
the 
support 
for 
the 
development of more applicable evaluation methodologies 
in the field, the current e-government situation is likely to 
remain unchanged for some time. Irrespective of the fact 
that renewed and complemented evaluation methodologies 
could assist policy-makers in all three steps of the public 
policy-making process, namely: agenda-setting, option-
formulation, and implementation. Alarming socio-economic 
situation in Slovenia could jeopardize the latest reform 
efforts and compel the government to concentrate on 
predominantly short-term economic issues and lower the 
investments for development of e-government in general, 
which could result in far-reaching implications for the 
public sector. Determination to resolve the pertaining 
problems 
with 
e-government 
development 
and 
implementation, enable better exploitation of ICT in the 
public sector organizations and eventually provide tangible 
benefits for providers and users, will therefore require the 
mobilization of all stakeholders and experts in the field, 
construction of the comprehensive and applicable analysis 
and evaluation tools, and a broad consensus about the 
priority areas within the e-government domain.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Analysis of the methodologies for the evaluation of e-
government policies has emerged as a very challenging 
mission. Despite limitations, seen mainly in the large 
diversity of the evaluation methodologies and absence of a 
unified and clear theoretical framework, conducted analysis 
provides a valuable insight into the current e-government 
evaluation practice and facilitates exposure of inadequately 
evaluated public interest areas in the domain of e-
government policies. Present public finance situation along 
with increasingly stringent austerity measures require 
careful direction of further e-government investments, 
particularly focusing on the proficient development of 
suitable ICT-supported solutions, which could enable 
enhanced policy-making procedures and optimization of the 
public sector in general. The analysis results represent an 
advance in research of the evaluation metrics and may 
eventually provide a solid platform for the establishment of 
a comprehensive methodology for the evaluation of e-
government policies including the public interest aspect. 
This could enable e-government decision-makers to conduct 
more qualified and quantified planning, implementation and 
evaluation of e-government policies – be it before or after 
their execution (ex-ante or ex-post), which should 
consequently initiate more user oriented, cost effective and 
performance-based development of e-government and 
enhance its overall harmonization with the public interest.  
It is evident that problems in the development of e-
government are strongly interrelated with the low quality 
and underdeveloped methodologies for the evaluation of e-
government policies and their public effects. A wide range 
of research and the existing evaluation methodologies reveal 
that the past development of e-government, and particularly 
e-services was based primarily on political preferences and 
only exceptionally on professionally 
verifiable and 
measurable 
impacts 
of 
these 
services. 
Addressed 
shortcomings will have to be resolved, in order to ensure 
quality evaluation and disclosure of objective situation in 
the field, which could ultimately initiate the broader 
inclusion of the public interest dimensions into the e-
government policy-making procedures, and accelerate the 
overall 
development 
of 
e-government 
policies 
and 
appropriate e-services with added value for all stakeholders. 
REFERENCES  
[1] D. Stanimirovic and M. Vintar, “Evaluation of e-Government 
Policies: Overlooked Aspect of Public Interest,” [SOTICS 2012: The 
Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics, Venice, 
Italy, pp. 35–41, October 21 - 26, 2012]. 
[2] R. Silcock, What is E-government? “Parliamentary Affairs,” Hansard 
Society, vol. 54, pp. 88–101, 2001. 
[3] OECD. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
E-government: Analysis Framework and Methodology, 2001. 
[4] M. Yildiz, “Examining the Motivations for E-Government from an 
Institutional Theory Perspective: Evidence from Turkey,” [The 
National Conference on Digital Government Research, Boston, 
2003].  
[5] OECD. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Focus on Citizens: Public Engagement for Better Policy and Services. 
Paris, 2009. 
[6] OECD. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Rethinking e-Government Services: User-centred approaches. Paris, 
2009. 
[7] OECD. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
E-Government Indicators: Proposal for a new Framework and 
Methodology, Paris, 2010. 

63
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] Capgemini, Smarter, Faster, Better eGovernment, 8th Benchmark 
Measurement, European Commission, 2009. 
[9] Capgemini, Rand, DTi, IDC, Sogeti, Digitizing Public Services in 
Europe: Putting ambition into action. Report of the 9th Measurement. 
European Commission, 2010. 
[10] Capgemini, IDC, Rand Europe, Sogeti and DTi,  eGovernment 
Benchmark Pilot on Open Government and Transparency. Measuring 
the potential of eGovernment to foster Open Government and 
Transparency in Europe. Directorate General Information Society of 
the European Commission, 2011. 
[11] M. Kunstelj, T. Jukić, and M. Vintar, “Analysing the demand side of 
e-government: what can we learn from Slovenian users?” [Electronic 
government: 6th international conference, EGOV 2007, LNCS 4656 
(pp. 305–317). Wimmer, M., A. et al. (Eds.), 2007].  
[12] C. K. Kim, “A Cross-national Analysis of Global E-government,” 
Public Organization Review, vol. 7, pp. 317–329, 2007. 
[13] M. Vintar and J. Nograšek, “How much can we trust different e-
government surveys? The case of Slovenia,” Information polity,  vol. 
15, pp. 199–213, 2010. 
[14] S. Dutta, “Estonia: A Sustainable Success in Networked Readiness?” 
The Global Information Technology Report 2006–2007, Palgrave 
Macmillan, pp. 81–90, 2007. 
[15] UN, United Nations E-Government Survey, Leveraging e-
government at a time of financial and economic crisis. Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs, 2010.  
[16] WEF. World Economic Forum, The Global Information Technology 
Report 2010–2011. Transformations 2.0, 2011. 
[17] C. Waelde and M. McGinley, “Public Domain; Public Interest; Public 
Funding: focussing on the ‘three Ps’ in scientific research,”  
SCRIPTed, vol. 71, pp. 83–106, 2005.  
[18] R. Yin, Case study research: design and methods (3rd edn.). Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, USA, 2003. 
[19] M. Patton, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods (2nd edn.). 
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, USA, 1990. 
[20] G. Laurie and C. Waelde, “Privacy, Property and Personalities: 
Whatever Happened to the Public Interest?” Law & Contemp. Probs. 
33, pp. 45–63, 2005. 
[21] D. D. Nimmo and T. D. Ungs, American political patterns conflict 
and consensus. Boston, Little, Brown, 2nd ed., 1969. 
[22] B. Ringer, “Authors’ Rights in the Electronic Age: Beyond the 
Copyright Act of 1976,” Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law 
Journal 1 (1), 1981. 
[23] R. E. Flathman, The Public Interest: An Essay Concerning the 
Normative Discourse of Politics, Wiley, New York, 1966. 
[24] P. D. Gordon, Public Administration in the Public Interest. A 
prescriptive analysis of a democratic humanist paradigm of public 
administration, 1975. 
[25] UN, United Nations E-Government Survey, From E-Government to 
Connected Governance. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Division for Public Administration and Development Management, 
New York, 2008. 
[26] Accenture, From e-Government to e-Governance: Using new 
technologies to strengthen relationships with citizens. Institute for 
Health and Public Service Value, Dublin, 2009. 
[27] D. M. West, Improving Technology Utilization in Electronic 
Government around the World, Center for Public Policy, Brown 
University, USA, 2008. 
[28] F. Bannister, “The curse of the benchmark: an assessment of the 
validity and value of e-government comparisons,” International 
Review of Administrative Sciences, vol. 73, pp. 171–188, 2007. 
[29] L. Dadayan, “Measuring Return on Government IT Investments,” 
Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Information 
Technology Evaluation. Genoa, Italy, 2006. 
[30] Economist Intelligence Unit, Digital economy rankings 2010. Beyond 
e-readiness, 2010. 
[31] ADAE, 2007, MAREVA methodology guide: Analysis of the value 
of ADELE projects. Fourth High Level Seminar on Measuring and 
Evaluating E-Government, Dubai, 2007.  
[32] RSO SpA & LUISS Management, eGEP - eGovernment Economics 
Project: Expenditure Study Final Version. European Commission, 
2006. 
[33] P. Rothig. WiBe 4.0 Methodology. Economic Efficiency Assessments 
in Particular with Regard to the Use of Information & 
Communication Technology, 2004, 2010.  
[34] AGIMO – Australian Government Information Office, 2004, Demand 
and 
Value 
Assessment 
Methodology 
- 
DAM 
& 
VAM. 
Commonwealth of Australia, 2004. 
[35] B. Klievink and M. Janssen, “Realizing joined-up government – 
Dynamic capabilities and stage models for transformation,” 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 6, pp. 275–284, 2009. 
[36] A. Fleur Van Veenstra, M. Janssen, and Y. H. Tan, “Towards an 
Understanding of E-Government Induced Change - Drawing on 
Organization and Structuration Theories,”  [Electronic government: 
9th international conference, EGOV 2010, LNCS 6228 (pp. 1–12). 
Wimmer, M. A. et al. (Eds.), 2010]. 
[37] K. Schedler and B. Schmidt, “Managing the e-government 
organization,” International Public Management Review, vol. 5, pp. 
1–20, 2004. 
[38] H. J. Scholl, “E-government: A Special Case of ICT-enabled 
Business Process Change,” [36th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, HICSS-36, January 6-9, 2003]. 
[39] H. J. Scholl, “Electronic Government: Information Management 
Capacity, Organizational Capabilities, and the Sourcing Mix,” 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 23, pp. 73–96, 2006. 
[40] C. Leitner and M. Kreuzeder, “Organisational Changes, Skills and the 
Role of Leadership Required by eGovernment,” [Electronic 
government: 4th international conference EGOV 2005, LNCS 3591, 
Wimmer, M. A. et al. (Eds.), 2005]. 
[41] B. Martin and J. Byrne, Implementing e-Government: widening the 
lens. RMIT University, Melbourne, 2003. 
[42] C. Bavec and M. Vintar, “What Matters in the Development of the E-
Government in the EU?” [Electronic government: 6th international 
conference, EGOV 2007, LNCS 4656, (pp. 424–435). Wimmer, M. 
A. et al. (Eds.), 2007]. 
[43] H. Singh, A. Das, and D. Joseph, “Country-Level Determinants of E-
Government Maturity,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 20,  2007. 
[44] OECD. Working Group 2 on E-government and Administrative 
Simplification, Good Governance for Development in Arab 
Countries. High Level Seminar on Measuring and Evaluating E-
government, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 2007. 
[45] D. Janssen, S. Rotthier, and  K. Snijkers, “If you measure it, they will 
score: An assessment of international eGovernment benchmarking,” 
Information Polity, vol. 9, pp. 121–130, 2004. 
[46] B. A. Hamilton, Building a Methodology for Measuring the Value of 
E-Services. USA Social Security Administration, 2002. 
[47] M. Kunstelj and M. Dečman, “Metrika na področju spremljanja 
razvoja e-uprave,” in E-uprava: Izbrane razvojne perspektive, M. 
Vintar and J. Grad, Eds., Ljubljana: Fakulteta za upravo, pp. 37–60, 
2004. 
[48] M. Kunstelj and M. Vintar, “Evaluating the progress of e-government 
development: A critical analysis,” Information Polity, vol. 9, pp. 131–
148, 2004. 
[49] M. C. Lacity and L. P. Willcocks, Information Systems and 
Outsourcing. Studies in Theory and Practice, Palgrave Macmillan, 
New York, 2009. 
[50] H. Taylor, “Critical risks in outsourced IT projects: the intractable 
and the unforeseen,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 49, pp. 75–
79, 2006. 

64
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[51] P. H. Jensen, Public Sector Outsourcing Contracts - The Impact of 
Uncertainty, Incentives and Transaction Costs on Contractual 
Relationships. VDM Verlag, Dr. Mueller e. K., Saarbrücken, 2007.    
[52] T. Kern, L. P. Willcocks, and E. V. Heck, “The winner's curse in IT 
outsourcing: Strategies for avoiding relational trauma,” California 
Management Review, vol. 44, pp. 47–69, 2002. 
[53] J. C. Linder, Outsourcing for Radical Change: A Bold Approach to 
Enterprise Transformation, AMACOM, 1st edition, New York, 2004. 
[54] M. J. Power, K. Desouza, and C. Bonifazi, The Outsourcing 
Handbook: How to Implement a Successful Outsourcing Process, 
Kogan Page, Chicago, 2006. 
[55] O. O’Donnell, R. Boyle, and V. Timonen, “Transformational aspects 
of E-government in Ireland: Issues to be addressed,” Electronic 
Journal of e-Government, pp. 23–32, 2003. 
[56] D. Griffin, A. Foster, and E. Halpin, “Joined-up E-government: an 
exploratory study of UK local government progress,” Journal of 
Information Science and Technology, vol. 1, pp. 58–83, 2004. 
[57] K. Layne and J. Lee, “Developing fully functional E-government: A 
four stage model,” Government Information Quarterly, vol. 18, pp. 
122–136, 2001. 
[58] M. Elnaghi, S. Alshawi, and F. Missi, “A Leadership Model for e-
Government 
Transformation,” 
[European 
and 
Mediterranean 
Conference on Information Systems, 2007]. 
[59] A. T. K. Ho, “Reinventing Local Governments and the E-
Government Initiative,” Public Administration Review, vol. 62, pp. 
434–444, 2002. 
[60] P. Norris, Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty 
and the Internet, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001. 
[61] J. Slevin, The Internet and Society, Polity Press, Cambridge, 2000. 
[62] A. V. Anttiroiko, “Toward the European Information Society,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 44, pp. 31–36, 2001. 
[63] C. Thurlow, L. Lengel, and A. Tomic, Computer mediated 
communication: Social interaction and the internet, London, 
Thousand Oaks, New Delhi, Sage Publications, 2004. 
[64] D. C. Shim and T. H. Eom, “E-Government and Anti-Corruption: 
Empirical Analysis of International Data,” International Journal of 
Public Administration, vol. 31, pp. 298–316, 2008. 
[65] C. J. Tolbert and K. Mossberger, “The Effects of E-Government on 
Trust and Confidence in Government,” Public Administration 
Review, vol. 66, pp. 354–70, 2006. 
[66] M. Parent, C. A. Vandebeek, and A. C. Gemino, “Building Citizen 
Trust through e-Government,” Government Information Quarterly, 
vol. 22, pp. 720–736, 2005. 
[67] WEF. World Economic Forum, The Global Information Technology 
Report 2009–2010, ICT for Sustainability, 2010. 
[68] S. Bolgherini, “The Technology Trap and the Role of Political and 
Cultural Variables: A Critical Analysis of the E-Government 
Policies,” Review of Policy Research, vol. 24, pp. 259–275, 2007. 
[69] P. J. Lor and J. J. Britz, “Is a knowledge society possible without 
freedom of access to information?” Journal of Information Science, 
vol. 33, pp. 387–397, 2007. 
[70] CIO Council, Value Measuring Methodology: How-To-Guide. 
Washington: Best Practices Committee, 2002. 
[71] OECD. Directorate for science, technology and industry, Working 
party on indicators for the information society. Guide to measuring 
the information society. DSTI/ICCP/IIS (2005)6/FINAL. Paris, 
France, 2005. 
[72] T. P. Rama Rao, V. Rao, V. Bhatnagar, S. C. Satyanarayana, and J. 
Shri, E-Governance Assessment Frameworks (EAF Version 2.0). E-
Governance (Assessment & Replication) Division, E-Governance and 
E-Rural Group, Department of Information Technology, Government 
of India, 2004. 
[73] S. Baudu and S. Dzhumalieva, Value Assessment Tool - VAST. 
Licensed by the European Commission under EUPL. European 
Commission, 2010. 
[74] UNESCO, E-government Tool Kit for Developing Countries. Asia 
Pacific Regional Bureau for Communication and Information, New 
Delhi, 2005. 
[75] Republic of Korea, Ministry of Public Administration and Security, e-
Government in Korea. OECD e-Leaders Meeting 2010, 11-12 Oct. 
2010, Brussels, 2010. 
[76] European 
Commission, 
Capgemini, 
& 
IDC, 
eGovernment 
Benchmarking in 2011, 2011. 
[77] D. K. Mahalik, “Outsourcing in e-Governance: A Multi Criteria 
Decision Making Approach,” Journal of Administration & 
Governance,  vol. 5, pp. 24–35, 2010. 
[78] P. R. Devadoss, S. L. Pan, and J. C. Huang, “Structurational analysis 
of e-government initiatives: a case study of SCO,” Decision Support 
Systems, vol. 34, pp. 253–269, 2002. 
[79] M. J. Moon, “The Evolution of E-Government among Municipalities: 
Rhetoric or Reality?” Public Administration Review, vol. 62, pp. 
424–433, 2002. 
[80] Y. C. Chen and J. Perry, “Outsourcing for E-Government: Managing 
for Success,” Public Performance & Management Review, vol. 26, 
pp. 404–421, 2003. 
[81] M. I. Štemberger and J. Jaklič, “Towards E-government by business 
process change – A methodology for public sector,” Int. J. Inf. 
Manage., vol. 27, pp. 221–232, 2007. 
[82] C. Pollitt, “Technological Change: a central yet neglected feature of 
public administration,” NISPAcee Journal of Public Administration 
and Policy, vol. 3, pp. 31–53, 2011. 
[83] K. M. Boyer-Wright and J. E. Kottemann, “An Empirical Assessment 
of Common Fundamentals in National E-Readiness Frameworks,” 
Journal of Global Information Technology Management, vol. 12, pp. 
55–74, 2009. 
[84] L. Picci, “The quantitative evaluation of the Economic Impact of E-
Government: A structural Modelling Approach,” Information 
Economics and Policy, vol. 18, pp. 107–123, 2006. 
[85] D. Y. Rhee, “The Study on Determinants of E-Government 
Evolution,” Journal of Korean Association for Regional Information 
Society, vol. 12, pp. 183–201, 2009. 
[86] R. W. Schwester, “Socio-Demographic Determinants of E-
government Adoption: An Examination of Major U.S. Cities,” 
Journal of Public Management and Social Policy, vol. 16, pp. 21–32, 
2010. 
[87] C. Serrano-Cinca, M. Rueda-Tomás, and P. Portillo-Tarragona, 
“Determinants of E-Government Extension,” Online Information 
Review, vol. 33, pp. 476–498, 2009. 
[88] I. Gallego-Álvarez, L. Rodríguez-Domínguez, and I. M. García-
Sánchez, “Are Determining Factors of Municipal E-Government 
Common to a Worldwide Municipal View? An Intra-Country 
Comparison,” Government Information Quarterly, vol. 27, pp. 423–
430, 2010. 
[89] Deloitte & Ipsos Belgium, Benchmarking deployment of eHealth 
services III, 2011. 
[90] P. Wauters, M. Nijskens, and J. Tiebout, Capgemini, The User 
Challange, Benchmarking The Supply Of Online Public Services, 
2007. 
[91] I. Meyer, T. Hüsing, M. Didero and W. B. Korte, (Empirica), eHealth 
Benchmarking (Phase II), 2009. 
[92] R. Weehuizen and C. van Oranje, Innovative and adaptive pan-
European services for citizens in 2010 and beyond Pan-European 
eGovernment Services (PEGS) in perspective: function, forms, actors, 
areas, pathways and indicators. DG Information Society & Media of 
the European Commission, 2007. 
[93] M. Holzer and S. T. Kim, Digital Governance in Municipalities 
Worldwide, A Longitudinal Assessment of Municipal Websites 
Throughout the World, The e-governance institute, New Jersey, 2007. 
[94] C. M. Bonina and A. Cordella, “The new public management, e-
government and the notion of public value: lessons from Mexico,” 
[Proceedings of SIG GlobDev’s First Annual Workshop, Paris, 2008]. 

65
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[95] K. Karunasena and H. Deng, “Exploring the Public Value of e-
Government: An Empirical Study from Sri Lanka,” [23rd Bled 
eConference, eTrust: Implications for the Individual, Enterprises and 
Society, Slovenia, 2010]. 
[96] W. Castelnovo and M. Simonetta, “The public value evaluation of e-
government policies,” The Electronic Journal of Information System 
Evaluation, vol. 11, pp. 61–72, 2007. 
[97] C. C. Yu, “Building a value centric e-government service framework 
based on a business model perspective,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 5184, pp.160–171, 2008. 
[98] I. Kearns, Public Value and E-Government. Institute for Public Policy 
Research, London, 2004. 
[99] R. Heeks, “Benchmarking e-government: Improving the national and 
international measurement evaluation and comparison of e-
Government,” in Evaluation of information systems, Z. Irani and P. 
Love, Eds., Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 257–301, 2008. 
[100] C. E. Merriam, Jr., The American Party System: An Introduction to 
the Study of Political Parties in the United States, New York, 
MacMillan, 1922. 
[101] P. D. Reagan, Designing a New America: The Origins of New Deal 
Planning, 1890-1943, Political Development of the American Nation: 
Studies in Politics and History, University of Massachusetts Press, 
1999. 
 

