 
Core-Body Temperature Acquisition Tools for Long-term Monitoring and Analysis
João M. L. P. Caldeira1,2, Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues1, José A. F. Moutinho3, Marc Gilg4, and Pascal Lorenz4 
1 Instituto de Telecomunicações, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal 
2 EST, Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco, Castelo Branco, Portugal 
3 Health Sciences Faculty, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal 
4 IUT, University of Haute Alsace, Colmar, France 
jcaldeira@it.ubi.pt, joeljr@ieee.org, jafmoutinho@fcsaude.ubi.pt, marc.gilg@uha.fr, lorenz@ieee.org
Abstract— The detection of fertile and ovulation periods may 
be performed by women’s body temperature variations. These 
variations are more accurate if a core-body temperature for 
their detection is used. Previous medical studies concluded that 
the use of skin temperature could be influenced by 
environmental conditions. Since the increasing of the body 
temperature in this period is only about 0.5 ºC, it is crucial that 
measurements should be the most accurate as possible. Due to 
the lack of solutions to realize that in order to measure and 
analyze the core-body temperature, this paper presents a 
system to capture, display, and monitoring core-body 
temperature. It is considered a hardware solution (sensor) to be 
placed 
inside 
cervix 
and 
a 
computer 
application 
to 
communicate and gather the collected data by the sensor. 
Bluetooth is used to perform the communication between a 
computer and the sensor. The system evaluation is performed 
by a medical team in several volunteer women. Furthermore, 
the collected data by the sensor may be used to study the 
relation between temperature variations and women health 
conditions. 
Keywords— Biosensor; Wireless sensor network; Biofeedback; 
e-Health; Temperature Monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
New technologies applied to healthcare and biofeedback 
improves the traditional way of medical procedures. Recent 
publications [1-3] report continuous evolution and progress 
of new biosensors for healthcare and biofeedback. These 
sensors became indispensable in the daily routine of medical 
staff where they have the capability for helping medical 
procedures and healthcare. Nowadays, biosensor systems 
are powerful available instruments in diagnosis, controlling, 
monitoring and prevention of some diseases [4, 5]. In some 
cases, they also became an essential instrument for heal 
support [6-8]. 
The evolution of these biosensors offers a new range of the 
infinity possibilities for applications they can provide. The 
miniaturized size of these nodes turns these systems more 
easy to use, in a comfortable way. They can access to 
inside-human body places that were difficult to reach and 
non comfortable for patients, using traditional methods [9]. 
Advantages of these systems and the great interest of 
medical community turn this research area as an important 
topic. 
The human body temperature is one of the most controlled 
bio-parameters because it reflects some health conditions 
through its variations. Monitoring this human parameter 
may improve healthcare on patients suffering from 
pathologies that could be controlled by body temperature 
regulations. In women this parameter is also correlated with 
fertility stages. The increasing of regular core-body 
temperature by about 0.5 centigrade degrees (ºC) probably 
indicates the occurrence of a fertility period. Therefore, 
monitoring this parameter becomes an excellent method to 
predict this period [13]. The acquisition of core-body 
temperature in women is crucial for the validity of the 
monitoring procedure. Digital thermometers are highly used 
for temperature measurements acquisition. This method is 
very inappropriate for active women that have to measure 
their core-body temperature at specific hours, in order to 
establish standard patterns. Therefore, this method also 
could lead to wrong measurements caused by rapid 
execution of the procedure and inappropriate handling of 
thermometers. The use of standalone systems could 
suppress the women intervention to collect this parameter. 
Although, these systems improve the quality of the collected 
values because they are less prone to bad handling that may 
lead to wrong measures. 
This paper proposes an integrated system for long-term data 
acquisition, processing and analysis of cervix women’s 
temperature. The system comprises three modules. First 
module is the temperature sensor (thermistor) it self. It is 
placed inside women body, close to the cervix. The second 
module is the processor unit responsible for data acquisition 
and long-term collection of the temperature values. Finally, 
the third module is a computer application software, used to 
operate the biosensor, and for representation and control of 
the intra-body temperature measured values. 
209
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This study is a joint work with physicians from the Health 
Sciences Faculty of the University of Beira Interior, 
Covilhã, Portugal. This new biosensor allows the execution 
of exploratory studies to increase the knowledge of female 
intra-vaginal physiological behavior. To perform this study, 
medical team wants to monitor and analyze the intra-vaginal 
temperature 
during 
the 
female 
menstrual 
cycle. 
Furthermore, they will use this new system for the following 
applications: preterm labor prevention, detection of 
pregnancy contractions, anticipation and monitoring of the 
ovulation period (for both natural contraception and in vitro 
fertilization purposes), effectiveness of some gynecology 
therapeutics, and supporting the discovery of new possible 
contraception methods. These system applications will be 
conducted taking into account previous medical studies 
where this physiological parameter (the temperature) is 
correlated with several human phenomena [10-12], 
including female fertility issues [13]. This confirms the 
importance of the contribution presented in this paper. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 
II elaborates on some available projects carried out on this 
topic. Section III describes the new biosensor and presents 
the system architecture and the construction of the biosensor 
firmware including the used communication mechanisms is 
presented in Section IV. In section V, the intra-vaginal 
temperature monitoring computer application is presented, 
focusing in its construction and validation. The biosensor 
validation and results are presented in Section VI. Finally, 
Section VII concludes the paper and points further research 
directions. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Research on healthcare has been striving to find 
relationships between core body temperature at female 
genitals and certain health conditions, such as ovulation 
period. A study presented in [10] concludes that exists a 
correlation between covert attention and basal temperature 
changing during the menstrual cycle phase based on 22 
adult females and proved the importance of basal (intra-
vaginal) temperature. In this study, a traditional way was 
used for temperature measurement. However, automatic 
measurements and analysis of intra-vaginal temperature 
readings in an unobtrusive and efficient way are desirable. 
One of the earliest known projects for vaginal temperature 
measuring was presented in 1994 [14] and 1996 [15]. The 
system needs a permanent radio-frequency connection to a 
computer. The computer receives all the temperature 
measures and collects them. The sensor itself cannot store 
the measured values. This limitation imposes the sensor 
must be near to a personal computer and it difficult the 
mobility of the monitored woman. The use of mobile 
systems frees women to follow their regular daily life 
always under monitoring. Although, if a sensor itself 
cancollect the temperature measures in long-term way, it is 
dispensable a permanent connection to any device which 
improves the sensor’s battery lifetime. 
Another study uses a radio pill created for astronaut use, to 
access internal body temperature on athletes, and take 
measures to cool them down, avoiding excessive fatigue 
[16]. However, such pill-based solution introduces issues on 
pill elimination, and the biosensor cannot be reused again. 
Other medical studies about developing integrated systems 
to acquire and monitor physiological parameters, including 
body temperature [7, 17]. These systems only measure the 
skin temperature. From [11] one can conclude that skin 
temperature cannot reflect the basal body temperature as it 
changes depending on the environment temperature. The 
AMON research team included a temperature sensor on 
their wearable system (AMON) [7] to study a possible 
correlation between the skin temperature readings by the 
sensor and the core body temperature. They concluded that 
skin temperature could be influenced by the environment 
conditions. Therefore, they could not show any correlation 
between skin temperature and core body temperature. 
DuoFertility project [17] created a system to predict women 
fertile period. This system bases its prediction on the 
measurement of skin temperature. During fertile period, the 
variation of women core body temperature occurs around 
10-14 days of menstrual cycle. It only changes about 0.5 
degree Celsius [13]. Thus, trying to get core body 
temperature by measuring skin temperature could lead to 
wrong interpretations and conclusions. 
In [18], the authors presented a system using UHF radio 
telemetry to measure the vaginal temperature and monitor 
the temperature. Another approach, presented in [19], the 
author proposed a highly accurate system where a capsule 
shaped sensor measures the central body temperature. This 
sensor can be ingested or inserted rectally such that it will 
transmit core body temperature continuously. 
A method for detecting and predicting the ovulation and the 
fertility period in female mammals is described in [20]. This 
method provides information relating the fertility of females 
mammals. It comprises the following steps: (i) takes 
multiple temperature readings from the female mammal 
during an extended period; (ii) identifies and disregards 
temperature readings having one or more characteristics of 
irrelevant or faulty data; (iii) obtains one or several 
representative temperature values for the extended period; 
(iv) repeats steps from (i) to (iii) over multiple extended 
periods; and (v) analyzes the representative temperature 
values obtained over multiple extended periods for one or 
more patterns in the representative temperature values. It 
210
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

indicates or predicts the ovulation in order to provide 
information related to the fertility of the female mammal. 
This method only describes a procedure to get temperature 
measurements for fertility purposes in female mammals and 
not really a hardware system that may allow this operation. 
Next sections present, in detail, the construction of the new 
intra-vaginal temperature biosensor, and the corresponding 
application and communication system. This system deploy 
results on a personal computer for monitoring and further 
analysis. 
III. 
INTRA-BODY BIOSENSOR 
Sensing is fundamental to all sensor networks, and its 
quality depends from many factors such as size and used 
materials.  
Body sensors measure core body temperature, ambulatory 
blood pressure, blood oxygen etc. As the accurate measure 
of core body temperature is highly preferred in numerous 
medical applications, intra-body biosensor is required. The 
main challenge is the construction of a novel intra-body 
biosensor 
for 
intra-vaginal 
temperature 
monitoring. 
Furthermore, the intra-body biosensor must consider the 
sensitivity of the body area, critical for the comfort of the 
user on a daily basis.  
This proposal falls in the conception of a novel biosensor 
device 
to 
measure 
intra-vaginal 
temperatures 
and 
continuously gather their measurements for further analyses 
purpose. To access and analyze all data collected by this 
intra-body biosensor, a new application was also developed. 
This biosensor uses a SHIMMER platform (Sensing Health 
with Intelligence Modularity, Mobility and Experimental 
Reusability). It is a wireless sensor platform designed by 
Intel and can be used as the central processor unit of the 
biosensor network. This platform has a Texas Instruments 
MSP430 CPU (8MHz), a class 2 Bluetooth radio 
communication, an IEEE 802.15.4 Chipcon wireless 
transceiver (2.4GHz), a 3-Axis Freescale accelerometer, a 
MicroSD slot for up to 2Gbytes, an integrated Li-Ion battery 
management and some extensions to append new features 
and functionalities mounted in a very small form factor (2 x 
4.5 cm) not larger than a thumb size. This platform is an 
ideal hardware for this work due to its small size, large data 
storage capacity and communication features. However, 
there is no temperature sensor installed on SHIMMER 
platform. In order to get temperature readings, a temperature 
sensor must be integrated on SHIMMER. Thus, the MA100 
thermistor from GE Industrial Sensing is used on this 
solution. Its sensitivity ranges from 0 to 50 degree Celsius, 
size is 0.762 x 9.52 mm, and is created for biomedical 
applications. MA100 is connected to the SHIMMER with a 
flexible cable. 
Due to its bulky size, is not possible to place SHIMMER 
inside the female cervix. Therefore, only MA100 thermistor 
is introduced inside the vagina and sends measurements (in 
voltage) to SHIMMER, using a flexible cable. The 
SHIMMER unit stays outside the women body and could be 
placed anywhere if the cable is long enough (~ 80 
centimeters). As the cable is very flexible and difficult to 
handle inside the female cervix, a tampon-like enclosure 
was created for the biosensor. This solution allows that 
women can easily introduce the tampon-like enclosure with 
temperature sensor inside body because it can be used as 
ordinary tampons. 
Figure 1 presents the proposed system architecture. The 
temperature sensor (MA100) is placed inside cervix, while 
the processor unit (SHIMMER) remains outside. Bluetooth 
performs the communication between this device and a 
computer. 
 
Figure 1. System architecture. 
To ensure the acquisition and storage of the read 
temperature values, a SHIMMER firmware was developed. 
This software, running in continuous mode, is waiting for 
personal computer commands over a Bluetooth connection. 
Once a command is arrived, SHIMMER analyzes it and 
proceeds in accordance with it. The available commands in 
SHIMMER firmware are the following: start collecting the 
temperature values and save them on a microSD, stop 
collecting, turn on a red led (for debugging purposes), 
programming the interval between temperature readings and 
send all the recorded data in microSD to a personal 
computer application. 
Valuable results can only be collected if a correspondence 
between the measured temperature and the exact time it was 
acquired may be identified. SHIMMER has a local time 
clock starting on the startup time, however it does not have 
a global time clock. In order to provide a global time clock 
on SHIMMER, when a computer performs a start collection 
command, it also sends its time and date to SHIMMER 
(assuming that computer clock is synchronized with global 
time clock). This information is used on SHIMMER, 
regarding its local time, to calculate the global time clock 
associated with each measure. 
211
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The proposed biosensor is presented in Figure 2. Figure 2(a) 
shows the MA100 thermistor in its enclosure. The 
SHIMMER platform and the external extension where 
MA100 is connected may be seen in Figure 2 (b). 
 
Figure 2. Biosensor for intra-vaginal temperature collection. 
(a) Temperature sensor (MA100) with enclosure; (b) SHIMMER platform. 
IV. COMMUNICATION TOOLS 
Although SHIMMER is a powerful biosensor platform with 
all the above-described features, it has very limited 
resources in terms of computation and is very dependable 
from a power battery with no long lifetime. In order to 
ensure increase of the battery lifetime, only temperature 
readings from SHIMMER are gathered, instead of collecting 
and processing them. Temperature readings are transmitted 
to a computer and collected by an application for further 
processing and analysis. 
Bluetooth performs the communication between SHIMMER 
and a personal computer. Wireless communications seems 
to be more realistic than other wired alternatives, taking into 
account patients comfort and operation simplicity by 
medical staff. Like any body area sensor network, it is 
unique and it attempts to restrict the communication radius 
to the body’s periphery. Limiting transmission range 
reduces 
a 
node’s 
power 
consumption, 
decreases 
interference, and helps privacy maintenance.  
The connection between the biosensor and a computer is 
only available if the sensor is in Bluetooth’s connection 
range to the computer, as expected. Because of that, an 
effective monitoring of the temperature values cannot be 
performed if the sensor is out of range. Therefore, in case of 
communication failure between SHIMMER and a personal 
computer, SHIMMER only collects temperature and saves 
temperature readings on its local microSD. Then, it can 
transmit them when a Bluetooth connection is active. This 
procedure prevents unnecessary use of power to perform the 
communication and increases battery’s lifetime. Figure 3 
shows a diagram of Bluetooth data transmission presenting 
the procedure performed in case of existence of an active 
Bluetooth connection, or not. 
 
Figure 3. Diagram of Bluetooth data transmission, existing an active 
connection or not. 
To operate with SHIMMER, several commands were 
implemented. 
The 
computer 
sends 
these 
operating 
commands to SHIMMER, which in turn, sends information 
and data to the computer. SHIMMER always waits for 
computer commands over a Bluetooth connection. Once 
SHIMMER receives a command, it proceeds accordingly. 
The operating commands available on SHIMMER are the 
following: 
- 
Start: when SHIMMER receives this command, it 
starts collecting temperature measurements in the 
microSD card. If a Bluetooth connection continues 
available temperature measurements are also 
delivered to computer for real-time monitoring and 
analyses. If no connection is available, temperature 
measurements are only written in a microSD card. 
That way, SHIMMER prevents unnecessary use of 
Bluetooth connection and allows increasing the 
battery lifetime. 
- 
Stop: this command stops the collection of new 
temperature measurements. 
- 
Get: this command performs the transmission of all 
temperature measurements stored on a microSD 
card to the computer application for further study 
and analysis. 
Figure 4 presents the diagram of the SHIMMER’s operating 
commands. 
 
212
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4. SHIMMER’s operating commands diagram. 
The analysis of temperature measurements is performed in 
off-line mode. To ensure good results, as above-mentioned, 
it is extremely important to know the exact time when each 
temperature measurement is taken. SHIMMER only has a 
local time clock, which starts on SHIMMER’s start up. To 
align each measurement with the right global time clock, 
when a start command is sent to SHIMMER, computer also 
sends its time and date (assuming computer clock is global 
clock synchronized). This information is then used by 
SHIMMER’s firmware as an offset to local time clock in 
order to calculate the exact global time clock for every 
instant of temperature measurements. 
V. 
 COMPUTER APPLICATION 
A. Application Software Construction 
This section describes the created application for collecting, 
processing, analyzing and visualization the acquired raw 
data performed by the intra-vaginal sensor in a personal 
computer. To achieve intra-vaginal sensor temperature 
values, both real-time and off-line operation modes are 
available. In the real-time mode, measured values can be 
achieved when SHIMMER is Bluetooth connected with a 
computer. In this case, the application software shows the 
real-time temperature values measured by SHIMMER. 
Simultaneously, all the temperature measures are sent to the 
connected computer, via Bluetooth, and at the same time 
written on the microSD card of SHIMMER platform. 
In the off-line mode, the application software can collect all 
the long-term temperature readings stored in the microSD 
card. The application software can retrieve all the stored 
data on the SHIMMER’s microSD card. These data may be 
both visualized and saved in a text file for further use, if 
needed. 
Figure 5 shows de Use Case Diagram of intra-vaginal 
temperature monitoring application. This use case represents 
the interaction of the user that can be a physician with this 
application. 
 
Figure 5. Use case diagram of the intra-vaginal temperature monitoring 
application. 
The description of each use case presented in Figure 5 is the 
following: 
- 
COM selection. This use case allows the physician 
to select the serial port used for SHIMMER’s 
Bluetooth 
communication. 
The 
selection 
is 
performed in a combo box with a list of all the 
COM ports associated with the SHIMMER 
platforms paired with the computer. This operation 
creates two threads. One (SimpleWriteRead), is 
responsible 
for 
the 
communication 
between 
SHIMMER 
and 
a 
computer. 
The 
other 
(GraphTempRT), 
represents 
the 
real-time 
temperatures graphic if the intra-vaginal sensor is 
already in collecting measures mode. 
- 
Start Collect. This operation initiates the collection 
of temperature readings in real-time mode. It 
creates a GraphTempRT thread to represent the 
real-time graphic temperatures. This operation also 
213
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

sends to the SimpleWriteRead thread a command to 
be sent through Bluetooth to the sensor’s firmware 
for initialize the temperature measures collection. 
The temperature readings are then returned from 
the SHIMMER to the SimpleWriteRead thread and 
are 
synchronously 
represented 
by 
the 
GraphTempRT thread. The synchronization is 
needed to allow the integrity of the represented 
values in a graph – it only goes to the next one if 
the previous is already presented. 
- 
Stop Collect. The SimpleWriteRead thread sends 
the stop collecting command to the SHIMMER 
over the air. This action also terminates the 
GraphTempRT thread. 
- 
Get Values. This action creates a GraphTempOL 
thread to present the graphic representation of the 
temperature values received from the SHIMMER. 
A Get command is next sent through Bluetooth 
connection from SimpleWriteRead thread to the 
SHIMMER platform. In return SHIMMER sends 
all the temperature measures in the microSD to the 
SimpleWriteRead 
thread. 
The 
GraphTempOL 
thread synchronously presents all the measured 
values retrieved by SHIMMER. Finally, when all 
values are returned and represented in off-line 
graph the GraphTempOL thread terminates. 
- 
Switch Led. This operation is used to confirm if the 
Bluetooth serial connection between a computer 
and the SHIMMER platform is working. If the 
connection is established this operation switches a 
red LED in SHIMMER. This operation sends the 
switch LED command from SimpleWriteRead 
thread to the SHIMMER over the air. 
- 
Load File. This feature allows an user (physician) 
to load temperature values from a file. This 
operation creates a GraphTempOL thread used to 
design the temperature graph of the values read 
from a file. These values are represented 
synchronously, and after all the values in the file 
are presented the GraphTempOL thread terminates. 
- 
Exit. This action concludes the application 
execution. Therefore IVSoftwareJFrame thread is 
terminated and consequently the application itself. 
Figure 6 presents the class diagram of the computer 
application for intra-vaginal temperature monitoring. 
 
Figure 6. Class diagram of intra-vaginal temperature monitoring application. 
214
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Intra-Vaginal Temperature Monitoring Application 
Figure 7 shows the main user’s interface of the computer 
application software. Here, several options are available to 
configure and interact with SHIMMER platform. This 
interface also provides a visualization area of graphical 
temperature readings performed by SHIMMER, in both 
real-time and off-line modes. 
 
Figure 7. Main window of the intra-vaginal temperature  
monitoring application. 
When the user’s interface is open, the Start Collect 
operation is disabled. This behaviour is defined to protect 
system in such a case that intra-vaginal sensor is already in 
collection mode. In that mode, if a user starts another 
collection all previously collected data will be lost. In this 
case, a Stop Collect operation must be firstly performed to 
guarantee that if sensor is in collection mode no data will be 
lost accidentally by performing a Start Collect operation 
inadvertently. The intra-vaginal sensor accepts a Stop 
Collect operation i) if the sensor is in collected mode, it 
stops the acquisition of data; and ii) if the sensor is in 
standby mode it is ignored and nothing happening. After 
performing Stop Collect operation the Start Collect 
operation is unblocked. 
Below, all the functionalities performed through this 
window are described in detail. 
Definition 
of 
Frequency 
Interval 
for 
Measures 
Acquisition 
This feature is performed by the selection of one of the 
available time values in a combo box identified by . This 
value is used to define the frequency interval of temperature 
values collected by the sensor. Due to the fact that Start 
Collect operation sends the selected frequency from this 
combo box to the intra-vaginal sensor, this selection must be 
performed before each start operation. In acquisition mode, 
red SHIMMER’s LED flashes at each new measure 
acquisition. 
Start Collect operation 
The Start Collect () operation is used to start the 
acquisition of temperature measurements from the intra-
vaginal sensor. This operation also sends to the sensor the 
current date and time of the computer and the data 
collection frequency above-described. To perform a Start 
Collect operation, SHIMMER must be in a standby mode. 
Observing the colour LEDs in this device it can be 
identified its mode. Green LED ON and orange LED 
flashing indicate standby mode. 
Stop Collect operation 
Stop Collect () operation stops the acquisition of 
temperature measurements. This operation performs a 
transition from SHIMMER acquisition mode to standby 
mode. 
Get Values operation 
Get Values () operation performs the transmission of all 
stored values in the microSD to the application software. 
This operation also saves data collected to a text file. This 
file can be used for persistent storage. When SHIMMER is 
performed to a Get Values operation red LED flashes 
quickly. 
Switch Led operation 
Switch Led () operation is used to verify if SHIMMER is 
connected to the intra-vaginal application or not. If so, each 
time a user uses this command, red LED must switch ON 
and OFF. Otherwise, if red LED does not switch, this 
means that SHIMMER is not well recognized by the 
application. In this case the user should close the application 
and start again. If the problem persists COM port selected 
probably is not the one associated with this SHIMMER 
platform, or SHIMMER could not be well paired with the 
computer. The user should repeat these configurations and 
try again the application. 
Temperature Information 
The label Temperature () is used when SHIMMER is 
operated in real-time mode and if it is in Bluetooth detection 
area of a computer. This information field shows the current 
measured temperature acquired by SHIMMER. 
Total Reads Information 
The label Total Reads () informs about the number of 
collected temperature measures stored in the microSD. This 
information is updated each time Get Values operation is 
performed. 
215
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Real-Time Graph 
The Real Time Graph tab () is used when a Start Collect 
operation is performed. If SHIMMER is in Bluetooth 
detection area this field represents a real-time line of 
temperature measurements. The graph is updated each new 
measure. 
Off-Line Graph 
Off-line Graph tab () presents the temperature graph of all 
collected temperature measurements stored in the microSD 
card. This field is filled when a Get Values operation is 
performed. 
Load Menu 
Load Menu option is used to load saved text files with 
previous temperature measures into the Off-Line tab field. 
This feature helps on analysis of collected data by the 
comparison with previous patterns. Various files could be 
loaded. A different colour line of the graph represents each 
loaded file. 
The 
proposed 
application 
interacts 
directly 
with 
SHIMMER. Then, all the above-described features could 
only be performed if Bluetooth connection is available for 
communication between a computer and SHIMMER. 
As may be seen in Figure 7, temperature values are 
presented using a graphical representation. Thus, it is easy 
to visually identify values outside the normal pattern. These 
values can lead to sign a range of conditions on female 
reproductive system (e.g., pregnancy contractions, ovulation 
period, best fertilization period, etc.). Next, a medical 
research will carried out with the execution of very 
important studies to be applied in different kind of 
gynecology issues, such as, the preterm labor prevention, 
detection of pregnancy contractions, anticipation and 
monitoring of the ovulation period (used either as a natural 
contraception method or, at the opposite, as a estimation of 
the best fertilization period), effectiveness of some 
gynecology therapeutics, and supporting the discovery of 
new possible contraception methods. 
VI. SOLUTION VALIDATION 
Comfort, usability and, mainly, accuracy were the goals 
followed in the construction of the intra-vaginal sensor. 
These targets should be tested and validated in a real 
environment. Thus, medical team conducted several tests to 
perform the solution validation. 
The biofeedback solution for intra-vaginal temperature 
monitoring was tested and evaluated in 12 volunteer 
women. Each woman was monitored for about 60 minutes 
with temperature readings per second. Simultaneously, 
women body temperatures under the arm and under the 
tongue, was measured using a trivial digital thermometer. 
After analyzing all the temperature data, medical team 
validated and certified the accuracy of intra-vaginal 
temperature readings. After concluding the test, each 
woman was questioned about the possible discomfort 
caused by the use of the intra-vaginal sensor. None of them 
shown any issue related to the use of this biosensor. 
The sensor was also tested with 8 volunteer women for a 
longer period on their normal daily life. These tests were 
preformed in periods of about 2~3 hours. The results were 
compared to patterns previously defined with traditional 
thermometers measures in same places above (under the 
arm and under the tongue). The medical team confirmed the 
validation of the results. 
 
Figure 8. Sample of intra-vaginal temperatures measurements in two 
different days for the same woman in normal day life. 
Figure 8 and Figure 9 present samples of temperature results 
obtained during tests. In Figure 8 shows temperature values 
performed by the intra-vaginal sensor for the same woman 
in tow different days. This graph could be divided in two 
segments for both curves. First segment, between minute 0 
and 2, represents the heating of the sensor to reach ambient 
temperature (sensor response). The second segment, beyond 
the 3rd minute, represents the real temperature readings 
inside vagina. Differences between both temperature 
readings, beyond the 2nd minute, correspond to the normal 
intra-vaginal 
temperature 
of 
this 
woman 
and 
her 
temperature on a fertile period (ovulation period). As 
expected, intra-vaginal temperature changes according to 
some female body situations. Monitoring this parameter it 
could help in medical detection of several situations, such as 
the preterm labor prevention, detection of pregnancy 
contractions, anticipation and monitoring of the ovulation 
period (used either as a natural contraception method or, at 
the opposite, as a estimation of the best fertilization period), 
effectiveness of some gynecology therapeutics, and 
supporting the discovery of new possible contraception 
methods. 
216
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9. Sample of intra-vaginal temperature measurements for 8 
volunteer women. 
Figure 9 presents a sample with results of eight tests 
performed in eight of the twelve volunteers women 
evaluated. In this graph, the two above-mentioned segments 
could also be distinguished. From 0 to 2nd minute, it is the 
response of the sensor and beyond the 3rd minute (after its 
stabilization), it represents the real temperature values inside 
women vagina. As may be seen, beyond 3rd minute, 
differences between both curves means (and confirm) that 
each woman have her own intra-vaginal temperature. By 
this reason, individual patterns may have to be established 
for each woman. 
These results represent a great success and encourage 
medical team for more patients’ data collection, using this 
new biosensor sensor, trying to establish patterns of intra-
vaginal temperature behavior. Further, these patterns will be 
used to understand the relationship between intra-vaginal 
temperature variations and some reproductive system 
behaviors, as well as the comparison between patterns and 
new data collections. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The control of women body temperature may help on 
detection of some symptomatic situations. The environment 
temperature could influence the skin temperature. This 
paper introduced a new way to collect women’s temperature 
by the creation of a new biosensor. This biosensor is placed 
inside women’s cervix and collects their core-body 
temperature. The biosensor can operate in a long-term way, 
once it has a memory card to store the collected data. The 
construction of a application software to operate the new 
biosensor and analyzing the collected data was also 
described in this paper. The communication mechanisms 
between the application and the biosensor were also 
presented. The system was tested, evaluated, and validated 
by a medical team with a set of 12 volunteer women. The 
accuracy of the results was also confirmed. Next, medical 
team will conduct several studies with this system trying to 
recognize some phenomena related with reproductive 
system behavior. These studies may contribute for the 
preterm 
labor 
prevention, 
detection 
of 
pregnancy 
contractions, anticipation and monitoring of the ovulation 
period, effectiveness of some gynecology therapeutics, and 
supporting the discovery of new possible contraception 
methods. 
The creation of a miniaturized intra-body biosensor that can 
be placed inside female cervix, as a hole, instead of placing 
only the thermistor, may be considered for further 
developments. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Part of this work has been supported by Instituto de 
Telecomunicações, 
Next 
Generation 
Networks 
and 
Applications 
Group 
(NetGNA), 
Portugal, 
in 
the 
framework of BodySens Project, by the Euro-NF Network 
of Excellence of Seven Framework Programme of EU, in 
the framework of the Specific Joint Research Project 
PADU, and by Luso-French Program of Integrated 
University Actions (PAUILF 2010) – Action No. F-TC-
10/10. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Kulkarni and Y. Öztürk, "Requirements and design spaces of 
mobile medical care," in ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and 
Communications Review. vol. 11, pp. 12 - 30, 2007.  
[2] 
G. Shobha, R. R. Chittal, and K. Kumar, "Medical Applications of 
Wireless Networks," in Proceedings of the Second International 
Conference on Systems and Networks Communications: IEEE 
Computer Society, p. 82, 2007. 
[3] 
A. Pantelopoulos and N. Bourbakis, "A survey on wearable biosensor 
systems for health monitoring," in Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, 2008. EMBS 2008. 30th Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE, pp. 4887 - 4890, 2008. 
[4] 
C. H. Chan, C. C. Y. Poon, R. C. S. Wong, and Y. T. Zhang, "A 
Hybrid Body Sensor Network for Continuous and Long-term 
Measurement of Arterial Blood Pressure," in International Summer 
School and Symposium on Medical Devices and Biosensors: 4th 
IEEE/EMBS, pp. 121 - 123, 2007. 
[5] 
S. Patel, K. Lorincz, R. Hughes, N. Huggins, J. H. Growdon, M. 
Welsh, and P. Bonato, "Analysis of Feature Space for Monitoring 
Persons with Parkinson's Disease With Application to a Wireless 
Wearable Sensor System," in Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society, 2007. EMBS 2007. 29th Annual Int. Conference of the 
IEEE, pp. 6290-6293, 2007. 
[6] 
W. D. Jones, "Taking Body Temperature, Inside Out," in IEEE 
Spectrum. vol. 43 Issue 1, pp. 13-15, 2006.  
[7] 
U. Anliker, J. A. Ward, P. Lukowicz, G. Troster, F. Dolveck, M. 
Baer, F. Keita, E. B. Schenker, F. Catarsi, L. Coluccini, A. 
Belardinelli, D. Shklarski, M. Alon, E. Hirt, R. Schmid, and M. 
Vuskovic, " AMON: a wearable multiparameter medical monitoring 
and alert system," in IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine vol. 8, Issue 4, pp. 415 - 427, 2004. 
[8] 
H. W. Taylor, S. E. Shidler, B. L. Lasley, L. Ngalamou, and F. E. 
Taylor, "FSH biosensor to detect postpartum ovarian recrudescence," 
in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEMBS '04. 26th 
217
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Annual International Conference of the IEEE. vol. 1, pp. 1998 - 2001, 
2004. 
[9] 
F. Nebeker, "Golden accomplishments in biomedical engineering," in 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE. vol. 21, pp. 
17-47, 2002. 
[10] J. Beaudoin and R. Marrocco, "Attentional validity effect across the 
human menstrual cycle varies with basal temperature changes," in 
Behavioural brain research. vol. 158, pp. 23-29, 2005. 
[11] I. Campbella, "Body temperature and its regulation," in Anaesthesia 
& Intensive Care Medicine. vol. 9, pp. 259-263, 2008. 
[12] E. F. J. Ring, "Progress in the measurement of human body 
temperature," in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 
IEEE. vol. 17, pp. 19-24, 1998. 
[13] L. Ngalamou and D. Rose, "Fertility information appliance," in 
Proceedings of the 15th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based 
Medical Systems (CBMS 2002). pp. 335- 338, 2002. 
[14] Z. McCreesh and N. Evans, "Radio telemetry of vaginal temperature," 
in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 1994. Engineering 
Advances: New Opportunities for Biomedical Engineers. Proceedings 
of the 16th Annual International Conference of the IEEE, Baltimore, 
MD, Nov. 03-06, vol. 2, pp. 904-905, 1994. 
[15] Z. McCreeshab, N. E. Evans, and W. G. Scanlonab, "Vaginal 
temperature 
sensing 
using 
UHF 
radio 
telemetry," 
Medical 
Engineering & Physics Journal by Elsevier Inc., vol. 18, pp. 110-114, 
1996. 
[16] W. Jones, "Taking Body Temperature, Inside Out," IEEE Spectrum 
online, pp. 13-15, January 2006. 
[17] DuoFertility, "http://www.duofertility.com", accessed in Feb. 2009. 
[18] Z. McGreesh, N.E. Evans, and W.G. Scanlon, “Vaginal temperature 
sensing using UHF radio telemetry”, Journal of Medical Engineering 
and Physics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 110-114, March 1996 
[19] D. H. Kosted, “A Method and System of Continual Temperature 
Monitoring”, 
US 
Patent 
20070027403, 
Feb 
2007, 
http://www.freepatentsonline.com/US20070027403.html 
[20] M. H. James and T. G. Knowles, "Method of detecting and predicting 
ovulation and the period of fertility," WO/2008/029130, 13/03/2008. 
218
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

