117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Cardiac Telemerty for Stress Assessment 
 
Anna Polevaia, Sergey Parin, Valeriia Demareva  
Psychophysiological Department 
UNN 
Nizhni Novgorod, Russia 
e-mail: a.dostoevskaya@gmail.com, parins@mail.ru, 
kaleria.naz@gmail.com 
Sofia Polevaia 
Neurophysiology and Experimental Modeling Department 
NNSMA 
Nizhni Novgorod, Russia 
e-mail: polevaia@ipfran.ru
 
 
Abstract—The use of stress assessment is receiving increasing 
attention. However, assessment approaches and methods this 
far are limited to static contexts. Scholars have raised 
questions concerning the validity of laboratory measurement 
results for stress detection in everyday life. The paper presents 
the results of developing a new method of stress assessment in 
real-life scenarios. This method is based on the noninvasive 
continuous cardiac rhythm monitoring. It is shown that the 
results obtained in the laboratory stress-related contexts have 
poor correlation with the results of the similar real-life 
scenarios. In this connection, the principal requirements for 
stress monitoring solutions are listed, and the architecture of 
the 
cardiac 
telemetry 
complex 
for 
continuous 
stress 
measurement is described. Drawing on experimental data over 
a 5-year period, we identify a stress-specific context-invariant 
HRV pattern. The theoretical and application perspectives for 
cardiac telemetry are presented for discussion. The progress 
achieved in the research and the ways for further investigation 
are outlined in the conclusion.  
Keywords- stress; heart rate variability; autonomic nervous 
system; wireless technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended presentation of [1], an 
experimental and theoretical justification for the role of 
endogenous opioid system in autonomic regulation of stress. 
Stress reaction is a physiological response to factors 
perceived as challenging, demanding or threatening. 
Extensive scientific literature shows that stress can be 
associated with adverse health outcomes, e.g., an increased 
risk of severe chronic diseases, illnesses such as 
cardiovascular and immunological diseases - contributing to 
poor relationships and lost productivity at work, reduced 
quality and duration of life [2-4]. The overall burden of 
stress-generating lifestyles is heavy both at individual and at 
the societal level [5].  
Measuring and monitoring stress is a key to identifying 
the main stressors and understanding the lifestyle-related 
choices and behaviors that make for healthy life and well-
being.  There is a dramatic growth of solutions for stress 
assessment over the past five years - from portable 
ambulatory diagnostics to home appliances, where the most 
advanced technologies investigate the potential of a modern 
smartphone and a wearable HR monitor [6] (see Figure 1). 
They allow to measure stress in a wide range of laboratory  
Figure 1.  Modern approaches to cardiac activity monitoring: (a) a pocket-
sized healthcare gadget (2017); (b) measuring stress through a built-in 
smartphone camera and flash (2015). 
and ambulatory contexts, or static real-life scenarios like 
sleep. However, such approach greatly narrows the scope of 
application of the technology and questions its predictive 
validity, since the human regulation is a dynamic process. 
This article introduces a cardiac telemetry solution for 
stress assessment in dynamic real-life scenarios and presents 
the results of its implementation in various experimental 
contexts. The developmental work is based on a combination 
of mathematical modeling and algorithm development with 
extensive empirical physiological and behavioral research. 
The datasets for developing the method include 7 432 field 
and laboratory assessments in 4 619 people. The technology 
described in this paper can be utilized widely in different 
types of healthcare studies, wellbeing and health promotion 
services, and consumer products such as chest belts, smart 
watches, as well as professional sports coaching and 
coaching amateur athletes. 
The article is organized as follows: Section II presents a 
brief description of the stress phenomenon and introduces 
related works; it is followed by Section III, dedicated to the 
concepts and implementation details of our cardiac telemetry 
solution. Section IV addresses the evaluation results. Section 
V ends the paper with a look to future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section starts with a brief definition of the stress 
phenomenon and an overview on Heart rate variability 
(HRV) analysis approaches that are relevant in the context of 
stress detection. Finally, a short sub-section gives an 
overview on mathematical methods for stress modeling. 

118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
A. Definition of Stress 
Stress is one of the most common extreme regimes for 
the living. According to the three-component theory, stress is 
a nonspecific protective systemic reduced response to 
damage or threat of damage [7-8]. That is, stress is not an 
adaptive, but a maladjustment process.  
The stress-launching factor is a disagreement between the 
current state and the necessary state [9]. Then, in accordance 
with the theory of functional systems (FS) [10], we can 
assume that the occurrence of excessive mismatch in any of 
the modules of the acting FS leads to stress activation, which 
realizes the protective mechanism. The stress activation 
involves 
a 
combination 
of 
certain 
physiological 
(neurochemical, immune, vegetative, etc.) mechanisms [7-8, 
11]. The same load can be optimal (or within the boundaries 
of the adaptation range) or stressing (beyond the adaptation 
range) for different people. 
B. Stress Recognition using HRV 
Autonomic nervous system (ANS) plays a key role in 
maintaining physiological functions of the body, including 
flexible and appropriate modification of the cardiac activity 
according to need. According to Baevsky et al., cardiac 
rhythm regulation can be represented as a double-circuit 
model with the central and autonomous circuits, with 
feedforward and feedback links (see Figure 2). In this case, 
the effect of the autonomous circuit is connected with 
respiratory arrhythmia, and the central circuit - with non-
respiratory arrhythmia [12].  
HRV analysis - determining the degree of variability in 
consecutive RR intervals or instant heart rate (HR) in a 
cardiogram - has become an important tool for assessing 
stress. A wide range of mathematical tools includes 
statistical, geometric, spectral, and nonlinear algorithms. 
Evolution of the mathematical apparatus for R-R intervals 
analysis is demonstrated by George E. Billman [13] (Figure 
3). At the same time, the whole set of mathematical methods 
of HRV analysis is redundant [14]. However, it is important 
to note that each method has its own limitations in 
application. The most accurate method in terms of the time 
resolution is spectral analysis of RR-intervals. The selection 
of HRV periodic components allows us to determine the 
current state of the neuro-humoral regulation system. For the 
first time, different types of sequences of RR-intervals were 
described by Fleisch and Beckman in 1932 [15]. Rhythmic 
activity of pacemaker cells of the sinus node is interrelated 
with endocrine and humoral processes that change the 
threshold of spontaneous depolarization of pacemaker sinus 
node [16-18]. This leads to an increase or decrease in the 
interval between heart cycles and, consequently, a decrease 
or increase in heart rate. The factors that regulate HR will 
also affect HRV. An important feature of this process is that 
the activity of these factors varies periodically [19-20]. 
However, it should be noted that in addition to periodic 
modulations of various factors in HRV, there are also non-
periodic components. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Scheme of double-circuit model for cardiac rhythm regulation. 
Figure 3.  The temporal sequence of some of the most important events in 
HRV research history [13]. 
The traditional analysis of RR-intervals divides the HRV 
frequency spectrum into three ranges, (a) high-frequency 
(HF) oscillations (0.15-0.4 Hz); (b) low-frequency (LF) 
oscillations (0.04-0.15 Hz); (c) very low frequency (VLF) 
oscillations (0.015-0.04 Hz). However, in addition to the 
classical frequency ranges listed above, a number of authors 
indicate very high frequency (VHF) oscillations (0.6-2 Hz). 
Experimental data show the presence of VHF-components in 
the structure of the HRV spectrum in patients and in healthy 
people [21-22]. Table I shows the most relevant frequency 
ranges for spectral analysis of HRV. 
 

119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
THE FREQUENCY RANGES FOR SPECTRAL HRV ANALYSIS 
Title  
of the Spectrum 
Component 
Frequency Range 
(Hz) 
Time Period (Sec) 
HF 
0,4 – 0,15 
2,5 – 6,6 
LF 
0,15 – 0,04 
6,6 – 25,0 
VLF 
0,04 – 0,015 
25,0 – 66,0 
ULF 
Below 0,015 
Over 66,0 
 
The first studies of the impact of the information load on 
the functional state of a person using cardiovascular 
indicators are mentioned in the work of Winkler [23], who 
demonstrated that performing an arithmetic test leads to an 
increase in HR. Accumulated empirical evidence indicates 
that the LF spectrum is the most sensitive to the effect of 
cognitive loads. As a result, it was concluded that the 
suppression of LF (0.1Hz) HRV component reflects the 
effort of the subject required to perform a cognitive task, 
while the restoration of the spectral power during the 
relaxation period after completion of the cognitive task 
reflects the degree of previous efforts [24]. Some examples 
of empirical studies are listed in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLES OF HRV SPECTRAL ANALYSIS UNDER 
COGNITIVE LOAD 
Author 
Experimental 
Problem 
Selected HRV 
Indices 
Trend 
Egelund, 
1982 [61] 
Fatigue spectral 
HRV indices in 
drivers 
LF (0,1 Hz) 
Decrease 
Kaplan, 
1999 [62] 
The change in 
the spectral 
indices in 
response to an 
erroneous 
action 
HF (0,15-0,4 Hz) 
Decrease 
Mulder, 
2000 [63] 
The change in 
the spectral 
indices under 
cognitive load 
LF (0,1 Hz) 
Decrease 
Brinkman, 
2004 [64] 
The change in 
the spectral 
indices during 
transition from 
solving simple 
equations to the 
complex ones 
LF (0,1 Hz) 
Decrease 
 
The autonomic HRV regulation reflects the level of the 
adaptive resources of the organism [12; 25]. Studies have 
shown that emotions, cognitive processes, and physical 
activity are closely related to the dynamics of autonomic 
HRV regulation [26-27]. The research into stress provides an 
extensive HRV database for different groups of subjects in 
clinical and laboratory contexts: patients with depressive 
disorders, post-stroke patients with diabetes, etc. [28-30]. 
Vegetative correlates of fatigue, overexertion and various 
types of stress are actively studied [31-34]. Integration of the 
available data leads to the conclusion that the autonomic 
HRV regulation is sensitive to changes in emotional, 
cognitive and physical activity and is informative for the 
study of adaptation and maladjustment processes. 
The data on the dynamics of HRV during stress are 
contradictory. Some studies demonstrate no changes in HRV 
[35] and the severity of respiratory arrhythmia in HR [36] in 
the presence of stress factors, while other authors show a 
high degree of variability in LF, HF, LF/HF spectral HRV 
parameters [37] (see Table III). Such contradictions could be 
explained by different software and hardware base of 
researchers. 
TABLE III.  
SELECTED EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF HRV IN STRESS-
RELATED CONTEXTS 
Author 
Context 
LF Trend 
HF Trend 
T. Chandola et al., 2008 
[34] 
Working 
stress 
Decrease 
Decrease 
J. Taelman et al., 2011 
[26] 
Intellectual 
load and/or 
physical 
load 
Decrease 
Decrease 
N.I. Shlyk, 2011  
[56] 
An 
intensive 
training 
Increase 
Increase 
H. Che-Hao et al., 2012 
[57] 
Inhalation 
anesthesia 
Increase 
N/D 
 
For decades stress could be evaluated at rest only [38] 
with sitting or lying position of the subject being mandatory, 
and a great risk to damage the data by any external irritant 
stimuli [39]. All the mentioned restrictions greatly narrow 
the scope of contexts for research and make stress 
measurement in real-life scenarios impossible. Since the 
autonomic HRV regulation is dependent on the target 
function and varies greatly in accordance with the context 
[25, 40], static measurements in the laboratory do not always 
agree with the principle of ecological validity [15, 30, 41-
42].  
Currently, the problem of stress-specific HRV parameters 
is still unsolved. The definition of such parameters is 
complicated by the presence of individual optimum indices 
for a particular person, which do not always coincide with 
the average statistical results. This conditions the use of 
correlation of the HRV parameters along with the absolute 
values. 
C. Neurohumoral HRV Regulation 
More than 150 years ago, Claude Bernard denoted the 
existence of close connections between the brain and the 
heart [43]. Practical implementation of this concept is 
characterized by a number of important advantages. First, the 
methods of measuring the parameters of the functioning of 
the cardiovascular system (minute and stroke volume, pulse 
rate, arterial pressure) are well-known and generally 
available. Secondly, cardiovascular variability data can be 
used to evaluate the system of neurohumoral regulation of 
the heart and blood vessels, of which HR is the most simple 
and accessible for analysis. 
Baro- and chemoreceptors control various parameters of 
the blood circulation in the vascular bed and heart, and as a 
result, the information about the ongoing endogenous 

120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
changes enters the central nervous system (CNS). This 
ensures the lability of the adaptation of the heart-vascular 
system (HVS) to continuously changing environmental 
conditions. Thus, by controlling the processes of HVS 
regulation, it is possible to obtain information on the 
effectiveness of adaptive mechanisms in response to stress 
conditions. 
As a theoretical approach, the neurovisual integrative 
model (NVM) is considered, according to which changes in 
HR are generally related to the state of the brain more, than 
to the state of the heart [44]. A number of nerve structures 
associated with heart rhythm are described within the 
framework of NVM. The data on these results are based on 
animal studies, studies of people with local cerebral lesions, 
physiological and pharmacological analysis, and work with 
methods of neuroimaging (PET, fMRT) [45-46]. 
HR is determined by the property of automatism, i.e., the 
ability of the cells of the conduction system of the heart to 
spontaneously activate and cause a contraction of the 
myocardium. Automatism is caused by the appearance of 
spontaneous depolarization of cells of the sinus node. The 
usual frequency is 60-80 pulses per minute. The fluctuations 
of HR are connected, on the one hand, with the intrinsic 
activity of the sinus node (intracardiac reflexes), and on the 
other hand with the influence of the higher centers of 
regulation [8]. HRV analysis, which is determining the 
degree of variability of consecutive R-R intervals or instant 
HR, has become an important tool for risk assessment. 
HF oscillations of HR reflect the connection between the 
vagus nerve and the sinus node and the exerted 
neuromuscular influences. Therefore, the spectral power 
(density) in the HF range of the HRV spectrum is related to 
the activity of the parasympathetic link of the vegetative 
nervous system [11]. 
The LF range of the HRV spectrum when analyzing the 
records of the R-R intervals measured at rest (lying, sitting) 
is usually represented by a single peak at a frequency of 0.1 
Hz. In fact, a wave peak with a frequency of 0.1 Hz in the 
spectrum of HRV means that the body has mechanisms for 
modulating HR with a period of 10 s. Oscillations with the 
same period are recorded in the rhythm of blood pressure. It 
can be assumed that the formation of a 0.1-Hz rhythm of 
RR-interval oscillations is the result of the participation of 
three mechanisms: baroreflex, central, and myogenic. For 
practical use, it is important that LF modulation of HR is 
associated with the activity of postganglionic sympathetic 
fibers, and their spectral power (density) reflects the activity 
of the sympathetic link of the VNS in the regulation of the 
heart rhythm [50]. 
As a rule, an increase in the power of LF oscillations is 
accompanied by a decrease in the power of HF oscillations, 
which may be the result of the existence of special mutual-
reciprocal relations between them. Such interactions are also 
observed between the parasympathetic and sympathetic 
contours of the VNS, which determine the presence of these 
wave oscillations in HRV. This substantiates the usage of the 
LF/HF ratio power ranges of the HRV spectrum (also called 
the vegetative balance index, or VBI) for assessing the 
autonomic balance level [34, 39]. 
D.  Stress Research Issues 
The development of mathematical processing of ECG 
naturally led to the discovery of a large number of indicators 
(statistical, geometric, frequency), which, on the one hand, 
closely correlate with each other, making the entire set 
redundant, and on the other hand, are suitable for interpreting 
and evaluating the cardiac signal only in stationary 
conditions [14].  
The key issues of autonomic regulation research are the 
following:  
 
What factors are responsible for autonomic 
responses in the context of daily-life activity? 
 
What psychophysiological processes underlie the 
HRV regulation in the context daily-life activity? 
 
Is it possible to predict HRV response in daily-life 
activity context from laboratory measurements? 
 
For accessing physiological stress, a neurophysiologic 
index is a simultaneous increase of LF/HF values with the 
fall in the total power spectrum of HRV [11-12, 31, 33-35, 
39-40].  
The relationship between laboratory and field indices of 
vegetative regulation of the heart rhythm has been studied 
for more than 30 years.  
Public speaking seems to be the most realistic natural 
activity context for stress study, along with an examination, 
an interview, etc. All of these real-life scenarios remain 
relatively manageable [42]. However, when public speech 
context was used as a component of the laboratory model of 
stress in the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) [47], the later 
comparison of the results with 41 trials of natural public 
speaking HRV records showed no correlations [48]. 
Numerous studies show much more pronounced changes in 
HR when performing in public in the natural activity context 
as compared to laboratory experiments [49-51]. The review 
[41] concludes that there are weak correlations between 
HRV measurements produced in laboratory and field 
contexts, although some positive correlations are found. 
Another approach to the problem of real-time stress 
diagnostics in natural dynamic contexts is the development 
of a new instrumental method. The method should allow 
recording of biophysical signals to provide personalized 
monitoring and remote diagnostics of stress without 
restrictions on the duration of recording. The California 
Institute of Technology and the Georgia Institute of 
Technology have made significant progress in this respect. 
They developed a clothing fabric with an incorporated 
network of contactless capacitive sensors to allow 
continuous HRV monitoring in real-life contexts [52]. 
In our work, we analyze HRV patterns from normal 
healthy people in various real-life contexts, e.g., stressful 
tasks, intensive physical activities, sudden maneuver while 
driving, etc. In order to do that, we use an unobtrusive HRV 
measuring device that can be easily worn long-term (24-
hours). Such approach will allow us to identify the stress-
specific HRV pattern for dynamic real-life scenarios. 

121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
III. 
CARDIAC TELEMETRY SOLUTION 
The cardiac telemetry technology was designed for stress 
detection in dynamic real-life scenarios.  The basic data for 
analysis are R-R intervals of the electrocardiogram (ECG) 
obtained in real time from a wireless sensor. The 
StressMonitor 
client 
application 
allows 
preliminary 
processing of the data and its representation in the form of a 
dynamic graph with indicated HRV spectral values. All the 
data is stored in a cloud. The solution is already in demand 
by 
medical 
institutions 
and 
scientific 
laboratories, 
professional coaches, and health-conscious people. 
A.  Solution Requirements 
Since the operation of the human body is a dynamic 
process, due to high lability and the contextual dependence 
of HRV, special requirements are imposed on the technology 
for stress measurement in real-life scenarios. Among such 
requirements we list the following: safety and convenience 
for use in everyday life; mobility, i.e., the signal source can 
be remote from the signal receiving unit; continuous 
recording of signal; low power consumption; autonomous 
mode of HRV diagnostics; automatic processing of 
interrupts; sustainability to external interference; ability to 
accumulate data in off-line mode. 
B. Solution Arcitecture 
Cardiac telemetry is a monitoring solution that allows 
continuous HRV monitoring while the volunteer remains 
active without the restriction of being attached to a bedside 
cardiac monitor. A three-module wireless technology has 
been developed [53-55].  
ZephyrTM HxMTM Smart (HxM, Zephyr Technology) 
sensor platform combines optimal size and energy 
consumption as well as quality of receiving and transmitting 
radio signals not sacrificing the comfort of the use. The 
platform is 65x32 mm in size and 17 grams in weight. Its 
design ensures reliable fixation of sensors on the human 
body. The platform combines a microprocessor, a radio 
signal reception and transmission unit, a low-power ECG 
sensor, an acceleration sensor, and a distance sensor. The 
device works for 150 hours without recharging. The signal 
transmission range is 10 m. The data transfer to a 
smartphone or a tablet PC is organized via Bluetooth SPP - 
2,4 GHz. Packets of raw data are transmitted every second, 
where each dataset contains a unique device identifier, 15 
last R-R intervals, and the start time of the recording.  
For temporary accumulation and preprocessing of data, a 
StressMonitor application for Android-operating smartphone 
is used. Further the data is transmitted via GSM channels to a 
special server (see Figure 4). The star-shaped topology of the 
sensor network ensures the efficient use of hardware in case 
of collective monitoring. 
The StressMonitor application displays real-time RR-
graphs with spectral frequency-related HRV indices [10] (see 
Figure 5). It was developed with the use of MySQL 5.5 
database, Python 2.7 programming language, Django 1.8 
development framework, the Flot 8.2 library, a framework  
 
Figure 4.  Architecture for wireless registration of HRV in a group of 
volunteers. 
Figure 5.  Graphical representation of RR-intervals with calculated HRV 
spectral indices; the red vertical bar indicates the onset of the stress 
episode. 
for creating a BootStrap 3.2 site design, NumPy, JQuery 2.1 
library, Yandex API Maps. 
The server database works on MySQL 5.5 software. The 
received RR signal is cut by a time window for 100 seconds 
with a time shift of 10 seconds. For the resulting windows, 
the discrete Fourier transform for uneven signals calculates 
the spectrum. For the purpose of analysis the spectrum is 
divided into the following ranges: VLF (0.003-0.04 Hz), LF 
(0.04-0.15 Hz), HF (0.15-0.4 Hz). The algorithm also uses 
frequency-related HRV indices: total power (TP) which is a 
sum of VLF, LF, and HF; vagally-sympathetic balance 
(LF/HF). As a result, we receive spectral HRV values, GSM 
coordinates, the time and events associated with stress in a 
particular person during real-life activity [10]. 
C. Mathematical Methods for HRV Analysis 
For the data processing, spectral periodogram method 
and statistical methods for analysis of HRV, as well as the 
continuous wavelet transformation were used. 
Spectral analysis is one of the most important types of 
time series analysis, which allows to determine the effect of 
autonomic regulation on HRV. 
When constructing the spectrum of the rhythmogram, it 
is important to take into account that the signal itself is not a 
time series of amplitudes of a physical quantity, but a 
number series of time intervals between adjacent QRS events 
in a cardiogram. Fundamentally, the Fourier transform 
cannot be performed because of the unevenness of the QRS 
events time scale. It is necessary either to convert a number 

122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
of intervals into a time series, or to adapt a transformation for 
a non-uniform series.  
Taking into account the specificity of the cardiac signal 
obtained in real-life contexts, namely, the presence of a 
nonstationary property and a large number of transition 
regions, a set of specialized spectral methods for signal 
processing is suggested: 
 
Continuous wavelet transform (CW method, or 
Morlet 
wavelet) 
for 
analysis 
of 
amplitude 
modulations 
of 
RR-intervals 
and 
spectral 
components of rhythmograms. 
 
Dynamic spectral analysis, which synthesizes Fast 
Fourier transformation algorithms and Lomba-
Scargla periodograms, for analysis of rapid changes 
in the structure of HR. In our case dynamic spectral 
analysis was performed in a specialized program 
built in the LabVIEW environment. 
As a result, we analyze the temporal dynamics of the 
power characteristics of the vibration spectra of the RR-
intervals, namely: the total power of the HRV spectrum (TP, 
ms2); LF, ms2; HF, ms2; the ratio of the power of the 
rhythmogram spectrum (LF/HF). 
D. Solution Validation 
The validity of the cardiac telemetry complex has been 
tested by the simultaneous recording with the two certified 
ECG clinical solutions: AIP Poly-Spectrum (Neurosoft) and 
Ankar-131 (Medicom) (see Figure 6), and statistical analysis 
of the HRV patterns and the time sequences of R-R intervals. 
There is a high correspondence of the time sequences for R-
R intervals and the HRV patterns (p = 0.995, Student's test). 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, our selected studies are considered. All 
the subjects gave informed written consent to participate in 
the research.  Trials with deviation over 10% were removed 
from the data prior to the analyses. R-R intervals of less than 
300 or more than 1500 ms were considered as deviations. 
Overall, data loss was below 3% across all measurements for 
each participant group. For all other trials, median filtering 
was performed prior to spectral analysis. 
A. Participants 
362 healthy people from Nizhny Novgorod (179 men and 
183 women, with a mean age of 21.5 (±1.3)) took part in the 
experiment. All participants had no heart condition. All of 
the participants gave an informed consent to stimulation by 
electrical impulses. All of the participants were naïve 
regarding the purpose of the experiment.  
B. Research Contexts 
The data for the research was gathered both in laboratory 
contexts and in real-life scenarios. 
 
The laboratory contexts were: 
 
Students during public speaking. 
 
Students playing a race computer game. 
 
Sportsmen playing chess with a computer. 
 
Figure 6.  Comparison of synchronized R-R records: (a) Cardiac 
Telemetry Solution; (b) Poly-Spectrum Analyzer. 
The real-life contexts were: 
 
Drivers of public transport during a sudden 
maneuver. 
 
Athletes during an intensive training. 
 
Firefighters during training in the gas-smoke 
chamber. 
C. Procedure 
Volunteers underwent research both individually and 
collectively, depending on the context. 
Before the test, a participant was asked to wear 
ZephyrTM chest belt. The person responsible for the 
experiment ran the SmartMonitor app and entered the 
participant’s name, age, and gender. Then the participant was 
instructed to start the experimentation activity. 
Research contexts could take from 30 minutes to several 
days depending on an activity. All this time, the volunteers 
wore ZephyrTM chest belt and their data was transferred to 
the cloud. 
After the tests, the lab technician downloaded data from 
the cloud. HRV spectral analysis was carried out 
automatically directly in the cloud with the use of a special 
program complex. Statistical processing of data within each 
context and between contexts was carried out manually in 
the program STATISTICA 10. 
D. Results 
When analyzing spectral HRV indices during public 
speaking, it was revealed that a decrease in TP with 
simultaneous increase in LF/HF is a typical pattern for the 
context (76% of cases). 
In the context of computer race game, the moments of 
mismatch and errors were also characterized by a decrease in 
TP and an increase in LF/HF values.  
During the game of chess in 77% of cases there was a 
decrease in TP and an increase in LF/HF at the time of a loss 
(see Figure 7). 
 
 

123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.   TP and LF/HF HRV spectral values during a game of chess: (a) 
the player attacks with a subsequent defeat; (b) the player loses the 
initiative and the game ends in defeat. 
In public transport drivers, a sudden maneuver was 
accompanied by an increase in TP and LF/HF, followed by a 
decrease in TP with an increase in LF/HF. 
HRV spectral analysis in the process of intensive training 
showed a statistically significant decrease of TP, LF, and HF 
values after the training load, as well as an increase in LF/HF 
(p<0,05) (see Figure 8). Table IV represents a comparison of 
the HRV spectral values for warm-up, where optimal HRV 
values for effective training are identified (see also Figure 9). 
TABLE IV.  
THE OPTIMAL SPECTRAL HRV PARAMETERS DURING 
WARM-UP 
HRV Indices 
Mean Value 
Standard Error of 
the Mean 
HR, beats per 
minute 
78,40 
± 4,53 
TР, msec2 
3653,82 
± 211,81 
LF, msec2 
1604,49 
± 87,59 
HF, msec2 
573,29 
± 61,01 
LF/HF 
3,09 
± 0,86 
 
When analyzing the spectral HRV dynamics in 
firefighters during training in a gas-smoke chamber, a 
characteristic R-R pattern was also found: the decrease of TP 
with an increase in LF/HF (97% of cases). 
Figure 8.  Mean values of spectral HRV parameters before and after 
exercise: (a) TP, LF, HF (msec2); (b) LF/HF (*p <0.05, Student's test). 
 
Figure 9.  Wavelet analysis of rhythmograms (Morlet wavelets) in athletes 
at different stages of training: (a) warm-up; (b) training process; (c) rest. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To summarize, we undertook an investigation of HRV 
dynamics during stress in various laboratory contexts and 
real-life scenarios with the use of cardiac telemetry. We 
found evidence that there is a dynamic pattern of RR-
intervals characteristic for stress, which is the decrease of TP 
values with the increase of LF/HF values. Therefore, stress is 
physiologically manifested by increased sympathetic and 
diminished parasympathetic activity of the ANS. 
The main objective of the study was to analyze the 
continuous dynamics of autonomic regulation of HRV in 
heterogeneous laboratory and real-scenarios and to identify 
the dynamic structures of autonomic regulation indices 
specific for the stress response. 
The results of the study of the HRV autonomic regulation 
dynamics under variousloads reproduce and confirm data on 
the high sensitivity of the regulation system to various 
changes in the internal and external contexts of a living 
system [25]. 
Using the new wireless cardiac telemetry solution that 
was developed specifically for the task of measuring living 
systems in the real-life scenarios opened new opportunities 
for research [51-52].  
As the result of experimental series, it is shown that the 
dynamics of the HRV autonomic regulation parameters is 
nonlinear, quasi-periodic, and does not have direct 
relationships with the autonomous regulation measurements 
in stationary contexts like sitting or lying. There are no 
grounds to deny the possibility of revealing the dependencies 
between the indices of the autonomic regulation at rest and in 
the context of natural activity. However, they seem to be 
individual. Therefore, an appropriate experimental design 
presupposes repeated long-term monitoring of a person in a 
rich set of real-life scenarios.  
Use of spectral analysis algorithms for uneven time 
series, such as the sequence of RR-intervals, made it possible 
to reveal VHF spectrum of HRV that was not considered in 
classical physiology and medicine. 
Mathematical methods of dynamic spectral analysis 
allow scaling the discreteness of the received parameters, so 
there is an opportunity to observe real-time changes in the 
structure of the autonomous regulation of HR in the course 
of real-life events. This makes it possible to use 15-second 
rhythmograms 
for 
analysis 
instead 
of 
300-second 
rhythmograms as in the classical HRV analysis. 

124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The novelty of the study is the approach with the loads 
differing not in the complexity, but in the very nature of the 
target task. 
In general, the decrease in HRV as a sign of the presence 
of a disease is discussed in many works [58-60]. The list of 
diseases is very wide, including cardiovascular system 
disorders (myocardial dysfunction, tetraplegia, hypertension, 
congestive 
circulatory 
insufficiency, 
chronic 
mitral 
regurgitation, cardiomyopathy, ventricular arrhythmias, 
supraventricular 
arrhythmias, 
etc.); 
psychoneurological 
disorders (posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety), 
oncological diseases, infectious diseases (influenza, ARVI). 
Apparently, the decrease in HRV is a nonspecific marker of 
the presence of a disease. Then, it is debatable that the 
famous Selye triad, which is a complex of three stress-
specific symptoms (hypertrophy of the adrenal glands, 
thymus involution, ulceration in the digestive tract), can be 
extended. In order to introduce the decrease in HRV as the 
dynamic marker of stress, we need to reproduce pharmaco-
physiological responses associated with stress reaction. 
The HRV data obtained in athletes during physical load 
represents a fundamentally new context for research of 
stress. An important result was obtained when trying to 
reveal the coordination between the initial states of athletes 
with their performance in the context of uninterrupted 
monitoring of their training activities from warm-up until 
rest.  
According to the 3-component theory of stress [8] and 
empirical data, we assume that the first phase of stress-
related HRV pattern dynamics is associated with the 
activation of all regulatory loops, and especially the 
sympathetic component of the autonomic nervous system. 
The second phase of HRV dynamics may be associated with 
the activation of the endogenous opioid system (EOS) (see 
Figure 9). 
A contradiction in interpretation may arise when 
comparing the two indices of the sympathetic activity, which 
is the power of the LF component of HRV and HR spectrum. 
It is commonly believed that an increase in HR and an 
increase in the LF index reflect the activity of the 
sympathetic system. In our case, the increase in HR values is 
combined with the decrease of the LF component (i.e., 
training load effects in athletes). That is, the two indices 
contradict each other.  
However, experimental data on the LF component 
dynamics were historically obtained in static contexts, that is, 
active contexts were not considered. At rest, there is a direct 
correlation between the power of LF and HR.  
As a result, changes in HR and LF power are not always 
associated with the activity of the sympathetic subsystem. 
Apparently, they reflect different regimes of sympathetic 
influence on the heart rhythm. The LF component reflects 
the phasic modulation of the HR in the context of rest.  The 
increase in HR is a single strong increase associated with 
sympathetic activation in the dynamic real-life context. 
The results of the use of the cardiac telemetry in 
numerous experiments justify its potential for application in 
further research into stress phenomenon, health promotion  
 
Figure 10.  The dynamics of the stress-protection systems SAS, HPAS, and 
EOS during stress. 
services, consumer wellness devices, professional sports, and 
amateur training.  
In future researches we would like to focus on defining 
the best practices for stress management. Research into 
neurobiological mechanisms of stress at the cell level is 
planned for further technology development. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for 
Humanities under grant 15-06-10894_a, grant 16-06-
00133_a, and RFBR, grant 16-06-00501_a. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.B. Parin, S.A. Polevaia, and A.V. Polevaia, “A 
Neurochemical Framework to Stress and the Role of the 
Endogenous Opioid System in the Control of Heart Rate 
Variability for Cognitive Load,” in COGNITIVE 2017: 9th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Cognitive 
Technologies and Applications, IARIA, pp. 16–20, 2017. 
[2] E-M. Backe, A. Seidler, U. Latza, K. Rossnagel, and B. 
Schumann, “The role of psychosocial stress at work for the 
development of cardiovascular diseases: a systematic review,” 
International Archieves of Occupational and Environtal 
Health, vol. 85, pp. 67–79, 2012. 
[3] S. C. Segerström and G. E. Miller, “Psychological Stress and 
the Human Immune System: A Meta-Analytic Study of 30 
Years of Inquiry,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 130(4), pp. 
601–630, 2004. 
[4] N. Schneiderman, G. Ironson, and S. D. Siegel “Stress and 
Health: 
Psychological, 
Behavioral, 
and 
Biological 
Determinants,” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, vol. 
1, pp. 607-628, 2005. 
[5] World Health Organization, “Charting the way to well-
being,” The European Health Report, 2012. 
[6] A. Muaremi, B. Arnrich, and G. Troster, “Towards Measuring 
Stress with Smartphones and Wearable Devices During 
Workday and Sleep,” Bionanoscience, vol. 3, pp. 172–183, 
May 2013, doi:10.1007/s12668-013-0089-2. 
[7] H. Selye, “The story of the adaptation syndrome,” Montreal: 
ACTA, Inc., Medical Publishers, 1952. 
[8] S. B. Parin, “Humans and animals in emergency situations: 
neurochemical mechanisms, evolutionary aspect,” Vestnik 
NSU, vol. 2(2), pp. 118–135, 2008. 
[9] S. B. Parin and S. A. Polevaya, “Features of information 
transformation under stress and shock,” VIII All-Russian 

125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Scientific and Technical Conference "Neuroinformatics-
2006", Moscow: MEPhI, pp. 165-171, 2006. 
[10] P. K. Anokhin, “Essays on the Physiology of Functional 
Systems,” Moscow: Medicine, pp. 17-59, 1975. 
[11] S. A. Polevaya, S. B. Parin, and E. G. Stromkova, 
“Psychophysical mapping of human functional states,” 
Experimental 
Psychology 
in 
Russia: 
Traditions 
and 
Perspectives, pp. 534-538, 2010. 
[12] R. M. Bayevsky, “Analysis of heart rate variability: history 
and philosophy, theory and practice,” Clinical informatics and 
telemedicine, vol. 1(1), pp. 54-64, 2004.  
[13] G. 
E. 
Billman, 
“Heart 
rate 
variability–a 
historical 
perspective,” 2011, doi:10.3389/fphys.2011.00086. 
[14] A. S. Ban, N. A. Paramonova, G. M. Zagorodnyi, and D. S. 
Ban, “Analysis of the interrelation between heart rate 
variability indices,” Military medicine: a scientific and 
practical peer-reviewed journal, vol. 4, pp. 21-24, 2010. 
[15] V. A. Barabanschikov, “Experimental Psychology in Russia,” 
Moscow: Institute of Psychology RAS, pp. 13-18, 2010. 
[16] H. Bonnemeier, G. Richardt, J. Potratz, U. K. Wiegand, A. 
Brandes, N. Kluge, and H. A. Katus, “Circadian profile of 
cardiac autonomic nervous modulation in healthy subjects: 
differing effects of aging and gender on heart rate variability,” 
J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol, vol. 14(8), pp. 791-799, 2003. 
[17] G. B. Stanley, K. Poolla, and R. A. Siegel, “Threshold 
modeling of autonomic control of heart rate variability,” IEEE 
Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 47(9), pp. 1147-1153, 2000. 
[18] A. Zaza and F. Lombardi, “Autonomic indexes based on the 
analysis of heart rate variability: a view from the sinus node,” 
Cardiovasc Res, vol., 50(3), pp. 434-442, 2001. 
[19] R. M Baevsky and G. G. Ivanov, “Heart rate variability: 
theoretical aspects and possibilities of clinical application,” 
Ultrasound functional diagnostics, vol. 3, pp. 108-127, 2001. 
[20] D. Singh, K. Vinod, and S. C. Saxena, “Sampling frequency 
of the RR interval time series for spectral analysis of heart 
rate variability,” J. Med. Eng. Technol, vol. 26(6), pp. 263-
272, 2004. 
[21] E. Toledo, I. Pinhas, D. Aravot, and S. Akselrod, “Very high 
frequency oscillations in the heart rate and blood pressure of 
heart transplant patients,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput, vol. 41, 
pp. 432-438, 2003. 
[22] S. V. Bozhokin, E. M. Lecova, V. O. Samoilov, and P. I. 
Tolkachev, “Wavelet analysis of non-stationary heart rate 
variability during passive orthostatic test,” Biophysics, vol., 4, 
pp. 696-712, 2012. 
[23] C. Winkler, “Attention and respiration,” Proc. Acad. Sci. 
Amsterdam, vol. 1, pp. 121-138, 1899. 
[24] V. A. Mashin, “Three-factor model of heart rate variability in 
psychological research of functional systems of human 
operator,” Moscow, 2010. 
[25] V. V. Parin and F. Z. Meerson, “Essays on the clinical 
physiology of blood circulation,” Moscow: Medicine, 1960. 
[26] J. Taelman, S. Vandeput, E. Vlemincx, A. Spaepen, and S. 
Van Huffel, “Instantaneous changes in heart rate regulation 
due to mental load in simulated office work,” Eur J Appl 
Physiol, vol. 111(7), pp. 1497-1505, 2011a. 
[27] J. Taelman, U. Katholieke, L. B. Leuven, S. Vandeput, I. 
Gligorijevic, and A. Spaepen, “Timefrequency heart rate 
variability characteristics of young adults during physical, 
mental and combined stress in laboratory environment,” Conf 
Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 1973-1976, 2011b. 
[28] E. K. S. Hanson, G. L. R. Godaert, C. J. M. Maas, and T. F. 
Meijman, “Vagal cardiac control throughout the day: the 
relative importance 
[29] of effort-reward imbalance and within-day measurements of 
mood, demand and satisfaction,” Biol. Psychol, vol. 56, pp. 
23-44, 2001. 
[30] A. Collins, A. Karasek, and K. Costas, “Job strain and 
autonomic indices of cardiovascular disease risk,” American 
Journal of Industrial Medicine, vol. 48, pp. 183-193, 2005. 
[31] P. Melillo, M. Bracale, and L. Pecchia, “Nonlinear Heart Rate 
Variability features for real-life stress detection. Case study: 
students under stress due to university examination,” Biomed. 
Eng.Online, vol. 10(1), pp. 96, 2011. 
[32] T. W. Buchanan and D. Tranel, “Stress and emotional 
memory retrieval: effects of sex and cortisol response,” 
Neurobiol. Learn. Mem, vol. 89, pp. 134-141, 2008. 
[33] R. Nikolova, L. Tzaneva, and S. Danev, “Investigation of 
noise exposure effect on heart rate variability parameters,” 
Cent Eur. J. Public Health, vol. 9(3), pp. 130-132, 2001. 
[34] T. Chandola, A. Britton, E. Brunner, H. Hemingway, M. 
Malik, M. Kumari, E. Badrick, M. Kivimaki, and M. Marmot, 
“Work stress and coronary heart disease: what are the 
mechanisms? ,” Eur Heart J, vol. 29, pp. 640-648, 2008. 
[35] T. 
Chandola, 
A. 
Heraclides, 
and 
M. 
Kumari, 
“Psychophysiological biomarkers of workplace stressors,” 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev, vol. 35(1), pp. 51-57, 2010. 
[36] N. Rohleder, J. M. Wolf, E. F. Maldonado, and C. 
Kirschbaum, “The psychosocial stress-induced increase in 
salivary alpha-amylase is independent of saliva flow rate,” 
Psychophysiology, vol. 43, pp. 645-652, 2006. 
[37] M. Altemus, L. S. Redwine, Y. Leong, C. A. Frye, S. W. 
Porges, and C. S. Carter, “Responses to laboratory 
psychosocial stress in postpartum women,” Psychosom. Med, 
vol. 63, pp. 814-821, 2001. 
[38] H. Lackschewitz, G. Hüther, and B. Kröner-Herwig, 
“Physiological and psychological stress responses in adults 
with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder 
(ADHD),” 
Psychoneuroendocrinology, vol. 33, pp. 612-624, 2008. 
[39] M. Malik, J. T. Bigger, A. J. Camm, R. E. Kleiger, A. 
Malliani, A. J. Moss, and P. J. Schwartz, “Heart rate 
variability: 
Standards 
of 
measurement, 
physiological 
interpretation, and clinical use,” Eur. Heart J, vol. 17(3), pp. 
354-381, 1996. 
[40] R. M. Baevsky, “Prediction of states on the verge of norm and 
pathology,” Moscow: Medicine, 1979. 
[41] P.K.. Anokhin, “Fundamental questions of the general theory 
of functional systems of the principles of the system 
organization of functions”, Moscow: Science, pp. 5-61, 1973. 
[42] J. R. Turner, D. Carroll, S. Dean, and M. G. Harris, “Heart 
rate reactions to standard laboratory challenges and a 
naturalistic 
stressor,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Psychophysiology, vol. 151, pp. 151-152, 1987.  
[43] C. Bernard, “The physiology of the heart and its relation to 
the brain: lecture,” N. Solovyov, Ed. St. Petersburg, 1867.  
[44] J.F. Thayer, F. Åhs, Fredrikson, M.J.J Sollers, and T.D. 
Wagere, “A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and 
neuroimaging studies: Implications for heart rate variability as 
a marker of stress and health,” Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36, pp. 747–756, 2012.  
[45] J.F. Thayer and R.D. Lane, “A model of neurovisceral 
integration in emotion regulation and dysregulation,” J. 
Affect. Disord., 61, pp.201–216, 2000.  
[46] J.F. Thayer and R.D. Lane, “Claude Bernard and the heart–
brain connection: further elaboration of a model of 
neurovisceral integration,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev, 33, 
pp.81–88, 2009. 
[47] Y. J. Zanstraa and D. W. Johnston, “Cardiovascular reactivity 
in real life settings: Measurement, mechanisms and meaning,” 
Biol. Psychol, vol. 86(2), pp. 98-105, 2011. 

126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[48] C. Kirschbaum, K. M. Pirke, and D. H. Hellhammer, “The 
‘Trier Social Stress 
Test’—a tool for 
investigating 
psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting,” 
Neuropsychobiology, vol. 28, pp. 76-81, 1993. 
[49] J. R. Turner, S. S. Girdler, A. Sherwood, and K. C. Light, 
“Cardiovascular responses to behavioral stressors: laboratory-
field generalization and inter-task consistency,” Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, vol. 34(5), pp. 581-589, 1990. 
[50] L. Warwick-Evans, J. Walker, and J. A. Evans, “A 
comparison 
of 
psychologically-induced 
cardiovascular 
reactivity in laboratory and natural environments,” Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, vol. 32, pp. 493-504, 1988. 
[51] L. J. Van Doornen and R. W. Van Blokland, “The relation to 
type a behavior and vital exhaustion with physiological 
reactions to real life stress,” Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, vol. 3, pp. 715-725, 1989. 
[52] J. P. Davig, K. T. Larkin, and J. L. Goodie, “Does 
cardiovascular reactivity to stress measured in the laboratory 
generalize to thesis and dissertation meetings among doctoral 
students? ,” International Journal of Behavioral Medicine, vol. 
7, pp. 216-235, 2000. 
[53] E.V. Runova, S.B. Parin, M.M. Nekrasova, A.V. Bakhchina, 
A.V. Kovalchuk, I.S. Shyshalov, and S.A. Polevaya, 
“Monitoring 
and 
distant 
diagnostics 
of 
sportsment’s 
functional state based on information technologies and 
telemetry in the conditions of natural activity,” Int J 
Psychophysiology, vol. 85(3), pp. 420– 421, 2012. 
[54] S. A. Polevaia, S. B. Parin, A. V. Bakhchina, M. M. 
Nekrasova, I. S. Shishalov, E. V. Runova, and V. V. 
Kozhevnikov, “Determination system of functional state of a 
group of people,” Patent RF №129680, 2013. 
[55] S. A. Polevaya, S. B. Parin, A. V. Bakhchina, M. M. 
Nekrasova, I. S. Shishalov, E. V. Runova, and V. V. 
Kozhevnikov, “Determination system of functional state of a 
group of people with feedback,” Patent RF №129681, 2013. 
[56] N. I. Shlyk, A. E. Alabuzhev, N. Z. Feofilaktov, and A. O. 
Sleptsov, “Dynamic studies of heart rate variability in mid-
season athletes in the training process in mid-mountain 
conditions,” Materials of the 5th All-Russian Symposium 
with international participation: Variability of the heart 
rhythm. Theoretical aspects and practical application, pp. 384-
389, 2011. 
[57] H. Che-Hao, T. Ming-Ya, H. Go-Shine, L. Tso-Chou, C. 
Kuen-Pao, H. Shung-Tai, S. LiangYu, and L. Chi-Yuan, 
“Poincaré plot indexes of heart rate variability detect dynamic 
autonomic modulation during general anesthesia induction,” 
Acta Anaesthesiologica Taiwanica, vol. 50, pp. 12-18, 2012. 
[58] K. Becker, I. Görlach, and T. Frieling, “Häussinger, D. 
Characterization and natural course of cardiac autonomic 
nervous dysfunction in HIV-infected patients,” AIDS, vol., 
11(6), pp. 751-757, 1997. 
[59] S. Cohen and N. Weinstein, “Nonauditory effects of noise on 
behavior and health,” Journal of Social Issues, vol. 37, pp. 36-
70, 1981. 
[60] M. De Couck, D. van Brummelen, D. Schallier, J. De Grève, 
and Y. Gidron, “The relationship between vagal nerve activity 
and clinical outcomes in prostate and non-small cell lung 
cancerpatients,” 
Oncology 
reports, 
pp. 
2435-2441, 
doi:10.3892/or.2013.2725. 
[61] N. Egelund, “Spectral analysis of heart rate variability as an 
indicator of driver fatigue,” Ergonomics, vol. 25(7), pp. 663-
672,1982.  
[62] A.Y. Kaplan, “Heart rate variability and the nature of 
feedback upon the result of operational activity in a human,”  
Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat I P Pavlova, vol.48(6), pp.345-350, 
1999. 
[63] G. Mulder, L.J.M. Mulder, T.F. Meijman, J.B.P. Veldman, 
and A.M. Van Roon, “A psychophysiological approach to 
working conditions,” in Engineering Psychophysiology: 
Issues and Applications, R.W. Backs, W. Boucsein, Eds. pp. 
139-159,2000.  
[64] W.P. Brinkman, R. Haakma, and D.G. Bouwhuis, “Memory 
Load: a Factor that Links the Usability of Individual 
Interaction Components Together,” Proc. the Conference 
HCI: Design for Life, vol.2, Leeds, UK, pp.165-168, 2004.
 

