169
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Achieving Good Worklife Ergonomics in eHealth Co-Creation 
- 
The ‘What’, the ‘Why’ and the ‘How’ 
 
Niels Frederik Garmann-Johnsen1,2, Migle Helmersen1 
1NORCE research, 
Kristiansand, Norway 
Emails: {ngar, mihe}@norceresearch.no  
Tom Roar Eikebrokk2 
2Dept. of Information Systems,  
University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
Email: tom.eikebrokk@uia.no
 
 
Abstract—Service 
improvement 
[‘servitization’] 
and 
digitalization are two megatrends that affect healthcare and 
public services along with other sectors in general. A new model 
is needed to prescribe how governance in an increasingly 
changing world of modern healthcare could be undertaken in a 
successful manner by embracing the power of Co-Creation. The 
concept of good worklife ergonomics is studied, both as a 
prerequisite, the ‘What’, and as a success factor in this context, 
the ‘Why’. This article proposes that the moderating, risk 
mitigating, factor of broadly-based employee involvement in all 
phases from planning and design to implementation will greatly 
improve quality in both innovation-process, and outcomes. A 
case-study from a public homecare living lab eHealth-project in 
Norway is visited to highlight some of the challenges ahead. 
Having established that employee co-creation can contribute to 
successful digital transformation of healthcare services, the 
‘How’ question is studied. The question of how to enable 
effective employee co-creation is under-researched. Employee 
participation in co-creation is stated as an important enabler of 
digitalization and service improvements. The Nordic Model for 
employee participation has proven successful for enhancing 
working life effectiveness and innovation. This article proposes 
that these principles of employee participation can be further 
enhanced by using web 2.0 technologies for Enterprise Social 
Networks. The article concludes with a discussion of 
consequences of applying such social networks for the digital 
transformation of healthcare services as well as implications for 
research and practice. 
Keywords-Co-creation; 
servitization; 
digitalization; 
healthcare; 
eHealth; 
Worklife 
ergonomics; 
Digital 
transformation; Employee; The Nordic Model; Web 2.0; 
Enterprise Social Networks; Enterprise Social Media. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The purpose of this article is to develop a conceptual 
process-model for co-creation in eHealth innovation, that also 
supports a good worklife ergonomics for employees. The 
article builds further on an eTELEMED conference 
contribution [1] and is a result of a cross-disciplinary 
collaboration, between one Doctor of Medicine, specializing 
in health and work environment, and two Doctors of 
Philosophy in social science, with management information 
systems as speciality. 
In many industrial countries, people live longer, but 
habitually with chronic diseases, due to better living standards 
and medical treatment advances. These changing population 
demographics mean there is an increasing demand for 
healthcare services [2]. eHealth technologies accompanied by 
changes in healthcare delivery processes and services, offer 
possibilities for a lower cost healthcare system, needed to 
meet future increases in demand for services. These changes 
can be referred to as servitization transformation [3] and put 
an emphasis on the interaction with customers that requires 
providers to offer customized and total solutions [3]. 
Digitalization capabilities support such servitization through 
employees’ involvement and codetermination of what should 
count as key performance indicators. Digitalization is “the use 
of digital technologies to change a business model and provide 
new revenue and value-producing opportunities; it is the 
process of moving to a digital business” [4]. 
But such change-projects often meet unforeseen barriers. 
Objections may be raised by the various professional groups 
themselves. Poor rooted changes risks leading to inferior 
solutions over time, which may work against their purpose. In 
Norway, primary care and homecare is a concern for the 
public sector, municipalities. Generally, new technologies and 
working methods, as well as new service providers, will have 
to absorb all the "tacit knowledge" inherent in the public 
organization to add new values to the services in an efficient 
manner. If employees are involved, they may be more inclined 
to become a driving force in the pursuit of a servitization 
strategy, that relies on developing digitalization capabilities, 
because the process of defining performance criteria promotes 
organizational learning [5].  
In Norway, primary healthcare and homecare is the 
concern of the municipalities. Local government-initiated 
eHealth pilot-projects are often unconnected experiments. A 
shared and common process management methodology for 
both 
development 
and 
implementation 
phases, 
that 
incorporates employee involvement and collaboration, will 
arguably be a useful tool for public sector change leaders who 
want to introduce new technologies and working methods, or 
invite new service providers that relieve or complete the 
overall welfare offer to citizens.  We will term this as Co-
creation governance [‘Co-creation’ as a term is disseminated 
further in Section IV]. Such a tool will be useful in the 
complex task of maintaining quality for both service recipients 
and service providing personnel – employees in the healthcare 

170
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
system. Lenka et al. [3] have recently proposed a model for 
co-creation between a product or service vendor and end-
consumers. But in eHealth innovation in the Norwegian 
context, system vendors, and health care providers are most 
often separate entities, so the health care provider generally 
add value through the combination of human services and the 
application of technology, not technology alone. Seen from 
the view of the health care provider, the research and 
development challenge can be put as: 
 
- 
How employees’ involvement is ensured in eHealth 
co-creation governance? 
- 
How this involvement contributes to ensuring 
performance quality on all levels of responsibility? 
 
A potential solution to this challenge is the development 
of a shared digital capability to continually improve service 
quality. When in place, this capability will ensure that internal 
and external service producers act through a continuous 
quality improvement cycle from plan, check, act, and correct 
that improves service quality over time. This understanding of 
digital capabilities is in line with Lenka et al.’s model. But this 
article argues that this capability must be developed along two 
dimensions of co-creation or collaborative innovation: 
 
- 
Horizontally along the chain of value co-creation, 
from ICT-vendor, through service-provider to home 
care service users, but also 
- 
Vertically along a line of innovation-process 
governance, from front-stage service-personnel 
employees to top-management. 
 
These capabilities must subsequently be built "bottom up" 
with the involvement and participation of all relevant 
municipal employees, ensuring that new and increasingly 
more technology enabled work processes still remain 
employee friendly, and thus improve the quality of worklife 
of employees as well as patients’ quality of life [6]. This 
article will also show how Lenka et al.’s aspects of 
digitalization, servitization and co-creation are linked to our 
highlighted aspects of [worklife] ergonomics, Business 
Performance Management, and [Information System] 
governance. 
Ergonomics is an applied science concerned with 
designing and arranging things people use so that the people 
and things interact most efficiently [7].  Ergonomics is the 
science of designing the workplace, keeping in mind the 
capabilities and limitations of the worker and in such way, 
fulfil the goals of occupational health and safety, and 
productivity of employees [8].  The implementation of new 
digital services in healthcare involves several new work tasks, 
and thus represents new work processes and potential risk 
factors at the workplace. Knowledge of this should be 
addressed to prevent potential negative health effects among 
employees. This article proposes the term worklife 
ergonomics as a holistic term that encompasses the system of 
service production that spans over workplaces and involved 
employees. As such, worklife ergonomics as a concept 
considers the whole information system with people, 
processes and technology. Employee engagement and 
involvement brings a new and needed perspective into co-
creation servitization, and digitalization. 
     Effective Business Performance Management, and 
[Information System] governance are important factors in 
achieving successful innovation, and the authors will show 
that such management tools need to be activated in parallel 
with the system- and service development processes. 
Employee involvement in the creation and execution of such 
management tools will serve to ensure the goals are met, and 
risks for failure are mitigated. 
The co-creation literature [3, 9] has shown how the 
involvement of customers and partners in all stages of 
innovation and process transformation can add value to new 
products and services. But there is a gap in this literature 
regarding the role of employees in innovation and process 
transformation in large service-organizations like healthcare-
organizations. This article will also show the ‘How’; how the 
process of digital transformation in healthcare services can 
benefit from employee co-creation, and how this can be 
achieved, using web 2.0 technologies. The propositions put 
forward here may contribute to both the digital co-creation 
model, and to healthcare innovation management practice. 
Despite the recognition of the need for co-creation, there 
is a general lack of research that can guide the utilization of 
the concept in healthcare. The gap is characterized by scarce 
knowledge about the factors that enable co-creation [9, 10]. 
Few studies describe the role of employees in co-creation [11]. 
This gap is of particularly importance in the research on digital 
transformation of healthcare, due to the important source of 
knowledge that employees represent. Employees have first-
hand knowledge of service demands, they know the process 
of service production from provider to client, and they have 
in-depth knowledge of the organization where new 
technologies and redesigned service production processes will 
be implemented. What is more, employees know their 
colleagues and can influence their behavior and acceptance of 
technology [12] and related changes in work processes [13]. 
By including and stimulating employees in the process of co-
creation, the organization can stimulate and utilize a new 
driving force in innovations both horizontally and vertically. 
Horizontally, this knowledge is utilized in the development of 
service innovations where employees know the service 
production processes from providers to customers and clients. 
Vertically, employees’ knowledge and influence are utilized 
when innovations are implemented in the organization as both 
a technical- and a social system. This vertical dimension, the 
co-creation between top management and all employees in the 
healthcare provider organization, thus adds a new source of 
value creation to the co-creation model. 
In healthcare organizations, nurses and other employees 
who are in direct touch with the patients, e.g., in homecare, 
accumulate detailed knowledge and experience about clinical 
practices. This detailed knowledge and experience is arguably 
of critical significance as input to the process of digitally 

171
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
transforming the same practices or creating totally new 
clinical practices. Likewise, employees can be instrumental in 
the redesign and implementation of new services. Employees 
can point out critical errors in the service design, seen from a 
caregiver to patient-relation point of view, that can overthrow 
otherwise beneficial changes.  
Hence, the overall aim of this paper is to close this gap in 
the literature by exploring how employees can be involved in 
co-creating new healthcare services. Specific objectives are to 
extend co-creation 
literature 
to 
healthcare; 
defining 
employees’ role in digital transformation and co-creation in 
healthcare, and to show how web 2.0 technologies can enable 
such employee co-creation in practice. 
Background 
     The so-called Nordic model describes a working life 
arrangement that not only allows, but in fact requires by law, 
that employers and employees are cooperating on a regular 
basis. The authors agree with Ramaswamy and Gouillart [14] 
in that by giving all stakeholders more attention and influence 
in the development of a "co-creative enterprise", it is likely 
insight, revenue and profit will increase. However, how this 
can be done in an appropriate and feasible manner is not 
explained in the literature. To describe the organizational 
significance of employee involvement in co-creation, we will 
refer to Scandinavian literature from different areas including 
system development, leadership and innovation, especially 
the article “Capabilities for Innovation: The Nordic Model 
and Employee Participation” by Nielsen et al. [15]. The 
Nordic Model consists of: “First, a comprehensive collective 
agreements system with coordinated bargaining between the 
partners at multiple levels; next, employee representation, 
participation, and cooperation on decisions at various levels; 
and third, a surveillance system for improving the work 
environment [15]”.  
     This opens for high employee involvement and describes a 
potential mechanism for enabling co-creation in the context of 
service innovations. In this model, employees are important 
for innovations, based on their education, experience and 
contacts upstream and downstream of the value chain. They 
also know their own organization with its culture, leadership, 
processes and technology. This model applied to the context 
of service innovation in healthcare will point at mechanisms 
that enable employees to contribute both to proposals for new 
service requirements. Employees can also give input on how 
these innovations can best be implemented in their own 
enterprise. Innovative projects will have arguably had extra 
strength when employee’s knowledge of service innovation 
[horizontally] is combined with their experience with service 
implementation [vertically], and when the goal and rationale 
of the project is effectively communicated by management.  
     Although healthcare consists of highly specialized and 
complex work tasks and patient pathways, and is highly 
labour intensive, little have been done to research co-creation 
in healthcare in combination with employee involvement. In 
countries like Norway, primary healthcare and homecare is 
the responsibility of local government on a municipal level. 
Employees are often involved in testing new types of welfare 
technology. But systematic employee involvement in problem 
analysis and -definition and deciding criteria for accepting or 
rejecting new technology pushes, seems absent in the eHealth 
[healthcare technology] literature. Perhaps are management 
hampered by the practical difficulties of involving all 
interested parties in large distributed service organizations? 
     To the rescue comes web 2.0, the use of social media 
within enterprises, also called Enterprise Social Media [ESM]. 
ESM can facilitate an Enterprise Social Network [ESN], ESN 
being perhaps the most widely used term in information 
systems research, in this area [16]. This article thus seeks to 
inform leaders and practitioners, as well as research, on the 
rationale for how enterprises can leapfrog into involving and 
engaging employees on an enterprise-wide platform, using 
emergent ESM platforms like Workplace [by Facebook], 
Yammer, and likewise technologies. These technologies offer 
new opportunities, but also new challenges for eliciting 
employees’ proposals for new service requirements within 
eHealth, and inputs as to how these innovations can best be 
implemented in their own enterprise. 
     The problem formulation thus becomes:  
 
1. 
How can the co-creation literature be extended to 
include employee involvement, in the context of 
healthcare?  
2. 
How can web 2.0 technologies enable such employee 
co-creation in practice? 
 
     Oldham and Da Silva [17] argue that three conditions are 
necessary if employees are to generate creative ideas:  
 
• 
Access and exposure to new and diverse information 
• 
Full engagement in the work role 
• 
The experience of socioemotional or instrumental 
support. 
 
     Oldham and Da Silva [17] briefly mention social 
networking platforms, alongside other types of information 
and communication systems; electronic communication tools 
[e.g., email, instant messaging, voice mail, faxing, and 
paging], 
electronic 
conferencing 
tools 
[e.g., 
data 
conferencing, 
voice 
conferencing, 
videoconferencing, 
discussion forums, and chat systems], and collaborative work 
management tools [e.g., file sharing, group calendars, events 
and polls]. 
The stucture of this article 
Having set the background for worklife ergonomics in 
eHealth co-creation, the rest of this article is organized as 
follows. In the next section, Methods, criteria for two different 
literature reviews and a Living Lab case-study are 
disseminated. In the Section III we disseminate the ‘What’ of 
co-creation and the role of employees, and also the rationale 
for such involvement, the ‘Why’. We also present the ‘How’ 
[Section III.C] both based on empirical study of a small-scale 

172
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Living Lab-concept, and the scaled-up version [Section III.D]. 
Based on these finds, we propose a model and framework for 
employee co-creation in Section IV Propositions. Here is also 
provided a framework for structuring and digitizing an 
Enterprise Social Network for eHealth co-creation. In 
Conclusion, the authors show how these articles can 
contribute to closing the gap in literature on employees’ role 
in eHealth co-creation. 
II. 
METHOD 
     The methods applied consists of two different literature 
reviews and a case-study in a Living Lab project. To devise a 
conceptual model of worklife ergonomics, we first conducted 
a literature review to explore how ergonomics are used in 
relation to the concepts of eHealth, digitalization and co-
creation. The authors were looking for state-of art principles 
in the literature that could guide us conceptually in designing 
a system that would encompass good worklife ergonomics in 
eHealth co-creation. A lot of research projects have gone into 
the different elements needed to enable employees’ role in co-
creation processes. What this articles authors have set out to 
do is to contribute to a more holistic approach, binding the 
different elements together to a coherent roadmap and relating 
it to the special context of eHealth; see Section III, results. 
A. Literature reviews 
A first literature review to map the ‘What’ question, was 
thus performed in October 2017. Using Google scholar, the 
literature was searched for articles containing the criteria 
[search string]; ergonomics AND digitalization AND 
servitization AND health AND employees. By using such 
Boolean-logic operators; ‘AND’, the authors ensured that the 
findings where narrowed to only articles including all the key-
terms, thus covering the desired context. This search and 
screening, resulted in three articles that provided concepts 
with substantially new insight [the rest of the articles screened, 
only briefly touched the key criteria]. 
     Next, to look closer at the ‘Why’ and ‘How’ – questions, 
this article bases its proposition on the guiding principles of 
the Nordic Model [15], and web 2.0 technologies, enterprise 
social media, used in innovation management in organizations 
[16].  
     To shed light on how Web 2.0 platforms can involve and 
positively engage employees in eHealth digital transformation 
processes, the authors performed a second literature review on 
the University of Agder’s electronic library, February 2018. 
This library is connected to, and includes, the major search 
engines like Ebscohost, Scopus and Elsevier. The search 
criteria’s chosen where simply “Workplace”, “Facebook” and 
“Yammer”, as these names are some of the most known social 
media-platforms for use within enterprises. The search was 
modified to peer-reviewed articles. The search gave 69 hits: 
screening these, the authors found 24 articles that could shed 
light on the research problem. In the screening we included 
articles from other sectors than healthcare, as we perceived 
that other industries use of enterprise web 2.0 may also inform 
the eHealth area of concern. The articles that were excluded 
from the research, revolved around the use of social media 
platforms within the educational sector, something we 
perceived to be a special case, outside our scope. Most of the 
found, and deemed relevant articles are relatively recent, i.e., 
from the last three years, showing that this is an area of 
growing interest to social science and information systems 
researchers. 
B. Case study in a eHealth Living Lab 
The identified concepts from the first literature [see 
Sections III.A and III.B], were compared with findings from 
discussions from awareness-workshops in an eHealth Living 
Lab action research project in a municipality in Norway [see 
Section III.C] [18]. In this project, the research team 
[including the authors of this article] held six awareness 
workshops 
together 
with 
representatives 
from 
the 
municipality [a joint project manager, ICT manager, 
management and employee representatives from municipal 
homecare and nursing services]. The workshops focused on 
these topics: 
 
• 
Stakeholder analysis 
• 
Service design and ‘design thinking’ methods 
• 
ICT-business as innovation partners [ref. co-creation 
with ICT-system vendors] 
• 
Capabilities and organizational learning 
• 
Enterprise performance management, and 
• 
Scaling up innovations from a Living lab. 
 
Two of the authors also visited design workshops where 
front-line personnel employees in home nursing, together with 
municipal healthcare-department managers and eHealth 
researchers, discussed issues and requirements related to a 
specific service innovation, the use of digital night 
surveillance for patients in need of this, staying at home, with 
use of cameras with video conferencing functionalities. This 
particular part-project is still ongoing research, but now, it is 
part of an EU-research project [as there are unsolved issues 
concerning, e.g., privacy]. The Living Lab project went on to 
study and implement other eHealth applications; home visits 
by video, and Global Positioning systems for tracking 
dementia-patients. Issues where detected and solved by using 
potential users as testers in a user panel, roleplaying care-giver 
and care receiver in a test lab and living lab setting.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The results are presented in relation to the key terms of the 
literature search. The identified articles offered design 
principles that can govern good worklife ergonomics in 
eHealth co-creation processes. 
A.  ‘What’ - Ergonomics in co-creation – the role of 
employees 
Neubauer and Stary [19] describe ergonomics as 
acknowledging the role of employees in innovation as leading 

173
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to both improvements and financial benefits, through human-
centred design. 
Human-centred design for interactive systems promotes 
the following key principles [19]: 
 
• 
The design is based upon an explicit understanding of 
users, tasks and environments 
• 
Users 
are 
involved 
throughout 
design 
and 
development 
• 
The design is driven and refined by user-centred 
evaluation 
• 
The process is iterative 
• 
The design addresses the whole user experience 
• 
The design team includes multidisciplinary skills and 
perspectives. 
 
Of advocating policies that could improve on this, Lopez-
Gomez et al. [20] suggest: 
 
• 
Promoting the access to highly qualified personnel to 
develop new concepts and service innovations in-
house 
• 
Developing training methods for personnel to be able 
to adapt innovations acquired from external sources 
• 
Need to better adapt curricula in education and 
training schemes to the demands of service economy 
• 
Recognizing informal learning so as to increase the 
attractiveness of continuous training for employees 
• 
Promoting 
modern 
innovation 
management 
approaches that better support creativity and 
autonomy of service workers [20] 
B.  ‘Why’ - Operationalizing these principles in eHealth 
While the forgone citations are from industrial contexts, 
Beaumont et al. [2] focus on service-design in eHealth, and 
propose 
that 
socio-technical, 
human-centred 
design 
approaches are better alternatives to techno-centric design. 
The article promotes joint innovation tools like service 
blueprints [21, 22] and stakeholder analysis [6] in the form of 
Systems Scenario Tool [SST] [23] as a basis. SST combines 
stakeholder, and system gap-analysis. 
The key points in the article are [2]:  
 
• 
Telehealth 
equipment 
and 
services 
offer 
opportunities for bridging the future gap between 
available health resources and demand created by an 
increase in life expectancy. 
• 
Current use of telehealth is limited by inadequate 
business models and service designs that fail to 
generate successful partnerships and value for 
customers and suppliers. 
• 
Traditionally, healthcare providers have taken a 
techno-centric approach to the implementation of 
new technologies, which often results in unforeseen 
barriers to success. 
• 
Design and implementation of new services can 
benefit from a socio-technical approach, which gives 
equal consideration to both social and technical 
aspects of a complex system. 
• 
Co-creation of value requires new tools, such as the 
System Scenarios Tool, which provides stakeholders 
with a holistic framework to help model the 
implications of service offering and business model 
choices.  
 
C. ‘How’ [I] - Design principles applied on a Living Lab 
project 
      Comparing these organizational design principles with 
experiences from the Living Lab project workshops, methods 
such as stakeholder analysis [6], and service blueprints [op. 
cit.], as devised in Beaumont et al., found in the literature 
review [2], proved to be useful in designing new services. To 
the known service blueprint template for process notation 
[swim lane diagram] we found it useful to add a band for step 
purpose and key performance indicators, see Figure 1. In 
addition to showing the process following a timeline or 
sequence [steps], the process diagram shows activities at 
different levels of the information system. The levels include 
both those parts that are visible to the end-user and the 
processes back stage, below the “line of visibility” [22]. 
Adding the purpose of each step purpose makes it possible to 
extract user stories to form a system requirement 
documentation for hand-over to Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library methods [ITIL] [24-26] or agile system 
development [27], and refined further to precise technical 
architectures and instructions to ICT-system engineers. At the 
same time, adding key performance indicators can be a 
starting point for defining inputs to a joint enterprise process 
and performance management system.     By adding the 
iteration of a workshop with all involved front-stage and back-
stage personnel-employees, like in the Living lab-case [see 
Section II], more aspects of a proposed innovation can be 
explored, before expensive investments and changes are 
made.  
     Although our process modelling exercise showed the 
proposed camera-surveillance case to be technically feasible 
and may give potential benefits to homecare patients, it also 
showed that such an innovation also has major implications 
for the worklife for, e.g., home nurses, as well as legal and 
privacy-issues in general, that needs to be examined and 
discussed further. The status, as this article is being written, is 
that implementing the camera-surveillance case has been 
postponed awaiting more ground research into the needed 
technology security and quality aspects, while other 
innovation-paths are now explored in test labs and living labs; 
e.g., replacing physical home-visits to patients with video-
meetings.  
 
 

174
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 1. Service Blueprint diagram template, with “lanes” for purpose and performance indicators added 
 
 
     Here, in the case of video-meetings, service blueprints and 
other service design-methods have been successfully applied, 
and pilots for new services may go live soon [in Fall, 2018]. 
Testing the user’s journey through new services, using low or 
high-fidelity testing [roleplay] gives informed users a pre-
experience of the benefits from new improved services. 
Experience from the Living Lab show that participants in such 
lab test can contribute with both real-life problem narratives 
as input to design of new eHealth measures, and later as 
“ambassadors”. Test panel participants can thus positively 
influence patient groups and colleagues, and help ease eHealth 
technology adoption, validating the general finds of Taylor 
and Todd [12], and Eikebrokk et al. [13] in this context. 
D. ‘How’ [II] - Scaling up participation using web 2.0 
technologies 
     We used Webster and Watsons [28] method for 
conceptualizing and grouping the finds of the second literature 
review. The results of this literature review are presented here. 
The literature review gave us insights within the following 
concepts and conditional factors: 
 
1. Customer satisfaction 
2. ESN adoption 
3. Gamification 
4. Human resource development 
5. Innovation ecosystems and urban planning 
6. IT governance 
7. Knowledge sharing 
8. Management 
9. Online design processes 
10. Organizational learning 
11. Risk factors 
12. Avenues for future research 
 
     Below are these finds with references to the [group of] 
reviewed articles that offered new insights into these concepts. 
 
1. Customer satisfaction: 
     Pintos study [29] shows that customers’ [patients’] positive 
attitude toward social media can be an effective method to 
enhance PCM [patient-centred medicine] and, ultimately, 
satisfaction. 
 
2. ESN adoption: 
     Chin et al. [30] illustrate that the likelihood of ESN use is 
significantly influenced by technological, organizational, 
social and individual factors. Sharma and Bhatnagar [31] state 
that it takes a lot more than mere investing in social media 
work tools; organizations need to build a “culture of openness 
and transparency”, where employees not only “feel free” to 
share ideas and opinions but also “feel happy and involved” 
with high-touch points in their entire employment experience. 
Doing this, ESN can be utilized to build social capital [trust] 
within a company [32]. In Razmerita et al.’s study [33] drivers 
for user adaptation are identified as: 
 
• 
Environment of helping others 
• 
Monetary rewards 
• 
Management support 
• 
Management encourages and motivates knowledge 
sharing behaviour, and 
• 
Knowledge sharing is recognized 
• 
Barriers to adaptation of ESN-ESM are: 
• 
[The perceived risks of] Change of behaviour [from 
hoarding information to sharing information] 
• 
Lack of trust 
• 
Lack of time 
 
 
 
Service Blueprint diagram
Pre service
Post service
Step name/no.
Step purpose
Key performance indicators
Service evidence
User action
Front stage personnel action ↓ "Visibilityline"
Back stage personnel action
Infrastructures (legal, 
standards, technical)
Legend
Descision
Connection
During service
Event
Process

175
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
3. Gamification: 
     The Li et al. article [34] identifies gamification as an 
important driver for making ESN [and ESM] work. They 
exhibit four case-studies; Google, Apple, Procter and Gamble, 
and Ace Hardware. Ace hardware uses the network to solve 
problems, and exchange ideas and experiences. Google allows 
employees to spend 20% of their time on their own-defined 
projects. These ideas are voted for on an “ideation white 
board”. On the Google Intranet; “MOMA” all information is 
compiled in to a searchable database, available to all 
employees. Procter and Gamble includes the employees of 
partners in their extended ESN, for ideas to new product-lines. 
Apple have gone further and have built a whole ecosystem for 
revenue generating services [34]. 
     Gilbert et al. [35] advocate establishing an idea-capture 
mechanism, using rewards and “Design Thinking” [36] 
competitions. Although monetary mechanisms and career 
advancement are important, the “power of fame and 
franchising should not be underestimated”. Gamification can 
also be used to enhance learning from enterprise training [37]. 
 
4. Human resource development: 
     Allowing employees to “brand themselves” will create 
enterprise winners in the emerging economic environment for 
the information age, using social learning or e-learning tools 
[38]. 
 
5. Innovation ecosystems and urban planning: 
     The innovation eco-system thinking can be extended to 
whole cities with their residents and businesses. This could be 
of interest also within an eHealth innovation context, as local 
governments, in charge of primary healthcare, as in Norway, 
also have the double goal of stimulating business 
development, alongside solving healthcare needs. San 
Francisco city founded the ‘tech chamber of commerce’ 
sfciti.org. “An important stated goal of [sfciti.org] was to 
encourage member firms to make pro-bono interventions in 
the city’s urban infrastructures. The first public statement 
consisted of a short video circulated via social media [39]”. 
 
6. IT governance: 
     Alimam et al. [40] highlight the need to integrate ESM with 
the enterprise’s existing mechanisms for IT governance and 
architecture. As the enterprise wants to promote desirable 
behaviours like collaboration and innovation, integration of 
these behaviours into an enterprise wide framework seems 
necessary. 
 
7. Knowledge sharing: 
     Knowledge sharing is an important asset to an 
organization. Especially in distributed organizations, e.g., 
multinationals, the expatriates rely on ESM for teamwork 
[41]. Social mechanism of a lighter nature, sharing humour 
and other kinds of relief, may encourage use of ESM [42], and 
thus also for more directly productive work.  
     Many organizations have social responsibility goals and 
strive to be able to hire and include employee-groups with 
special needs [43]. 
 
8. Management 
     ESM needs to be managed, but there are no clear rules as 
to the level of management needed, it depends on the 
circumstances, according to Guinan et al. [44]. The article 
advices 
three 
approaches; 
top-down, 
from 
middle 
management [middle out], and bottom up, depending on the 
context. In a context with many silos [relevant to, e.g., a 
healthcare setting and its many stakeholder-groups], middle 
out may perhaps prevail as the best approach. 
     Niell and Moody [45] identified nine strategic roles and the 
associated responsibilities [involved in social media 
management] including policy maker, internal collaborator, 
technology tester, communications organizer, issues manager, 
relationship analyser, master of metrics, policing, and 
employee recruiter. 
     e-Leadership may be a lot different from ordinary 
hierarchical management. Avolio et al. [46] produce a model 
that shows that the transition management will go through as 
enterprises 
become 
increasingly 
digital. 
In 
general, 
technologies tend to “flatten out” leadership, and decision-
making. There will be a need for leadership development. 
ESN can be used to enhance such development [47]. Other 
studies; Korzynski [48] show “that online social networks are 
more useful for participative and consultative leadership style 
on social networking platforms than for directive leadership 
style [op. cit.]”.  According to Korzynski [48] the more 
employees are empowered; the more benefits can be realized 
from ESN-ESM. 
 
9. Online design processes: 
     One article presents a solution for implementing social 
media functions into a software development project. Alvertis 
et al. [49] report from an EU-funded project, resulting in the 
site named CloudTeams [50]. The solution also entails 
connectors to third party services, and reward end-users for 
their participation in “campaigns”.  
 
10. Organizational learning: 
     The organizational learning aspect of ESN-ESM is 
disseminated in several articles found in the review. Increased 
emphasis on ESM may represent a new stress-factor for many 
employees. So, the organizations should facilitate programs to 
improve employee’s digital literacy [51]. Increased intensity 
of collaboration in many environments, like press-work, 
creates the need for more fine-grained tracing of everyday 
activities [52]. Using quantitative survey-evaluation methods, 
Qi and Chau [53] have tested the positive consequences of 
ESN-site [ESNS] usage, and confirm that “ESNS usage is an 
important antecedent of knowledge creation and knowledge 
sharing. ESNS usage is also an important contributor to 
organizational learning. Knowledge creation and knowledge 

176
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sharing both mediate the path between ESNS usage and 
organizational learning [op. cit.]”. 
 
11. Risk factors: 
     ESN-tool use is not without its risks, both reducing 
potential, and for direct economic loss. Comparing with the 
Excellence theory [54], Verheyden and Cardon [55] finds that 
management ideology may hamper the information producing 
abilities of employees and also the realization of benefits from 
using social media. Employees’ use of ESM could potentially 
compromise business secrets: Väyrynen et al.’s [56] 
conceptual article proposes eight questions to ask regarding 
what roles and authorities’ different categories of employees 
have. Based on this, strategies to meet knowledge protection 
challenges can be devised.  
 
12. Avenues for future research 
     ESN is a topic in need of more research, according to 
Ellison et al. [57]: “As ESNSs are introduced into a wider 
range of organizations, it will become increasingly important 
to study, theorize, and design for the ways in which use of 
such tools is transforming knowledge sharing and other 
organizational practices [op. cit.]”. 
IV. 
PROPOSITIONS 
     Going from elicited principles [from literature] to 
propositions, the authors here conceptualize propositions by 
analysing the principles using the framework of Design 
Thinking methodologies as lens, as advocated by, e.g., 
Gilbert et al. [35]. Based on the authors analysis of finds the 
literature reviews and the case study, propositions are here 
made for: 
 
a) Governance principles for co-creative processes 
involving employees 
b) Realising scaled up-participation using web 2.0 
technologies 
A. Governance principles for co-creative processes 
involving employees 
This article proposes that enterprises that want to succeed 
with eHealth innovation and co-creation over time, need to 
secure the involvement of their frontline personnel, because 
they are key to establishing a Business Performance 
Measurement system. There are numerous definitions of what 
a Business Performance Measurement system contains. In a 
literature review, Franco-Santos et al. [58] identified these 
main features: 
 
1. Performance measures 
2. Objectives/goals 
3. Supporting infrastructures [including data acquisition 
and analysis] 
4. Targets [gauges – does the enterprise meet its targets] 
5. Causal models [what are drivers for successful 
performance] 
6. Hierarchy/cascade 
[organization, 
delegation 
of 
concern] 
7. Performance 
contract 
[negotiated 
contractual 
relationships with stakeholders] 
8. Rewards [incentives] 
 
Co-creation is a relatively new term. It has become part of 
the slogan and strategy of many universities. But what does it 
mean in practice and where does the term come from? A 
recent review by Galvagno and Dalli [11] traces the term back 
to three theoretical perspectives including service science, 
innovation and technology management, and marketing and 
consumer research. The literature on co-creation operates on 
two levels of analyses: company centred vs. customer 
experience centred. Apparent themes in the literature include 
co-creating 
value 
through 
customer 
experience 
and 
competence, service innovation, including digital customer 
involvement. Today, service science and marketing play a 
major role in the literature and refer to the involvement of 
customers in the supplier's product- and service development. 
In information systems research and management research, 
the term co-creation has been used by, among others, 
Grönroos and Voima [9], and Lenka et al. [3]. 
Lenka et al. have provided a model that will explain the 
connection between "megatrends" in industry and working 
life; digital development and change ["digitalization"] and 
development of a service culture in production-oriented 
environments ["servitization"] through co-creation processes. 
As authors, we agree with Lenka et al., that an important 
prerequisite for success is the development of digitalization 
capabilities 
in 
service-based 
organizations. 
These 
digitalization capabilities in turn, will govern the "Value Co-
creation" mechanisms; consisting of two main mechanisms; 
one linked to needs analysis [perceptive mechanisms] and one 
linked to design and construction cycles [responsive 
mechanisms]. Between these two [from observation to design 
and construction], knowledge about measurement points is 
transferred to goals and values that form the basis for 
implementation of the service [in design and construction]. 
Both mechanisms must be repeated for each overlapping link 
in the value chain. 
Moreover, we propose that the change work done in these 
overlapping links in the value chain can be expressed 
[including the core, the actual digitalization capability] as 
Deming Cycles [Plan-Do-Study-Act], see Figure 2.  
     Iterative development-cycles like this allow the time for 
involvement of both external and internal stakeholder groups 
and should include discussing goals and measurements. The 
saying “You can’t manage what you don’t measure” [1] is 
attributed to both Edwards Deming and Peter Drucker. 
 

177
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 2. Deming cycles 
 
 
Focus in achieving worklife ergonomics will be the 
relationship between the observational input and response 
outputs from the service co-creation and system co-creation 
cycles as a prerequisite for successful eHealth co-creation 
governance. Lenka et al. states, that value is added at each part 
of the chain, as new actors bring in new experiences, see new 
opportunities and add new value to the service. This includes 
the service consumers themselves, and their next-of-kin. The 
measurement system will be a trigger for new innovations, 
while being a missed "GPS" guidance system, to find the way 
[59]. Such a system will also act to spur organizational 
learning, providing incentives that motivate and intensify 
innovation [59].  
     To stay relevant, since the frames, and context, of the 
eHealth area is rapidly changing, we believe that the overall 
quality system [Process and performance management 
system] itself must be agile and subject to at least annual 
evaluation [a slower Deming cycle], while the services that 
the system controls, go through its many and fast Deming 
cycles. Together, these form a proposed conceptual process-
model for co-creation in eHealth innovation, that also supports 
good worklife ergonomics. The concept is illustrated in Figure 
3. The thickening of the arrows in the value-delivery chain in 
bottom of the figure illustrates how value is added with each 
chain in the delivery from new technology to improved 
services, in accordance with Lenka et al.’s model.  
     The users both add value and gain value. Finds from the 
case study [Section II.B] indicate that new eHealth 
technologies successfully implemented can improve quality 
of worklife, the feeling of self-efficacy; mastering work task 
in a better way with less unnecessary waste of time and 
acquiring new skills.  Healthcare users can also add value to 
the service, in even unforeseen ways, using new technology to 
solve more problems at a time.       When it comes to the Plan-
Do-Study-Act cycles in the value-chain [system co-creation, 
service co-creation] – different process modelling tools, like 
swim lane diagrams, can be used to visualize, convey, and 
discuss the consumer journey with stakeholders, using, e.g., 
“Service Blueprint” or similar [21, 60]. 
All in all, the goal is that the entire ecosystem is set in a 
state of continuous improvement and value innovation, and 
that a shared and improved service culture in the 
municipalities and their partners, [servitization], develops 
through digital transformation. This secures the ability to go 
back and start again, if necessary. 
B. Realising and scaled up-participation using web 2.0 
technologies 
Based on the finds from the second literature review and 
analysing this through the lens of the general literature on co-
worker co-creation, we can list several healthcare innovation 
capabilities provided by a broad participation in digital 
transformation and eHealth innovation processes, open to all 
involved employees in healthcare [illustrated in Figure 4.]. 
This figure also illustrates the main benefits: 
 
• 
Increased knowledge base  
• 
Enhanced digital worklife ergonomics [digital 
systems that are better adapted to real life work-processes] 
• 
Increased involvement and implementation 
• 
Support 
from 
employees 
in 
designing 
and 
implementing change  
 
 
 

178
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. Process-model for co-creation in e-Health innovation; The ecosystem [Based on Lenka et al., 2017]. 
 
 
Based on the review on web 2.0 concepts we will here 
present some propositions for how employee involvement can 
be secured, to achieve these desired benefits and capabilities. 
We propose that the effect of employing ESM can be 
enhanced by adding a plan and structure to the co-creation 
process. When looking for a framework that can provide plan 
and structure, the authors have used the Design Thinking 
philosophy [60, 61] as a guide. Design thinking is a human- 
and needs-centric approach to innovation [op. cit.] that is well 
aligned with the needs of the very labour-intensive healthcare 
sector. Arguably, Service Design Thinking [60] is the new 
model for collaborative Business Process Management [62] 
and addresses and simplifies some complexity issues in 
business process modelling [6]. 
The British Design Council’s Double Diamond – model 
[63] can thus be used as a framework for casting several of the 
ideas and concepts from the literature review as steps in a 
design process or roadmap; see Figure 5. The Double 
Diamond – model in its many variations has rapidly become a 
standard for guiding design processes in a user- and problem 
centric manner, associated with the Design Thinking 
philosophy [36]. The Diamond shape symbolizes activity 
levels through a time-line, and due to activities and material 
collected or produced peaking midway in each Diamond.  
The Double Diamond’s two parts revolve around problem 
and solution respectively, with decision milestones at start, 
end and in between the two “Diamonds”. The Problem-
Diamond is divided in two distinct phases: 
 
• 
Discover [the features of the problematic area, and 
its stakeholders], giving insights into the problem 
• 
Define – the area to focus on. Questions to ask are: 
“Which area matters most? Which area should we act on first? 
What is feasible?” 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A conceptual model for sequential and overlapping process steps and impacts in co-creating digital transformation in healthcare 

179
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Starting joint problem-solving with the problematic 
situation, can widen the frame for [co-]creation [61]. Arguably 
this opening of a discourse should encompass all employees 
to achieve the added value that the enterprise is striving for 
[op. cit.]. The British Design Council states that; “One of the 
greatest mistakes is to omit the left-hand diamond and end up 
solving the wrong problem [63].” This can underpin the 
concepts of knowledge sharing, organizational learning and 
the online design process. Having defined the problem, a brief 
for the design can be formed, thus starting the Solution-
Diamond, where the focus is to: 
• 
Develop – potential solutions [in plural; testing 
different alternatives]. “This process of trial and error helps 
designers to improve and refine their ideas [op. cit.]” 
• 
Deliver – solutions that work, this tie narrowing the 
field based on decision criteria from the brief, and evaluations 
done underway.  
 
This should be comprehended as an iterative process. 
“This means that ideas are developed, tested and refined a 
number of times, with weak ideas dropped in the process. This 
cycle is an essential part of good design [63]”.  
 We propose that this “wisdom of crowd”, especially using 
the inherent knowledge and wisdom of employees, can be 
mobilized throughout the process using ESN – ESM, for: 
 
1. 
 “Service innovation”; choosing the right problem; 
defining a new service blueprint [22] 
2. 
 “Implementation”; 
including 
new 
eHealth 
measures; choosing the right solution 
 
The process-structure should also include a joint process 
for digital governance, as the literature review has shown a 
need for management of ESN/ESM and the whole design 
process; measuring and ensuring other concepts found in the 
literature review [like customer satisfaction, human resource 
development and risk factors], ref. Figure 5: 
 
3. 
Process 
management, 
IT 
service 
transition 
governance [25], consisting of: 
3.1. Setting goals [based on problem] 
3.2. Decision criteria [quality measures; based on problem 
definition and design brief, following the “Service 
innovation”; 1. above] 
3.3. Evaluation [evaluating the total solution, following 
the “Implementation”; 2. above. Also evaluating the whole 
design process] 
 
Polls on ESM [gamification] can be utilized for advising 
top managers, as to what measures should be prioritized, and 
how. If necessary, all steps and phases can be iterated until the 
aspired level of confidence in the measures and potential 
values are reached. Leveraging the increased knowledge base, 
and support of all employees, with defined criteria’s and 
milestones for decision-making, chances for successful 
implementations are optimized, and the potential risk for 
failed investments may be mitigated. 
Adding the support process of process management, 
allows for having a holistic governance of parallel innovation 
projects and involving employees in the performance 
management of the whole segment of healthcare, as well in 
individual welfare technology projects [64]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This articles literature searches have shown that for the 
purpose of establishing a holistic eHealth innovation 
ecosystem-concept, 
and 
achieving 
digitalization 
and 
servitization throughout the organization, the following 
elements are necessary [but perhaps not sufficient]; digital 
governance 
capabilities, 
process 
and 
performance 
management methods and systems that align new 
technologies with high quality work processes [worklife 
ergonomics], and appropriate tools to visualize and 
communicate processes and services with end-users, as well 
as different professional employee groups involved, front 
stage and back stage. By involving employees though iterative 
project-cycles and achieving a general consensus on what 
goals and measures should count, the necessary sorting and 
maturing of ideas is achieved, so that failed changes can be 
avoided before too great investments are made and lost. 
Other factors that are necessary are processes that align 
local service strategies with central government legal and 
technical frames [compliance]. More research is needed on 
how these different eco-systems [central, local] can be 
efficiently combined. 
More research is needed into future innovative means of 
capturing both qualitative and quantitative data about end-
users or patients’ using “Big data”; combining social media 
and transaction data from the service systems. More action, 
design and evaluation research are also needed for devising 
how the proposed model [Figure 3] can be implemented and 
operationalized in a manner that ensures both employee and 
end-user involvement and commitment for achieving a high 
quality, lower cost health care system, while maintaining a 
high quality of worklife.  
This article has also shown digital transformation and -
innovation in healthcare with employee involvement in the 
co-creation process, can be further enhanced through the help 
of web 2.0 technologies. The article contributes to the growing 
co-creation literature [3, 9], by adding the vertical dimension 
of internal co-creation between healthcare management and 
all employees. This contributes to answering our first research 
problem-area; the ‘What’ and ‘Why’ of how can the co-
creation literature be extended to include employee 
involvement, in the context of healthcare? 
Further research could deal with the question of how such 
use of digital technology in the co-creation process, can 
enhance and clarify the role of employees. 
 
 

180
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 5. “Double Diamond” framework for Web 2.0-enabled eHealth design process or roadmap 
 
 
     The clarity of roles and tasks for employees in introducing 
new technology at the workplace is also a necessary 
workplace environment factor, which prevents adverse health 
effects among employees; so-called technostress [65].  
A model-test of the proposed frameworks could show if 
successful implementation and outcomes are enabled, and 
risk-management of adverse health, safety and environment 
effects when introducing new technologies are improved.  
Some healthcare organization have programs for 
encouraging open innovation [66] or capturing ideas from 
employees’ inventions, and some organizations use software 
for this, like Spigit [67], Ideation360, Inductsoftware or the 
research-based CloudTeams [50]. Further case-studies; e.g. 
action- and design research could show how such software 
could involve and engage the whole organization in digital 
transformation and co-creation in combination with web 2.0 
technologies. However, caution is needed, as our case-study 
[ref. Sections II.B and III.C] has indicated, some social 
engineering may be a necessary step before introducing 
technology. 
One of the findings from this case study, as recognized by 
the responsible municipality project management, is the great 
value the users [both internal users, and home care receivers] 
have in the innovation work. The user panels are not passive 
testers, they contribute ideas and input. Often the participants 
in the user panel have taken a role as ambassadors for other 
employees in the municipalities [those not directly involved 
in the lab tests] and other potential users. Thus, they have 
played an active role in the creation of new products and 
services.  
All in all, this Living Lab approaches the principles of co-
creation. But getting there was a process long in the making. 
Finding suitable first uses as well as the persons suited to man 
up the user panels for pilot studies required a lot of effort by 
the municipalities project management. There may still be 
issues concerning to the scaling up of implementations, from 
small scale pilots, to large scale service production. Applying 
web 2.0 technologies may be helpful here. 
Limitations 
Our conclusion is partly based on search in scholarly 
literature within fields like information systems and 
management [with emphasis on the first; information systems 
research] using specific search criteria. Our search and 
screening are surely not exhaustive. Other criteria might have 
given other finds of relevance to this article’s scope. Within 
strategy and management research disciplines there may be 
relevant sources of studies, e.g., within the Workplace 
Innovation-literature [68] not reported here. There may also 
be instances of web 2.0 and ESN practice of interest to this 
research and reported in scholarly literature that have not been 
found by this article’s authors.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, M. Helmersen, and T. R. Eikebrokk. 
“Worklife Ergonomics in eHealth Co-Creation Governance - 
You can’t manage what you don’t measure,” The Tenth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine 
(eTELEMED 
2018), 
IARIA, 
Mar. 
2018, 
ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-618-7 
[2] L. Beaumont, L. Bolton, A. McKay, and H. Hughes. 
“Rethinking service design: a socio-technical approach to the 
development of business models,”  Product Development in the 
Socio-sphere: Springer; 2014. pp. 121-41. 
[3] S. Lenka, V. Parida, and J. Wincent. “Digitalization 
Capabilities as Enablers of Value Co‐Creation in Servitizing 
Firms,” Psychology & Marketing. 2017; 34 [1]: pp. 92-100. 
[4] Gartner. 
IT 
glossary 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/digitalization/ 
2018.12.01 
[5] R. G. F. Braz, L. F. Scavarda and R. A. Martins. “Reviewing 
and improving performance measurement systems: An action 
research,” International Journal of Production Economics. 
2011; 133 [2]: pp. 751-60. 
[6] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, and Ø. Hellang. “Collaborative 
Process Modelling and Evaluation in E-health,” Scandinavian 
Conference on Health Informatics; August 22; 2014; Grimstad; 

181
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Norway; 2014: Linköping University Electronic Press, ISSN 
(online): 1650-3740, ISBN: 978-91-7519-241-3 
[7] Merriam-Webster. Dictionary [Online] Available from: 
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ergonomics' 
2018.12.01. 
[8] L. Punnett, M. Cherniack, R. Henning, T. Morse, and P. Faghri. 
“A conceptual framework for integrating workplace health 
promotion and occupational ergonomics programs,” Public 
Health Reports. 2009; 124 [4_suppl1]: pp. 16-25. 
[9] C. Grönroos, and P. Voima. “Critical service logic: making 
sense of value creation and co-creation,” Journal of the 
academy of marketing science. 2013; 41 [2]: pp. 133-50. 
[10] P. Frow, S. Nenonen, A. Payne, and K. Storbacka. “Managing 
co‐creation design: A strategic approach to innovation,” 
British Journal of Management. 2015; 26 [3]: pp. 463-83. 
[11] M. Galvagno, and D. Dalli. “Theory of value co-creation: a 
systematic literature review,” Managing Service Quality. 2014; 
24[ 6]: pp. 643-83. 
[12] S. Taylor, and P. A. Todd. “Understanding information 
technology usage: A test of competing models,” Information 
systems research. 1995; 6 [2]: pp. 144-76. 
[13] T. R. Eikebrokk, J. Iden, D. H. Olsen, and A. L. Opdahl. 
“Determinants to the use of business process modeling,” 43rd 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
2010; IEEE, Electronic ISBN: 978-1-4244-5510-2, Print 
ISBN: 978-1-4244-5509-6, Print ISSN: 1530-1605 
[14] V. Ramaswamy, and F. J. Gouillart. The power of co-creation: 
Build it with them to boost growth, productivity, and profits. 
Simon and Schuster; 2010. 
[15] P. Nielsen, R. N. Nielsen, S. G. Bamberger, J. Stamhus, K. 
Fonager, and A. Larsen, et al. “Capabilities for innovation: The 
Nordic model and employee participation,” Nordic Journal of 
Working Life Studies. 2012; 2 [4]: p. 85. 
[16] B. Wehner, C. Ritter, and S. Leist. “Enterprise social networks: 
A literature review and research agenda,” Computer Networks. 
2017; 114: pp. 125-42. 
[17] G. R. Oldham, and N. Da Silva. “The impact of digital 
technology on the generation and implementation of creative 
ideas in the workplace,” Computers in Human Behavior. 2015; 
42: pp. 5-11. 
[18] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, T. R. Eikebrokk, M. Helmersen, and 
K. Lindland. Agder Living Lab - Hvordan lykkes med 
tjenesteinnovasjon i eHelse [Online] Available from: 
Agderforskning.no; 2018.12.01. 
[19] M. Neubauer, and C. Stary. S-BPM in the Production Industry. 
Springer: 2017. 
[20] C. López-Gómez, D. Leal-Ayala, M. Palladino, and E. 
O’Sullivan. 
Emerging 
trends 
in 
global 
advanced 
manufacturing. Policy links: University of Cambridge: 2013. 
[21] G. Lynn Shostack. “Designing Services That Deliver,” Harvard 
Business Review. 1984. 
[22] M. J. Bitner, A. L. Ostrom, and F. N. Morgan. “Service 
blueprinting: a practical technique for service innovation,” 
California management review. 2008; 50 [3]: pp. 66-94. 
[23] H. P. Hughes, C. W. Clegg, L. E. Bolton, and L. C. Machon. 
“Systems scenarios: a tool for facilitating the socio-technical 
design of work systems,” Ergonomics. 2017: pp. 1-17. 
[24] J. Iden, and T. R. Eikebrokk. “Implementing IT Service 
Management: A systematic literature review,” International 
Journal of Information Management. 2013; 33 [3]: pp. 512-23. 
[25] T. R. Eikebrokk, and J. Iden. “ITIL implementation: The role 
of ITIL software and project quality,” 23rd International 
Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications 
[DEXA]; 2012: IEEE, ISBN 978-3-642-32597-7 
[26] J. Iden, and T. R. Eikebrokk. “Using the ITIL process reference 
model 
for 
realizing 
IT 
Governance: 
An 
empirical 
investigation,” Information Systems Management. 2014; 
31[1]: pp. 37-58. 
[27] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall. “Self-organizing roles on 
agile software development teams,” IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering. 2013; 39 [3]: pp. 422-44. 
[28] J. Webster, and R. T. Watson. “Analyzing the past to prepare 
for the future: Writing a literature review.,” MIS quarterly. 
2002: pp. xiii-xxiii. 
[29] M. B. Pinto. “Social media's contribution to customer 
satisfaction with services,” The Service Industries Journal. 
2015; 35 [11-12]: pp. 573-90. 
[30] C. P-Y. Chin, N. Evans, and K-K. R. Choo. “Exploring factors 
influencing the use of enterprise social networks in 
multinational 
professional 
service 
firms,” 
Journal 
of 
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce. 2015; 
25 [3]: pp. 289-315. 
[31] A. Sharma, and J. Bhatnagar. “Enterprise social media at work: 
web-based solutions for employee engagement,” Human 
Resource Management International Digest. 2016; 24 [7]: pp. 
16-19. 
[32] C. King, and H. Lee. “Enhancing internal communication to 
build social capital amongst hospitality employees–the role of 
social media,” International Journal of Contemporary 
Hospitality Management. 2016; 28 [12]: pp. 2675-95. 
[33] L. Razmerita, K. Kirchner, and P. Nielsen. “What factors 
influence knowledge sharing in organizations? A social 
dilemma perspective of social media communication,” Journal 
of Knowledge Management. 2016; 20 [6]: pp. 1225-46. 
[34] Q. Li, R. N. Nagel, and L. Sun. “Migrating to Agility 2.0:: How 
social computing creates strategic value,” Organizational 
Dynamics. 2011; 40 [2]: pp. 119-26. 
[35] D. H. Gilbert, A. C. Smith, F. Sutherland. “Osmotic strategy: 
Innovating at the core to inspire at the edges. Organizational 
Dynamics,” 2015; 44 [3]: pp. 217-25. 
[36] M. Stickdorn, M. Hormess, A. Lawrence, and J. Schneider. 
This Is Service Design Doing - Applying Service Design 
Thinking in the Real World. O'Reilly: 2018. 
[37] M. T. Cardador, G. B. Northcraft, and J. Whicker. A theory of 
work gamification: Something old, something new, something 
borrowed, something cool? Human Resource Management 
Review. 2017; 27 [2]: pp. 353-65. 
[38] W. F. Cascio. Leveraging employer branding, performance 
management and human resource development to enhance 
employee retention. Taylor & Francis; 2014. 
[39] D. McNeill. “Governing a city of unicorns: technology capital 
and the urban politics of San Francisco,” Urban Geography. 
2016; 37 [4]: pp. 494-513. 
[40] M. Alimam, E. Bertin, and N. Crespi. “ITIL perspective on 
enterprise social media,” International Journal of Information 
Management. 2017; 37 [4]: pp. 317-26. 
[41] M. K. Omar, N. A. Dahalan, and Y. H. M. Yusoff. “Social 
Media Usage, Perceived Team-Efficacy and Knowledge 
Sharing Behaviour among Employees of an Oil and Gas 
Organisation in Malaysia,” Procedia Economics and Finance. 
2016; 37: pp. 309-16. 
[42] J. L. Gibbs, J. Eisenberg, N. A. Rozaidi, and A. Gryaznova. 
“The “megapozitiv” role of enterprise social media in enabling 
cross-boundary communication in a distributed Russian 
organization,” American Behavioral Scientist. 2015; 59 [1]: pp. 
75-102. 
[43] N. Vohra, V. Chari, P. Mathur,  P. Sudarshan, N. Verma, and 
N. Mathur, et al. “Inclusive Workplaces: Lessons from Theory 
and Practice,” Vikalpa. 2015; 40 [3]: pp. 324-62. 
[44] P. J. Guinan, S. Parise, and K. Rollag. “Jumpstarting the use of 
social technologies in your organization,” Business Horizons. 
2014; 57 [3]: pp. 337-47. 

182
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[45] M. S. Neill, and M. Moody. “Who is responsible for what? 
Examining strategic roles in social media management,” Public 
Relations Review. 2015; 41 [1]: pp. 109-18. 
[46] B. J. Avolio, J. J. Sosik, S. S. Kahai, and B. Baker. “E-
leadership: Re-examining transformations in leadership source 
and transmission,” The Leadership Quarterly. 2014; 25 [1]: pp. 
105-31. 
[47] K. L. Cullen-Lester, C. K. Maupin, and D. R. Carter. 
“Incorporating social networks into leadership development: A 
conceptual model and evaluation of research and practice,” The 
Leadership Quarterly. 2017; 28 [1]: pp. 130-52. 
[48] P. Korzynski. “Online social networks and leadership: 
Implications of a new online working environment for 
leadership,” International Journal of Manpower. 2013; 34 [8]: 
pp. 975-94. 
[49] I. Alvertis, S. Koussouris, D. Papaspyros, E. Arvanitakis, S. 
Mouzakitis, and S. Franken, et al. “User Involvement in 
Software Development Processes,” Procedia Computer 
Science. 2016; 97: pp. 73-83. 
[50] W. 
Prinz. 
Cloudteams 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://customers.cloudteams.eu/projects/ 2018.12.01. 
[51] W van Zoonen, J. W. Verhoeven, and R. Vliegenthart. 
“Understanding the consequences of public social media use 
for work,” European Management Journal. 2017; 35 [5]: pp. 
595-605. 
[52] S. Pigg. “Coordinating constant invention: Social media's role 
in distributed work,” Technical Communication Quarterly. 
2014; 23 [2]: pp. 69-87. 
[53] C. Qi, and P. Y. K. Chau. “Will enterprise social networking 
systems promote knowledge management and organizational 
learning? An empirical study,” Journal of Organizational 
Computing and Electronic Commerce. 2018; 28 [1]: pp. 31-57. 
[54] J. E. Grunig. Excellence in public relations and communication 
management. Routledge: 2013. 
[55] M. Verheyden, P. Cardon. “Social software and internal 
communicators’ gatekeeping sense of self,” Public Relations 
Review. 2018. 
[56] K. Väyrynen, R. Hekkala, and T. Liias. “Knowledge protection 
challenges of social media encountered by organizations,” 
Journal 
of 
Organizational 
Computing 
and 
Electronic 
Commerce. 2013; 23 [1-2]: pp. 34-55. 
[57] N. B. Ellison, J. L. Gibbs, and M. S. Weber. “The use of 
enterprise social network sites for knowledge sharing in 
distributed 
organizations: 
The 
role 
of 
organizational 
affordances,” American Behavioral Scientist. 2015; 59 [1]: pp. 
103-23. 
[58] M. Franco-Santos, M. Kennerley, P. Micheli, V. Martinez, S. 
Mason, and B. Marr, et al. “Towards a definition of a business 
performance measurement system,” International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management. 2007; 27 [8]: pp. 784-
801. 
[59] A. Pavlov, and M. Bourne. “Explaining the effects of 
performance measurement on performance: An organizational 
routines perspective,” International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management. 2011; 31 [1]: pp. 101-22. 
[60] J. Schneider, and M. Stickdorn. This is service design thinking: 
basics, tools, cases. Wiley: 2011. 
[61] K. Dorst. “The core of ‘design thinking’and its application,” 
Design studies. 2011; 32 [6]: pp. 521-32. 
[62] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, and T. R. Eikebrokk. Critical Success 
Factors for Inter-Organizational Process Collaboration in 
Ehealth. The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2014) 
IARIA Mar. 2014, ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN 978-3-642-32597-
7 
[63] British Design Council. The Design Process: What is the 
Double 
Diamond? 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-
process-what-double-diamond 2018.12.01. 
[64] S. 
S. 
Nudurupati, 
S. 
Tebboune, 
and 
J. 
Hardman. 
“Contemporary performance measurement and management 
[PMM] in digital economies,” Production Planning & Control. 
2016 ;27 [3]: pp. 226-35. 
[65] R. Karasek, and T. Theorell. Healthy Work: Stress, 
productivity and the the reconstruction of working life. Basic 
books: 1990. 
[66] H. W. Chesbrough. Open innovation: The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology. Harvard Business 
Press: 2006. 
[67] Spigit. Aligning Crowdsourcing with Corporate Strategy at 
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care 2018 [Online]. Available from: 
http://go.spigit.com/ignite-2018-patricia-forts-harvard-
pilgrim.html  
[68] F. Pot, S. Dhondt, and P. Oeij. Social innovation of work and 
employment.  In: Challenge social innovation. Springer: 2012. 
pp. 261-74. 
 

