39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Effectively Using an Online Multidisciplinary Tool to Update Healthcare Mentors: 
A Comparative Evaluative Study 	  
 
Stephen White, Karen Ousey 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
stephen.white@hud.ac.uk , karen.ousey@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents data comparing two evaluation 
studies following the implementation of a multiprofessional 
online mentor update tool designed to meet the learning needs 
of mentors in clinical healthcare practice. The data presented 
highlights that there was a positive response from clinicians 
using the tool during the first evaluation of 643 respondents 
and that this has remained positive following an increase in use 
to 1439. The huge resources needed to sustain traditional 
delivery of the updates, plus the inability of mentors to attend 
these events, were amongst the main drivers for the 
development of this tool. Results of the evaluation have 
identified that the flexibility of the online tool promotes 
engagement for both mentors and their line managers, and in 
doing so provides academic staff to alternatively utilize the time 
saved delivering it. The multiprofessional originality and 
uniqueness of the package has also promoted users to consider 
the mentor role from an inter-disciplinary perspective. With 
the Nursing and Midwifery Council praising the package as an 
example of innovative good practice, it is intended to promote 
its use in other regions that provide healthcare education.  
Keywords 
- 
Online; 
Mentor; 
Mentor 
update; 
Multidisciplinary; Interdisciplinary; Multiprofessional; Nursing 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
In healthcare education, the term mentor is used 
to describe the member of staff responsible for 
supporting students, for facilitating their learning 
and experiences within the clinical area, and 
making assessment decisions on their clinical 
abilities and knowledge. Mentors need to be 
adequately 
prepared, 
understanding 
the 
expectations and responsibilities of the role and the 
needs of their mentees. This paper explores and 
discusses further collection and analysis of 
evaluation data following implementation of an 
online multiprofessional update package for 
mentors of nursing, midwifery and other healthcare 
professionals. 
The 
package 
was 
originally 
conceived at the University of Huddersfield for use 
by just three professional groups [1], and has since 
been designed for use by fourteen professions in 
total: nurses; midwives; operating department 
practitioners (ODPs); occupational therapists; 
physiotherapists; 
dieticians; 
podiatrists; 
audiologists; clinical physiologists; diagnostic 
radiographers; radiotherapists; social workers; 
speech and language therapists and paramedics 
across the nine Higher Education Institutions 
(HEIs) in the Yorkshire and the Humber Strategic 
Health Authority [2].  
An initial evaluation of the update tool was 
carried out [3], and this paper takes this process 
further. The data collection and analysis tools that 
were used for the prior evaluation are used again, 
but with a greater number of respondents 
(n=1439), to determine if the original outcomes are 
consistent. Finally, a summary of the findings and 
future plans are presented.  
 
II. 
WHY IS THIS STUDY IMPORTANT? 
The importance of healthcare professionals 
learning together to provide quality care has been 
discussed in the literature [4,5]. With increased 
time pressures on all healthcare professionals 
internationally, the need to provide education that 
is flexible to meet the personal and professional 
priorities of staff is essential. Additionally the use 
of an on line tool allows for mandatory 
information to be shared to large groups of 
individuals in a time efficient manner. Although 
this paper presents an online multidisciplinary tool 
focused on meeting the education needs of 
healthcare 
mentors, 
the 
underpinning 
developmental principles of the tool can be 
transferred to a range of learning activities, where 
it is important that information is transferred to 
large groups of staff immediately to maintain their 
knowledge and skills base. The interactivity of the 
tool provides the user with opportunities for 
professional 
development 
and 
to 
learn 
collaboratively, share ideas, discuss practice and 

40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reflect on their own practice. Additionally tutors 
can facilitate conversations, offer advice and 
guidance ensuring that principles of quality are 
maintained, which is supported by Sims, who 
maintained that an online learning environment 
must be interactive and engage the learner in 
active communication [6].  
III. THE NEED FOR AN ALTERNATIVE MENTOR 
UPDATE PACKAGE 
The purpose of the update is not only to 
provide information, but also to offer a forum for 
mentors to discuss issues and to ask questions. For 
nurses and midwives there is a requirement by the 
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC), to update 
annually in order to be on a ‘live’ mentor register 
[7]. For ODPs an update is required within a two-
year 
period 
as 
part 
of 
their 
Continuing 
Professional Development (CPD) cycle [8]. For 
the other disciplines involved in this project there 
are currently no specific periodic requirements for 
an update. 
The updates, when delivered ‘traditionally’ 
through face-to-face sessions, were found to be 
resource-intensive, and variable in duration, 
quality and content, dependent on who delivered 
them. Added to this was a growing trend of falling 
attendance due to increased pressures from the 
clinical workplace. Therefore the time was right to 
consider an alternative delivery method. As a 
result, a web-based update tool for healthcare 
mentors was produced and evaluated. Background 
information 
on 
the 
development 
activity, 
underpinning processes, and initial evaluation, are 
described in detail in previous publications [1-3]. 
IV. DATA COLLECTION 
Data collection is a continuous process. A 
questionnaire of both quantitative and qualitative 
questions is presented to the mentors at the end of 
the update, asking for responses that evaluate the 
update activity they have just undertaken; this 
provides the opportunity for regular analysis to 
take place [3]. A Likert scale [11] is used to extract 
data: strongly agree – agree – neutral –disagree – 
strongly disagree, with space available to add in 
comments, if required.  
V. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
One thousand, four hundred and thirty nine 
mentors completed the online update over a 
twelve-month period, more than double the 
number included in the previous evaluation [3]; 
Table I shows the demographic of the disciplines. 
Nurses and midwives, as expected, are still the 
majority of the professions that are updating; this 
will be a regular pattern for reasons previously 
indicated in this paper. 
VI. DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE 
The update provided all of the relevant 
information relating to the mentorship role, as 
reported by 86% of mentors, with 88% indicating 
that it helped provide them with the knowledge of 
where to access further information. In relation to 
specific sections, positive responses were received 
from 90% of the users on the generic content (19% 
Strongly Agree, 71% Agree), 87% on the content 
in the Sets (scenarios) (18% Strongly Agree, 69% 
Agree), and 90% on the profession-specific content 
(20% 
Strongly 
Agree, 
70% 
Agree). 
In 
consideration as to whether the update had been 
relevant to their role as a mentor, 92% were in 
agreement (21% Strongly Agree, 71% Agree).  
Table II displays the differences between the 
original evaluation of 652 respondents compared 
to the follow up evaluation of 1439 respondents. 
Interestingly respondents from both groups have 
continued to agree that the content is relevant to 
their role thus highlighting that the format and 
content is meeting the needs of the mentors.  
One mentor commented, ‘Good update - 
interaction good as makes you consider all areas. 
Good to reflect on past experiences whilst having 
update and relevant learning criteria’, however, a 
small number of mentors commented that they 
would have preferred a face-to-face update and 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF MENTORS IN EACH DISCIPLINE THAT HAVE 
COMPLETED THE UPDATE PACKAGE (N= 1439) 
Audiology 
3 
 Operating Department Practitioner 46 
Clinical Physiology 
4 
 Paramedic 
0 
Diagnostic Radiography 
3 
 Physiotherapy 
18 
Dietetics 
0 
 Podiatry 
0 
Midwifery 
82 
 Radiotherapy 
0 
Nursing 
1272  Social Work 
2 
Occupational Therapy 
9 
 Speech and Language Therapy 
0 
 

41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF MENTORS RESPONSES REGARDING 
RELEVANCE OF THE CONTENT 
 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neutral Disagree Strongly 
Disagree 
Overall relevance 21% 19% 71% 72% 7% 8% 1% 1% 0% 1% 
Professional 
content 
20% 20% 70% 69% 8% 10% 1% 1% 0% 0% 
Sets 
18% 16% 69% 69% 11% 13% 1% 1% 0% 0% 
Generic content 19% 17% 71% 70% 9% 12% 1% 1% 0% 0% 
Key:       Unshaded = 652 responses      Shaded = 1439 responses 
 
would prefer the information to be paper based; it 
is worthwhile noting that there were consistent 
negative responses from this number of mentors 
for every question, clearly indicating a dislike for 
anything computer-based. However the majority 
reported that they preferred the online version as 
‘it made me think’ and ‘more interactive than 
sitting listening to a tutor’; a sentiment echoed by 
another mentor ‘i had to engage a lot more than i 
do in the attended updates where i don’t always 
concentrate’. 
One aim in developing the package was to 
move away from the disparate uni-professional 
nature of traditional updates, and to engender a 
multiprofessional perspective to the activity. This 
appears to have been achieved; when asked if the 
update had improved their understanding of how 
the mentor role can function in a multiprofessional 
way, 77% of the mentors felt that it had (20% 
Strongly Agree, 57% Agree), with only 4% 
disagreeing (3% Disagree, 1% Strongly Disagree). 
VII. DURATION 
One of the main drivers for developing the 
online update, was to overcome the problem of 
clinical staff struggling to find time to attend 
scheduled update activities. However, this same 
lack of time has been reported in the past as a 
specific obstacle to nurses undertaking computer-
based education in the clinical area [12,13], as has 
lack of access to computers, and deficiencies in 
users’ IT skills [14-16]. During the first evaluation 
we identified that the highest majority of mentors 
took under four hours to complete the package. 
During the second evaluation we wanted to 
ascertain whether this was still the case, as we did 
not want staff to be taking over four hours to 
complete the update knowing that many of the 
mentors were undertaking this in their own time.  
When asked ‘How long, not including breaks, 
did the update take you to complete?’ the mentors’ 
responses indicated that 50% took less than 2 
hours to complete it, and 79% completed it in 
under 3 hours (Table III); this indicates the 
duration of the online update is equitable to the 
traditional update for most users. In contrast, 8% 
of mentors responded that the update had taken 
longer than 4 hours; however, it is not an 
unreasonable assumption that this was due to them 
accessing multiple areas of content, because 
students from more than one discipline were 
placed within their clinical area. This would have 
traditionally required them to attend multiple 
update events, each lasting several hours, and as 
such there appears to be time saved through doing 
it this way. 
When asked ‘Were you given time during your 
working day to complete this update?’ it was 
interesting to note that 64% of mentors had been 
given time, which appears to contradict the 
supposition that mentors had not been able to 
attend the face-to-face update sessions due to work 
pressures. It is not unreasonable to surmise, based 
on some of the qualitative comments, that in direct 
response to a new system being introduced, line 
managers had unusually made time available; one 
mentor stated that this was the ‘first time ever that 
I have been given time…’ Another mentor 
identified that ‘I have just started a new job so had 
the time made available during working hours as 
part of induction programme’. However, not all 
mentors were afforded time to undertake the 
package, but due to the nature of the delivery were 
able to complete it in personal time; one mentor 
said, ‘Because of the shortage of staff on our unit 
time was not available to allow me to complete this 
in works time’. Indeed one mentor; ‘found quiet 
time within night shift to complete’ which would 
not have been possible to achieve had they been  
TABLE III.  
TIME TAKEN TO COMPLETE THE UPDATE 
Less than 1 hour 
6% 
5% 
1 to 2 hours 
44% 
43% 
2 to 3 hours 
29% 
28% 
3 to 4 hours 
13% 
15% 
4+ hours 
8% 
8% 
Key:  Unshaded = 652 responses    Shaded = 1439 responses 

42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
expected to undertake the traditional face-to-face 
session. These comments would support the 
assertion that finding time is a problem [12,13], 
but also identify that it can be overcome during 
certain shift patterns. There were no comments 
from mentors to indicate that lack of resources or 
poor personal ability hindered their progress with 
the update; this contradicts previous findings [14-
16]. 
Respondents did state that they would have 
found it beneficial to be informed of the 
approximate time it takes to complete the update, 
prior to starting it, so that they could plan their 
time accordingly. They also commented that they 
would have liked to see a ‘timeline’ on each page 
so they knew how much they had completed. 
These issues are being addressed, with the 
evaluation data on duration, discussed above, 
being used to provide guidance on the average 
length of time it may take to complete the package. 
A progress indicator is also being introduced; 
however this is proving more difficult than 
anticipated due to the ‘looping’ options available 
to the mentors as they progress through the 
package. 
VIII. USABILITY 
The online package was reported as easy to 
navigate by 76% of the mentors (21% Strongly 
Agree; 55% Agree), with a further 15% providing 
a Neutral response. These figures are comparable, 
if not slightly improved, over the previous 
evaluation, as indicated in Table IV. Whilst 
recognizing that this is a positive outcome for a 
new tool with an untested design, and despite one 
mentor commenting that ‘I am not the best IT 
person but find it so easy to use’, the data suggests 
there is still some room for improvement.  
Ease of use featured regularly in the qualitative 
comments, with mentors indicating that the tool 
was ‘easy to navigate’, ‘easy to understand and  
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON OF MENTORS’ RESPONSES REGARDING EASE 
OF NAVIGATION 
 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neutral Disagree Strongly 
Disagree 
652 respondents 
18% 
55% 
17% 
8% 
2% 
1439 respondents 
21% 
55% 
15% 
7% 
2% 
follow’, ‘user-friendly’ and ‘straightforward to 
use’. Arguably one parameter from which usability 
could be determined is how enjoyable the mentors 
found the experience. 40% of the mentors 
indicated positively with regard to enjoyment of 
the activity (7% Strongly Agree; 33% Agree), with 
41% staying Neutral in their response; this means 
that 19% did not enjoy the experience (14% 
Disagree; 5% Strongly Disagree). It is not possible 
from this data alone to determine if these mentors’ 
lack of enjoyment is a direct result of this 
particular package or the new delivery method, nor 
indeed whether it is the actual experience of 
updating that they do not find enjoyable. However, 
when asked if they would, by choice, undertake 
other activities online following this experience, 
83% of the mentors said ‘Yes’. Also, when invited 
to rate this package in comparison to other updates 
they have experienced (1 being the lowest and 10 
being the highest), 75% valued it 6 or above, with 
13% providing a neutral response, Table V. 
From the outcome of these two questions it can 
be surmised that overall the package and its ‘new’ 
delivery method were generally well received, 
suggesting the lack of enjoyment experienced by 
some may not be specifically related to the tool, 
but some other, as yet undetermined, factor. 
Determining how enjoyable the mentors found 
TABLE V.  
 COMPARISON OF MENTORS’ RESPONSES REGARDING HOW 
THEY RATE THE ONLINE PACKAGE, WITH 1 BEING THE LOWEST AND 10 
BEING THE HIGHEST 
 
652 respondents 
1439 respondents 
1 
1% 
1% 
2 
2% 
2% 
3 
4% 
3% 
4 
6% 
4% 
5 
17% 
13% 
6 
9% 
12% 
7 
15% 
19% 
8 
29% 
28% 
9 
14% 
11% 
10 
4% 
5% 

43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
the package is also important in relation to levels 
of personal motivation, high levels of which have 
been identified as essential for success by students 
on online courses [17]. 
IX. ACCESSIBILTY  
The inability of mentors to attend traditional 
updates had been cited as one of the main drivers 
for the initiative to develop this tool and therefore 
accessibility of the package was an important 
factor in determining how successful the project 
had been for mentors. Indeed one of the main 
drivers for the development of accessibility of the 
learning tool was the importance of providing 
quality education and updates for staff who work 
in rural locations. These staff often found it 
difficult to leave their place for of work to attend 
traditional face-to-face updates due to the time 
taken to travel to locations.  Therefore to be able 
to provide a means of education that ensured they 
received mandatory information to continue to 
undertake the mentor role in an effective manner 
was vital to both the mentor themselves and for 
the organisation. Through providing online 
education, the organisation could be assured that 
staff were provided with a vehicle to access up to 
date information regarding the mentor role and 
any 
professional, 
local 
or 
national 
guidance/policies/procedures 
that 
had 
been 
developed in support of the role.  
Flexibility and convenience were repeatedly 
mentioned when mentors were asked what they 
liked most about the update during both 
evaluations, particularly being able to undertake it 
in a place of their choice, usually at home, rather 
than having to attend a session in a specific 
location; ‘it was convenient for me to do at home 
because I have childcare issues to think about’; ‘I 
could do it at work and not attend a study day’; ‘if 
I have to attend a day course it is 140 miles round 
trip’; ‘I could sit in my lounge and drink tea!’ This 
supports 
the 
supposition 
that 
healthcare 
professionals in general prefer to undertake 
computer-based professional education at home 
[18].  
Being able to undertake the update at a time of 
their own choosing, was also perceived to be 
beneficial by mentors, ‘I could complete it in my 
own time when convenient for me’; ‘able to do 
online read at your leisure’; ‘it could be done 
when it was convenient to me and my workplace’; 
‘it was on line so didn’t need to go to a lecture and 
could do it when i wanted’; ‘the ability to complete 
update without attending a teaching session, made 
it easier to fit in work commitments’.  
In addition, the ability to work at their own rate, 
as and when practical for each mentor, was 
identified as advantageous, ‘was able to complete 
at a convenient time and pace’; ‘able to complete it 
at my own speed’; ‘I was able to work at my own 
pace’, as was the functionality that permits 
mentors to carry out the update intermittently, 
returning as and when time permits, ‘because the 
ward has been so busy i have been able to do this 
in my own time and be able to go back to it from 
time to time’; ‘could log out and complete the 
course in sections rather than having to complete 
it in one go’; ‘liked the ability to log in and out and 
not complete the update in one sitting’. 
It was important for us during the second 
evaluation that respondents remained positive 
about the update package and that they were 
continuing to use it. We were concerned that there 
may have been less enthusiasm about the on line 
version 
as 
time 
progressed. 
However 
this 
flexibility was appreciated so much, that several 
mentors already exhibited anxiety at the thought of 
not using it; ‘I wish the updates could always be 
like this’; ‘I would rather do this every year than 
have to go to a normal update in three years time 
like they say I have to’; ‘Why do we have to do a 
face to face update every 3 years when this is good 
enough?’  
X. 
SUMMARY 
‘Yes, it exceeded what I thought I needed but in 
reflection may be it was just what the doctor 
ordered’. 
As indicated by this quote from one of the 
mentors, the online mentor package has evaluated 
positively during the evaluation period. Users of 
the package have found it easy to navigate, whilst 
also identifying that it has met the learning and 
information needs required to undertake their 
mentor role effectively.   
The inability of staff to attend updating 
activities [1,9] appears to have been remedied in 

44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
many ways through the online version, with 
significant numbers undertaking the update in a 
short period of time. This would appear to not only 
be due to its flexible access allowing staff to fit it 
into their schedules [19,20], but also as a result of 
a visible shift in the line managers’ willingness to 
give time during the working day. It may be that 
the stimulus of a new approach was the cause of 
this, but whatever the reason, it contradicts 
suggestions that staff lack motivation and incentive 
to attend [21], if provided with the opportunity.  
Somewhat surprisingly, staff also stated that 
they generally enjoyed the experience, and whilst 
it is unknown whether this also applied to the 
traditional approach, there is clear evidence that 
this tool was appreciated, in the main, above 
previous 
update 
experiences. 
This 
supports 
findings that online approaches to learning can 
provide stimulus and interest for students [22], 
promoting meaningful learning [23]. 
The 
multiprofessional 
originality 
and 
uniqueness of the package has also promoted the 
professional groups to learn about the mentor role 
from a perspective beyond their own discipline, 
and importantly it has provided them with a ‘one 
stop shop’ to enhance their knowledge base in 
mentoring students from more than one profession 
and one HEI, at one session.   
There still appears to be confusion amongst 
some of the nursing mentors regarding the 
requirements of the Nursing and Midwifery 
Council, and whether or not a face-to-face update 
is still required once in every three-years. This 
appears to be a misinterpretation of the updated 
NMC Standards [4], where the information 
pertaining 
to 
‘Continuing 
Professional 
Development for Mentors’, states that the 
provision for updating should give mentors the 
‘opportunity to discuss issues related to mentoring, 
assessment of competence and fitness for safe and 
effective practice.’ This in itself would not explain 
the confusion, but may do so when coupled with 
reference in the Standard to a triennial review, 
where each mentor is reviewed every three years, 
to ensure they continue to meet the requirements to 
be 
a 
mentor. 
Regardless 
of 
why 
this 
misinterpretation may have occurred, the situation 
will need clarification for the future to ensure the 
mentors understand what is required. There are 
several ways for mentors to discuss elements of the 
role, even when updating online. For this reason, 
the update package has systems built-in that 
facilitate 
both 
updating 
as 
a 
group, 
and 
communicating via a synchronous text-based 
communication (Chat room); mentors can also 
discuss issues arising from the update with 
colleagues back in the workplace. This activity of 
sharing may enforce learning, and also promote 
teams of mentors in consistently working together. 
It is anticipated that freeing academic staff from 
the ‘burden’ of delivering the updates will now 
enable them to concentrate this time more 
effectively in providing further support for the 
mentors within the actual placement environments; 
thus meeting their identified needs [9, 24]. 
A limitation of this evaluation is that the 
majority of the participants are from one 
discipline, nursing, which may make it difficult to 
generalize the results. However, this can also be 
construed as a positive, because for this 
professional group, annual updating will have been 
‘the norm’ throughout their career; as such they are 
the group most suited to evaluate this new tool 
against their previous, traditional, experiences. 
However, it is interesting to note the 
experiences of medical staff mentors’ experiences 
of undertaking mentor learning programmes [25]. 
It was identified that very few publications 
exploring mentorship programmes focused on the 
effect of these programmes for the mentor, but 
rather discussed the benefits to the mentee. Results 
highlighted 
that 
respondents 
discussed 
the 
increased use of reflection of their own work and 
values, as well as a development in their approach 
to relations, patients, colleagues and ethical 
dilemmas, as a result of undertaking a mentorship 
course [25]. In our evaluation of the online mentor 
update 
tool 
respondents 
highlighted 
that 
undertaking 
the 
tool 
had 
heightened 
their 
awareness of working as a multidisciplinary team 
member, as can be seen in Figure 1. 
The whole ethos of the mentor role is to 
improve the experience of the learner, Stenfors-
Hayes et. al. suggested that the findings of their 
study may provide a link between teaching and 
clinical practice and be a way to support and 
enhance the teacher role in the field of medicine 
[25].   

45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
Figure 1.   “I have an improved understanding of how the mentor role can 
function in a multiprofessional way” 
 
Indeed in our study respondents claimed that their 
understanding of the learning needs of students had 
been enhanced, as exemplified in Figure 2. 
XI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The development and implementation of the 
package has proved successful in meeting the 
mandatory training needs of mentors in practice. 
Additionally it has identified the importance of 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
Figure 2.   “Through this activity my understanding of how to improve the 
learners’ experience has been enhanced” 
clinical practitioners learning together and has 
promoted interdisciplinary learning.  The NMC 
have praised the package as being ‘an example of 
innovative good practice’, and as such it is 
intended to promote use of it in other regions that 
provide healthcare education.  It is also anticipated 
that the structure underpinning the tool may be 
utilized for other subject areas. 
Future work includes continual evaluation of 
the package to ensure the information maintains its 
relevance and currency; it is anticipated that this 
will 
be 
achieved 
through 
delegation 
of 
administrative rights to each discipline or 
institution, allowing self-management of the 
content. 
Further development of the chat tool [2] is also 
being considered, to introduce video functionality, 
in order to enhance the interactions between the 
mentors. However, initial investigations into this 
suggest there may be problems accessing video via 
some institution’s networks, due to current security 
settings. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ousey, K.J. and White, S.A. “Developing a multi-professional e-
learning mentor update package”, Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, elml, pp. 103-
107, 2009. 
[2] 
Ousey, K. and White, S. “A case study exploring a multi-disciplinary 
collaborative initiative to use e-learning to meet the professional 
learning needs of health care practitioners,” in: Interprofessional E-
Learning and Collaborative Work: Practices and Technologies, A. 
Bromage, L. Clouder, J. Thistlethwaite and F. Gordon, Eds. IGI-
Global: Pennsylvania, pp. 286-300, 2010.  
[3] 
White, S. and Ousey, K. “Evaluating Effectiveness of a 
Multiprofessional Online Mentor Update Tool” Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line 
Learning, elmL, pp. 6-11, 2011.  
[4] 
Pollard, 
K., 
Sellman, 
D., 
and 
Senior, 
B. 
“The 
need 
for interprofessional working”, in: Interprofessional working in health 
and social care: Professional perspectives, G. Barrett, D. Sellman, 
and J. Thomas, Eds. Palgrave Macmillan: Basingstoke, pp. 7–17, 
2005. 
[5] 
Nembhard, I.M., and Edmondson, A.C. “Making it safe: The effects 
of leader inclusiveness and professional status on psychological safety 
and improvement efforts in health care teams”, Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 27(7), pp. 941–66, 2006. 
[6] 
Sims, R. “Promises of interactivity: Aligning learner perceptions and 
expectations with strategies for flexible and online learning”, Distance 
Education, 24(1), pp. 85-103, 2003. 
[7] 
N.M.C. “Standards to support learning and assessment in practice”, 
Nursing and Midwifery Council, London, 2008. 
[8] 
C.O.D.P. “Standards, recommendations and guidance for mentors and 
practice placements: Supporting pre-registration education in 
Operating Department Practice provision”, College of Operating 
Department Practitioners, London, 2009.  
N = 1,439 
Positive = 77% 
Negative = 4% 
N = 1,439 
Positive = 76% 
Negative = 5% 

46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[9] 
Pulsford, D., Boit, K. and Owen, S. “Are mentors ready to make a 
difference? A survey of mentors’ attitudes towards nurse education”, 
Nurse Education Today, 22(6), pp. 439-446, 2002. 
[10] Myall, M., Levett-Jones, T. and Lathlean, J. “Mentorship in 
contemporary practice: the experiences of nursing students and 
practice mentors”, Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17(14), pp. 1834-1842, 
2008. 
[11] Trochim, 
W.M. 
“Likert 
scaling”. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/scallik.htm. Accessed: 03 
December 2011 
[12] Atack, L. “Becoming a web-based learner: registered nurses' 
experiences”, Journal of Advanced Nursing 44(3), pp. 288–297, 2003. 
[13] Cooper, R., Rittenbruch, M., Viller, S. “Clinical Practice Performance 
Portfolio Evaluation”, The University of Queensland, 2006. 
[14] Lawson, M., Nestel, D., Jolly, B. “An E-Portfolio in Health 
Professional Education”, (No. 38), Blackwell Publishing Limited, 
2004. 
[15] Wright, A., Bingham, H. “E-Learning Scoping Exercise for NHS 
South Central: Results and Recommendations. Part One: Trusts and 
PCTs”, 2008. 
[16] Huntington, A., Gilmour, J., Schluter, P., Tuckett, A., Bogossian, F., 
Turner, C. “The Internet as a research site: establishment of a web-
based longitudinal study of the nursing and midwifery workforce in 
three countries”, Journal of Advanced Nursing, 65(6), pp.1309–1317, 
2009. 
[17] Farrell, M. “Learning differently: e-learning in nurse education”, 
Nursing Management - UK 13(6), pp.14–17, 2006. 
[18] Dames, D. and Handscomb, A. “A pilot study to assess the case for e-
learning in the NHS”, Nursing Times Research 7(6), pp.428–443, 
2002. 
[19] O'Malley, J. and McGraw, H. “Students perceptions of distance 
learning, online learning and the traditional classroom”, Online 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 2(4), 1999. 
[20] Sit, J.W.H., Chung, J.W.Y., Chow, M.C.M. and Wong, T.K.S. 
“Experiences of online learning: students’ perspective”, Nurse 
Education Today, 25, pp. 140–147, 2005. 
[21] Joshua-Amadi, M. “Recruitment and retention: a study in motivation”, 
Nursing Management, 9, pp. 7–21, 2002. 
[22] Rosenlund, C.H. and Damark-Bembenek, B. “Assessing the 
effectiveness of an online program”, Nurse Educator, 24(1), pp. 5–6, 
1999. 
[23] Jonassen, D.H. “Transforming learning with technology: Beyond 
modernism and postmodernism or whoever controls the technology 
creates the reality”, Educational Technology, 40(2), pp. 21–25, 2000.  
[24] Hutchings, A., Williamson, G.R. and Humphreys, A. “Supporting 
learners in clinical practice: capacity issues”, Journal of Clinical 
Nursing, 14, pp. 945–955, 2005. 
[25] Stenfors-Hayes, T., Kalén, S., Hult, H., Dahigren, L.O., Hindbeck, H., 
and Ponzer, S. “Being a mentor for undergraduate medical students 
enhances personal and professional development”, Medical Teacher, 
32, pp. 148–153, 2010. 
 
  
  
  
 
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
 

