What Motivates Faculty to Adopt Distance Learning? 
 
Data Collected from a Faculty Development Workshop Called “Build a Web Course” 
 
Tamara Powell 
Director of Distance Education, College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Email: tpowel25@kennesaw.edu 
 
 
Abstract--To assist faculty at KSU (Kennesaw 
State  University outside Atlanta, Georgia in the 
United States) in using instructional technology, 
the CHSS (College of Humanities and Social 
Sciences) Office of Distance Education has 
created, piloted, and implemented a hybrid 
training workshop designed to take potential 
online instructors from curious to comfortable 
and competent in three months. This workshop is 
offered through the KSU CHSS. This workshop 
design is based on secondary research into adult 
learning and ten years of grant supported primary 
research in professional development instructional 
technology. Five workshops have been completed 
so far, with the latest workshops ending January 
28, 2011. Sixty two faculty in the humanities and 
social sciences, education, and nursing successfully 
completed the training. Before, during, and after 
the training, participants were surveyed regarding 
their various aspects of distance learning, 
including their own thoughts and beliefs. This 
paper presents the rationale, methods, results, and 
lessons learned in these trainings.  
 
Keywords-distance learning; hindrances to distance 
learning; 
incentives; 
instructional 
technology; 
motivation; professional development;  training 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     Those who direct distance learning are often 
called upon to share their expertise with others.  We 
have served in various capacities where we have been 
called upon to assist faculty in using instructional 
technology. We have observed what works and have 
endeavored to improve upon those results. That effort 
has yielded some valuable insights. In 2009, the 
Office of Distance Education in CHSS (College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences) at KSU (Kennsaw 
State University outside Atlanta, Georgia, in the 
United States),  created, piloted, and implemented a 
hybrid training workshop designed to take potential 
online instructors from curious about instructional 
technology 
to 
comfortable 
with 
instructional 
technology in three months, or one semester [1].  
     The workshop content, rationale, and research are 
presented here along with a link to resources for the 
workshop and faculty responses to each round of 
implementation. This workshop and its delivery 
methods are based on secondary research into adult 
learning and 10 years of grant supported primary 
research in training and supporting faculty in 
instructional technology. 
 
A.      Assessing the Need for Training 
     The first step in training is assessing the need for 
training [2]. We have found that while some faculty 
might do well with a handout on distance education 
or a book on online learning, the majority of today’s 
faculty want a person to assist in the technological 
and design aspects of putting a course online. Faculty 
do not need in-depth training in pedagogy and 
assessment. They prefer training in how to transfer 
their successes in the physical classroom into 
successes in the online classroom.  
 
B.     Putting the Faculty Member in the Position of 
Online Student 
 
     One of the hardest things for faculty to understand 
is how different the orientation in the online 
classroom is from the orientation in the physical 
classroom. We all know how the physical classroom 
operates. The students walk into the assigned room at 
the assigned time and take seats. From there, the 
instructor tells the students how the course will 
progress. In the online classroom, where does the 
student get his or her information about the course? 
How does he or she know how to get started in the 
course or how to navigate it? How does the student 
communicate with the faculty member? How does he 
or she know how to navigate the course successfully? 
Having the first two sessions of this faculty 
development workshop meet online helps the faculty 
members to understand how confusing a poorly 
structured online course can be.  This experience is 
intended to impress upon the faculty member the 
importance of setting up the course in a logical way 
173
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and letting the student know how the course should 
progress. 
 
II. 
EXPLANATION OF THE WORKSHOP 
   The design of the workshop considers faculty needs 
and current research into andragogy to provide 
effective and practical training to assist faculty in the 
exact skills they need to transport their teaching 
styles into the electronic classroom.  
 
A. Workshop 
Rationale: 
A 
Practical 
Approach 
     Faculty and administrators complain of high-
priced “consultants” who zoom into campus to teach 
or explain some technological gizmo to faculty and 
then leave campus, leaving faculty feeling that time 
was wasted because 1) they didn’t have enough time 
to explore the uses of what was taught, 2) no one 
applied the content to faculty needs and uses in the 
classroom, and 3) either unsatisfactory support or no 
support at all was provided after the training. In 
designing this workshop, our first consideration was 
respect for the faculty who might be involved.  
Faculty are adult learners, and as Malcolm Knowles 
established, “adults and children learn differently” 
[3].  Adults desire respect for their experiences, and 
faculty have a great deal of experience both in their 
subjects of expertise and in delivering education.   
 
1)   Respect for Faculty Time 
 
     Faculty are busy, and converting a course from the 
traditional classroom delivery method to online 
delivery is an added burden. Stacking an additional 
training workshop atop that load is unappealing to 
faculty. We designed this workshop to  lighten the 
load upon faculty.  For busy faculty tapped to teach 
online, training in instructional technology should 
lighten their loads considerably. 
 
2)    Respect for Faculty Expertise 
 
     Some faculty fear that distance learning will 
replace them with computers. During training, we 
emphasize the importance of individual faculty 
expertise in the content being developed.  If faculty 
are tapped to teach online, no one can put their 
expertise online but them. Faculty can borrow and 
share online teaching ideas and content, but even if 
two faculty use the same slide presentation in their 
individual classes, the uses they make of it will be 
unique to the individual faculty member. 
     A breakthrough moment we had in training once 
occurred when we were asked to assist several 
faculty developing web courses who were resistant to 
creating content for electronic delivery. One faculty 
member said, “The students have a textbook, so I 
don’t need to bother with creating my own content.” 
The other faculty member had loaded scholarly 
articles and YouTube videos into his online course in 
lieu of creating his own content. To both, we 
explained,  “The magical substance holding all of this 
course content together is  your 
expertise. 
That’s 
what students pay for,  
and that’s what students 
hope to learn from. But looking at this course, we 
don’t see your expertise. We see YouTube, we see 
scholarly articles by other experts, we see discussion 
boards where students interact with each other. All of 
that content is good, but one might ask of this course, 
what does anybody need you for?” The light bulb 
went off for both faculty, and their attitudes changed. 
After realizing how vital their decisions and expertise 
were to creating high-quality electronic courses, they 
were excited about adding their own course content, 
even though it is one of the most time consuming 
elements of creating an electronic course. 
 
B.    The Workshop 
     Ideally, the workshop should have been capped at 
15 registered participants per session and consisted of 
11 modules, running at most two hours each.  
However, given the high demand for this workshop, 
50 faculty were originally accepted for the first run of 
the workshop, and 42 successfully completed the 
workshop. But even 42 participants, in two classes of 
20-25 each, were too many.  
     In the evaluations of the workshop, eight 
participants complained that there was too wide a 
range of skill levels among participants. We believe 
that fact in itself would not have been a problem if 
there had not been so many participants in the 
workshop to begin with. Individual assistance during 
the workshop sessions, which is an important part of 
this workshop, was simply not available as it needed 
to be.   
     In the second run of the workshop, 20 faculty 
were accepted, and the workshop was broken into 
three sections of five to eight participants each. 
174
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Evaluations for the second run have not yet been 
completed, but faculty satisfaction seemed to be 
higher. Faculty still complained that there was a wide 
range of participant skill levels the workshop, and in 
response, four additional trainers are being added in 
the future to allow for more sections at popular time 
slots.  
     A third run of the workshop begins in January 
2011 with 34 faculty participating in three sections of 
10-12 faculty each.  That workshop will also train 
three additional trainers. Two of the faculty enrolled 
in the third run successfully completed the first run of 
the workshop and are re-taking the workshop without 
incentives. A fourth run is planned for the fall of 
2011. Data collected in every run are used to improve 
the next run. 
     In addition to four online modules and seven, two 
hour workshop face to face meetings, faculty are also 
expected and encouraged to work on their own to 
develop their courses in between meeting times. 
Faculty reported that optional, small group session 
“recaps” between meeting times, as well as 
individual sessions working one-on-one with the 
trainer to solve individual problems, were highly 
beneficial.  
     An example of a typical workshop is featured in 
the list below.  
1. Online Session. Orientation to Online Learning 
and overview of the workshop, including streaming 
media lecture, discussion board, and assessment 
activities. 
2.  Online Session. Vocabulary and theory lessons. 
Quality Matters. Puzzles and games. Discussion 
board. 
3. F2F (face to face) session in a computer lab: 
Faculty who have already taught online will share 
their experiences and advice and demonstrate 
strategies. 
4. F2F Session in a computer lab: Workshop on 
creating content with MS Word, PowerPoint, and 
Adobe Professional. 
5. F2F Session in a computer lab: Participants will 
create a web page using a free html editor 
(SeaMonkey). 
6. F2F Session: Participants will use a Wiki 
(PBWiki) to critique the previous web page session. 
Then, participants will use the knowledge gained in 
the web page session to create blogs (using Blogger) 
and podcasts. 
7. F2F Session: Participants will create streaming 
media (using Camtasia, Captivate, Jing, and 
ScreenToaster)  and interactive course content (using 
Hot Potatoes and Quandary) 
8. F2F Session: Participants will finalize their goals 
and assessment techniques and start to implement 
these items in their courses.   
9. Online Session. Workshop on designing and 
implementing a web course, including designing 
banners and buttons (using Aviary). 
10. Online Session. Participants will view a 
humorous video called “Late Night Learning with 
John Krutsch.”  
11. F2F Session: Participants will demonstrate their 
courses so far and discuss plans for completing their 
courses. 
 
C.     Requirements and Resources for Successful 
Implementation 
 
     The workshop requires a learning management 
system such as Blackboard or Moodle. KSU uses 
GVV (GeorgiaView/Vista). The workshop also 
requires a dedicated computer lab. The resources for 
the workshop, such as instructions and presentations, 
can be kept on the learning management system. 
However, the CHSS Department of Distance 
Education maintains and updates the resources on a 
teaching resources web page [4].       
    An advantage of having resources available to 
faculty on the open web is that faculty can access the 
information long after the training workshop is over 
or after they have moved on to other career 
opportunities. Faculty have told us that even a few 
years after taking a training workshop, they might 
find themselves working on a project late at night and 
remember a resource on the training page. They 
could access the resource and solve their problem 
instantly. 
 
D.   Marketing and Delivering a Friendly Workshop: 
An Open Door Policy and Rewards 
 
     Sometimes professional development trainers 
believe that faculty must be coerced and punished if 
they resist performing in the way the trainer has 
commanded. The real factor in such instances may 
not be the need for faculty compliance so much as a 
need on the trainer’s part to feel important and 
175
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

powerful. Such an attitude breeds resentment on the 
part of faculty.  
   Ultimately, blatant disrespect for faculty time and 
expertise is ineffective and obstructs the goal of 
faculty success in the electronic classroom. It is 
important to note that most examples of such 
behavior come from trainers who do not understand 
and respect the differences in instruction across 
disciplines. The trainer should deliver his or her 
method as a possible way to meet a desired goal 
rather than as the litmus test of instructor worth.  
 
   1)     What Faculty Need, Not What the Trainer     
   Wants 
 
     Faculty often balk at the idea of committing to a 
training workshop. Some will make the commitment 
because they are almost coerced by an impending 
online teaching assignment. Other faculty may wish 
to learn more about wikis, for example, and nothing 
else. In this training workshop, faculty are invited to 
drop in to any session that interests them, without 
committing to the entire training.   
 
  2)    Rewarding Faculty 
 
     Those faculty who finish the entire workshop 
should be rewarded with more than a sense of 
achievement. The final grade rests solely on the last 
session of the workshop.  Of course, it is not really a 
grade, but an incentive.  To ensure faculty are on 
track to achieve the workshop goals, they must “show 
off” their progress midway through the workshop. 
During the sixth session on blogging, all faculty are 
required to post a three minute video “course so far” 
tour on the workshop blog [5]. Other faculty then 
view and comment on their colleagues’ work. This 
project also allows others to see all the work 
participants are doing in the workshop.        
   During the last session, participants present half of 
the course that they have designed during the 
training. KSU evaluates all electronic courses using 
the QM rubric. Therefore, a “passing” presentation is 
one that provides a tour of the faculty member’s 
course with attention to how it fulfills QM guidelines. 
Participants are encouraged to peer review each 
other’s work during the presentations with their own 
QM rubrics. This session is a fun session, with snacks 
and a friendly atmosphere. Participants lavish praise 
on each other’s work.  To those who may express 
concern that presenting work might be humiliating to 
some, we would respond that a public presentation 
does motivate faculty to produce. If the trainer 
models an attitude of support throughout the 
workshop, then during the presentations, participants 
will point out the strong aspects of a colleague’s 
work with praise before moving to suggest areas 
where improvement should be made.   
     Certainly, some faculty are more talented at 
design aspects, some at technological aspects, and 
some at pedagogical aspects. Often during the 
presentations, faculty find colleagues whose work 
inspires them, and they make plans to work together 
with that colleague to share resources and expertise—
an outcome that we find very exciting.  
     Participants who attend all sessions and present 
part of a course at the end, including a coherent 
delivery plan and handout of the rest of the course 
plan, 
receive 
a 
participation 
certificate, 
QM 
certification, and a $3000 stipend.  Also, any faculty 
member who attends any of the sessions receives, at a 
later date, a certificate listing session(s) attended.   
     Of course, faculty do not work for rewards such as 
praise, recognition, certificates or thumb drives. Also, 
$3000 is not enough money to compensate a faculty 
member for his or her time and expertise. However, 
despite what many students might imagine, faculty 
are human beings. Like most other human beings, 
faculty do like the idea of rewards.  Sorcinelli has 
noted that faculty like to be recognized and rewarded 
and will respond positively to incentives that 
recognize their participation and work: “[Participants 
in a technology workshop for senior faculty] 
expressed a need for something often vaguely 
described as respect or recognition. Senior faculty 
who have been ‘good citizens’ and have put 
considerable time into developing as teachers often 
remark that they receive little acknowledgment for 
such efforts” [6].  Faculty may not realize it, but it is 
likely 
that 
they 
will 
receive 
even 
less 
acknowledgment for online efforts.  
     The online environment is different from the 
physical classroom in that it does not exist in physical 
space. While colleagues may see the faculty member 
ferrying books and teaching materials to the 
classroom, and hear faculty teaching, and think 
“Wow, what a great teacher and hard worker!” and 
even comment to that effect to the faculty member, 
online 
faculty 
will 
not 
get 
such 
positive 
reinforcement.  In fact, the first time we taught 
176
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

classes online, another faculty member remarked to 
us, “Oh, you’re teaching online? It must be nice to 
get so much time off!” Recently an administrator 
remarked to a group of faculty, “I just feel that 
faculty who teach online are getting away with 
something!” These comments are absurd given that 
creating a online course generally takes three times 
more time than creating a traditional course. Online 
faculty often complain that they feel unappreciated, 
so the presentation session in the training workshop 
may be the only time faculty get support from 
colleagues regarding their online work.  
     The Office of Distance Education in CHSS also 
encourages all faculty to “show off” their courses to 
us any time. We very much enjoy visiting with 
faculty and seeing their hard work and success. As a 
young assistant professor struggling to teach our first 
course online, we remember being hit hard with the 
realization that the administrators who assigned us 
this task had no idea what we were doing or how we 
were doing it. There were even mean-spirited 
whispers that we weren’t really doing anything but 
answering email while others were working hard at 
teaching in the traditional classroom. We felt very 
isolated, and we knew our work would never be 
appreciated by our peers. We want to make sure the 
faculty we serve do not feel that way.  
 
D.    The Importance of Post-Training Support 
    
   After the training is over and the faculty member 
receives his or her incentives, he or she may still need 
assistance with developing and implementing an 
online or hybrid course.  
 
   1)    Encouraging the E-Faculty Community 
 
   Support for online faculty does not end when the 
workshop ends. The CHSS Office Of Distance 
Education is available on campus for personal and 
electronic support throughout year.  Another 
important aspect of the training is the building of a 
community of faculty who teach online. Without an 
e-faculty community such as that which can emerge 
from an “e-faculty coffee hour” every month to 
discuss, share, and even complain about instructional 
technology, faculty may feel that only the trainer can 
assist and support him or her. Fig. 1, below, 
illustrates the faculty/trainer relationship that may 
emerge.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Possible model of trainer/faculty relationships after 
training. 
 
Such a model does two things that should be avoided. 
First, it puts the trainer in a position of power, where 
all learning must go through him or her. While such a 
model might be flattering, it makes unreasonable 
demands upon the trainer, especially as he or she is 
called upon to train more and more faculty. In 
addition, no one person knows everything about 
anything. Faculty will quickly have tips and tricks to 
share with each other and the trainer, and such 
development should be fostered and encouraged. The 
desired model would look more like Fig. 2, below.  
 
 
Figure 2. Desired model of trainer/faculty relationships after 
training.  
 
     
177
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 2)    Anytime, Anywhere Support 
 
     The method used to conduct the instructional 
technology workshops includes providing a hard 
copy handout with step-by-step instructions specific 
to the task that will be performed in the workshop. 
These instructions are created and updated by 
members of the KSU CHSS Distance Education 
Department with regard to the version of software we 
will be using and the order in which steps will be 
presented.  We include, when appropriate, how to 
load content onto our learning management platform.  
In the past, we have used many different methods, 
including purchasing ready-made software texts for 
participants and putting general and specific 
instructions 
online. 
Nothing 
has 
worked 
as 
consistently well as creating task specific, linear 
instructions for faculty.  Many people have suggested 
we try videos instead, and we did try them for some 
basic training in the first run. Participants commented 
that the videos were not helpful, and they preferred 
the handouts. After almost ten years of research, this 
method of creating goal-specific, text and graphic 
based, linear instructions is the one that works most 
effectively in assisting faculty in learning and 
retaining 
information. 
Research 
supports 
this 
observation. According to Sorcinelli, “Like most 
adult learners, [faculty] responded best to lots of 
‘hands-on’ 
practice 
rather 
than 
listening 
to 
presentations” [6]. And while much visual design 
research supports the superiority of all graphic vs. all 
text instructions [7], many faculty are used to 
following text-based instructions and are very 
comfortable with them. In addition, most of the 
resources that we create integrate text and graphics.  
     When a member of the CHSS Distance Education 
Department is called to a faculty member’s office to 
assist, he or she is usually greeted with the instruction 
sheet used in class with markings all over it. The 
faculty member will usually say, “I am stuck here” 
and point to the instruction sheet. The sheets seem to 
be well-used, and such specific information helps us 
to help the faculty member effectively.   
     The task specific, linear instructions are time-
consuming to create, but it seems to be the best tool 
to help faculty save time and work more effectively.  
We believe that part of our office’s relationship to 
faculty as distance learning support means that we 
will devote time and effort to creating resources, 
instituting usability tests, and updating the resources 
when needed. This work is one way our office shows 
that we respect faculty time and expertise. That 
respect goes a long way toward building a 
community of elearners.  
 
E.   Overall Perceptions of the Faculty Training 
Workshop  
 
     Participants were asked to evaluate their training 
experiences in the workshop. They were asked fifteen 
questions, and asked to answer “strongly agree,” 
“agree,” “disagree,” “strongly disagree,” or “do not 
know.” Of the 42 participants in the first run of the 
workshop, 33 participated in the survey, although not 
all answered every question.  Below, in Fig. 3-17,  is 
a graphic summary of their responses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Question 1. The workshop provided me with 
useful information related to designing an online course.  
22
9
2
0 0
Question 1
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
178
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Question 2. The workshop provided me 
with useful information related to delivering an 
online course.  
 
20
11
2
0 0
Question 2
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
 
Figure 5. Question 3. The facilitator was prepared 
and effectively led the face-to-face portions of the 
workshop. 
 
19
12
1
0
1
Question 3
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
 
Figure 6. Question 4. The facilitator created effective 
components for the online portions of the workshop.  
 
23
8
2
0 0
Question 4
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
 
Figure 
7. 
Question 
5. 
The 
facilitator 
used 
GeorgiaView/Vista effectively in designing and 
delivering the workshop. 
21
11
0
0
0
Question 5
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
179
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
10
0
1
1
Question 8
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Question 6.  The facilitator provided 
adequate support as I created my online or hybrid 
course. 
 
25
7
0
0
0
Question 6
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
Figure 9. Question 7. The software training sessions 
were effective in helping me to learn what software I 
might choose to use in my courses.
19
11
0 1 1
Question 7
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Question 8. The training materials 
provided to me during the workshop assisted me 
in creating course content. 
 
 
Figure 11. Question 9. The guest speakers were 
appropriate to the workshop and provided helpful 
information 
11
16
4
0
2
Question 9
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
180
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Question 10. My questions related to 
designing and delivering online courses were 
answered during the workshop.  
 
21
11
1 0
Question 10
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
      Figure 13. Question 11. The workshop prepared  
      me to teach online.  
 
14
13
4
1 0
Question 11
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
Figure 14. Question 12. The workshop prepared me 
to go through the QM process. 
14
11
3
3
1
Question 12
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
Figure 15. Question 13. If I have problems while    
  working on my course, I know where to go or who to ask     
  for assistance.  
21
9
3
0 0
Question 13
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
181
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Two additional questions were asked. Question 16 
was “Identify the aspects of the workshop that most 
contributed to your learning (include examples of 
specific materials, exercises, and/or the faculty 
member’s approach to teaching, supervision, and 
mentoring).” It received 31 open-ended responses, 
and the following summations are not necessarily 
taken from separate responses. Some participants 
mentioned many things that helped them to succeed, 
and some mentioned only one or two. Ten 
participants mentioned that the availability of the 
facilitator 
most 
contributed 
to 
their 
learning 
experiences. Seven participants noted that the 
handouts contributed the most to their learning 
experiences, and seven participants said the “hands 
on” experiences contributed the most to their learning 
experiences.  Four participants said actually having to 
build components for a real course and meet 
deadlines for that course contributed the most to their 
learning experiences. One participant said that “It 
was helpful to have a cohort of peers who were 
working on the same project.”   
     Question 17 was “Identify the aspects of the 
course, if any, that might be improved (include 
examples of specific materials, exercises, and/or the 
faculty member’s approach to teaching, supervision, 
and mentoring).” Thirty participants answered the 
question and three skipped it, although eight 
answered it with “none” or “does not apply.”  The 
following summations are not necessarily taken from 
separate responses. Some participants mentioned 
many things that could be improved, and some 
mentioned only one or two. Nine participants 
mentioned that the varying skill levels of participants 
was a drawback, and that the class could be improved 
with separating participants into advanced and 
beginner sections. Four participants stated that more 
information on the QM process would improve the 
workshop. 
Three 
mentioned 
that 
technology 
problems either in their offices or in the workshops 
were drawbacks to their success. Two participants 
mentioned that one of the classrooms where one 
section of the workshops was held was arranged in a 
way that made participants choose between facing the 
screen or the facilitator, and that aspect was 
considered to be a drawback. One participant 
believed the workshop would have been better if it 
were only about GVV. Finally, three Mac users 
participated in the workshop, and the workshop was 
strongly (almost entirely) geared toward PC users. 
Therefore, one participant requested that Mac support 
be added to the workshop to improve it.  
     The first run of the faculty development workshop 
concluded in May 2010. Six months later, in 
November 2010, after faculty had received all their 
 
 
Figure 16. Question 14. Overall, I was satisfied with 
the workshop.  
 
19
9
4
1
0
Question 14
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
 
 
Figure 17. Question 15. Overall, I was satisfied with 
the facilitator.  
 
24
6
0 1 1
Question 15
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
Do Not 
Know
182
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

incentives for successfully completing the workshop, 
faculty were again surveyed regarding their opinions 
of the workshop.  
     Of the 18 participants who responded to the 
survey, 66% said they used what they learned in the 
workshop at least once a month or more. Out of those 
66%, 22%  said they used what they learned more 
than once a week. Regarding what faculty use the 
most from the workshop, instructional technology 
information ranked first, followed by course design 
information and pedagogical information. One of the 
main goals of the workshop was to help faculty 
become more comfortable with teaching online. 
Faculty were asked,  
 
At the end of the workshop, participants 
 
overall rated themselves as twice as 
 
comfortable with creating blogs, wikis, 
 
websites, and audio/video materials as 
 
before they took the workshop. They 
 
also 
rated 
themselves 
as 
twice 
as 
 
comfortable 
as 
the 
control 
group 
 
participating 
in 
surveys. 
Now, 
seven 
 
months later, how confident do you feel 
 
about your abilities to use blogs, wikis, 
 
websites you created, and audio/video 
 
materials you created in your face to 
 
face, hybrid, and online courses? 
 Fifty percent responded that they were confident in 
their abilities. Twenty five percent rated themselves 
as very confident, and 6.3% said they were extremely 
confident (“I am the master of the Web 2.0 
universe”).  Only 18.8% rated themselves as “not so 
confident.” 
See 
Fig. 
18, 
below.
 
 
 
 
     When asked what instructional technology tools 
they used the most from the workshop, faculty rated 
GeorgiaView/Vista first, with Camtasia second. 
SeaMonkey and Hot Potatoes tied for third place.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Six months after successfully completing the workshop, how  confident do you feel about your instructional technology skills? 
183
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Participants were asked “On the whole, after half a 
year to reflect, do you feel the workshop was a 
valuable experience?” Ninety-three percent of 
responders answered “yes,” and seven percent 
answered “no.”  When asked what could be 
improved, more emphasis on Mac users and products 
was mentioned repeatedly.  
 
 
F.   What Hinders Faculty from Adopting Elearning?  
 
     Many self-described “experts” on education and 
college faculty speculate as to why faculty do not 
rush to join the online course boom. What hinders 
faculty 
from 
embracing 
online 
learning? 
At 
conferences, we have heard these “experts” proclaim 
faculty to be lazy and egocentric, afraid to learn 
something new because they won’t know everything 
about it. But it turns out, the widespread public 
opinion that distance education is not to be taken 
seriously has infected the students. Therefore, some 
students enter online courses expecting an easy 
grade, and those erroneous expectations make online 
courses extra hard to teach. In addition, such students 
are often dissatisfied, and express that dissatisfaction 
in evaluations, which in turn jeopardizes faculty 
tenure and promotion.   
 
KSU faculty who participated in this 
workshop were asked what hindered them from 
teaching online, and student attitudes topped the list.   
According to the KSU faculty in this survey, 31% 
said student attitudes was the main hindrance (see 
Fig. 19).  The learning management system used at 
KSU and the poor reputation of elearning tied for 
second place. Other faculty attitudes came in third. 
All factors but the learning management system stem 
from stereotypes of and attitudes toward elearning, 
not faculty laziness and egocentrism. Only 6.3% said 
that mastering the technology was a hindrance.  
Faculty also wrote in additional responses:  
 
 
1. 
Chair's 
erratic 
attitude. 
Sometimes 
seems 
supportive, then does not approve. Changes mind 
about whether we're allowed to offer hybrid courses. 
2. Students in my hybrid commented that they hope 
we don't get too many hybrids and online courses at 
KSU because then we'll be like "them" (i.e. Univ. of 
Phoenix). The other hindrance is the QM...this 
system needs to be changed ASAP. I get tired of 
justifying to people outside my area (many of whom 
have never taught online) that I want to use "learn" 
"apply" or whatever verb there is. I know my field 
and I know how to teach. I don't want someone 
looking 
and 
nitpicking 
my 
course 
to 
death...especially if they don't teach online or know 
my field. 
3. The negative attitudes of some faculty members in 
the English department towards online learning.  
4. The huge amount of extra time in doing an online 
class vs an in class one. 
5. The small size of our program: we need the small 
number of full-time faculty in our program in the 
traditional classroom (especially for our upper-level 
courses). 
6. In addition to the item above, the unreasonable 
rigid structure of that is required for teaching online. 
Also, it is extremely difficult to develop a course 1 
year in advance of approval. 
7. Time required to put an online course together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
G.   Does the Training Work?  
 
     The proof of success, of course, is in results. Every 
faculty member accepted into the workshop signs a contract 
stating which course will be developed into an online course 
or hybrid, and when it will be put taught.  Therefore, 96 new 
online or hybrid courses should be offered in the next three 
years. But how many new online courses are running now at 
KSU because of this workshop? Of the 18 participants who 
responded to the survey, only half had offered the course 
they developed. As can be ascertained from the responses, 
even after developing an online course at KSU, it can be 
over a year before it is allowed to be offered. For that reason 
it is no surprise that this number is low.  
     Of those who had taught their courses online, 55% said 
they were comfortable or very comfortable teaching their 
courses online after the workshop. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
We have spent the past ten years in various capacities 
preparing institutions to design, develop, and implement 
electronic  learning. We have faced a multitude of scenarios, 
including an institution that saw distance learning as a cash 
cow, desired to expend as few resources as possible to 
develop and deliver distance education, but desired to make 
money hand over fist regardless. We have been hired to give  
a two hour workshop on distance learning to a university, 
only to find out that the faculty we had briefly introduced to 
distance learning were  
expected to go out and develop programs in distance 
learning by the end of the next week—we quickly explained 
to the gentleman who contracted us that that scenario was 
not  realistic.  However, as far as he was concerned, his 
work, and our work, were done.  The burden was now solely 
upon the faculty.  
     As many of us in the field now understand, electronic 
learning is an investment that must be made with full 
understanding that it is not a cash cow, but when developed 
 
 
Figure 19. After successfully completing a workshop on building web courses, faculty were asked what hinders faculty from teaching 
hybrid/online courses.  Student attitudes topped the list.  
12.5%
18.8%
31.3%
6.3%
12.5%
18.8%
What do you feel is your biggest hindrance from teaching 
hybrid/online courses?
No hindrance
The learning management 
system
Student attitudes
Your ability to master the 
technology
Other faculty attitudes
The poor reputation of online 
schools like The University of 
Phoenix
185
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

correctly, it can yield multi-faceted benefits. Because the 
burden of electronic learning falls mostly on the faculty, 
faculty must be a priority in distance education 
development. A university’s desire to move into online 
learning is not an excuse to overburden and abuse faculty. 
     It is important to have institutional infrastructure and 
planning in place. Technological and developmental support 
must be available for all involved in distance learning, 
including faculty. Faculty also need incentives to develop, 
teach, and redesign online courses. Hiring a full-time team 
to assist faculty with instructional technology is also a good 
way to support faculty. Bringing in a guest speaker for an 
hour long presentation on “what is distance learning” is fine, 
but it is not a solid leg of support for faculty who are 
expected to create online courses and programs.  And 
certainly money to bring in the guest speaker would be 
better spent as incentives for faculty to complete 
instructional technology training.  
     All faculty use faculty evaluations to improve their 
courses, and this workshop is no different.  After the first 
run of the workshop, faculty feedback resulted in 1) more 
support for Mac users, 2) fewer participants in each 
workshop session, 3) more self-check and quiz items on 
areas that participants seemed to overlook, 4) “what’s next” 
components to help participants orient themselves at the end 
of each module, and 5) small weekly prizes to help 
participants stay motivated and engaged. 
     In the faculty evaluations of the first workshop, although 
the entire second online module of the workshop addressed 
QM, three participants commented that QM was not 
addressed early in the workshop. One participant also added 
to his/her comments that  “I do not think that the power 
point  [sic] presentations with voice were effective. They 
took quite a while to listen to and much of the information 
could have been presented in a quicker format that would 
have been easier to review at a later date.” This comment 
stands in stark contrast to all other comments about that 
content delivery mode. This comment also seemed to 
indicate that the participant did not listen to the online 
modules and, therefore, missed the QM information 
presented early in the workshop. Subsequent runs of the 
workshop have included recaps of online modules in the 
face to face meetings to encourage participants to take the 
online workshop materials as seriously as the face to face 
activities.  Faculty who teach hybrid courses often remark 
that students “dismiss” the online portions of hybrid courses 
as “not important.” Clearly, some faculty attitudes parallel 
those of our students. 
     Formal evaluation data from the second run of the 
workshop is not yet available. However, informal 
participant feedback resulted in 1) more trainers being 
added to each workshop session, 2) printable activity 
checklists for each online module, 3) use of the calendar 
function in GVV to help participants gauge what tasks 
should be completed each week, 4) the addition of the 
Hybrid-O-Matic, a online tool developed by the CHSS 
Department of Distance Education that counsels faculty 
regarding how to translate their face to face teaching styles 
into a hybrid course, 5) an advanced workshop series 
focusing on those with a higher level of skills, and 6) brown 
bag workshops led by faculty experts in various techniques 
and technologies, mainly focusing on hybrid learning. We 
expect that improvements will be made for each run for the 
life of the workshop. 
    To help address the negative attitude toward elearning 
both from the public, from faculty, and from students, KSU 
has launched a distance learning website  to support students 
and faculty interested in online learning [8]. A video, 
“Words of Wisdom from KSU Online Faculty,” located 
prominently on the site, works hard to dispel the myth that 
online courses are not serious courses.  
     As a result of these training workshops, we had hoped to 
see more of a building of an elearning community, but 
invitations to socialize outside of class were met with replies 
of “We’re too busy,” as indeed, faculty are. Faculty did 
socialize to a degree on the workshop wiki at the beginning 
of the workshop, and perhaps more electronic social 
networking opportunities will better serve faculty needs. 
That area is ripe for future research. 
     In short, there’s no easy, fast, and cheap solution to 
moving faculty toward creating quality online instruction. 
However, the investment and time are worth it, as online 
education becomes part of every university’s offerings. 
Especially in the United States, a lack of affordable child 
care, coupled with the rising cost of health care, including 
elder care,  in part, drives the demand for distance education 
opportunities. Many adults want educational opportunities 
but can’t leave children and elderly parents alone and travel 
to the university. For the increasing number of adults in 
such situations, distance education is a necessity. The 
demand will continue to increase.  
      The workshop described in this paper won the 2010 
Sloan Consortium Award for Faculty Development in 
Online Teaching. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
   Great thanks to KSU CHSS, and Dean Richard Vengroff 
and Associate Dean Thierry Leger especially, for 
sponsoring and supporting these workshops and this 
research. Thank you to Dr. Solomon Negash for 
encouraging us in this research. Thank you to KSU’s CETL 
(Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning), ITS 
(Information 
Technology 
Services), 
ODG 
(Online 
Development Group), and DLC (Distance Learning Center) 
for being the backbone of distance learning at KSU. Thank 
you to all members of the KSU CHSS Distance Education 
team: Dr. Laura McGrath, Ms. Nikki Hill, and Mr. Dustin 
Proctor. Also, great thanks to the Sloan Consortium, who 
recognized our hard work. Finally, thanks to all of the 
faculty who have supported us as trainee and trainer in the 
past ten years. We appreciate your patience. 
 
186
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Powell, "Delivering Effective Faculty Training: A Course and 
Methods to Prepare Faculty to Teach Online," Proc. elml 2010 
Second International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-Line 
Learning, Feb. 2010, pp.7- 10, 
doi: 
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/eLmL.2010.8. 
Accessed 
February 20, 2011.  
[2] 
R. Hassell-Corbiell,  Developing Training Courses: A Technical 
Writer’s Guide to Instructional Design and Development. Tacoma, 
WA: Learning Edge, 2001.  
[3] 
M.S. Knowles, E.F.  Holton III, and R.A. Swanson, The Adult 
Learner. 6th ed. Burlington,  MA: Elsevier, 2005. 
[4] 
T. Powell. “Kennesaw State University College of Humanities and 
Social 
Sciences 
Electronic 
TeachingResources.http://www.kennesaw.edu/elearning.Accessed 
February 20, 2011.  
[5] 
 “Impressive 
Elearning 
Course 
Tours.” 
http://24hourstours.blogspot.com. Accessed February 20, 2011. 
[6] 
M.D. 
Sorcinelli, 
"Post-tenure 
Review 
Through 
Post-tenure 
Development: What Linking Senior  
Faculty 
and 
Technology 
Taught Us." Innovative  
Higher Education vol. 24.1, Fall 1999, 
pp. 61-72.  
Academic Search Complete. EBSCO. Horace W. 
Sturgis Library, Kennesaw, GA. 25 Aug. 2009. 
[7] 
E. Donaldson, L. Shoemaker, J. Slavin, and J.  
Lake. “Text Vs. 
Graphics Formats for Online Instructions.” Student HCI Shore’99 
Online Research Experiments. University of Maryland. Department 
of 
Computer 
Sciences. 
August 
28, 
2009. 
http://otal.umd.edu/SHORE99/jdfl/index.html. Accessed January 15, 
2011. 
[8] 
 “Distance 
Learning.” 
Kennesaw 
State 
University. 
2010. 
http://www.kennesaw.edu/distancelearning.shtml.     
Last accessed February 20, 2011. 
. 
 
 
 
187
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

