Energy Harvesting Nanostructured Porous Silicon Scaffolds for Enhanced 
Efficiency Biofuel Cells 
 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan, Hussein Hajj-Hassan, Hassan M. Khachfe                                                           
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb, houssein.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb, hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract— An Enzymatic biofuel cell is a specific type of fuel 
cell which uses enzymes as catalysts to oxidize its fuel. Because 
of their efficient size and immobility, they pose as a great 
promise in terms of their relatively inexpensive components 
and fuels, as well as a potential power source for bionic 
implants. Here, we present the use of dry-etched nanotextured 
porous silicon scaffolds as a basis for new biofuel designs.  
Such an architecture increases the contact surface area of 
silicon with surrounding biofuel to enhance the process of 
harvesting of energy, and consequently, the efficiency of the 
cell.  
Keywords-nanotechnology; porous silicon; biofuel cell 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent advances in micro and nanotechnologies allow 
the development of implantable, portable, and miniature 
devices for a broad range of applications, including 
biomedical fields [1]. Powering implantable medical devices 
necessitates the development of lightweight, non-toxic and 
stable sources of energy with long life spans. In fact, the 
number of battery charging cycles in micro-energy 
harvesting methods is a major source of limitation [2]. 
Several micro-energy harvesting sources have been already 
identified in previous research, namely, low and high 
frequency electromagnetic Radio Frequency (RF) signal 
harvesting, conversion of vibration into energy, thermal and 
pressure gradients energy harvesting in addition to the latest 
attempts towards organic energy generation directly within 
the human body using fuel cells [3, 4].  
Harvesting energy using ambient vibration has been the 
focus of various projects [5-7]. Devices made for this 
purpose are mechanically modeled with a base excitation of 
an elastically mounted seismic mass moving past a coil. 
Optimal architecture for maximal power generation under 
different operating conditions has also been shown [8]. 
Various applications of this principle have manifested in 
systems integrated in footwear to harvest energy from 
walking [9], while in other designs piezoelectric and 
electromagnetic generators convert pressure variations into 
electricity [10]. The power generated using these methods 
ranges from tens to hundreds of milliwatts [4, 7, 8]. On the 
other hand, several studies have focused on energy 
harvesting from low frequency vibrations [7, 11]. This 
concept was made viable by creating a generator that 
converts low-frequency environmental vibrations to a higher 
frequency by employing the frequency up conversion 
technique [12, 13]. One major limitation of this technology is 
encountered with patients that are not able to perform any 
physical activities in order to power the generator and, 
hence, produce the necessary charging current. 
Energy harvesting using RF inductive coupling is a very 
promising technology, particularly in the presence of such a 
wide variety of RF signals in our everyday environment. 
Additionally, this technology can also be used to send data 
back to a base station, thus creating a two-way link. The 
system consists of a power generating circuit linked to a 
receiving antenna in order to capture the RF signal and 
convert it to a DC voltage [14]. The main challenge in this 
technology is in the receiver’s capacity to read various 
frequencies, as well as the use of efficient power rectifiers. 
Several interesting studies have reported either the use of 
multiple energy harvesting antennas in one area [15], which 
has shown that an increase of 83% in area results in 300% 
increase in power, or the design of a high efficiency, ultra-
low voltage active rectifiers [16].  
This article covers the use of porous silicon scaffolds for 
biofuel cells. The next section presents and compares 
different types of biofuel cells. Section III introduces the 
immobilization and electrodes configurations for energy 
harvesting. Section IV presents porous silicon technology. 
Section V discusses existing porous silicon fabrication 
techniques. Section IV details the fabrication process of the 
porous silicon scaffolds using XeF2.        
 
II. 
BIOFUEL CELLS 
The first enzyme based glucose/O2 fuel cell to generate 
electricity was introduced in 1964 by Yahiro et al., aiming at 
using this concept to power an artificial heart [17]. While the 
field of fuel cell research has flourished in various industrial 
and environmental arenas, biomedical applications started 
making use of the technology only after 2001, with recent 
successes in micro fuel cell technology [18-20]. The two 
most dominant classifications of fuel cells are enzymatic, 
illustrated in Fig. 1, and microbial, based on the catalyst used 
to oxidize or reduce the fuel used in the design [21]. While 
microbial catalysts offer more longevity to the fuel cell, 
microbial fuel cells require a barrier between the cathode and 
the anode and between the fuel cell and its surrounding 
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

environment [22]. Such a design increases its size and 
decreases the current density since the fuel cell lacks direct 
contact with the fuel. Most importantly, when it comes to the 
use of microbial fuel cell for implantable devices, long term 
infections, thrombosis and other types of complications raise 
serious concerns [23, 24]. Therefore, it is natural that the use 
of microbial fuel cells was limited to few studies, one of 
them suggesting its use within the intestinal environment 
inside the transverse colon [25]. On the other hand, 
enzymatic fuel cells have lower stability and shorter lifespan 
because the longevity of enzymes is in the range of 10 days 
[26]. This has driven research in enzymatic fuel cells 
towards short term uses such as glucose sensors, post-op 
temperature measurement or as a power supply for pressure 
sensors indicating blockage of fluid flow in the nervous 
system [23]. However, since enzymes are selective in nature, 
the design of enzymatic fuel cells can be made into 
microscopic sizes without the need for a separating 
membrane to regulate the flow of the fluid and enzymes used 
in its design, thus achieving higher power densities due to 
the direct contact between the probes and the fuel [26]. 
Continuous attempts to increase the lifetime of the enzymes 
exist using immobilization techniques or using magnetic iron 
nanoparticles that shield the enzymes from getting oxidized 
or self-digested [27]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of an enzymatic biofuel cell using Glucose and 
Oxygen. 
Another important factor in the design of the fuel cell is 
the target fuel. Although most implantable fuel cell studies 
have focused so far on the use of blood stream glucose, some 
studies have considered other alternatives such as the use of 
white blood cells based on their ability to generate electron 
current across their cellular membrane [28-30]. 
Most importantly, the complex environment inside the 
human body, such as the amount of glucose and oxygen 
available in addition to the neo-vascular build up that can 
hinder the exposure of the fuel cell to body fluids, represent 
important obstacles that any fuel cell design have to 
overcome in order for it to become a viable one [29]. Based 
on the first in-vivo study conducted by Cinquin et al., an 
enzymatic fuel cell was built by adjusting the types of 
enzymes used in order to account for the specific PH, 
concentration, and the effect of urea presence on the fuel cell 
[31]. This was implanted inside the peritoneal cavity of a rat, 
and has proven to provide a stable power of more than 7.52 
μW/mL for a period of three months [31].  
Here, we are interested in increasing the efficiency of 
energy harvesting in enzymatic fuel cells by increasing the 
contact surface area between the harvesting probes and the 
surrounding fuel. This can be achieved by (1) using porous 
interface to provide a large surface to volume ratio and 
consequently lager area of contact with enzymes (2) 
increasing the area of electrodes collecting the resulting 
amount electrons by using an array of electrodes. Doped 
porous silicon represents a good candidate due to the fact 
that it combines both biocompatibility and electrical 
conductivity [32, 33]. 
 
III. 
IMMOBILIZATIONS AND ELECTRODES PLATFORM 
  The proper functioning of an enzyme-based biofuel cell 
relies on both the chemical and physical properties of the 
immobilized enzyme layer. Physical and chemical methods 
can be used for immobilization of enzymes. Physical 
methods include: (1) Gel entrapment wherein enzymes are 
entrapped in a gel matrix, such as gelatine and 
polyacrylamide, as well as dialysis tubing [34]. (2) 
Adsorption where no additional reagents are required but 
only weak bonding involved between enzymes and electrode 
surface. Chemical methods are the main methods used for 
developing enzyme-based biofuel cells. The methods include 
covalent immobilization and immobilizing enzyme in 
polymer matrix.  
Although enzymes are highly efficient catalysts they are 
difficult to incorporate into fuel cells. Low catalytic 
efficiency and stability of enzymes have been seen as 
barriers for the development of large-scale operations to 
compete with traditional chemical processes. This can be 
tackled with the use of nanostructured materials possessing 
large surface areas leading usually to high enzyme loading, 
resulting in improvement of power density of the biofuel 
cells. 
      Fig. 2 is the schematic representation of the novel 
enhanced porous silicon biofuel cell. It consists of an array 
of inter-digitized fingers made out of silicon covered by a 
layer of gold. The area between the inter-digitized fingers is 
made porous for entrapping and better immobilization of 
enzymes. The energy harvesting process is based on 
oxidation-reduction reactions taking place between the two 
arrays of inter-digitized fingers so that one array can be the 
anode and the second array can be cathode. Using 
microfabrication technology, it is possible to obtain 
identical anode and cathode electrodes. The enzymes get 
attached and immobilized between the two electrodes which 
in turn collect the resulting electrons and relay them to 
electronic circuit. 
 
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the  enhanced enzymatic biofuel cell. 
IV. 
POROUS SILCION TECHNOLOGY 
Implantable biomedical devices built from bulk silicon 
have been available for biosensing and actuating applications 
for several years. However, this form of silicon is not 
biocompatible and so far this has prevented its use in vivo. 
Bulk silicon-based devices need coating or packaging in a 
biocompatible material, if they are to be used in and linked to 
living tissues [32, 33]. The majority of today's medical 
devices are coated with materials such as Polyvinylchloride 
(PVC), polypropylene, polycarbonate, fluorinated plastics 
and stainless steel. These materials are tolerated by the 
human body and are described as bioinert. An effective 
biomaterial, however, must bond to living tissue and is 
known as bioactive.  
Nanostructured porous silicon (PS), whose particular 
texture can be described as a network of pores 
interconnected 
by 
solid 
nanocrystalline 
silicon, 
has 
properties that make it a very promising bioactive 
biomaterial [35, 36], in particular for devices that need to be 
linked to the biological system such as implantable devices 
[37]. Porous silicon  material  is  useful  and  attractive  for  a  
wide  variety  of  applications  to  develop biological sensors 
[37-39] and biomedical devices [40, 41]. This has 
significantly increased the interest in using porous silicon in 
biofuel cells.  
An essential requirement for fabricating porous silicon in 
different applications is to have the ability to vary the size 
and configuration of the pores by choosing the appropriate 
fabrication parameters and conditions. For instance, for 
photonic bandgap filters, the pores are designed to the on the 
order of the wavelength of the light to retain and tune the 
optical reflectivity of the porous silicon [42, 43]. For 
biological sample filters, the pore size has to be large enough 
to allow the desired biomolecules to be filtered and cross 
through the pores freely [44]. 
V. 
FABRICATION OF POROUS SILCON 
Many previous reports have shown that porous silicon 
can be prepared through a galvanostatic, chemical, or 
photochemical etching procedures in the presence of 
hydrofluoric (HF) acid solutions or through stain etching 
[45-47]. Other methods such as pulsed anodic etching [48] 
and magnetic-field assisted anodization [49] were also 
employed for porous silicon preparation. In these techniques, 
the pore characteristics such as  diameter,  geometric  shape  
and  direction  of  the  pores  not  only  depend  on  the 
composition of the etching solution, but they also depend on 
temperature, current density, crystal orientation, dopant and 
doping density of the silicon substrate [45, 47, 50]. 
Moreover, porous silicon produced on large surface areas 
along with high porosity and/or thickness leads to a 
systematic cracking of the layer during the evaporation of the 
etching solvent. The origin of the cracking is the large 
capillary stress associated with evaporation from the pores. 
During the evaporation process, a pressure drop occurs 
across the gas/liquid interface that forms inside the pores 
[51]. 
 
A. Gas-Based Etching Technique 
Gas etching method provides a suitable solution for the 
usage of the wet etching methods [52]. Due to the use 
conventional integrated circuit technology, the wet etching 
methods are not compatible with the widespread use of gas 
cluster tools. Moreover, wet etching techniques generate 
large quantities of dangerous waste in the manufacturing 
environment. 
A mixture of oxygen (O2) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) 
gases are combined with hydrogen fluoride (HF) and water 
vapors to produce photo-luminescent porous silicon layers as 
depicted in Fig. 3. The processes that were taken into 
account in the selection of these gases could be represented 
by a combination of the following chemical reactions. 
Formation of nitric acid: 
4NO2 + 2H2O + O2  HNO3 
2NO2 + H2O  HNO2 + HNO3 
3HNO2  HNO3 + 2NO + H2O 
2NO + O2  2NO2 
Oxidation of silicon: 
4HNO3 + Si  SiO2 + 2H2O + 4NO2 
Si + O2  SiO2 
Etching of silicon dioxide: 
SiO2 + 6HF  H2SiF6 + 2H2O 
 
The gas etching technique consists of exposing silicon 
samples to a mixture of O2 and NO2 gases in addition to HF 
and water vapors. 
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3. Schematic of the gas etching setup[52]. 
The experimental details were listed as follow: 
• 
Silicon samples were loaded onto a tray that was 
mounted at the bottom of a chamber. 
• 
The chamber was sealed after installing a gas 
distribution plate which aims to improve the 
uniformity of the gas flow. Noted that the chamber, 
tray, and distribution plate were made of chemically 
inert Teflon. 
• 
Pure oxygen (99.995%) was flown through a 
scrubber containing HF (47-51%). The HF chamber 
could be kept at room temperature or heated up to 
70 ̊C. 
• 
The scrubber HF merges with a flow of diluted 
nitrogen dioxide (2%) before entering the etching 
chamber. The NO2 cylinder was heated at its base to 
a temperature of 40 ̊C to avoid accumulation of 
nitrogen dioxide at its bottom and enhance the 
mixing of NO2 and air. 
• 
The stainless steel tubing connection the NO2 
cylinder to the chamber was heated to a temperature 
of 30 ̊C to avoid the condensation of NO2 on the 
tubing wall. 
• 
The outlet of the chamber is connected to a 
scrubber containing sodium hydroxide (NaOH) 
solution which neutralizes the HF. 
• 
The flow rates of O2 and NO2 could be varied by a 
flow-meter. The flow of O2 and NO2 varied 
between 10-50 ml/min. 
• 
Samples are rinsed using ethyl alcohol (95%)  
• 
Substrates are dipped in ethyl alcohol for 5 minutes 
and then removed. 
• 
Substrates are left to dry in a high purity nitrogen 
environment (99.95%). 
• 
Silicon samples were obtained from the dicing of 
boron-doped 
p-type 
wafers 
whose 
electrical 
resistivity was 20Ω. 
• 
Samples were cleaned using RCA-type hydrogen 
peroxide mixtures, etched in a 5% HF solution for 2 
minutes, rinsed in deionized water for 5 minutes, 
and then oxidized at room temperature in a SLM 
flow rate of ozone (O3) gas with the presence of 
nitrogen for 5 minutes. 
• 
Note that is cleaning sequence allowed a stringent 
control of the sample surface, yielding a hydrophilic 
surface. 
• 
At the end of oxidization step, samples were loaded 
in the chamber and etching was performed for a 
time of 30 minutes. 
• 
The morphology of the porous layers was 
investigated by a scanning electron microscopy. 
And the photo-luminescence properties of the 
porous layers were investigated using a photo-
detection system (Fluorescence, PDS). 
 
B. Stain Etching Technique 
 
The formation of porous silicon by the strain etching 
process was conducted on p-type and n-type silicon wafers 
having different doping concentrations. Different porosity 
gradients were conducted since strain etching is a wet 
etching method which attacks the pore wall. 
Experimental Procedure: 
• 
Porous silicon layers were prepared on p-type and 
n-type wafers with doping concentrations of 2 x  
1015 atom/cm³. 
• 
More layers were prepared on p+ type and n+ type 
with  doping concentration of 5 x 1018 atom/cm³ 
• 
Noted that the doping materials could be boron or 
phosphorus. 
• 
The 
solutions 
for 
strain 
etching 
contained 
concentrated hydrofluoric acid and nitric acid with 
ratios between 50:1 and 500:1 [53, 54]. 
• 
Two additives were added into the solution, 
sodium-nitrite with a concentration of between 0.1 
and 0.6 g/l in order to reduce the incubation time on 
PSL formation [55] and a surface-active substance 
to ensure that the evolving bubbles do not stick to 
the silicon surface [56]. 
• 
The mass of dissolved Si was 1 x 10-4 g. 
• 
The as-grown porous layer was characterized by 
spectroscopic ellipsometrical(SE) measurements at 
75̊ nominal angle of incidence in the spectral range 
from 280 to 840 nm. 
 
By means of the gravimetrical and the spectroscopic 
ellipsometrical measurements the formation process of stain-
etched PSL reveals continuous dissolution of the top surface 
of the layer and simultaneous formation of porous Si at the 
porous-crystalline interface. As a result, the stain-etched 
PSLs have self-limiting thickness when n-type substrates or 
low doped p-type substrates are used. The structural and 
optical characterization proved the existence of a porosity 
gradient in the layers, which stems from the partial 
dissolution of the pore walls and the top surface during 
formation. The morphology of the final structure is 
characterized by a random pore propagation direction in the 
case of low doped p-type and low and highly doped n-type 
silicon. 
90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Electro-Chemical Etching Technique [11] 
 
Electro-chemical etching is simply presented by the ‘AMMT 
Porous Silicon Fabrication System’. This system is 
specifically designed for the fabrication of porous silicon 
using hydrofluoric acid as illustrated in Fig. 4. The user must 
wear appreciate safety gear and follow the safety guidelines 
set by the UCLA (University of California, Los Angeles) 
Nanolab using Hydrofluoric Acid. 
The system contains: 
1. Porous Silicon Bath (PSB): two chamber of HF-bath 
for porous silicon formation which are electrically 
isolated. 
2. Waste Jug: located at the lower level of the PSB and 
is connected to the two HF drain valves. 
3. Water Holders: two different water holders are 
available, one for the wafer and the other for the 
small samples. 
4. Power Supply (Galvanostat): provide up to 24 A of 
electrical current. 
5. Porous Silicon Galvanostat Software: Installed on 
the computer and enables the user to set the 
parameters and time etching. 
6. Light source: 20 Watt halogen lamp located in front 
of the illumination windows. 
 
 
Figure 4. Schematic schematically setup of anodic experiment. 
 
Preparation Process: 
1. Cleaning: water should be cleaned from any 
impurities to ensure optimal porous etching result. 
2. HF Preparation: wear the complete safety gear and 
check the drain valves. 
3. Sample Mounting: mount the wafer in one of the 
wafer holders and place the wafer into the gap 
between the bayonet and the separator plate. 
4. Electrode Positioning: place the electrodes in 
position with respect to the mounted wafer. 
Noted that the electric contact of the electrode and the 
wafer is made through the HF electrolyte where no physical 
contact is required. 
Fabrication Process: 
1. Connect the PSB to the power supply. 
2. Open the software and set the etching parameter. 
3. To ensure illumination during etching, place the 
lamp close to the side window. 
4. Set the timer for the desired time of etching. 
5. After etching is over, turn off the power supply. 
 
D. Photo-Chemical Etching Technique 
 
The anodization is an easy method by which to form a 
luminescence layer on single crystalline Si. There are many 
difficulties in forming porous silicon on silicon on insulator 
(SOI) structure or on multilayered integrated circuit, since 
the anodization method requires electrodes in electrolyte 
solutions and on the back surface of a Si wafer. This 
becomes an obstacle for the applications of the PS for visible 
luminescence layers. A photochemical etching method that 
requires no electrode to form a visible luminescence layer on 
a single crystalline Si wafer is studied [57, 58]. 
Fig. 5 illustrates the following experimental procedure: 
• 
An n-type (0.22-0.38 and 35-45 Ohm-cm) silicon 
wafer (100) was set at the bottom of the vessel 
filled with an etchant. 
• 
A mixture of hydrogen fluoride acid solution (HF) 
and hydrogen peroxide (H 2O 2) as an oxidant were 
used for the etchant. 
• 
Noted that the etchant concentration varied with 
HF: H2O2 = 100:17 ~ 250 for volume ratio. 
• 
The silicon wafer surface was irradiated by a He-Ne 
laser (633 nm, 18.4 mW /cm²) as a visible laser for 
5-45 minutes in order to form photochemically 
etched silicon. 
 
  
 
Figure 5. Schematic set up for a photochemical etching method [59]. 
 
The following reaction model of photochemical etching 
process of silicon atoms is depicted in Fig.6. 
- 
He-Ne laser irradiation forms an electron-hole pair 
as a carrier in the Si substrate. 
- 
H2O molecular attacks to the wafer surface. 
- 
Silicon atom is oxidized by H2O and holes. 
Si + 2H2O + nh+ SiO2 + 4H+ + (4 – n)e-  
h+: hole, 
e-: electron, n ≤ 4 
91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1. The SiO2 region is solved by HF; therefore this 
means that a silicon atom is etched from the wafer. 
2. H2O2 as an oxidant removes electrons left in the 
substrate, and H2O2 molecular and H+ ions change 
into water molecules. 
 
Figure 6. Schematic chemical reaction model of photochemical etching 
process of silicon atoms [58]. 
 
E. Chemical-Based Fabrication Technique 
 
Porous silicon is usually fabricated under anodic 
polarization in an electrochemical cell. Another technique is 
introduced to form porous silicon without the use of any 
external source. Etching will occur by the formation of a 
galvanic cell, with the silicon acting as local anode and the 
metal as local cathode [60]. 
Experimental Procedures 
1. Use of <100>-oriented n-type or p-type silicon with 
a resistivity of 2-5 Ω cm. 
2. Etching of the sample with a dilute of HF solution 
with the use of some ethanol to prevent the 
formation of hydrogen bubbles. 
3. Oxygen is the solution served as an oxidizing agent 
for the galvanic cell. 
4. H2O2 may be added to increase the concentration of 
the oxidizing agent knowing that these agents are 
not reduced at the p-type silicon and do not cause 
the semiconductor to be etched chemically. 
Two types of experiments could be performed. 
 
Figure 7. Schematic set up of type 1 experiment [60]. 
 
The experiments of type 1, illustrated in Fig. 7, were 
performed with either a Si working electrode (WE) or a 
metal (M) WE. A potentiostat the potential of the working 
electrode was regulated with respect to a standard calomel 
electrode (SCE). The current was measured between the WE 
and the Point counter electrode (Pt). 
1. POS703 Bank potentiostat resulted in the formation 
of the current-potential curves of silicon and metal 
electrodes in HF solution (scan rate of 1mv /s). 
2. The potential is always cited with respect to the 
standard calomel electrode (SCE) and the current is 
measured between a working electrode (WE) and a 
Point counter electrode (Pt). 
3. The area of the silicon electrode was 0.5 cm² and 
the edges were protected from the solution by a HF 
resistant O-ring. 
4. The galvanic cell formation is obtained when the Si 
electrode is connected in short circuit to the metal 
electrode. 
 
Figure 8. Schematic set up of type 2 experiment [60]. 
 
92
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Experiments of type 2, illustrated in Fig. 8, were performed 
with an Au electrode on chip, noted that the potentials or 
currents 
could 
not 
be 
measured. 
This 
experiment 
demonstrates the formation of porous silicon without 
external contacts.  
 
- 
A silicon nitride etch mask was deposited on one 
side of the wafer. 
- 
An inert metal electrode was formed on the other 
side of the wafer by evaporation a film of Au /Cu. 
- 
The metal /exposed silicon are ratio was typically 
16. 
 
The main advantage of galvanic porous formation technique 
is that a special sample holder to contact the Si is not 
required. This makes the technique suitable for batch 
fabrication of porous silicon devices. The contact between 
the silicon sample and a layer of noble metal is mandatory. 
The etching rate may be controlled by the metal /Si area 
ration and the concentration of oxidizing agent in solution.  
 
F. Pulsed Current Etching 
 
This technique for porous silicon formation is based on 
pulsed current anodic etching. The technique offers the 
possibility of fabricating luminescence  
material 
with 
selective wavelength emission depending on cycle time (T) 
and pause time (Toff) of pulsed current during the etching 
process as depicted in Fig 9. 
Pulse current anodization of porous silicon is applied by a 
sequence of current pulses. During the pause period of 
anodic current, H2 bubbles will desorb. Desorption of the H2 
bubbles allows fresh HF species inside the pores to react 
with silicon wall that sustains the etching process at 
appreciable rate. This process will increase the thickness of 
the porous silicon layer thus, enhancing the porous layer 
intensity [61]. 
Experimental Procedures 
- 
Porous 
silicon 
samples 
were 
prepared 
by 
electrochemical etching of p-type silicon, boron 
doped, and 0.75-1.25 Ω cm wafers. 
- 
The electrolytic cell is described in. 
- 
Aluminum film was deposited on the back side of 
the samples to improve the uniformity of the anodic 
current. 
- 
The electrolyte solution was a mixture of 
hydrofluoric acid (HF 49%) and ethanol (95%), 1:4 
by volume. 
- 
Anodization process was carried out for 30 min for 
all samples. 
- 
An output signal from a pulse current generator was 
used to feed the current through the anodic etching 
circuit. 
Note that both the cycle time (T) and the pause time (T off) 
were adjusted. 
 
 
Figure 9. Schematic diagram of wave form of the pulse current used in the 
etching process [62] . 
 
The PS formation sequence according to the current burst 
model is given as follows: 
- 
Direct dissolution of silicon. 
- 
Oxidization of silicon. 
- 
Silicon oxide is dissolved. 
- 
A slow surface passivation by H2 starts at the clean 
surface. 
To start the cycle again, each current burst has to overcome 
this H-passivation of the surface. 
This process shows that there is significant freedom of 
choice available in peak spontaneous emission wavelength. 
 
In this paper, we employ a novel and simple fabrication 
technique which employs Xenon Difluoride (XeF2)-based 
dry isotropic etching to selectively form porous silicon in 
bulk single crystal silicon wafers [63]. XeF2 is plasma-less 
etching technique and is based on the reaction of the fluorine 
ions, which represents the main etchant, with the solid 
silicon to produce – at room temperature – the volatile gas 
SiF4. In a XeF2-based etching process, a standard hard baked 
layer of photoresist can serve as a masking layer. In addition 
to its etching process simplicity, XeF2 has a high etch 
selectivity to silicon. It reacts readily with silicon, but is 
relatively inert to photoresistance, silicon dioxide, silicon 
nitride and aluminum, which allows this technique to be used 
in the presence of CMOS integrated circuits as a post 
processing step. This is not the case when HF-based etching 
is used, as this latter will etch or damage the circuitry 
without a very hard mask followed by complex post-
processing to remove the mask. 
VI. 
METHODS 
We utilized XeF2 dry etching to create porous silicon 
surfaces on single crystalline silicon wafers. We used 3 inch 
diameter, 381± 20 μm thick <100> boron-doped (5–10 ohm 
cm) silicon wafers. The wafer was cut into 1.3 X 1.3 cm2 that 
were then loaded in the XeF2 etching chamber. The XeF2 
etching process does not depend on the silicon crystal 
orientation or its dopant content.  
The fabrication process is achieved in a sequence of steps. 
First, undissociated gaseous XeF2 is adsorbed onto the 
exposed areas of bulk silicon. The adsorbed gas is then 
dissociated into xenon and fluorine, after which the fluorine 
ions react with silicon to produce SiF4 gas. Dissociation of 
the gas phase at room temperature leaves behind a porous 
93
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

silicon surface. In this process, increasing the etching process 
time increases the overall size of the pores and the thickness 
of the porous silicon film. The chemical reaction for the 
etching of silicon by XeF2 is: Si + 2XeF2  SiF4 + 2Xe. As 
a dry etching technique, there is no post-fabrication drying 
step required, thus reducing the risk of damage to the newly 
formed porous surface.  
XeF2 leaves behind porous silicon surfaces on top of the 
remaining bulk silicon with porous silicon layer thickness on 
the order of several hundreds of nanometers (600 to 700 nm). 
The obtained porosity depends on the etching time. Fig. 10 
shows a representative Scanning Electron Microscope image 
of porous silicon sample prepared using XeF2.  
 
 
Figure 10. Scanning electron micrograph of a nanostructured porous 
silicon etched with XeF2. 
VII. FABRICATION OF ENZYME ELECTRODES 
The fabrication process of the comb capacitor starts with 
dicing 3 inch 381+20-mm-thick <100> boron doped (5–10 
ohm-cm) silicon wafer into small 3x3 cm squared pieces. 
Metal layers of titanium (adhesion layer, 500 nm thick) and 
gold (conducting layer, 750 nm thick) were deposited by 
sputtering on the silicon wafer. A 1.4 micron thick layer of 
photoresist is then spun on and photolithographically 
patterned to define the inter-digitized fingers. The gold and 
titanium are then wet etched, with 1:2:10 I2:KI:H2O and 
20:1:1 H2O:HF:H2O2, respectively. Acetone was then used to 
remove the remaining photoresist thus exposing the gold 
layer covering the inter-digitized fingers. Fig. 11(a) is a 
scanning electron micrograph of the array of fingers. Fig. 11 
(b) is a magnified view of the scanning electron microscope 
(SEM) picture of the network of pores fabricated selectively 
in between the silicon comb fingers covered with titanium-
gold. Porous silicon layers with different porosities can be 
obtained by changing the etching recipes in the XeF2 
system. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Nanostructured doped porous silicon is a promising 
material for Biofuel cells. It offers several advantages, 
including the use of silicon in microelectronics, biocompati- 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 11. Scanning electron micrographs (a) novel inter-digitized energy 
harvesting electrodes (b) magnified view of two fingers with the porous 
area in between. 
 
bility, and simplicity in tailoring porosity and conductivity. 
Dry etching of porous silicon using XeF2 allows, due to its 
compatibility with integrated circuits, allows an easy 
integration 
of 
porous 
silicon 
scaffolds 
with 
the 
microelectronic harvesting integrated circuit. Future work 
will focus on testing porous silicon samples in complete 
enzymatic fuel cell setup. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The current project is supported by the National Council 
for Scientific Research, Lebanon. The authors would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of the McGill’s Nanotools and 
Microfabrication Laboratory, Montreal, in preparing the 
porous silicon samples, and the Lebanese International 
University for logistic assistance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. 
Hajj-Hassan, 
Hajj-Hassan, 
H., 
and 
H. 
M. 
Khachfe,                            
"Nanostructured Porous Silicon Scaffolds for Biofuel Cells," The Second 
94
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

International Conference on Global Health Challenges, Lisbon Portugal, 
pp. 38-42,  2013. 
[2] P. D. Mitcheson, G. K. Rao,  A. S. Holmes, and T. C. Green, "Energy 
Harvesting From Human and Machine Motion for Wireless Electronic 
Devices," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 96, pp. 1457-1486, 2008. 
[3] S. Heydari Nasab, M. Asefi, L. Albasha, and N. Qaddoumi, 
"Investigation of RF Signal Energy Harvesting," Active and Passive 
Electronic Components, vol. 2010, 2010. 
[4] H. Chun-Ching, S. An-Shen, and C. Jing-Chih, "Improvement of 
Pyroelectric Cells for Thermal Energy Harvesting," Sensors, pp. 534-548, 
2012. 
[5] N. G. Stephen, "On energy harvesting from ambient vibration," Journal 
of Sound and Vibration, vol. 293, pp. 409-425, 2006. 
[6] H. A. Sodano, D. J. Inman, and G. Park, "Comparison of piezoelectric 
energy harvesting devices for recharging batteries," Journal of Intelligent 
Material Systems and Structures, vol. 16, pp. 799-807, 2005. 
[7] S. P. Beeby, RN. Torah, MJ. Tudor, P. Glynne-Jones, T. O'Donnell, 
CR. Saha, and S. Roy, "A micro electromagnetic generator for vibration 
energy harvesting," Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 
17, p. 1257, 2007. 
[8] F. Cottone and H. Vocca, L. Gammaitoni, "Nonlinear energy 
harvesting, "Physical Review Letters, vol. 102, p. 080601, 2009. 
[9] J. Q. Liu, H. B. Fang, Z. Y. Xu, X. H. Mao, X. C. Shen, H. Liao, and B. 
C. Cai, "A MEMS-based piezoelectric power generator array for vibration 
energy harvesting," Microelectronics Journal, vol. 39, pp. 802-806, 2008. 
[10] H. B. Fang, Liu, J. Q., Xu, Z.Y., Dong, L., Wang, L., Chen, D., Cai, 
B.C., Liu, Y., "Fabrication and performance of MEMS-based piezoelectric 
power generator for vibration energy harvesting," Microelectronics Journal, 
vol. 37, pp. 1280-1284, 2006. 
[11] J. A. Paradiso and T. Starner, "Energy scavenging for mobile and 
wireless electronics," Pervasive Computing, IEEE, vol. 4, pp. 18-27, 2005. 
[12] H. Kulah and K. Najafi, "Energy scavenging from low-frequency 
vibrations by using frequency up-conversion for wireless sensor 
applications," Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 8, pp. 261-268, 2008. 
[13] O. Zorlu, E. T. Topal, and H. Kulah, "A vibration-based 
electromagnetic energy harvester using mechanical frequency up-
conversion method," Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 11, pp. 481-488, 2011. 
[14] B. Jiang, J. R. Smith, M. Philipose, S. Roy, K. Sundara-Rajan, and A. 
V. Mamishev, "Energy scavenging for inductively coupled passive RFID 
systems," in Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, 
2005. IMTC 2005. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2005, pp. 984-989. 
[15] M. Mi, M. H. Mickle, C. Capelli, and H. Swift, "RF energy harvesting 
with multiple antennas in the same space," Antennas and Propagation 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 100-106, 2005. 
[16] A. J. Stratakos, R. W. Brodersen, and S. R. Sanders, "High-efficiency 
low-voltage DC-DC conversion for portable applications," University of 
California, Berkeley, Fall 1998. 
[17] A. T. Yahiro, S. M. Lee, and D. O. Kimble, "Bioelectrochemistry: I. 
Enzyme utilizing bio-fuel cell studies," Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 
(BBA)-Specialized Section on Biophysical Subjects, vol. 88, pp. 375-383, 
1964. 
[18] B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, "Materials for fuel-cell technologies," 
Nature, vol. 414, pp. 345-352, 2001. 
[19] R. Hahn, S. Wagner, A. Schmitz, and H. Reichl, "Development of a 
planar micro fuel cell with thin film and micro patterning technologies," 
Journal of Power Sources, vol. 131, pp. 73-78, 2004. 
[20] T. J. Yen, N. Fang, X. Zhang, G. Q. Lu, and C.Y. Wang, "A micro 
methanol fuel cell operating at near room temperature," Applied Physics 
Letters, vol. 83, pp. 4056-4058, 2003.  
[21] S. K. Chaudhuri and D. R. Lovley, "Electricity generation by direct 
oxidation of glucose in mediatorless microbial fuel cells," Nature 
biotechnology, vol. 21, pp. 1229-1232, 2003. 
 [22] B. E. Logan and J. M. Regan, "Microbial fuel cells-challenges and 
applications," Environmental science & technology, vol. 40, pp. 5172-
5180, 2006. 
[23] S. Calabrese Barton, J. Gallaway, and P. Atanassov, "Enzymatic 
biofuel cells for implantable and microscale devices," Chemical Reviews, 
vol. 104, pp. 4867-4886, 2004. 
[24] B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. 
Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete, and K. Rabaey, "Microbial fuel cells: 
methodology and technology," Environmental science & technology, vol. 
40, pp. 5181-5192, 2006. 
[25] Y. Han, C. Yu, and H. Liu, "A microbial fuel cell as power supply for 
implantable medical devices," Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 25, pp. 
2156-2160, 2010. 
[26] I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish, and J. Hart, "Comparative 
study of three types of microbial fuel cell," Enzyme and microbial 
technology, vol. 37, pp. 238-245, 2005. 
[27] J. D. Keighron and C. D. Keating, "Enzyme: nanoparticle 
bioconjugates with two sequential enzymes: stoichiometry and activity of 
malate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase on Au nanoparticles," 
Langmuir, vol. 26, pp. 18992-19000, 2010. 
[28] G. A. Justin, Y. Zhang, M. Sun, and R. Sclabassi, "An investigation of 
the ability of white blood cells to generate electricity in biofuel cells," in 
Bioengineering Conference, 2005. Proceedings of the IEEE 31st Annual 
Northeast, 2005, pp. 277-278. 
[29] A. E. Franks and K. Nevin, "Microbial fuel cells, a current review," 
Energies, vol. 3, pp. 899-919, 2010. 
[30] G. A. Justin, Y. Zhang, M. Sun, R. Sclabassi, "Biofuel cells: a possible 
power source for implantable electronic devices," in Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, 2004. IEMBS'04. 26th Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE, 2004, pp. 4096-4099. 
[31] P. Cinquin, C. Gondran, F. Giroud, S. Mazabrard, A. Pellissier, F. 
Boucher, J.P. Alcaraz, K. Gorgy, F. Lenouvel, and S. Mathé, "A glucose 
biofuel cell implanted in rats," PLoS One, vol. 5, p. e10476, 2010. 
[32] S. C. Wang, F. Yang, M. Silva, A.W.Y. Zarow, and Z. Iqbal, 
"Membrane-less and mediator-free enzymatic biofuel cell using carbon 
nanotube/porous silicon electrodes," Electrochemistry Communications, 
vol. 11, pp. 34-37, 2009. 
[33] C. Liu, S. Alwarappan, Z. Chen, X. Kong, and C.Z. Li, 
"Membraneless enzymatic biofuel cells based on graphene nanosheets," 
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 25, pp. 1829-1833, 2010. 
[34] D. Schumacher, J. Vogel, and U. Lerche, "Construction and 
applications of an enzyme electrode for determination of galactose and 
galactose-containing saccharides," Biosensors and Bioelectronics, vol. 9, 
pp. 85-89, 1994. 
[35] W. Sun, J.E. Puzas, T.J. Sheu, and P.M. Fauchet, "Porous silicon as a 
cell interface for bone tissue engineering," Physica Status Solidi A-
Applications and Materials Science, vol. 204, pp. 1429-1433, 2007. 
[36] M. Hajj-Hassan, M. Khayyat-Kholghi, H. Wang, V. Chodavarapu, and 
J.E. Henderson, "Response of murine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal 
stromal cells to dry-etched porous silicon scaffolds," J Biomed Mater Res 
Part A, pp. 269-274, 2011. 
[37] S. Chan, P. M. Fauchet, Y. Li, L. J. Rothberg, and B. L. Miller, 
"Porous silicon microcavities for biosensing applications," Physica Status 
Solidi a-Applied Research, vol. 182, pp. 541-546, Nov 2000. 
[38] R. A. Williams and H. W. Blanch, "Covalent Immobilization of 
Protein 
Monolayers 
for 
Biosensor 
Applications," 
Biosensors 
& 
Bioelectronics, vol. 9, pp. 159-167, 1994. 
[39] A. Janshoff, K. P. S. Dancil, C. Steinem, D. P. Greiner, V. S. Y. Lin, 
C. Gurtner, K. Motesharei, M. J. Sailor, and M. R. Ghadiri, "Macroporous 
95
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

p-type silicon Fabry-Perot layers. Fabrication, characterization, and 
applications in biosensing," Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 
120, pp. 12108-12116, Nov 25 1998. 
[40] J. L. Coffer, M. A. Whitehead, D. K. Nagesha, P. Mukherjee, G. 
Akkaraju, M. Totolici, R. S. Saffie, and L. T. Canham, "Porous silicon-
based scaffolds for tissue engineering and other biomedical applications," 
Physica Status Solidi A-Applications and Materials Science, vol. 202, pp. 
1451-1455, Jun 2005. 
[41] E. J. Anglin, L. Y. Cheng, W. R. Freeman, and M. J. Sailor, "Porous 
silicon in drug delivery devices and materials," Advanced Drug Delivery 
Reviews, vol. 60, pp. 1266-1277, Aug 17 2008. 
[42] G. Lammel, S. Schweizer, S. Schiesser, and P. Renaud, "Tunable 
optical filter of porous silicon as key component for a MEMS 
spectrometer," Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 11, pp. 
815-828, Dec 2002. 
[43] M. G. Berger, M. Thonissen, R. Arensfischer, H. Munder, H. Luth, M. 
Arntzen, and W. Theiss, "Investigation and Design of Optical-Properties of 
Porosity Superlattices," Thin Solid Films, vol. 255, pp. 313-316, Jan 15 
1995. 
[44] C. C. Striemer, T. R. Gaborski, J. L. McGrath, and P. M. Fauchet, 
"Charge- and size-based separation of macromolecules using ultrathin 
silicon membranes," Nature, vol. 445, pp. 749-753, Feb 15 2007. 
[45] H. Foll, M. Christophersen, J. Carstensen, and G. Hasse, "Formation 
and application of porous silicon," Materials Science & Engineering R-
Reports, vol. 39, pp. 93-141, Nov 1 2002. 
[46] E. A. de Vasconcelos, E.F. da Silva, B.D. Santos, W.M. de Azevedo, 
and J.A.K. Freire, "A new method for luminescent porous silicon 
formation: reaction-induced vaporphase stain etch," Phys. Status Solidi 
A—Appl. Mat, vol. 202, pp. 1539–1542, 2005. 
[47] R. L. Smith and S. D. Collins, "Porous Silicon Formation 
Mechanisms," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 71, pp. R1-R22, Apr 15 
1992. 
[48] J. Escorcia-Garcia, O. Sarracino Martínez, J. M. Gracia-Jiménez, and 
V. Agarwal, "Porous silicon photonic devices using pulsed anodic etching 
of lightly doped silicon," Journal of Physics D: Applied, vol. 42, p. 145101 
(7pp), 2009. 
[49] T. Nakagawa, H. Koyama, and N. Koshida, "Control of structure and 
optical anisotropy in porous Si by magnetic-field assisted anodization," 
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 69, pp. 3206-3208, Nov 18 1996. 
[50] Z. C. Feng and R. Tsu, Porous Silicon: World Scientific Pub Co Inc, 
1994. 
[51] M. Bouchaour, A. Ould-Abbas, N. Diaf, and N.C. Sari, "Effect of 
drying on porous silicon," J Therm Anal Calorim, vol. 76, pp. 677–684, 
2004. 
[52] S. Boughaba and K. Wang, "Fabrication of porous silicon using a gas 
etching method," Thin Solid Films, vol. 497, pp. 83-89, 2006. 
[53] J. Xu and A. J. Steckl, "Stain‐etched porous silicon visible light 
emitting diodes," Journal of Vacuum Science &amp; Technology B, vol. 
13, pp. 1221-1224, 1995. 
[54] A. Hidekazu, M. Akira, K. Akira, A. Tomoyoshi, and S. Akinobu, "A 
Comparative Study of Visible Photoluminescence from Anodized and from 
Chemically Stained Silicon Wafers," Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 32, p. L1, 1993. 
[55] M. T. Kelly, J. Chun, K. M. Bocarsly, and B. Andrew, "High 
efficiency chemical etchant for the formation of luminescent porous 
silicon," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 64, pp. 1693-1695, 1994. 
[56] V. Lehmann, H and Föll, "Formation Mechanism and Properties of 
Electrochemically Etched Trenches in n-Type Silicon," J. Electrochem. 
Soc. , vol. 137, pp. 653-659, 1990.  
[57] S. Shih, K. H. Jung, T. Y. Hsieh, J. Sarathy, J. C. Campbell, and D. L. 
Kwong, "Photoluminescence and formation mechanism of chemically 
etched silicon," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 60, pp. 1863-1865, 1992. 
[58] Y. Naokatsu and T. Hiroshi, "Blue Luminescence from 
Photochemically Etched Silicon," Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 38, p. 5706, 1999. 
[59] N. Yamamoto and H. Takai, "Formation mechanism of silicon based 
luminescence material using a photo chemical etching method," Thin Solid 
Films, vol. 388, pp. 138-142, 2001. 
[60] A. M. Hynes, H. Ashraf, J. K. Bhardwaj, J. Hopkins, I. Johnston, and 
J. N. Shepherd, "Recent advances in silicon etching for MEMS using the 
ASE™ process," Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 74, pp. 13-17, 
1999. 
[61] A. A. Aziz, "Fabrication and characterization of uniform quantum size 
porous silicon," Materials science forum, vol. 517, pp. 232-236, 2006. 
[62] N. K. Ali, M. R. Hashim, A. Abdul Aziz, I. Hamammu, "Method of 
controlling spontaneous emission from porous silicon fabricated using 
pulsed current etching," Solid-State Electronics, vol. 52, pp. 249-254, 2008. 
[63] M. Hajj-Hassan, M. Cheung, and V. Chodavarapu, "Dry etch 
fabrication of porous silicon using xenon difluoride," Micro & Nano 
Letters, IET, vol. 5, pp. 63-69, 2010. 
 
96
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

