137
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 The Application of Validating and Dialectical Coaching Strategies in  
a Personalised Virtual Coach for Obese Emotional Eaters 
Rationale for a Personalised Coaching System 
A Research Protocol  
Aranka Dol1, Christina Bode2, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen2, Tatjana van Strien3,4 
1Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanzehogeschool UAS, Groningen 
2Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede 
3Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen 
4Department of Health Sciences and the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam 
e-mail: 1{a.dol, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl, 2{c.bode, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl, 3t.vanstrien@psych.ru.nl 
 
 
Abstract—There is a growing number of eHealth interventions 
aiming at enhancing lifestyle to address obesity. However, the 
existing interventions do not take the emotional aspects of 
obesity into account. Forty percent of the overweight population 
is an emotional eater. Emotional eaters gain weight because of 
poor emotion regulation, not just due to bad eating habits. We 
aim at developing a personalised virtual coach ‘Denk je zèlf!’ 
providing support for self-regulation of emotions for obese 
emotional eaters. This paper presents a research study protocol 
on validating persuasive coaching strategies in emotion 
regulation, based on Dialectical Behaviour Therapy, ultimately 
targeting behaviour change. Our goal is to design a personalised 
eCoaching framework, allowing us to optimally translate 
successful behaviour change mechanisms and techniques, such 
as dialectical strategies, into personalised persuasive coaching 
strategies. 
Keywords-obesity; 
emotional 
eaters 
(emotional 
eating 
behaviour); Dialectical Behaviour Therapy; validation strategies; 
dialectical strategies; eHealth; mHealth; persuasive technology; 
virtual coach; personalised coaching. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Obesity has become a major societal problem worldwide 
[1]-[3]. The main reason for severe overweight is an excessive 
intake of energy, in relation with the individual needs of a 
human body. Obesity is associated with poor eating habits 
and/or a sedentary lifestyle. A significant part of the obese 
population (40%) overeat due to negative emotions [4].  They 
suffer from food cravings and give in to food binges in 
response to high negative feelings or stress. There is little 
attention to the personal needs of emotional eaters when it 
comes to existing health interventions [5]-[7]. Current face-
to-face treatments have insufficient recognition to affect 
regulation.  
There is a need for self-management support and 
personalised coaching for emotional eaters to train themselves 
in recognising and self-regulating their emotions [8][9]. 
This paper is structured as follows: In Section II, we 
discuss the theoretical underpinnings of dialectical behaviour 
therapy and persuasive coaching strategies. Next, in Section 
III, we elaborate on the design rationale of a personalised 
virtual coach. And in Section IV we present the design of the 
research protocol. We finish this paper in Section V with a 
discussion on the expected contributions of this research 
study, conclusion, and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Virtual coaching systems form a broad and vivid research 
area [10]-[13]. Since chatbot Eliza was invented by Joseph 
Weizenbaum [14], many new studies have emerged. Over the 
last years, virtual coaches have been developed for behaviour 
change support, healthy lifestyle, and physical activity support 
[15]-[19]. Existing virtual coach applications lack systematic 
evaluation of coaching strategies and usually function as 
(tele)monitoring systems, limited to giving general feedback 
to the user on achieved goals and accomplished (online) 
assignments [20].  
This paper presents the research protocol and design 
rationale for a personalised coaching system and the 
evaluation of persuasive coaching strategies for emotional 
eaters based on the Dialectical Behavior Therapy and 
Persuasive Technology.  
This research study is a continuation of a previous study 
on the design and development of emotion-enriched personas 
[9]. The objective of developing a personalised virtual coach 
for obese emotional eaters is to raise their awareness about 
emotions, to enhance a positive change of attitude towards 
accepting the negative emotions they experience, and to 
accomplish a balance in body weight. 
A. Dialectical Behavior Therapy 
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) focuses on getting 
more control over one’s own emotions by reinforcing skills in 
mindfulness, emotion regulation, and stress tolerance [8]. 
Emotion regulation is about recognising and acknowledging 
emotions and accepting the fact that they come and go. The 
behaviour change strategies within DBT are based on 
validation and dialectical strategies [21]. Validation is about 
acknowledging one’s experiences or feelings, without 
judgment. Validation strategies suggest responding in an 
empathic way, by hearing another person’s point of view and 
accepting them (and their emotions) without judging. 

138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Dialectical strategies help to find truth (synthesis) in opposing 
viewpoints and encourage a change of the users’ attitude and 
behaviour. Opposites create incongruence between belief and 
behaviour since the stimuli or the given information contradict 
each other. Dialectical strategies focus on confronting the user 
with a practical focus on changing problem behaviour; the key 
is in finding a balance between acceptance of intense feelings 
and emotions and the need for change by adapting feelings 
and emotions using emotion regulation and interpersonal 
effectiveness.  
Emotional eaters deal with an invalidating daily life 
environment. With a well-balanced mix of being validated in 
their perception of negative emotions and a confrontation 
(dialectical) focussing on changing problem behaviour, DBT 
offers powerful mechanisms of change [23]. Our eCoaching 
model translates these mechanisms into persuasive features 
and compelling dialogues.  
B. Persuasive Technology  
Persuasive Technology (PT) is a significant predictor of 
adherence and offers strategies to reinforce the validation – 
and dialectical strategies’ influence on attitudes and 
behaviours [23]. We believe that PT can assist emotional 
eaters in attitude change and acceptance of their own 
emotions. It is essential to identify the intended outcome or 
change of the intervention, before determining the design 
principles and coaching strategies that would positively 
contribute to the persuasiveness in any way. We selected the 
Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) model [24] for translating 
behaviour change techniques from DBT into persuasive 
coaching strategies [25] since PSD focuses on persuasion 
context and easily implementable compelling design features. 
We assume that the integration of the dialectical behaviour 
change strategies and persuasive functions (PSD model) will 
enhance the personalisation of the virtual coach for emotional 
eaters and improve the effectiveness of the intervention.  
III. 
DESIGN RATIONALE FOR A PERSONALISED VIRTUAL 
COACH 
The virtual coach ‘Develop a wise mind and counsel 
yourself!’ (a translation of the Dutch title: ‘Denk je zèlf!’) in 
Figure 1 is an interactive and self-learning persuasive system 
that coaches attitude and/or long-term behaviour change by 
providing real-time personalised support [9] and by supplying  
personal feedback based on persuasive coaching strategies, 
originated from validation and dialectical strategies of DBT 
and persuasive features of the Persuasive System Design 
model [24]. It provides the user with practical exercises to 
enhance skills in mindfulness, emotion regulation and stress 
tolerance.  
 
A. Components Virtual Coach  
The virtual coach application consists of three different 
components:  
1. the personalised Virtual Coach, 
2. the emo.analyser,   
3. a set of skills practices in mindfulness, emotion regulation 
and stress tolerance.   
 
Fig. 1. Schematic overview Denk je Zelf! application 
 
1. Personalised Virtual Coach  
The virtual coach is the main part of the application. The 
virtual coach holds a central position in the application. It acts 
as a mentor or tutor throughout the application by four 
functions:  
a. intake; b. commitment; c. communicator; and d. coach. It is 
always on hand for questions. After downloading and 
installing the application on the smartphone, the virtual coach 
will be nested in the Contacts list and will become a friend 
eventually. It communicates as the user prefers, via the private 
chat timeline delivered with the application, or in WhatsApp, 
Facebook Messenger, Slack or Telegram. 
 
a. intake 
New users have to download the application from the App 
Store. After installation of the application, the user is guided 
by the virtual coach to go to the intake module. It invites the 
user to register and to set a personal profile (the intake 
module) with information about demographics data, such as 
(nick) name, age, gender, weight, length, place of residence. 
The virtual coach wants to get to know the user to be able to 
provide the utmost service and personalised feedback. She 
will be asked to fill in questionnaires about her eating 
behaviour: “Are you an emotional eater?” [26] and about her 
personality traits: “What kind of person are you?" [27]. The 
virtual coach also offers features to customise the application 

139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with favourite colour schemes, and to select a preferred 
picture to personify the virtual coach.  
 
b. commitment 
After leading the user through the intake procedure, the virtual 
coach helps the user to set personal goals and solemnly declare 
to quit emotional eating behaviour and to learn how to be 
prepared for the possibility of failure when things don’t turn 
out to be useful at once.  
 
c. communicator 
The virtual coach welcomes users at login and acts as a point 
of contact. It supplies information about the application and 
redirects users to the other components. It provides the user 
feedback on the outcomes of the emo.analyser.  
 
d. coach 
The virtual coach provides feedback and coaching based on 
the information users put down in the emo.analyser.  
 
2. Emo.analyser 
The emo.analyser is a built-in tool to help the user to 
register what happened today that made them experience 
cravings or binges. The goal of the emo.analyser is to create 
awareness by examining the factors that lead to problematic 
eating behaviour and the consequences that follow on that 
behaviour. The user gets to the emo.analyser by (a). on her 
initiative, because she is experiencing cravings or is thinking 
of binging; (b). as a result of a conversation with the Virtual 
Coach, triggered by emotion - or eating behaviour related 
words, or (c). the user logged in after a reminder to visit the 
app and the answer to one question about her current 
emotional status. In a progressive scheme the user will be 
questioned about her eating behaviour over the past 24 hours. 
See Figure 2. The first step of six is to point out the problem 
behaviour (1). Problem behaviour varies from mindless eating 
to binge eating. The next step is to determine the prompting 
event (2) that triggered the problem behaviour. Prompting 
events emerge in the user’s surroundings. The user specifies 
what made her vulnerable (3) to perform that specific 
behaviour. This event could have an internal or external 
reason, such as physical illness or being home all alone, or 
being invited to a birthday party. The problem behaviour and 
the prompting event are linked (4) by a series of thoughts, 
actions, bodily sensations and cognition. Once these are all 
identified, users are to describe the consequences (5) of their 
problem behaviour.  This way of behaving varies from staying 
away from a birthday party, to feeling numb, or being 
depressed.  The last step in the chain is to figure out how to 
repair (6) and reduce vulnerability for example by getting 
more sleep, or by not buying snack food.  
The emo.analyser collects the above-mentioned data and 
provides feedback, shown in a graphic presentation, on the 
discovered behaviour patterns. By doing the exercise over and 
over, the user gains a better understanding of patterns in how 
she responds to emotional occurrences, the impact on her 
eating behaviour, and the consequences for her emotional 
well-being. Based on the context (e.g., the weather, log data 
on location, calendar) and data about the personality and 
emotional state of the user, the virtual coach application 
enables tailoring of real-time feedback to the individual user 
(A). The Virtual Coach provides the user with validating and 
Figure 2. emo.analyser 

140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
dialectical coaching strategies (B). These strategies ratify the 
emotions that the user experiences, but could also put them on 
edge by providing statements that oppose each other.  By 
expressing opposite sides that both hold true, a sense of 
imbalance might be achieved which brings about a renewed 
attitude towards her behaviour eventually [28]. It helps the 
user to monitor her emotional and behavioural patterns. 
Personalised coaching is articulated by providing validating 
or dialectical comments based on the patterns.  
Validation strategies focus on ‘empathic’ approach 
suggesting to genuinely hear another person’s point of view 
and accept them (and their emotions) just the way they are, 
without judging. For example, in a dialogue a (virtual) coach 
is clarifying the message of the user by ‘reflection’: “So what 
I hear you saying is...” or ‘direct’: “To me it makes sense 
that....”; or ‘empathising’ the emotion “I can see you are sad”; 
or a cognition “Is that true, or you just think it is?”; or in a 
more ‘cheerleading’ way “You are doing well. I am proud of 
you!’’, and radically accept the messenger.  
Dialectical means finding the synthesis out of opposites 
(thesis + antithesis). It is finding a balance between acceptance 
and change: accepting the occurrence of strong feelings and 
emotions making use of mindfulness and stress tolerance and 
adapting feelings and emotions using emotion regulation and 
interpersonal effectiveness. Dialectical strategies focus on 
confronting the user with a practical focus on changing 
problem behaviour. Dialectical strategies consist of several 
sub-strategies, such as ‘entering the paradox strategy’ with  
“and” versus “but” responses; the use of ‘natural change’ with 
the “That was then, this is now…” response;  the ‘making 
lemonade out of lemons strategy’ with  the “That’s great!” 
response; the ‘devil’s advocate technique’, with the “Are you 
sure?” response, or ‘extending’ with the “Wow, that’s pretty 
serious!” response.   
To make users completing the emo.analyser questionnaire 
on a daily basis, the virtual coach sends out a (WhatsApp or 
SMS) message to the user with the question whether she 
experienced problems with her eating behaviour, such as 
cravings or binges, over the past 24 hours. When answering 
“No” it goes to “exit” for this day.  
 
3. Skills practises 
The application contains three modules on skills practices in 
mindfulness, emotion regulation, and distress tolerance.  The 
module mindfulness provides exercises in observing, 
describing and participating in reality, enhancing the quality 
of awareness in a person’s life. The module emotion 
regulation contains exercises in building self-efficacy and 
learning to cope with difficult situations. Distress tolerance 
teaches skills how to survive crises and to accept reality as it 
is.  
 
B. Functionalities Virtual Coach 
The application Denk je zelf! contains four types of  tasks: 1. 
Conversational features; 2. Functional features; and 3. 
Ecological Momentary Assessments.   
 
 
 
1. Conversational 
The conversational tasks are carried out by the Virtual 
Coach. The Virtual Coach (VC) is a text-based both 
conversational and functional in-app chatbot [29][30]. It has 
conversations with the user over the built-in timeline, or via 
WhatsApp or Facebook Messenger.  As a contextual help 
system, it understands text from users to a certain extent, 
based on natural language processing and recognising 
wording patterns from an emotions-related lexicon. The VC is 
always available. It knows the user’s name. It produces 
appropriate textual feedback and coaching according to the 
information that users have filled out in the emo.analyser.  
 
2. Functional  
The Virtual Coach provides users with useful information 
about emotional eating behaviour. It redirects users to 
valuable skills practices. It sends out reminders/invitations to 
use the emo.analyser. The user controls the whole process of 
onboarding. It starts with some basic options. The user has the 
ability to opt-out any time. It guides the user through the 
onboarding process (Fig. 3) – the whole course from first log 
in (1), via setting the personal profile (2), to arrival at the 
actual start-up screen (3), in which the user dictates how much 
time she spends on the intake procedure at that very moment. 
The more steps involved, the more knowledge about the user 
is collected.  
 
Figure 3. Compact onboarding 
The Virtual Coach provides the user with visualisations of the 
data generated from the questionnaires at intake and from data 
collected by the emo.analyser. Data is stored in a local folder 
on the smartphone.  
The option-based user interface (Fig. 4) presents the user 
with an overview of options with the help of which the user 
can respond. A multi-functional keyboard makes it easier for 
the user to find essential issues such as favourite skills 
practices, pages last visited, and fun stuff just by pushing the 
right button instead of typing words. 

141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4. Option-based keyboard 
3. Ecological Momentary Assessments (EMA) 
Ecological Momentary Assessments are applied to 
systematically collect data about daily experience and feelings 
of the users, as well as the context of use, for instance, through 
a user-friendly smartphone application. Experience sampling 
is widely used in daily psychiatry practice [30][31], allowing 
to measure and record encountered feelings and emotions 
through mHealth applications in real time.  
The Virtual Coach sends out a daily message via the built-
in timeline, or via WhatsApp or Facebook Messenger  inviting 
the user to log in into the application to answer just one 
question: “Did you have cravings or binges today, in the last 
24 hours?”. As soon as she answers that question with a “yes”, 
she will be redirected to the emo.analyser.     
IV. 
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY 
Before starting developing a prototype of the above-
mentioned modules and functions, more research is needed to 
find out how the the target group experiences the validating 
and dialectical coaching strategies. That is why we put up an 
experimental study design first. For this vignette study - 
described under V. A. Vignettes study - we designed a low-
fidelity concept of the virtual coach to evaluate validating and 
dialectical strategies with target users. This concept version 
lacks the functionality of the emo.analyser and the 
conversational functionalities. Next step will be building a 
working prototype of the emo.analyser. The functional 
criteria, as drawn up along the lines of the Behaviour Chain 
Analysis [8, pp.57-58,75] from the Dialectical Behaviour 
Therapy will then be coupled with the outcomes of the 
vignette study, being the ratified coaching strategies.  
A. 
Vignettes study 
In the design of this experimental study, participants are 
presented with scenarios describing the daily life of a persona 
[8]. A persona is a fictional representation of the target group 
of emotional eaters. The persona experiences the very same 
negative emotions and also encounters food cravings that can 
lead to binge eating. The realistic scenarios are based on 
validated personas [9]. The depicted circumstances in the 
vignettes [33]-[35] will appeal to the emotions and feelings of 
the participants in the study. See Figure 5. Three different 
coaching strategies are presented at random to the 
participants: 1. validating response, 2. confronting or 
dialectical response, or 3. a combination of a validating and a 
dialectical response.  
 
Figure 5. Vignette, example. 
B. Research questions 
 
This research study aims at answering the following 
research questions:  
• 
Which coaching strategies do emotional eaters prefer 
just at the moment they are experiencing food 
cravings and are about to give in to binging?  
• 
Is there a relationship between the participant’s 
preferences and her personality traits?  
• 
Is there a relationship between the emotional eating 
behaviour (e.g., intensity, fierceness, what negative 

142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
emotion is dominating, time of the day etc.) and the 
participant’s preferences for a coaching strategy? 
 
We will ask the participants to state their opinion on the 
given scenario. Does it seem realistic to them? Do they relate 
to the personas? Do they find the given feedback useful? How 
would they respond to the provided feedback themselves? 
What kind of coaching style would they prefer?  
For the vignette study, we will use Qualtrics -  a tool to 
interrogate experiences and to distribute questionnaires [36]. 
C. Questionnaires and measures 
After answering the questions on the vignettes, 
participants will be referred to sequential inquiries to get to 
know them better: “What type of eater are you?” on eating 
behaviours, “Who are you?” on personality traits and “How 
do you feel at the moment?” on current emotions:   
1. the Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire (DEBQ) 
[26] with 33 questions to determine which eating 
behaviour out of emotional, external, and restraint 
eating behaviour is prevalent, using a 5-point Likert 
scale (1=never; 5=very often),  
2. The Quick Big Five Personality Test [27], based on 
the five-factor model that describes five broad trait 
dimensions, to identify the personality traits 
neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, 
agreeableness, and conscientiousness, using a 5-
point Likert scale (1=does not apply; 5=applicable). 
The results of this questionnaire will give us more 
clues about what personality traits will be suitable for 
the application.  
3. The Positive and Negative Affect Scales (PANAS) 
[37], containing 20 feelings and emotions the 
participants experience at this particular moment, 
using a 5-point Likert scale (1=very slightly or not at 
all; 5=extremely). 
 
During the whole time span of the research study, namely 
seven days, some Ecological Momentary Assessments 
[29][30] will be carried out. Participants receive text messages 
(SMS) on a daily basis, with an invitation to log in to the 
application and answer to just one question: “Did you have 
cravings / have a binge today?’ In case of a “YES”, 
participants will be redirected to a questionnaire named 
emo.analyser, the trying-plane for the future emo.analyser 
application.  In this questionnaire, participants will be asked 
to fill in what happened right before they gave in to a binge, 
and which emotions/feelings they were experiencing.  
In this chain of events and emotions, they analyse the 
vulnerabilities that made them open to experiencing specific 
events, developing strong feelings and emotions over it, and 
making them giving in to binges. In case of a “NO” 
participants will be invited to answer some additional 
questions.   
 
D. Methods 
The target group consists of emotional eaters (N=45), 
women, age 18 years and upwards. Participants are recruited 
via a Dutch franchise organisation of dietitian nutritionists, 
who are specialised in treating emotional eating behaviours.  
First, a pilot study will be conducted with 2-3 participants 
to validate the study protocol and to test the questionnaires. 
Participants are ensured in the anonymity of their 
participation. Data collected during this research study will be 
analysed for research purposes only. The data will be stored 
anonymously and safely on a local server, using an encrypted 
secure network connection (https) only the main researchers 
have access to.  
Recruited participants are invited by email to visit the 
stated link. They will be asked to fill out the demographics 
data, such as (nick) name, age, gender, weight, length, place 
of residence.  
Participants will be invited to participate in a semi-
structured post-interview to discuss their experiences with the 
presented dialogues and their motivation for picking specific 
answers. Post-interviews will be audio recorded with 
permission of participants. 
V. 
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents the research study design to evaluate 
and validate coaching strategies that emotional eaters prefer 
in a personalised virtual coach, based on their emotional state 
and context. The potential contribution of this research is 
divided into two objectives.  
First, a multidisciplinary holistic user-centered design 
approach [38] provides valuable insights into preferred 
persuasive coaching strategies of the target users for 
developing a meaningful and persuasive virtual coaching 
system for self-managing emotions. One of the primary goals 
of the personalised virtual coach for emotional eaters is to 
raise their awareness of their own emotions and to enhance a 
positive change of attitude towards accepting the negative 
emotions they experience daily. Ultimately, improving 
emotion regulation is expected to lead to better weight 
management of emotional eaters.  
Second, it will gain more insights into applying the 
behaviour change techniques from health psychology and 
persuasive technology for virtual coaching application. Next 
step is to focus on developing virtual coaching systems that 
coach the user by analysing real-time behaviour by providing 
real-time personalised timely feedback based on user profile, 
events, and context. Coaching-based applications can provide 
self-management support for patients at times when a 
therapist is not available, or in the case that the user needs 
personalised anonymous help that is always within reach, 
which is the case for emotional eaters who often experience 
feelings of shame. 
After conducting the vignette study we will be able to 
provide personalised and customised feedback and coaching 
based on experienced and digested emotions and feelings that 
users have entrusted to the emo.analyser, so the next step will 
be to construct the first working prototype of the 
emo.analyser. After user evaluation, the functionalities of the 
emo.analyser will be integrated into a choice-based user 
interface.  
To conclude, this study makes two main contributions: (1) 
gaining more insights in: a) what coaching strategies do 

143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
emotional eaters prefer; b) what triggers emotional eaters to 
(over)eat and at what times of the day the craving usually 
occur; c) emotional states at the moments of experiencing 
food cravings and giving in to binges, and (2) we aim at 
developing a general personalised eCoaching framework, 
enabling the optimal translation of successful behaviour 
change techniques, such as dialectical strategies, into 
persuasive coaching strategies implementable for broader 
target groups. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  A. Dol, C. Bode, H. Velthuijsen, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, and T. 
van Strien, “The use of dialectical dialogues in a personalized virtual 
coach for obese emotional eaters: A research protocol for a field study 
among target group,” The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2017), ISSN: 2308-
4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-540-1, pp.101-104. 
[2] 
World Health Organisation, Obesity and Overweight. October 2017. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ 
[retrieved: November 29, 2017] 
[3] 
The GBD Overweight Collaborators, Health Effects of Overweight and 
Obesity in 195 Countries over 25 Years, 2015, The New England 
Journal of Medicine.  
[4]  T. Van Strien, C.P. Herman, and M.W. Verheijden, “Eating style, 
overeating and weight gain. A prospective 2-year follow-up study in a 
representative Dutch sample,” Appetite, 12;59(3), pp. 782-789, 2012. 
[5] 
J. Harvey-Berino et al. “Internet delivered behavioral obesity 
treatment,” Prev Med, 08;51(2), pp. 123-128, 2010. 
[6] 
M.J. Hutchesson et al. “eHealth interventions for the prevention and 
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review with 
meta-analysis,” Obesity Reviews, 16, 5, pp. 376-392, 2015. 
[7] 
G.M. Manzoni, F. Pagnini, S. Corti, E. Molinari, and G. Castelnuovo, 
“Internet-based behavioral interventions for obesity: An updated 
systematic review,” Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental 
Health, 7, pp. 19-28, 2011.  
[8] 
M.M. Linehan, “Skills training manual for treating borderline 
personality disorder,” New York, NY US: Guilford Press, 1993. 
[9] 
A. Dol, O.A. Kulyk, H. Velthuijsen, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, and 
T. van Strien, “Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach ‘Denk je 
zèlf!’ for Emotional Eaters through the Design of Emotion-enriched 
Personas,” International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8, 
3&4, 2016. 
[10] H. Geissler, M. Hasenbein, S. Kanatouri, and R. Wegener, “E-
Coaching: Conceptual and Empirical Findings of a Virtual Coaching 
Programme International,” Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and 
Mentoring. Vol 12 (2), pp. 165 – 187, 2014. 
[11] S. Kelders, O.A. Kulyk, L. van Gemert-Pijnen, and H. Oinas-
Kukkonen, “Selecting effective persuasive strategies in behavior 
change support systems,” In: Third International Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS 2015), In conjunction with 
PERSUASIVE 2015, June 3-5, Chicago, USA, 1 – 6, 2015. 
[12] N. Beerlage-de Jong, A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A. Voss, R. 
Sanderman, and J. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Combining User-Centered 
Design with the Persuasive Systems Design Model; The Development 
Process of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring System for 
Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes,” Int. Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, 6, pp. 262-271, 2014. 
[13] O.A. Kulyk, C. den Daas, S. David, and L. van Gemert-Pijnen, “How 
Persuasive are Serious Games, Social Media and mHealth 
Technologies for Vulnerable Young Adults? Design Factors for Health 
Behavior and Lifestyle Change Support: Sexual Health Case,” In: Proc. 
of the 3d Int. Workshop on Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS 
2015). In conjunction with PERSUASIVE 2015, June 3-5, Chicago, 
USA, 2015. 
[14] J. Weizenbaum, “ELIZA--A Computer Program For the Study of 
Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine,” 
Communications of the ACM. Volume 9, Number 1, pp. 36-35, 1966. 
[15] T.W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated 
interventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational 
agents,” Patient education and counseling 92(2), pp. 142-148, 2013. 
[16] O.A. Kulyk, H.J.A. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, and J.E.W.C. van 
Gemert-Pijnen, “Personalized Virtual Coaching for Lifestyle Support: 
Principles for Design and Evaluation,” International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, 6;3&4, pp. 300-309, 2014. 
[17] A. Van Wissen, C. Vinkers, and A. van Halteren, “Developing a 
Virtual Coach for Chronic Patients: A User Study on the Impact of 
Similarity, Familiarity and Realism,” Proceedings 11th International 
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016. 
[18] E. Hudlicka, “Virtual training and coaching of health behavior: 
Example from mindfulness meditation training,” Patient Education and 
Counseling. 92, pp. 160–166, 2013.  
[19] R.J. Beun, et al., “Improving Adherence in Automated e-Coaching. A 
case from Insomnia Therapy,” Proceedings 11th International 
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016. 
[20] A. Lentferink et al., “Self-tracking and Persuasive eCoaching in 
Healthy Lifestyle Interventions: Work-in-progress Scoping Review of 
Key Components,” Proceedings of the Fourth Int. Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS16), co-located with the 11th 
Int. Conference PERSUASIVE 2016, Salzburg, Austria, April 5, pp. 
15-35, 2016.  
[21] T.R. Lynch, A.L. Chapman, M.Z. Rosenthal, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. 
Linehan, “Mechanisms of change in dialectical behavior therapy: 
Theoretical and empirical observations,” J Clin Psychol. 04;62(4), pp. 
459-480, 2006. 
[22]   D.L. Safer, C.F. Telch, and E.Y. Chen, “Dialectical Behaviour Therapy 
for Binge Eating and Bulimia,” New York: The Guilford Press, 2009. 
[23]  Beun, R.J., Brinkman, W.P., Fitrianie, S., Griffioen-Both, F., Horsch, 
C., Lancee, J., Spruit, A.G.L. Improving Adherence in Automated e-
Coaching. A case from Insomnia Therapy. Proceedings 11th 
International Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, 
April 5–7 (2016) 
[24] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive Systems Design: 
Key Issues, Process Model, and System Features. Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems,” 24(1), 28, pp. 485-500, 
2009. 
[25]  Oinas-Kukkonen, H., A foundation for the study of behavior change 
support systems. Pers Ubiquit Comput. 17, 1223-1235 (2013) 
[26]  T. Van Strien, J.E.R. Frijters, G.P.A. Bergers, and P.B. Defares, ”The 
Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire (DEBQ) for Assessment of 
Restrained, Emotional, and External Eating Behavior,” International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 5(2), pp. 295-315, 1986. 
[27]  The Quick Big Five Persoonlijkheidstest. Handleiding. A.A. Vermulst 
& J.E.M. Gerris. Leeuwarden CDC.  
[28] M. Dainton, M., Zelley, E.D.: Chapter 5: Explaining theories of 
persuasion. Applying communication theory for professional life: A 
practical 
introduction 
(1st 
ed.) 
(2004) 
Retrieved 
from 
http://ezproxy2.utwente.nl:2180/upm-
data/4985_Dainton_Chapter_5.pdf 
[29]  https://www.chatbots.org/chatbot/ [retrieved: November 29, 2017] 
[30] “PIONIER Project,” University of Groningen, The Netherlands. 
Available at: http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/ [retrieved: 
November 29, 2017].  
[31] S. Shiffman, A.A., Stone, and M.R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary 
assessment,” Annu Rev Clin Psychol, 4:1–3.6, 2008. 
[32] I. Myin-Germeys et al., ”Experience sampling research in 
psychopathology: opening the black box of daily life,” Psychological 
Medicine, 39, pp. 1533-1547, 2009. 
[33] Experimental Vignette Studies in Survey Research, Christiane 
Atzmüller and Peter M. Steiner, Methodology 2010; Vol. 6(3):128–
138. DOI: 10.1027/1614-2241/a000014, 2010 Hogrefe Publishing 

144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[34] The Use of Vignettes in Qualitative Research, Christine Barter and 
Emma Renold, Issue 25, 1999, Social Research Update is published 
quarterly by the Department of Sociology, University of Surrey, 
Guildford GU2 7XH, England.  
[35] Finch, J. (1987) The Vignette Technique in Survey Research, 
Sociology, 21 (1) pp.105-114 
[36] Qualtrics 
Available 
at: 
https://www.qualtrics.com/ 
[retrieved: 
November 29, 2017] 
[37] D. Watson, L.A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, “Development and validation 
of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 54(6), pp. 1063-
1070, 1988. 
[38]  E.J. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al. “A holistic framework to improve the 
uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,” J Med Internet Res, vol.13, 
no. 4, 2011, e111.
 

