87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Reverse Paternalism in Medical and Clinical Engineering Practice 
 
Sarah Hammoud and Ali Hage-Diab 
Department of Biomedical Engineering  
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
11031556@students.liu.edu.lb, ali.hagediab@liu.edu.lb 
   
 
 
Hassan Khachfe 
Center for Quality Assurance, Institutional Assessment & 
Scientific Research (QAIASR) 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
 
Bassam Hussein 
Department of Industrial Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
bassam.hussein@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract— Professions are governed by ethical frameworks of 
moral standards each within its own professional boundaries.  
So often boundaries intersect and present ethical challenges 
that should be dealt with from the point of view of more than 
one professional ethical standard; such as in the case of 
engineering and medicine.   As the medical profession depends 
more and more on medical equipment for treatment and 
diagnosis, medical decisions present ethical dilemmas to the 
clinical engineer responsible for the purchase and maintenance 
of medical equipment.  One of these challenges is related to 
paternalism, which is the act of interfering with a person’s 
autonomy by making decisions for them claiming that it is “for 
their own good”.  This problem is universal, but more 
prevalent in countries where education and awareness are 
limited. In Lebanon for example, ethical challenges are widely 
spread in the field of medicine, though they are not being 
discussed in the literature. Throughout time, paternalism has 
found its way to turn into a new form, termed and defined for 
as reverse paternalism. Reverse paternalism refers to the act of 
sacrificing one’s autonomy and self-determination and giving 
another person or group the right for making decisions on 
their behalf. Some people, as moral agents, are giving up their 
autonomy and rights for making decisions to medical 
practitioners because “they know better”. The main focus of 
this paper is therefore on reverse paternalism that will be 
investigated as an ethical dilemma.  What exactly is Reverse 
Paternalism? What might be possible causations that led to its 
emergence? Are there regulations that restrict such kind of 
paternalism? Are medical practitioners to blame in such cases? 
And to what extent is there auditing over what happens in 
hospitals, private clinics, medical centers and institutions? We 
focus on Lebanon and try to compare it to other countries.  
Our aim is to shed light on this ethical dilemma and highlight 
how serious and wide spread it has become, by providing 
statistical data we have collected. 
Keywords – professionalism; medical ethics; engineering 
ethics; medicine; paternalism; reverse paternalism. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This study builds on a previous study identifying reverse 
paternalism in engineering and medicine as an emerging 
dilemma in developing countries such as the case of Lebanon 
[1].  This paper introduces more information about the issue.  
Different occupations and professions exist within 
different societies across the globe. People get educated to 
major in their fields of interest and decide to become 
professionals or not, because not all occupations are 
professions. A profession is a group of individuals in the 
same occupation voluntarily organized to earn a living by 
openly serving a moral idea in the most morally permissible 
way [2]. Lawyers, professors, scientists, doctors, engineers, 
etc., are all considered to constantly find themselves in 
positions of taking decisions that most probably will have 
impact on many people’s lives. They are said to be the ones 
that ‘know better’, because people tend to turn to them when 
it comes to life-dependant decisions. Consideration of 
professional or non-professional occupations differ from 
country to country.  In Lebanon, they are considered 
professionals, and to govern their behavior, moralities or 
moral standards have been arisen as guidelines for those 
professionals throughout their career. In general, we find 
three types of ethics, common morality, personal morality, 
and professional ethics. Common morality is the set of 
standards that is shared by almost everyone, personal ethics 
are those that contribute to moral beliefs that each person 
hold, whereas professional ethics are the set of standards 
adopted by professionals with certain characteristics [2]. 
These characteristics include formal codes, focus on 
important profession’s issues, can have negative/positive 
dimensions, and most importantly, they take precendence 
over personal morality  [2]. Each profession should include a 
basic methodology for deciding what is morally right and 
what is morally wrong in one’s professional conduct to 
qualify whether an action is right or wrong. This normative 
ethics and principles lead to the codes of ethics that 
demonstrate the accountabilities and duties of each 

88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
profession and when these codes are followed, the field 
flourishes and brings changes to the field and the world as 
well. Unfortunately, there is no existence of an ideal society, 
despite the presence of ethical codes and rules, society will 
face deviations from the proper standards that are stated. 
What would be even more challenging is the normalization 
of deviance from what is allowed. Normative ethics and 
standards are ought to be embedded in societies, so that 
professions are built on an ethical base. An ethical base is 
important in order to practice the profession in all legal, 
ethical and safe ways possible. As mentioned previously, 
there is a difference between personal ethics and professional 
ethics. What might be ethical in a person’s opinion must not 
be allowable at one’s workplace. Therefore, it is very 
important to differentiate and control one’s ability to have 
both. Ethical codes of standards are thus an obligation to 
protect workers, and society as a whole, as well as keep them 
as safe as possible. As a professional, one has the duty to 
keep their society prioritized. Deviations from those 
standards are proportional to risk and inversely proportional 
to safety. The increase of deviation from proper standards 
increases safety risks. Whenever one is in a position of doing 
harm, normalizing this act by doing it numerously, there is 
automatically an increase of risk on themselves, as well as 
the ones surrounding them. This increase compromises 
safety mandated by the codes of ethics and standards. In 
other words, ethical challenges are based on deviation from 
ethical norms and codes. First of all, one has to identify a 
profession, then categorize each occupation as a profession 
or not, which is normally dependent on the country. In some 
countries, engineering counts as a profession and therefore 
has specific norms of codes of ethics governing this 
profession, and in other countries such as in the USA, 
engineering is not a profession. We mainly find two models 
of 
professionalism, 
the 
business 
model, 
and 
the 
professionalism model. Priorities of the business model are 
mainly monetary, making profit within the boundaries set by 
law, gain monopoly over certain services to increase profit, 
and persuade governmental regulators that a great deal of 
autonomy is granted in the workplace [2]. The professional 
model includes an implicit trust relationship with the public 
known as the Social Contract, which will be focused on 
thoroughly throughout our study regarding the field of 
engineering and medicine. The model focuses on holding 
paramount the public’s safety, health and welfare, and might 
only seek monopoly if it is to protect the public from 
incompetent providers for example [2].  
In countries where engineering and medicine are 
professions governed by codes of ethics, it is important to 
shed light on what is known as a “Social Contract”. This 
contract is conducted between a professional such as an 
engineer, and between the public. It is a contract that ensures 
trust between them, maintaining the public’s health, safety 
and welfare prioritized, and guaranteeing that those 
professionals will do what is possible to keep that trust built 
up. “What does an engineer do when no one is looking?” 
Everyone in the society that has the ability of rational 
decision-making is a moral agent. Moral agency leads to acts 
of responsibility, and a moral agent is therefore responsible 
for their actions. An engineer, furthermore, is ethically 
responsible for the decisions that are taken concerning the 
society. The social contract is of high importance because it 
includes the engineer and the people they work with. This 
does not only apply to engineers, but also to the individuals 
in society. They are moral agents as soon as they take 
rational decisions and take responsibility for them. Engineers 
are concerned with accountability for what they have done in 
the past, present and will do in the future. They are not only 
obliged to adhere to regulatory norms and standard practices 
of engineering, but also to satisfy the standard of reasonable 
care. Since there are two types of responsibility, professional 
responsibility and liability [2]. Any intentionally, recklessly 
or negligently caused harm will have consequences, and they 
will be held accountable or legally responsible for them. The 
standard of care is a demanding norm that goes beyond what 
is asked to be done by professional engineers. Safety, 
competency, efficiency, quality and responsibility are all 
examples included in the standards that need to be applied by 
professionals. What might hold engineers back from acting 
responsible can be attributed to self-interest, self-deception 
or ignorance. Engineers should not have egocentric 
tendencies, a microscopic vision or an uncritical acceptance 
of authority, that decreases the engineer’s sense of personal 
accountability for consequences for the public. Engineers are 
expected to respect professional confidentiality and honesty 
at work, and any form of dishonesty is an impediment to 
being professionally trustworthy as they should be according 
to the social contract. Engineers have responsibilities and 
duties of providing what is best and beneficial for the public. 
In any case of harm, they are obliged to announce and make 
sure everyone is aware of that harm. They are in charge of 
alerting, informing and advising the public and avoid any 
conflict of interest, because health and safety of the public 
always comes first.  
This brings us to a point where we realize how much of 
unethical behavior occurs in our societies. Every field faces 
ethical challenges, and in fields like engineering or more 
precisely, clinical engineering, where technology and 
medicine merge, ethical challenges are more likely to be 
encountered because of the implications that are present. 
Implications might be personal, such as the impediments we 
have mentioned previously, meaning that engineers or 
doctors are causing these challenges. On the other side, there 
can be cultural and religious factors, depending on the type 
of society and the traditions or religious rules they are used 
to or abide by, meaning that ethical challenges arise from the 
public itself.  Despite the fact that both parties might be 
causing ethical dilemmas, there is no excuse of not trying to 
solve these dilemmas, by finding at least middle-way 
solutions. This means that we must first identify the problem 
we are addressing. The interaction of clinical engineers 
heads towards patients as well as doctors, and their duties 
regard their responsibility to the safety of both by gaining 
more insight of the nature of the doctor-patient relationship. 
A doctor-patient relationship is said to have certain 
characteristics governed by ethical guidelines. These 
guidelines are important in order to prevent ethical dilemmas   
that might turn into legal problems. When mentioning this 

89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
kind of relationship, paternalism is often an obvious 
challenge noticed in many societies, areas and fields. 
Paternalism, the act of interfering with a person’s autonomy 
by making decisions for them, claiming for them to be “for 
their own good” [2]. Paternalism can be defined but is very 
difficult to be outlined, as it not only depends on medical 
facts, but also needs to take patient’s views and judgements 
into consideration. This is why one should pay attention to 
where the patients come from, what culture or religion they 
follow, what beliefs and traditions they have. Doctors are 
ought to have more knowledge about the medical conditions 
of their patients, but this does not imply for them to act as if 
“they know better” when it comes to decision-making, 
especially life decisions. Paternalism is therefore an act that 
makes doctors take decisions for their patients regardless of 
the reasons. Ideally speaking, doctors would make decisions 
for their patients in order to save their lives, but in a 
materialistic world reality, there is a high chance of finding 
people that are more self-centered and aim for their own 
benefits. Instead of looking out for what is best for their 
patients, they search for a way of benefiting from each case. 
Patients who put trust in their doctors, believe in the fact that 
they know better and are afraid of not doing as they have 
been told to do. This gives rise to a phenomenon that has 
barely being addressed and has never been identified as an 
ethical challenge. Reverse paternalism, is when a patient 
sacrifices their autonomy and self-determination by giving 
another person (most probably their doctor) the right for 
making decisions for them. There are many reasons that 
might make patients act that way, and it is very important to 
shed light on it and categorize it as being something ethically 
wrong. Even though physicians might have wider knowledge 
about the medical status, it is not for sure that their priority is 
always the patient. Medicine, in general, is a field that is 
subject to ethical complications and this makes it more 
vulnerable to ethical dilemmas. Reverse paternalism is 
another way of saying that patients are encouraging 
paternalism and making it easier for physicians to act that 
way, without even considering the possible consequences. 
Sometimes it is done intentionally, and very often it is done 
unintentionally, without noticing that one is actually 
compromising his or her moral agency.  
A study performed in Lebanon, a rather developing 
country, has shown substantial proof of the presence of 
reverse paternalism [1]. It is of high interest, to study the 
phenomena in other areas as well, including developed, 
developing, and underdeveloped countries. It is also 
important to focus on the fact that engineers have 
responsibility towards the awareness of the public of such 
dilemmas, especially when related to medical fields, such as 
the doctor-patient relationship.  
In Section II of this paper, an overview of the diversities 
in ethics from around the world is presented. There are 
differences in the background and history of the way ethical 
regulations have been made in Africa, Asia or the Western 
countries. In Section III, the main types of professional 
ethics are identified, starting from Bioethics, to Medical 
ethics, and Engineering ethics, and of course the definition 
and duties of the Bioethical Engineer. It provides an 
explanation of the responsibilities of engineers in general, 
and clinical engineers in specific. Section IV defines 
paternalism and explains the extent of it in our society, by 
giving examples of a specific topic (the increase of C-
sections in Lebanon). It shows how paternalism is 
encouraged by the patients themselves and triggered clinical 
engineers to identify a new ethical dilemma named reverse 
paternalism. It also explains the decision-making process and 
how it should be applied. Section V comprises the 
importance of informed consents in the fields of medicine 
and engineering. The survey we have done is represented in 
part B of that section, which shows the quantification of 
reverse paternalism in Lebanon. Section VI finally closes the 
article with a conclusion we have made about this issue 
concerning Lebanon. We also gave recommendations and 
mentioned what our aim as future work will be considering 
this subject in other societies.   
II. 
DIVERSITY OF ETHICS WORLDWIDE 
Ethics can be classified into a variety of categories, either 
as professional and non-professional, or with respect to 
cultural, religious, or even moral interpretation. It is a group 
of principles, values, rules and regulations, beliefs, morals 
and rules of conduct [2]; a group that organizes either the 
goals, or the actions that need to be implemented for certain 
achievements. Ethics can also be described as a system of 
moral principles that differentiate between what is right and 
wrong, a norm of conducts that recommends concepts of 
acceptable and unacceptable behavior [1]. 
When analyzing ethics one must take into consideration 
that it has diverse perspectives depending on each area of 
interest, because ethics are local. There are countries that 
have their ethical norms of conduct affected by their culture 
rather than the main religion governing their area. Then there 
is western and non-western ethics, each having different 
ethical expectations. Studies that compare ethics in countries 
with different cultural dimensions, show that these 
dimensions could serve as predictors of the ethical standards 
desired in a specific society [3]. National culture plays a 
fundamental role in forming cultural values [3]. Ethics is the 
discipline that examines one’s moral standards as well as the 
moral standards of a society. Whenever a subject is to be 
analyzed based on ethical standards or rules in any society, 
one has to take into account on what these rules are based on. 
As mentioned before, each society has their ethics embedded 
in different ideas or beliefs.  
In most of Africa, a group of societies has evolved ethical 
systems to guide social and moral behavior. African 
philosophers have been evolving their values for the last 
three decades in order to make some contribution to the 
understanding of African ethical thinking. So, through their 
critical analyses and arguments, philosophers try to explain, 
sharpen, clarify or even enlarge the understanding of the 
concepts and issues of morality. In order to do so, one has to 
approach this subject by an inquiry into African moral 
language and search for the word ‘ethics’ in the different 
African languages. It is interesting to mention that most of 
the languages in Africa do not have a direct equivalent of the 
word ‘ethics’ or ‘morality’ [4]. But what is even more 

90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
interesting and relevant to our study, is that, the African 
religion is traditionally characterized to be a mystic religion 
[4]. This indicates that African ethics is independent of 
religion and makes it an autonomous moral system. It is 
correct to regard African religion as ethical, instead of 
regarding African ethics as religious.  
Moral personhood is attained in the later years by 
carrying out the obligations that transform one from the it-
status of early childhood into the ethical mature personhood. 
Thus, one can say that the concept of a person in African 
thought embodies ethical presuppositions.  Different 
societies in Africa have various definitions for the word 
“person”. A central notion would be that an individual can be 
a human being without being a person. Even though, it must 
be noted that not being a person does not withdraw any right 
as a human being. Not being a person simply implies not 
having a good character, if used normatively. But how is a 
good character defined? How do African ethics define and 
differentiate between right and wrong? According to 
traditional thinkers, a good character is built up by deeds, 
habits, and behavior patterns considered by the society as 
worthwhile because of their consequences for human welfare 
[4]. Generosity, truthfulness, faithfulness, respect, justice, 
honesty, hospitality, etc., are examples of the goods that give 
a person a good character in the African society. This again 
implies that African ethics is humanist, thus a moral system 
that is preoccupied with human welfare. According to 
Monica Wilson, “The basis of morality was fulfillment of 
obligation to kinsmen and neighbors, and living in amity 
with them” [5]. An important statement was made by Edwin 
Smith claiming that the norm of right and wrong is custom; 
that is, the good is that which receives the community’s 
approval; the bad is that which is disapproved. The right 
builds up society; the wrong tears it down. One is social; the 
other is anti-social [6].   
Criteria for ethics vary from culture to culture and field to 
field. The south Asian culture is a conglomeration of many 
religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam and 
Christianity [7]. Thus, ethical principles are mainly 
influenced by the culture of the south Asian countries. In 
terms of medical ethics, these civilizations have been 
influenced lately by the Western medicine during the 
colonial period [7].  When mentioning the field of medical 
ethics, the Hippocratic Oath is what comes first to the mind 
as well as the tenets of the early religious healing traditions 
of the West. There are also several Asian traditions of ethical 
tenets governing the physician-patient relationship [8]. In the 
field of contemporary medical ethics, the first codes of ethics 
were developed by the doctors in the USA in the first 
meeting of the American Medical Association (AMA) in 
1846. The impact of science and technology increased and 
traditional ethics have changed into an interdisciplinary field 
involving lawyers, historians, theologians, social scientists, 
physicians and other health professionals [9].  Every culture 
is ought to have an ordered moral system or set of norms to 
guide the behavior of their citizens. These are most of the 
times a reflection of both the nature of morality and the 
culture’s own moral repertoire, mostly religion and theology. 
They have also played an active role in the enterprise of the 
early Greek approaches and trajectories for the ethical life 
and vice versa [10]. Certain movements in recent times have 
sought to return to the ancient Greek insights (from Aristotle 
to the Stoics) to avert the crisis that some writers, such as 
Foucault 
following 
Nietzsche, 
argument 
has 
been 
precipitated by the codes of Christian moralism and 
rationalism of the (European) Enlightenment [10].  
When intellectuals in India come together to talk about 
ethics in Indian tradition they ask one very important 
question: “Has there ever been ethics in India?” [10]. Indian 
thinkers recognized morality's pervasiveness throughout 
human life and culture, and did not shy away from inquiry 
into the nature of morality of ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ or ‘good’ 
and ‘bad’. In Indian philosophy, one begins with the 
practices that are embedded in all human cognitive and 
aesthetic forms [10].  Thus, we can assign India as a 
civilization whose roots recede into antiquity, and expected 
to have a variety of ethical systems within the Indian 
tradition. The notion of ethics in India has undergone 
significant shifts in meaning and emphasis over the long 
history of Indian philosophical speculation [10]. This is also 
true with respect to Western ethics where classical and 
modern moral philosophy is sharply distinguished by the 
work of Henry Sidwick in his Method of Ethics [10].  
As a conclusion, ethics can be identified as well as 
defined in many ways, but what Western, Asian, African and 
most of the countries agree on, is that ethics serves as 
guidance for their societies to distinguish between ‘good’ 
and ‘bad’. Differences lie in the extent of how much of 
culture and religion influences these ethical regulations.   
III. 
THE MAIN TYPES OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
This study’s main objective concerns ethics in the field of 
biomedical/clinical engineering, the intersection of bioethics, 
medical ethics and engineering ethics (Figure 1).  In order to 
understand bioethics from an engineering perspective, the 
three will be defined, as well as a description of the 
relationship and contribution to one another, will be 
provided. An explanation of the ethical frame of each field 
will be given by demonstrating their standards and codes of 
ethics, in addition to their ethical relation in a clinical 
engineering context. Most importantly, there will be a 
detailed description of the applications, principles, and 
ethical requirements of clinical engineering, leading to the 
profession of bioethical engineering. A principle is a basic 
truth that is used as a basis for ethical reasoning by guiding a 
specific action or behavior, also helping in assisting moral 
agents in making moral decisions where its guidance is more 
general than that of laws [2]. 
A. Bioethics, Medical Ethics, and Engineering Ethics 
Bioethics is an activity; it is a shared, reflective 
examination of ethical issues in health care, health science, 
and health policy [1]. It is a discussion and a relatively new 
field that emerged due to new medical technologies and legal 
cases that have thrown up ethical issues. Bioethics is a 
multidisciplinary, where bioethicists are clinically, legally 
and philosophically ‘informed’, by learning from doctors and 
other scientists that work in clinical and research areas of 

91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
biomedicine. It is a discussion that is often sparked with new 
developments due to the enhancements of clinical scientific 
technologies, but also raises new questions about old issues.   
 Medical ethics is a system of morals and principles 
being applied to situations that are specific to the medical 
world and the practice of medicine. It formally considers the 
morality of medical decision-making and addresses thereby 
the wide ethical principles that impact not only physicians 
and healthcare providers, but also the patients [11]. It also 
concerns the code of ethics of healthcare providers. Ethics in 
general can be seen as systemic rules or principles that point 
out the right and wrong of actions, in addition to the good 
and bad of the motives and ends of these actions. Another 
definition would be that it is a moral construct focused on the 
medical issues of medical practitioners, stating the principles 
of proper professional conduct concerning the rights as well 
as the duties of physicians, patients, and fellow practitioners, 
in addition to the care of patients and in relation to their 
families [12]. What is important to notice, is that the history 
of medical ethics goes far beyond that of bioethics, since it 
began with the Hippocratic Oath. “To treat the ill to the best 
of one’s ability, to preserve a patient’s privacy, to teach the 
secrets of medicine to the next generation, etc…” [13]. 
Medical ethics has four commonly accepted principles 
excerpted from Beauchamp and Childress [14]:   
1. Principle of respect for autonomy 
2. Principle of non-maleficence 
3. Principle of beneficence 
4. Principle of justice 
Engineering ethics stands for the set of ethical standards 
and principles ruling the behavior of engineers in their title 
role as professionals. The term profession has been presented 
in the introduction and will be explained later on in relation 
to bioethical engineers. A profession is motivated by either 
economic self-interest (business model) that makes the social 
practice or occupation concerned with making profits, or by 
ethical commitment (professional model), which makes 
professionals agree to regulate their practice in accordance to 
promoting the public good [2]. In the engineering profession, 
the ethical commitment of an engineer must overshadow the 
business and profit model because they agree to regulate 
themselves by high standards of technical competence and 
ethical practice so that their main goal remains in the area of 
the decent and fair of the public. The professional codes of 
ethics have been documented by several professional 
engineering societies, such as the National Society of 
Professional Engineers (NSPE), the American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers (ASME), the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the American Society 
of Biomedical Engineers (ASBME). The idea of ethical 
codes is rather uniform. A code can be general “Using their 
knowledge and skill for the enhancement of human welfare”, 
or specific “Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, 
health, and welfare of the public” [2]. According to the 
preamble stated in the National Society for Professional 
Engineers (NSPE) [2]:  
Engineering is an important and learned profession. As 
members of this profession, engineers are expected to exhibit 
the highest standards of honesty and integrity. Engineering 
has a direct and vital impact on the quality of life for all 
people. Accordingly, the services provided by engineers 
require honesty, impartiality, fairness, and equity, and must 
be dedicated to the protection of the public health, safety, 
and welfare. Engineers must perform under a standard of 
professional behavior that requires adherence to the highest 
principles of ethical conduct.  
  All of which brings us back to the point that an engineer 
should always be devoted to the protection of public health, 
safety and well-being; even if it takes going beyond what an 
engineer is expected to do.  
B. Biomedical Engineering Ethics 
Biomedical 
Engineering 
is 
the 
application 
of 
engineering principles and techniques on medicine and 
biology [1].  It comprises design and problem solving skills 
of engineering with medical and biological sciences to 
enhance the quality of people’s life, by evolving medical 
health care and technology.  Clinical Engineering is a sub-
specialty of Biomedical Engineering concerned with 
healthcare delivery.  Each profession is ought to include a 
basic methodology for deciding what is morally right and 
what is morally wrong in one’s professional conduct [1]. 
Ethics is therefore a central concept and not a peripheral 
one, because its principles guide biomedical engineers to 
recognize ethical problems and attempt to solve them. This 
is why there is a code of ethics that emphasizes the major 
canons for biomedical engineers, helping them to recognize, 
think critically and engulf the ethical problems they might 
face. One important thing is the responsibility they have 
towards their profession as well as them being fully 
attentive of the potential for their professional knowledge 
and skills to affect health and human life. Public health, 
safety, and well-being are paramount considerations, and 
ethical responsibilities incorporate those of engineers and 
medical practitioners. Thus, the moral obligations of 
medicine and biomedical engineering diverge due to the 
specialized nature of both practices. It should be noted that  
biomedical 
engineers 
are 
considered 
as 
indirect 
practitioners; the technologies and techniques they advance 
co-determine medical practice and affect the medical field 
as well [15]. Three types of ethics are manifested in 
biomedical engineering: Professional ethics, Patient ethics, 
and Natural & Human ethics [14]. Honesty, fairness, and 
not publishing false data comprise professional ethics. 
Honesty and confidentiality are necessary to allow engineers 
to conduct research with patients comprising patient ethics. 
Preserving the standards of nature and not crossing the line 
between enhancing one’s quality of life and changing their 
traits comprise natural and human ethics. Again, Respect for 
autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice, are 
the most widely used frameworks and provide an extensive 
consideration for biomedical engineering ethics while 
analyzing bioethical issues. 

92
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. The Bioethical Engineer  
Since the professional does profess, he asks that he 
trusted. The client is not a true judge of the value of the 
service he receives; furthermore, the problems and affairs 
of men are such that the best of professional advice and 
action will not always solve them ... The client is to trust the 
professional; he must tell him all secrets which bear upon 
the affairs in hand. He must trust his judgement and skill. 
[16]  
Everett C. Hughes 
All kinds of professions are somehow related to 
bioethics, especially engineers and physicians who work to 
enhance the quality of life, care for the public’s health and 
safety. There is a need for bioethical sensibilities in the 
engineering codes of ethics such as those just mentioned. 
What is always expected from any professional in any field, 
is trust and reliability. Honesty, confidentiality and many 
other forms of honesty are of high importance in engineers. 
Society demands and puts trust in the professionals they 
deal with, from medical to engineering to legal and other 
professionals. Not only are they expected to be current and 
capable, but also honest, especially when undergoing 
medical treatment and dealing with healthcare providers, 
such as physicians, nurses, emergency personnel and others. 
Society cedes a substantial amount of trust to a relatively 
small group of experts; the professionals in increasingly 
complex and complicated disciplines that have grown out of 
the technological advances that began in the middle of the 
twentieth century and grew exponentially in its waning 
decades [16].  There is a contiuum among science, 
engineering and technology, becase many health problems 
require interrelated harmony among doctors, clinical 
engineers, and technicians [16]. Ethics related to these 
fields, are bioethics that govern what is clearly wrong and 
clearly right.  
All engineering projects are commnal; there would be no 
computers, there would be no airplanes, there would not 
even be civilization, if engineering were a solitary activity. 
What follows? It follows that we must be able to rely on 
other engineers; we must be able to trust their work. That is, 
it follows that there is a principle which binds engineering 
together, because without it the individal engineer would be 
helpless. This principle is truthflulness. [16] 
         Joseph Bronowski 
In order to gain the trust of a whole society, an engineer 
should first be able to meet the trustworthiness of the 
engineering community, which is articulated by the 
engineering profession through the codes of ethics. We have 
mentioned before that a good engineer is an engineer that 
has the traits of a professional character. A character that 
might go beyond what is asked from, in order to posses 
pride in technical excellence, social awareness and 
environmental consciousness [2]. Since there must be 
professional harmony between engineers, such as clinical 
engineers, medical practitioners, and physicians, the 
relationship should be based on honesty, trust and 
reliability, towards themselves and the society. In order to 
be trustworthy, engineers also have to be professionally 
responsible as well as legally. Engineers should be held 
accountable for not only what has been done in the past, but 
what will happen in the future. “What does an engineer do 
when no one is looking?” a social contract of professional 
intrinsic ethics controls this kind of contract between an 
engineer and society as a whole. A good clinical engineer 
knows that he is accountable for what is happening with 
patients when undergoing any kind of medical procedure. 
They satisfy a norm called the standard of care, which goes 
beyond basic job resposnibilites as defined by employment 
terms. According to the preamble of the code of ethics of 
the National Society for Professional Engineers (NSPE): 
Engineering is an important and learned profession. As 
members of this profession, engineers are expected to 
exhibit the highest standards of honesty and integrity. 
Engineering has a direct and vital impact on the quality of 
life for all people. Accordingly, the services provided by 
engineers require honesty, impartiality, fairness, and equity, 
and must be dedicated to the protection of the public health, 
safety, and welfare. Engineers must perform under a 
standard of professional behavior that requires adherence 
to the highest principles of ethical conduct.         
IV. 
FROM PATERNALISM TO REVERSE PATERNALISM 
Professionals possess the knowledge that qualifies them 
to be superior in the field they work in.  For example, 
medical doctors have more scientific and medical 
information, which might be a reason for them to act 
paternalistically. 
Paternalism 
is 
by 
definition, 
the 
interference of a state or a person with another person’s 
autonomy. This is motivated by the claim that this 
interference will provide benefit or protect from harm. 
Paternalism can take place in different areas of our personal 
and public life. It can be reasonable, when being protective 
and it can be unacceptable, when being beneficial for the 
wrong party. What we will focus on is medical paternalism, 
because as clinical engineers it is of our concern to provide 
safety and health for patients that undergo medical 
procedures, since there is always contact with any kind of 
medical equipment. In addition to that, biomedical/clinical 
engineers are in interaction not only with doctors, nurses, 
clinical research departments, etc., but also patients (Figure 
1). Moreover, as professional engineers, it is of our 
responsibility to protect and provide safety for these patients. 
This is why we have to make sure that paternalism does not 
completely incapacitate patients’ ability to make decisions. 
There lies an even bigger problem in the fact that paternalism 
is being asked for. For reasons, we are trying to find out, 
patients are giving physicians the opportunity to make 
decisions for them and thereby give up their moral agency. 
They do not realize that in some cases physicians might take 
advantage of those patients who leave their choices to the 

93
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
doctors they trust, blindly. Even though paternalism can 
sometimes be the correct way of handling patients, it is 
ethically unacceptable to not involve them in the decision-
making process. 
Figure 1. Diagram Illustration of the interaction of a Clinical Engineer [17]. 
 
A. Paternalism in our society 
Every moral agent can reason, make rational decisions 
and form self-interested judgments based on concepts of 
right and wrong conduct, being therefore responsible for 
their actions [2]. Moral responsibility for one’s actions is 
based on the concept of autonomy, that refers to the aptitude 
of a balanced individual to make an educated an un-coerced 
decision. In ethics, autonomy refers to a person’s capacity 
for self-determination and decision-making in the context of 
moral choices and making decisions based on a course of 
action out of respect for moral duty [14]. Paternalistic 
interventions are categorized into legitimate and illegitimate. 
They are legitimate when the patient is incapable of making 
an autonomous and voluntary decision. This implies that 
being or acting paternalistically needs certain conditions and 
is not always acceptable or even allowable.  
Medicine is facing a transformation for relocating the 
authority of decision making from physicians to patients. 
This is noted by a comparison of the ethical codes of the 
American Medical Association (AMA) in the last two 
centuries. In article II of the 1847 AMA ethical code entitled 
“Obligations of patients to their physicians”, the following 
statement was found in Section 6 [13]: 
“The obedience of a patient to the prescriptions of his 
physician should be prompt and implicit. He should never 
permit his own crude opinions as to their fitness, to influence 
his attention to them. A failure in one particular case may 
render an otherwise judicious treatment dangerous, and even 
fatal.” 
In contrast, AMA’s opinion in 1990 on “Fundamental 
Elements of the Patient-Physician Relationship” now states a 
radically different position [18]: 
“The patient has the right to make decisions regarding the 
health care that is recommended by his or her physician. 
Accordingly, 
patients 
may 
accept 
or 
refuse 
any 
recommended medical treatment.” 
Today, the principle of patient autonomy and self-
determination has emerged as the dominant ethos in health 
care, threatening in many instances to totally eclipse the 
principle of medical beneficence [18]. Sometimes, doctors 
act paternalistically by not explaining in a detailed manner 
why a patient needs to undergo certain treatments, because in 
their opinion “they know better” and patients most often will 
not understand. A pregnant woman sees her doctor regularly 
and begins to trust her, so when that doctor tells her that she 
needs to undergo caesarean operation instead of giving birth 
naturally, she would believe her. What matters to her is the 
safety and health of her child. But what is so dangerous 
about this issue, is that many women do not ask why. They 
do not pay attention to the fact that many doctors have so 
much self-interest that they only care for how much money 
they can make out of this operation. Women do not ask for 
all the information they deserve to know in order to 
understand the advantages and disadvantages or side effects 
of any treatment or surgery. This kind of “marketing” is very 
common in Lebanon and the rate of C-section (CS) patients 
is rising unbelievably, most of which are performed for 
nonmedical reasons. C-sections were introduced in clinical 
practice as a life saving procedure for the mother and the 
baby. In 1985, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
stated: “There is no justification for any region to have CS 
rates higher than 10-15%” [19]. According to a study done in 
2010, about the global numbers and costs of additionally 
needed and unnecessary Caesarean Sections performed per 
year, Lebanon is among the countries that have a rate of 
above 15% of C-sections with a percentage of 23.3% [20]. 
The rate of CSs in Lebanon is the highest in the Arab region, 
and the rates are still rising. In 2013, the Ministry of Public 
Health (MoPH) covered a rate of 44-45% CSs of total 
deliveries. Along with the Syrian crisis, the women 
delivering their babies in Lebanon by CSs is 35%, according 
to the UNHCR (collected data from the hospitals Syrian 
women were admitted to) which is higher than the rate in 
Syria (23%) [21]. Again showing an increase in comparison 
to the acceptable rate given by WHO (15%). WHO stated 
that they do not recommend achieving a specific rate at 
population level anymore, but urges focusing on the medical 
needs of women and the indications that necessitate the 
procedure [22]. In order to reduce the rate of unnecessary or 
repeated CSs, Vaginal Birth after CSs (VBAC) is rising in 
developing countries, whereas in Lebanon this rate is only of 
7%. Which is relatively low and indicates that women who 
undergo CSs are more likely to undergo repeated CSs due to 
the refusal of most physicians to perform VBAC [23].  
What we are addressing, is the right of patients to decide 
and gain full knowledge about their medical conditions. In 
this case, women must gain full knowledge about the risks 
they will have to handle when the CSs are unnecessary. They 
can result in major health risks and various complications for 
mothers and newborns, which might lead to significant 
burdens on health care systems [24]. Multiple systematic 
reviews indicated increase in adverse health consequences 
such as the need for antibiotic treatment [25]; neonatal 

94
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
intensive care unit admission [26]; blood transfusion [27]; 
hysterectomy [28]; and sometimes death [29], in addition to 
many others. Thus, acting paternalistically as a physician in 
such cases is not always beneficial for the patient. Factors 
that might lead to doctors advising women to go through CSs 
are the absence of national guidelines, diversity in medical 
schools (diversified practices and absence of unified medical 
standards in the field of maternal healthcare [30]), opposition 
of powerful stakeholders (opposing standardized regulations 
that aim to reduce the rate of CSs in the country [31]), 
absence of law, need for strengthened primary healthcare, 
unregulated medical practice, presence of medical insurance 
(women with medical insurance are more likely to have CSs 
than others [32]), higher hospitalization costs and benefits 
[33] as well as higher procedural costs and revenues [34]. 
Which implies that CSs ensure excessive profits for hospitals 
as they require higher bed occupancy and longer hospital 
stays that subsequently result from programmed births, 
which in turn increases the benefits of the hospital and leads 
to an increase in CSs rate. In Lebanon, the coverage of CSs 
by the MoPH and the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) 
insurance schemes and physician reimbursement are higher 
than those of vaginal or normal deliveries, which is of course 
associated with the preference of health providers to do more 
CSs [29]. This is evidence of practiced paternalism in 
Lebanon by medical physicians towards their pregnant 
patients of performing unnecessary CSs for the benefits of 
their own.       Paternalism is a pure realm of applied ethics, 
and raises many ethical and theoretical questions. How 
should we think about individual autonomy and its limits? 
What is the trade-off, if any, between regard for the welfare 
of another and respect for their right to make their own 
decisions? When does a physician have the right to be 
paternalistic? We have started our study in Lebanon, which 
seems to be one of the countries that suffer from medical 
paternalism. Traditional cultures across the world empower 
family members and doctors alike to “protect” patients from 
knowing the truth of their medical condition or by ruling 
their medical decisions as well. In countries like Japan, Iran, 
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Lebanon, these views are 
strongly tied to social norms and traditions that topple the 
western conception. Ethics does shed light on the concept of 
paternalism, in particularly medical paternalism, but what we 
have noticed is that there has been a reverse of paternalism 
coming from the patients themselves.  
B. Reverse paternalism 
As we have made clear, about the long practiced medical 
paternalism that doctors tend to make decisions for their 
patients. This is how they take advantage of their position as 
specialists having the power to reach personal achievements. 
We have identified an emerging ethical dilemma concerning 
the doctor-patient relationship that shows how patients 
themselves are encouraging the act of medical paternalism. 
This ethical issue is commonly present in the field of 
medicine in  a developing country like Lebanon and termed 
it for the first time as reverse paternalism. Reverse 
paternalism refers to the act of sacrificing one’s autonomy 
and self-determination and giving another person or group 
the right for making decisions on their behalf [1].  Whenever 
a patient refuses to choose a treatment procedure among 
other procedures and trusts the doctor to choose for them, we 
have a case of reverse paternalism. People have not 
acknowledged the severity of the presence of such an ethical 
issue yet. One of the reasons is the absence of regulations 
that specific to reverse paternalism that restrict physicians’ 
unethical behavior towards their patients. There is a lack of 
auditing and supervision over what happens in hospitals or 
clinics. What was also been noticed is that patients are not 
usually advised to seek second opinions about certain 
medical treatments or procedures. Many patients show too 
much dependence on their doctors, others are ignorant and 
do not seek information about their medical situation other 
than what their doctors tell them, some do not have the 
courage to question their doctors. Most of the time patients 
trust their physicians too much. Patients’ educational level, 
medical experiences, financial status and psychological 
states can play a huge role in enhancing this kind of 
paternalism. Paternalism induces power imbalance between 
health professionals and patients. Doctors have the medical 
knowledge that makes them superior to patients in making 
decisions as mentioned before. A decision-making process is 
a process of selecting a belief or a course of action among 
various alternative choices. There are seven main steps that 
highlight the importance of patients’ moral agency. These 
steps also include the principle of an informed consent of 
which we will provide a detailed explanation in the 
following section. Patients are advised to surrender to an 
epistemic authority. It is the process of selecting a belief or a 
course of action among various alternative choices. It is very 
important for patients to be aware of how this can be done.  
The main steps are:  
1. Identify decision to be made 
2. Gather relevant information  
3. Identify alternatives 
4. Weigh evidence 
5. Choose among alternatives  
6. Take action  
7. Review decision and consequences 
 
Table I, as shown in the Appendix, illustrates a 
comparison between how decision-making should occur and 
how it is done in Lebanon [1]. The description of how it is 
happening in Lebanon is only generalized and points out 
how important it is to solve this issue and search for 
recommendations. Reasons are numerous and most of them 
might be of cultural sources. There is a strong relationship of 
dominance and affection between the way decisions are 
made and the cultural perceptions. Each culture brings its 
own views and values to the health care system, which alters 
health care beliefs, health practices and the nature of doctor-
patient relationships [1]. Mutual respect and appreciation of 
roles is the basic guideline on which a healthy relationship 
should be based on. Professionals should not abuse their 
position by manipulating or coercing patients against their 
will, so patients must not coerce professionals to go against 
their fundamental ethical convictions and professional values 
[35].   

95
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Clinical Engineers and Reverse Paternalism 
Biomedical/Clinical 
engineers 
have 
a 
range 
of 
interactions in which they might be required to engage in a 
hospital setting (Figure 1).  In cooperation with doctors, they 
share duties towards patients. They are involved in medical 
operations and accepted medical practices between the 
doctor and the patient to ensure efficacy and safety. Thus, 
clinical engineers must act in a patient-centered manner and 
apply engineering principles in managing medical systems 
and devices in the patient setting. Since engineers are 
responsible for decisions taken about particular designs that 
will affect the lives of patients and financial well-being of 
many people, give professional advice, they are obliged to 
regard responsibility towards the health and safety of 
patients. As biomedical engineers, the current doctor-patient 
relationship presented in our society, has triggered our sense 
of responsibility. Reverse paternalism is an ethical dilemma 
that interferes with decisions taken by engineers working in 
the medical field. It is of our duty to alert and inform the 
public so their moral agency keeps protected. We have 
therefore, for the first time, identified, quantified and 
discussed this issue by assigning it as a problem in various 
fields such as medical diagnosis and treatment in Lebanon. 
So if someone asks if engineers really do have patients, in 
order to be concerned for an issue such as reverse 
paternalism, the answer is clearly yes. In the fourth canon of 
the National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) it is 
stated that [16]:  
Engineers shall act for each employer or client as faithful 
agents or trustees.  
Furthermore, the preamble to the NSPE code affirms: 
Engineering has a direct and vital impact on the quality 
of life for all people. Biomedical engineers design and test 
devices to be used to treat diseases and to ameliorate the 
quality of life of individual patients [16]. Thus, the real 
clients of clinical engineers are physicians, but being the 
trustee of the public, the devices and systems must hold 
paramount health, safety, and welfare. This makes patients 
indirect clients of engineers. At a minimum, engineers are 
part of the team that supports the physician, who in turn 
treats the patient. Which implies that the clinical engineer is 
held responsible to both, the client (physician) and patient 
(recipient of the engineered system) [16].   
V. 
INFORMED CONSENTS IN MEDICINE AND 
ENGINEERING 
We will  take a  closer  look  at  the  concept of  informed  
consents. The principle of autonomy implies that a patient 
has the capacity to act intentionally, with understanding and 
without controlling influences that would influence a free 
and voluntary act. Which is the basis for the practice of 
informed consents. It is important to shed light on this 
process after noticing that this is still unknown to a large 
portion of the public.   
A. The importance of informed consents 
Informed consents can be defined as the process that gets 
a patient’s permission before being subjected to healthcare 
interventions. The patient is requested to consent before 
receiving therapy, or a clinical researcher asks a research 
applicant before signing them up into clinical trial. It 
comprises a clear appreciation and understanding of the 
facts, implications and consequences of the specific therapy, 
surgery or trial as well as providing all relevant facts. A 
physician is obliged to give a detailed explanation of every 
step of a treatment, the reason and possible side effects to the 
patient, and thereby get their permission. This is done by 
providing them with a document that contains all the 
information the patient has to be aware of in order to 
accurately go through the decision-making process we have 
explained previously. Certainly, no information should be 
kept from the patient so that they are able to form a rational 
decision and avoid severe ethical issues arising from the lack  
of sufficient data. Informed consents are another way of 
respecting moral agents’ autonomy and right of taking 
decisions related to their health. Mental disability, sleep 
deprivation, Alzheimer’s disease or being in a coma, or 
immaturity are cases of limited moral agency, implying that 
other individuals are certified to give consent on their behalf, 
such as parents, siblings, or legal guardians of a child. 
Informed consents can be divided into two parts, one 
containing the information specific to what type of medical 
intervention, and the second one comprising the consent. The 
information component refers to disclosure of information 
and comprehension of what is disclosed giving the patient 
the chance to consider its contents in their decision-making 
process. The consent component refers to that the decision 
about to be made is voluntary and permission is given to 
proceed. Note that informed consents are collected according 
to guidelines from the fields of medical and research ethics 
[1]. We have found out by a survey we will provide in the 
next section, that many patients have never received neither 
heard of informed consents. Which is ethically unacceptable 
especially in cases of surgeries and medical interventions 
with probable side effects. Permission is often taken verbally 
if not paternalistically, and what we are concerned about is 
the fact that many of those cases are results of reverse 
paternalistic cases.  
Informed consents should be seen as protection not only 
for the patients, but physicians as well. It is evidence that 
patients are aware of all the possible outcomes and have fully 
understood what and why is going to happen, and what 
might happen if this intervention is not taking place. 
However, many practitioners believe that patients may thus 
be better served if efforts are directed instead of finding ways 
of minimizing hard paternalism without too great of 
compromise on patient’s freedom [18]. This argument is yet 
to be validated from an ethical perspective.     
B. Survey  
The purpose of this survey is to examine the presence of 
the suggested phenomenon in Lebanon and to assess to what 
extent it is present in the field of medicine. Based on the 
results we may indicate if it is spread out in the Lebanese 
society. If yes, the next step would be to alert the public and 
suggest some regulations to restrict this kind of paternalism.  

96
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The following hypothesis is formulated to achieve the 
objectives of the present study: A new kind of paternalism is 
emerging in the field of medicine in Lebanon, termed as 
reverse paternalism.  
The study was conducted on a representative sample of 
85 patients in the region of Beirut. The patients are a 
selection of males and females with diversity in age and 
education (Table II, as shown in the Appendix, represents a 
sample of the questionnaire). The questionnaire consists of 
20 items each with five alternative responses: strongly 
disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, and strongly agree. The 
items are related to the following concepts: 
1. Patient’s autonomy  
2. Decision making process 
The questionnaire comprises a variety of questions that 
refer to a paradigm of reverse paternalism or the absence of 
reverse paternalism, as well as a neutral point of view. 
Figures 2-a, b, c and d give an illustration of the age, gender, 
marital status, employment status, and educational level. A 
total of 85 patients have answered 20 questions. Each 
question was analyzed in order to categorize it. Questions 1, 
4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12 and 15 are direct questions referring to 
reverse paternalism. The questions can be separated into two 
types, 10 positive questions and 10 inversed questions 
(meaning the opposite of the positive ones). As Figure 3 
shows, 85% ask their doctors about suggested treatments or 
procedures. 70% disagree with their doctors not involving 
them in decisions about their treatments (Figure 4). Only 
53% do not allow their doctors to choose on their behalf, 
19% have a neutral opinion, which means that 28% allow 
their doctors to take decisions for them (Figure 5). Figure 6 
illustrates how 38% agree that it is ethically permissible for 
doctors to act paternalistically with their patients. When 
asked if they refuse to let their doctors take decisions for 
them, 44% disagreed (Figure 7).  
As most of the results indicate the existence of weak 
reverse paternalism, we took a closer look at the age and 
educational level of those who showed tendency towards 
reverse paternalism. Some of the patients that are in the age 
of 40-60 years have a lower educational level, due to the 
complications of war Lebanon has faced, also showing 
tendency towards reversing paternalism. We chose a patient 
to ask about his last visit to a doctor. This patient is a married 
employed male of age between 40-60 years with an 
elementary educational level. He was asked about how much 
he trusts his doctor and how much he believes in what he 
prescribes as treatments. He agreed on telling us what his 
problem was and what was prescribed, and when we asked 
him if he knows what each drug is for he said no: “He is a 
very good doctor and I am sure he knows what is best for me 
to get better.” Again, we took a closer look at the 
questionnaire this patient has filled and noticed that they do 
not quite match the way he really acts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. An overview of the personal information and diversity of 
surveyed patients, in terms of (a) age, (b) gender, (c) marital status, and (d) 
employment status. 
 
 
  
 

97
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
             
Figure 3. Illustration of how many patients ask for information. 
 
 
 
 
      Figure 4. Patients' disagreement on not being involved in decision-
making processes. 
 
 
 
       Figure 5. Patients that say that they have a successful  shared-decision 
making process with their doctors. 
 
 
       Figure 6. Patients that want their doctor to choose and decide on their 
behalf. 
 
 
 
   Figure 7. The percentage of patients who find it ethically permissible for 
doctors to act  
paternalistically. 
 
 
       Figure 8. The patients that refuse to let their doctors choose on their 
behalf. 
 
 
 

98
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Living in a society where professionals are considered 
trustees most of the public believe in, it is important to pay 
attention to the ethical issues that may be encountered. 
Patients trust their doctors sometimes too much, which can 
lead to the emergence of new phenomena in ethics. 
Paternalism is a long-known dilemma that is widely present 
in our society, but what we have noticed is that paternalism 
is not as hard to be achieved as it once was. By encouraging 
it by patients, doctors find it much easier nowadays. This 
refers to a new ethical dilemma termed as reverse 
paternalism. When we first started to gather information we 
had to look at it from different perspectives. Is paternalism a 
bad thing to do? Can reverse paternalism have positive 
aspects? So, we started interviewing people and with time 
had a clearer view at what is really happening in our society. 
We already knew that culture and religion play major roles in 
the decision-making processes patients undergo, and knew 
that there are many other factors that make patients tend to 
trust their doctors sometimes blindly. Though the outcome of 
the survey showed weak reverse paternalism according to the 
collected and compiled data, but the fact that it is present is a 
problem itself. The absence of regulations specific to reverse 
paternalism that can restrict the physicians’ unethical 
behavior towards patients is one of the most difficult 
problems to solve. It is difficult in a society where doctors 
take advantage of their patients, thus a society that is losing 
faith in humanity. In Lebanon, medical practitioners lack the 
sense of responsibility due to the lack of auditing and 
supervision over what happens in hospitals/clinics. Who is to 
blame? The doctors or the patients themselves? A good test 
for their responsibility is the question “Do physicians 
commit to ethical or legal standards when there is no 
supervision?” and it seems that most doctors fail this test! It 
is the same question that must trigger the consciousness of 
engineers when asking “What does an engineer do when no 
one is looking?” we must always remember that there is a 
social contract between the public and us, promising health, 
safety and welfare. 
As we have mentioned, some of the questions were 
answered in ways patients only “wish” to act in real life. But 
what is important is that it started to raise awareness and 
open the eyes of those who were involved in our study. As 
engineers it is our responsibility to alert people, inform them 
about the challenges they might face and advise in order to 
help. We have started in Lebanon and wish to reach other 
countries where this might be happening too.  
Thus, recommendations must be provided to control this 
ethical dilemma. Ethical guidance that governs the behavior 
of doctors and patients in cases of reverse paternalism should 
be developed. Highlighting the importance of consent before 
any medical intervention is another recommendation. This 
can be done by the organization of seminars for patients to 
raise their awareness of having the right to get all the 
information they need as moral agents. This is an ethical 
issue that should not only be acknowledged in Lebanon, but 
in all societies that suffer from reverse paternalism.     
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  S. Hammoud, Z. Shahrour, A. Hage-Diab, H. 
Khachfeh, and B. Hussein, "Emerging Issues in 
Medical and Engineering Ethics: The Case of Reverse 
Paternalism in Lebanon," The Fourth International 
Conference on Global Health Challenges (GH 2015) 
IARIA, Nice, France, 2015.  
[2]  C. Harris, M. Pritchard, and M. Rabins, Engineering 
Ethics Concepts & Cases, California: Wadsworth-
Cengage Learning Belmont, 2009.  
[3]  R. Alas, "Ethics in countries with different cultural 
dimensions," Journal of Business Ethics, no. 69, pp. 
237-247, 2006.  
[4]  K. 
Gyekye, 
"African 
Ethics," 
The 
Stanford 
Encyclopedia of African Philosophy, 2011. 
[5]  M. Wilson, Religion and Transformation of Society, 
Cambridge: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press., 
1971.  
[6]  M. J. McVeigh, God in Africa, Cape Cod, MA: CLade 
Stark, 1974.  
[7]  R. A. Kallivayalil and R. K. Chadda, "Culture, ethics 
and medicine in South Asia," International Journal of 
Person Centered Medicine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 56-61, 
2011.  
[8]  P. N. Desai, "Medical Ethics in India," Journal of 
Medicine and Philosophy, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 231-255, 
1988.  
[9]  R. M. Veatch, "How philosophy of medicine has 
changed medical ethics," Journal of Medicine and 
Philosophy: A Forum for Bioethics and Philosophy of 
Medicine, 31 (6), pp. 585-600, 2006.  
[10]  P. Bilimoria, J. Prabhu, and R. M. Sharma, Indian 
ethics: 
Classical 
traditions 
and 
contemporary 
challenges (Vol. 1), Ashgate Publishing, Ltd, 2007.  
[11]  "American Medical Association and New York 
Academy of Medicine, Code of medical ethics," in 
Ludwig & Company, 1848.  
[12]  K. D. Clouser, "What is Medical Ethics?," Annals of 
Internal Medicine, vol. 80, no. 5, pp. 657-660, 1974.  
[13]  L. Edelstein, The Hippocratic Oath, text, translation, 
and interpretation., 1943.  
[14]  T. L. Beauchamp and J. F. Childress, Principles of 
biomedical ethics, Oxford University Press, 2001.  
[15]  P. Brey and J. P. Berg-Olsen, Biomedical Engineering 
Ethics, Blackwell, 2009.  
[16]  D. A. Vallero, Biomedical Ethics for Engineers: Ethics 
and Decision Making in Biomedical and Biosystem 
Engineering, Elsevier, 2007.  
[17]  J. Dyro, Clinical Engineering Handbook, Academic 
Press, 2004.  

99
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[18]  J. J. Chin, "Doctor-patient relationship: from medical 
paternalism 
to 
enhanced 
autonomy," 
Singapore 
medical journal , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 152-155, 1996.  
[19]  World Health Organization, "Appropriate technology 
for birth," in Lancet 2(8452): 436-7, 1985.  
[20]  R. Jurdi and M. Khawaja, "Cesarean Section Rates in 
the Arab Region: a cross-national study," Health Policy 
and Planning, vol. 19, pp. 101-110, 2004.  
[21]  K. Huster, "Cesarean Sections among Syrian refugees 
in Lebanon since December2012/January 2013 to June 
2013: Probable causes and recommendations," The 
Yale journal of biology and medicine, vol. 3, no. 87, 
pp. 269-88, 2013.  
[22]  F. Richard and V. De Brouwere. Non-clinical 
intervention for reducing unnecessary caesarean 
section: RHL commentary. The Who Reproductive 
Health Library; Geneva: World Health Organization. 
2012. 
[23]  World Health Organization - WHO, 2010. The Global 
Numbers and Costs of Additionally Needed and 
Unnecessary Caesarean Sections Performed per Year: 
Overuse as a Barrier to Universal Coverage. [Online].         
Available 
from: 
http://www.who.int/healthsystems/topics/financing/ 
2016.5.30. 
[24]  R. Porreco and J. Thorp, "The cesarean birth epidemic: 
Trends, causes, and solutions," American Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, pp. 369-374, 1996.  
[25]  F. M. Smaill and G. M. Gyte, Antibiotic prophylaxis 
versus no prophylaxis for preventing, The Cochrane 
Library., 2010.  
[26]  M. E. Hannah, W. I. Hannah, S. A. Hewson, E. D. 
Hodnett, S. Saigal, and A. R. Willan A. R., "Planned 
caesarean section versus planned vaginal birth for 
breech presentation at term: a randomised multicentre 
trial," The Lancet, 356 (9239), pp. 1375 - 1383, 2000.  
[27]  D. J. Rouse, C. MacPherson, M. Landon, M. W. 
Varner, K. J. Leveno, A. H. Moawad, and B. M.  
Mercer, "Blood transfusion and cesarean delivery," in 
Obstetrics & Gynecology, 108(4), 2006, pp. 891-897. 
[28]  C. M. Rooney, A. T. Crawford, B. J. Vassallo, S. D. 
Kleeman, and M. M. Karram, "Is previous cesarean 
section a risk for incidental cystotomy at the time of 
hysterectomy?: A case-controlled study," American 
journal of obstetrics and gynecology, 193(6), pp. 2041 
- 2044, 2005.  
[29]  J. Kacmar, L. Bhimani, M. Boyd, R. Shah-Hosseini, 
and J. Peipert, "Route of delivery as a risk factor for 
emergent peripartum hysterectomy: A case-control 
study," Obstet Gynecol, 102(1), pp. 141-145, 2003.  
[30]  M. Carayol, A. Zein, N. Ghosn, C. Mazaubrun, and G. 
Breart, "Determinants of caesarean section in Lebanon: 
Geographical differences," in Paediatric and Perinatal 
Epidemiology, 2008, pp. 136 - 144. 
[31]  T. Kabakian-Khasholian, R. Shayboub, and F. El-Kak, 
"Seeking Maternal Care at Times of Conflict: The Case 
of Lebanon," Health care for women international, 
34(5), pp. 352-362, 2013.  
[32]  H. Tamim, S. El-Chemali, A. Nassar, A. Aaraji, O. 
Campbell, A. Kaddour, and K. Yunis, "Cesarean 
Delivery Among Nulliparous Women in Beirut: 
Assessing Predictors in Nine Hospitals," in Birth , 
2007, pp. 14-20. 
[33]  K. H. Hsu, P. Liao, C. Hwang, "Factors Affecting 
Taiwanese Women's Choice of Cesarean Section," 
Social Science and Medicine; 66(1), pp. 201-9, 2008.  
[34]  A. Mroueh, "The maternal healthcare in Lebanon: 
Problems and challenges," (Arabic version of a 
published report), 2011. 
[35]  J. Wyatt, "Medical Paternalism and the Fetus," Journal 
of Medical Ethics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. ii15 - ii20, 2001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
APPENDIX 
 
Table I. The Decision Making Process. 
Process steps 
Description of each step  
Application of each step in 
Lebanon 
Identify decision to be made 
Go through an internal process of trying to define clearly the 
nature of the decision you must make.  
 
Patients realize that there is a 
decision to be made but instead 
of going through an internal 
process, they immediately ask 
their physicians for advices and 
what to do.  
 
Gather relevant information 
Most decisions require collecting pertinent information. The 
real trick in this step is to know what information is needed 
the best sources of this information, and how to go about 
getting it. Some information must be sought from within you 
through a process of self-assessment; other information must 
be sought from outside yourself-from books, people, and a 
variety of other sources. This step, therefore, involves both 
internal and external “work”.  
 
Many people do now know 
where to look for information or 
whom to ask. Others try to get 
information from people with 
similar experiences instead of 
researching 
properly. 
The 
process of self-assessment is 
sometimes not clear to certain 
patients.  
 
Identify alternatives 
Through the process of collecting information you will 
probably identify several possible paths of action, or 
alternatives. You may also use your imagination and 
information to construct new alternatives. In this step of the 
decision-making process, you will list all possible and 
desirable alternatives.  
 
Many 
patients 
ask 
their 
physicians for alternatives, but 
do not know where to look for 
information other than their 
healthcare practitioners, which 
is the same problem found in 
step 2.  
 
Weigh evidence 
You draw on your information and emotions to imagine 
what it would be like if you carried out each of the 
alternatives to the end. You must evaluate whether the need 
identified in Step 1 would be helped or solved through the 
use of each alternative. In going through this difficult 
internal process, you begin to favor certain alternatives, 
which appear to have higher potential for reaching your goal. 
Eventually you are able to place the alternatives in priority 
order, based upon your own value system. 
The challenge in this step is that 
many patients do not even reach 
this step. But helping them 
reach this point would make it 
easier for them to be able to 
imagine themselves in certain 
situations.  
 
Choose among alternatives 
Once you have weighed all the evidence, you are ready to 
select the alternative, which seems to be best suited to you. 
You may even choose a combination of alternatives. 
What is done here, is that most 
patients only take into account 
the alternatives their physicians 
have told them, so when left 
with a number of alternatives 
they are lost when confronting 
decisions on their own. (Only if 
physicians 
haven’t 
been 
paternalistic 
when 
implying 
what alternative to choose).  
 
Take action 
You now take some positive action, which begins to 
implement the alternative you chose in Step 5.  
 
This is where patients return to 
reverse paternalism and let their 
health care practitioners choose 
what alternative to choose and 
implement.  
 
Review 
decisions 
and 
consequences 
In the last step you experience the results of your decision 
and evaluate whether or not it has “solved” the need you 
identified in Step 1. If it has, you may stay with this decision 
for some period of time. If the decision has not resolved the 
identified need, you may repeat certain steps of the process 
in order to make a new decision. You may, for example, 
gather more detailed or somewhat different information or 
discover additional alternatives on which to base your 
decision.  
 
This depends on what type of 
decision was made. If the 
decision has not resolved the 
identified need, if a surgery has 
not been successful, patients 
often blame their physicians. 
These physicians however, have 
been told to decide for them, 
which is why shared-decision 
making 
is 
of 
highest 
importance. 

101
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Table II Patient Questionnaire 
Answer questions as they relate to you.  
Check the box(es) that are most applicable to you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8) About You 

102
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Please complete the following questionnaire by circling the appropriate answer. 
 
 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neutral 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
I never ask my doctors for information about a suggested 
treatment/procedure 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I seek multiple opinions before selecting a surgery/treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I am confident that my doctors provides me the best treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t want my doctor to involve me in decisions about my 
treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I have a successful shared-decision making relationship with my 
doctor 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I want my doctor to choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Doctors know best for patients and they have to decide for them  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is ethically permissible for patients to allow doctors to act 
paternalistically  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
In critical cases I prefer my doctor to choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I trust my doctor in everything he/she says because he/she is 
well-known to be the best in his/her field 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I always ask my doctor for information about a suggested 
treatment/procedure 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is not necessary to seek multiple opinions before selecting a 
surgery/treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t trust my doctor’s ability to provide the best treatment for 
me 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I want my doctor to involve me in decisions about my treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
My doctor-patient relationship lacks a successful shared-decision 
making process 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I refuse to let my doctor choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Even though doctors know better, they don’t have the right to 
choose for patients 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is not ethically permissible for patients to allow doctors to act 
paternalistically  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I prefer to take all my medical decisions by myself  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t trust my doctor completely just because he/she is known 
to be the best in his/her field 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
9) Doctor-patient Relationship 

