Towards an Interactive Web Tool That Supports Shared Decision Making in 
Dementia: Identifying User Requirements 
 
 
 
Marijke Span, Carolien Smits, Leontine Groen-van de 
Ven, Jan Jukema 
Research group Innovation of Care of Older Adults and 
Social Work, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl, chm.smits@windesheim.nl, 
lm.groen-vander.ven@windesheim.nl, 
js.jukema@windesheim.nl 
 
Marike Hettinga 
Research group IT Innovation in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.hettinga@windesheim.nl  
 
 
Anita Cremers 
TNO Human Factors, Utrecht University of Applied 
Sciences, department: Multi Modal User Interface Design,  
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
anita.cremers@tno.nl  
 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen  
Department of Primary Care, IQ HealthCare, Radboud 
University Nijmegen; Kalorama Foundation, Radboud 
Alzheimer Centre  
Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
myrra.vernooij-dassen@radboudumc.nl 
 
Jan Eefsting 
Department of Nursing Home Medicine and EMGO 
Institute for Health ad Care Research, VU University 
Medical Centre 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
j.eefsting@zgijv.nl 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— To support shared decision making in care 
networks of people with dementia, an interactive web tool for 
people with dementia, informal caregivers, case managers and 
other professional caregivers is being developed. This study 
aims to identify user requirements for such a tool. A multiple 
method study with an iterative, participatory design was 
conducted. Data collection involved 50 semi-structured 
interviews with end users (people with dementia, informal 
caregivers, case managers and other professional caregivers), 
eight focus group interviews with end users and experts, a 
dementia expert consultation, and two multidisciplinary 
workshops. Content analysis was applied to the data and 
resulted in two sets of user requirements for the interactive 
web tool. The first set of user requirements consists of care and 
well-being related topics addressing decision making in 
dementia. Most important topics are care, daily activities, 
mobility, safety, future, finances, living, and social contacts. 
The second set of user requirements addresses additional needs 
and preferences of end users such as: participation of the 
person with dementia in the decision-making, insight into the 
decision history, anticipation of possible future problems and 
decisions, and the degree of self-management and autonomy 
preservation of the person with dementia. The two sets of user 
requirements form a solid basis for the further development of 
a user-friendly, interactive web tool facilitating shared decision 
making in care networks of people with dementia.  
Keywords- dementia, decision making, user requirements, 
participatory design, assistive technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This study focuses on the development of an interactive 
web tool to facilitate shared decision making in care 
networks of people with dementia [1]. Dementia is a 
degenerative disease affecting increasing numbers of people 
worldwide [2][3]. Over a prolonged period of time people 
with dementia and their caregivers are faced with many 
problems and decisions [4][5][6]. Decision-making in 
dementia is complex; it involves multiple participants with 
different capacities and interests [7].  
To better understand the needs and preferences of people 
with dementia, it is important to include them in the 
decision-making 
[8][9][10][11]. 
Research 
shows 
that 
involving people with dementia in decision-making increases 
well-being [9] and quality of life [12] for both the person 
with dementia and the informal caregiver. Informal 
caregivers also show lower levels of depression and lessened 
relationship strain [12]. However, professionals and informal 
caregivers do not include people with dementia in decision 
making as a matter of course [8][ 9].  
Shared decision making (SDM) is a way to involve 
patients in decision making by emphasizing the collaboration 
between professionals and patients in making a shared 
decision [13]. There are seven consecutive steps in SDM: 
identifying problems, information exchange, clarifying 
preferences and values, presenting and exploring options, 
338
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

discussing pros and cons of the options, deciding together, 
and evaluating the decision [14][15][16][17]18]. SDM 
increases patient autonomy and empowers the patient [19]. 
This could also benefit people with dementia, who are well 
able to express their needs [8]. Moreover, they are capable of 
expressing their preferences, even in an advanced stage of 
dementia [20].  
Case 
management 
in 
dementia 
is 
implemented 
differently. In Europe, Canada, and the United States, 
community-dwelling patients diagnosed with dementia and 
their caregivers may receive case management support [21]. 
In The Netherlands case management is offered to people 
with dementia. Case management in the Dutch context aims 
to support informal caregivers and people with dementia 
during the complex care trajectory. Moreover, it aims 
enabling people with dementia to live independently as long 
as possible [22]. As case management for dementia is a fairly 
recent phenomenon, case managers need support to address 
the complex needs and preferences of people with dementia 
and their caregivers, possibly in the form of tools [23].  
Although research increasingly focuses on dementia, 
SDM or supportive tools separately, studies that combine 
these elements are lacking. Thus far, existing decision aids 
have supported SDM in various patient groups by means of 
supporting discussion of value-based choices and options 
about single decisions [24]. Most decision aids facilitate 
SDM in single medical decisions in the clinical area 
[18][25].  
The new interactive web tool differs from existing 
decision aids in at least four aspects. First, people with 
dementia and their caregivers have to make many decisions 
over a prolonged period of time in the order of years, as 
opposed to single-issue decisions. Second, the web tool has 
to take into account an ongoing cognitive decline in contrast 
to existing decision aids that focus on cognitively able 
people. Third, the person with dementia is part of a network 
of informal and professional caregivers who may participate 
in decision-making. Regular decision aids focus mainly on 
the patient-clinician relation. Fourth, the decisions of people 
with dementia and their caregivers are not just about single 
medical decisions, as the existing decision aids are, but also 
about multiple care and well-being decisions. Besides, aimed 
end users of the interactive web tool are people with 
dementia, informal caregivers, case managers and other 
professionals. 
To develop user-friendly and useful tools involvement of 
both end users [26][27] and other interested parties [28][ 29] 
in developing IT applications is important. We used the 
Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management 
(CeHRes) roadmap to increase a structural embedding of the 
new interactive web tool in practice [29]. This roadmap 
offers a holistic framework of five phases: contextual 
inquiry, value specification, design, operationalization, and 
summative evaluation. This paper describes the phase of 
value specification (analyzing the preferences of all those 
concerned). Therefore, this study aims to identify user 
requirements for an interactive web tool facilitating shared 
decision making in dementia of all participants involved 
(people with dementia, informal caregivers, case managers 
and experts).  
The research questions are: 1) What topics can be 
identified for an interactive web tool facilitating shared 
decision-making in dementia? 2) What additional needs and 
preferences regarding an interactive web tool facilitating 
shared decision making in dementia can be identified?  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the design and methods of this study. Section III presents the 
results in detail. Section IV addresses the discussion of the 
findings of this study. The paper closes with the conclusions 
in section V and the acknowledgment.  
 
II. 
DESIGN AND METHODS 
This multiple method study with an iterative participatory 
design is part of a larger longitudinal study on decision 
making in care networks op people with dementia [1]. To 
guarantee rigorous development, we used multiple data 
sources to answer the research questions [30]. For both 
research questions the same data set was used: 50 interviews 
and 8 focus group interviews. The focus group interviews 
were organized on the basis of the findings of the individual 
interviews to enhance data richness [31][32]. In addition, an 
expert consultation was undertaken for research question 1 
and two multi-disciplinary workshops for research question 
2. Table I provides an overview of the characteristics of 
methods used.  
All participants gave their written informed consent. 
Special attention was paid to the informed consent of people 
with dementia in order to be sure of their voluntary 
participation. In line with Murphy and colleagues [33], we 
invested in ongoing consent. This started with time for social 
talk in order to get to know the person. After gaining initial 
consent we checked their consent during the interview. We 
ended the interview with a positive affirmation by 
emphasizing the importance of their contribution. The 
investigators were careful to notice any signs, non-verbal or 
otherwise, of discomfort or restlessness. In such a case, the 
participant was given ample opportunity to quit. People with 
dementia who were unable to give written consent because 
the form confused them were asked for their verbal consent 
(recorded on audio tape). The focus group participants at the 
day care center were first informed and then asked for their 
consent in a group meeting. Afterwards, they were explicitly 
and individually asked for their consent for participation.  
 
A. Analysis 
To answer research question 1, content analysis was used 
starting by reading and rereading the (focus group) interview 
transcripts [30]. For this research question paragraphs in the 
text that addressed problems and decisions were of interest. 
Therefore, 
two 
researchers 
coded 
the 
interviews 
independently focusing on experienced problems and 
decisions. They then clustered the identified problems and 
339
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. CHARACTERISTICS OF METHODS USED ADDRESSING RESEARCH QUESTION 1 AND 2 
Research Questions 
1. What topics can be identified for an interactive web tool facilitating shared decision-making in dementia?  
2. What additional needs and preferences regarding an interactive web tool facilitating shared decision making in dementia can be identified?  
1,2 
1,2 
1 
2 
Methods 
Interviews 
Focus group interviews 
Expert consultation 
Workshops 
Respondents 
Fifty members of ten care networks of 
people 
with 
dementia 
(mild 
to 
moderate) 
were 
individually 
interviewed about decision making: 
- 10 persons with dementia 
- 20 informal caregivers 
- 10 case managers 
- 10 other professional caregivers 
  
8 focus groups (n=34) were 
conducted: 
- 2 groups with people with 
dementia (n=9) 
- 2 groups with informal caregivers 
(n=11) 
- 2 groups with case managers 
(n=14) 
- 2 groups with dementia experts 
(n=13) 
We 
chose 
this 
approach 
of 
homogenous selection to enable 
respondents, and especially people 
with 
dementia, 
to 
speak 
for 
themselves.  
7 national dementia experts were 
consulted via email. 
Member check was performed in 
a central meeting. 
2 multi-disciplinary workshops 
were performed with de same 
participants (n=7): 
- Interpretation workshop 
- 
Affinity 
diagramming 
workshop 
Recruitment 
The participants were recruited via case 
managers, Alzheimer cafés, the Dutch 
Alzheimers’ 
Association, 
residential 
homes, and daycare centers.  
 
 
People with mild to moderate 
dementia and informal caregivers 
were 
recruited 
from 
daycare 
centers, residential homes, and the 
Dutch Alzheimer Association. Case 
managers 
were 
recruited 
from 
regional case managers’ networks.  
Via the consortium of the SDM 
research program. 
Via the consortium of the SDM 
research program.  
Sampling/inclusion criteria 
The network inclusion was based on 
maximum diversity of sex of the person 
with dementia, stage of dementia, type 
of dementia, type of informal caregiver 
(e.g., spouse and child), type of formal 
caregiver (e.g., case manager and home 
care nurse), and the socio-economic 
status of the person with dementia. 
Participation of people with dementia 
required the ability to converse with a 
researcher. This corresponds with a 
score of 2-5 on Reisberg’s Global 
Deterioration 
Scale 
and 
excluded 
people with severe dementia [34].  
Participation 
of 
people 
with 
dementia required the ability to 
converse with similar people in a 
group 
and 
a 
researcher 
(corresponding with a score of 2-5 
on Reisberg’s Global Deterioration 
Scale). In order to create a safe 
environment, a daycare center was 
approached in order to recruit 
people with dementia who knew 
each 
other. 
Furthermore, 
the 
principal researcher (i.e., the focus 
group leader) attended the daycare 
center for 6 days, 5 before and 1 
after the focus group interview. 
Inclusion focused on diversity of 
organizations: 
e.g., 
Dutch 
Alzheimers’ 
Association, 
University/University of Applied 
Sciences, and elderly care lobby. 
Inclusion focused on diversity of 
the 
disciplines: 
e.g., 
older 
adults/dementia 
experts, 
technicians, and developers. 
Topics 
The interviews were based on a topic 
list 
addressing 
decision-making 
elements such as: values, problems, 
decisions, 
personal 
considerations, 
options, and information need. The 
interviews 
were 
semi 
open 
and 
explorative, as we wanted to get insight 
into participants’ personal experiences. 
The interview guide started with the 
questions: “How are you right now?”, 
“What has changed for you lately?” and 
“What choices did you have to make 
because of these changes?”. We then 
elaborated on respondents’ answers. 
The face-to-face interviews took thirty 
to seventy five minutes. 
Based on the findings of the 
interviews focus group members 
were asked to check the information 
of the interviews and to give 
additional information.  
 
Two researchers moderated all 
focus group interviews, that lasted 1 
to 2 h each. The principal researcher 
led the focus group using an 
interview protocol to direct the 
interview. The second researcher 
assisted the principal researcher.  
The consultation focused the 
refinement and prioritization of 
the 
dementia 
related 
topics 
identified in interviews and focus 
group interviews. Experts were 
invited 
to 
comment 
on 
the 
clustered experienced problems 
and 
decisions 
and 
what 
experienced 
problems 
and 
decisions were in line with the 
aim and scope of the interactive 
web tool. 
The workshops aimed to align 
project members’ views of the 
new IT application and identify 
user requirements emerging from 
the needs and preferences of the 
interviews 
and 
focus 
group 
interviews. 
 
Both interviews and focus group interviews were audio taped, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed with Atlas.ti software.  
 
340
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

decisions in categories using Affinity diagramming [35] till 
consensus was reached. The clustered list of problems and 
decisions was then presented in focus groups for a check of 
this list and gathering supplementary problems and decisions 
and to enhance data richness [31][32]. Participants were 
asked whether they recognized the items on the list, and 
whether they had additional items for the list. Then, in an 
expert meeting with national dementia experts the results of 
the interviews and focus groups were discussed and a 
priority of decision-making topics was determined that 
addressed the aim and scope of the interactive web tool. 
To address research question 2 the interviews were 
analyzed using content analysis for fragments containing 
implicit or explicit information regarding needs and 
preferences of end users about what a new interactive web 
tool should offer. Relevant fragments identified by the 
principal investigator were peer-reviewed by a second 
researcher.   
The focus groups were used to check whether 
participants recognized the selected needs and preferences 
and gathering additional needs and preferences. The 
principal researcher made an initial clustering of these 
fragments using Affinity diagramming [35] with a second 
researcher. This resulted in a clustered list of fragments. The 
findings of the focus group interviews provided input for the 
consecutive workshops. Finally, the clustered list of needs 
and preferences was discussed in two consecutive 
multidisciplinary workshops; an “interpretation workshop” 
followed by an “affinity-diagramming workshop”. 
The workshops aimed to align project members’ views of 
the new interactive web tool and identify user requirements 
emerging from the needs and preferences. Therefore, in the 
first workshop, the participants interpreted and translated the 
identified needs and preferences of end users in user 
requirements (“the tool facilitates/clarifies/supports/provides 
…”). Subsequently, they defined initial categories of needs 
and preferences. Disagreements were discussed until 
consensus was reached [35]. In the second workshop, the 
definition of categories was reviewed, summarized, and 
reformulated. Moreover, views of the workshop participants 
were explored, the boundaries of the new interactive web 
tool were clarified, and the categories were clustered in 
domains using Affinity diagramming [35]. Determining 
boundaries of the interactive web tool was necessary. Not all 
needs, preferences and expectations of participants could be 
addressed in view of the aim of the interactive web tool. The 
two workshops, both consisting of the same seven 
respondents, were audio taped and field notes were taken. 
 
B. Ethical considerations 
The principal investigator contacted all interview 
participants, who gave their informed consent individually, 
mostly in written form. We paid special attention to the 
informed consent of people with dementia in order to be sure 
their participation was voluntarily [33]. The institutional 
review board of the regional medical ethics committee gave 
written approval for the study.  
 
III. 
RESULTS  
Analysis of the data resulted in two sets of user 
requirements addressing the two research questions. The 
first set of user requirements consisted of decision-making 
topics the new interactive web tool should address. The 
second set of additional user requirements consisted of 
needs and preferences the new interactive web tool should 
address.  
A. Research question 1: decision making topics in 
dementia the interactive web tool should address 
Eighteen topics of clustered experienced problems and 
eight topics of clustered decisions addressing decision  
making 
in 
dementia 
arose 
from 
the 
interviews 
(characteristics 
in 
Table 
IIa) 
and 
focus 
groups 
(characteristics in Table IIb). In the data of experienced 
problems and decisions eight similar topics emerged: social 
contacts, daily activities, mobility, safety, living, future, care, 
and finances (Table III).   
Besides, other topics of clustered experienced problems 
were: decreasing autonomy of people with dementia, 
involvement of people with dementia, participants in 
decision making, communication, information, role of 
professionals, role of informal caregivers, options, and 
timing of decisions. These experienced problems show an 
overlap with the identified user requirements based on users’ 
needs and preferences (research question 2).  
More problems were identified than decisions. Moreover, 
the problems (e.g., loneliness, mobility, managing behavior 
of person with dementia, lack of safety, and overburdening 
of the informal caregiver) were more related to well-being 
than the decisions, that were more often related to care (e.g., 
decisions 
about 
household 
assistance, 
home 
care, 
resuscitation, and personal alarm devices). Informal 
caregivers and professional caregivers named more problems 
than people with dementia did. People with dementia 
reflected more on important values (e.g., autonomy and 
staying at home) than the informal and professional 
caregivers. Focus group participants (except people with 
dementia) were very well able to indicate problems in the 
decision-making. Expressing preferences for the new 
interactive web tool proved to be more difficult for the 
people with dementia.  
 
B. Research question 2: needs and preferences regarding 
the new interactive web tool 
Two hundred fragments were generated from the 
interviews (characteristics in Table IIa) and focus group 
interviews (characteristics in Table IIb). These fragments, 
containing implicit and explicit participants’ needs and 
preferences about the new interactive web tool resulted in 36 
additional user requirements that were clustered in eleven 
categories and three domains (Table IV) [29]. These three 
domains stemming from the data are: “involved people and 
their 
roles”, 
“timeline”, 
and 
“information 
and 
communication”.  
 
341
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. CHARACTERISTICS OF PARTICIPANTS 
 
A. Characteristics of participating care networks in interviews 
Network 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Age of PWDa) 
82 
83 
80 
84 
70 
89 
83 
73 
86 
87 
Gender of PWD 
Male=M/ Female=F 
F 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
Education of PWDb) 
Low (L)/Medium (M)/High (H) 
M 
H 
M 
L 
H 
M 
M 
H 
L 
M 
Type of dementia 
Alzheimer (AD)/Vascular (VD)/Lewy Body (LBD) 
LBD 
VD 
AD 
? 
AD 
AD 
? 
AD 
? 
AD 
Marital status 
Married=M/Widowed=W/Single=S 
W 
W 
W 
W 
M 
W 
M 
S 
W 
M 
Living situation pwd at T0 
Nursing home=NH/Independent living=IL 
NH 
IL 
IL 
IL 
IL 
IL 
IL 
NH 
IL 
IL 
Type of informal caregivers intervieweda) 
D 
D 
D 
F 
D 
S 
GS 
GDiL 
Sp 
S 
D 
SiL 
S 
D 
Si 
N 
S 
S 
Sp 
D 
Type of formal caregivers interviewedc) 
PA 
CM 
E 
CM 
HCN 
CM 
HCN 
TLN 
E 
HCN 
HCN 
CM 
E 
CM 
PA 
CM 
CC 
HCN 
HCN 
TLN 
a) PWD= person with dementia, D=daughter, F=friend, S=son, GS=grandson, GDiL=granddaughter in law, Sp=spouse, SiL=son in law, Si=sister, N=niece. b) Low: primary/secondary school 
graduate, medium: high school graduate, high: college graduate. c) PA=principal attendant, CM=case manager, E=employee day care center, HCN=home care nurse, TLN=team leader nurse, 
CC=care coordinator 
 
B. Characteristics of focus groups' participants 
Characteristics people with dementia attending a daycare center (n=9) 
Gender 
Age 
Educationa) 
Type of dementiab) 
Marital status 
5 Male 
68-86 (M=79,2) 
3 low 
4 AD 
5 Married 
4 Female 
 
4 medium 
1 VD 
4 Widowed 
 
 
2 high 
1 FTD 
 
 
 
 
3 MCI/D 
 
Characteristics of informal caregivers (n=11)  
Gender 
Age 
(2 did not fill in) 
Educationa) 
(2 did not fill in) 
Relation pwd 
Experienced caregiving 
3 Male 
41-83 (M=64,6) 
0 Low 
7 Spouse 
5 Heavy 
8 Female 
 
4 Medium 
3 Daughter 
6 Medium 
 
 
5 High 
1 Friend 
 
Characteristics of case managers (n=14)  
Gender 
Age 
Experience as case manager 
1   Male 
25-58 (M=42,1) 
6:  < 1year 
13 Female 
 
7: 1 -5 year 
 
 
1: > 5 year 
 
a) Low: primary/secondary school graduate, medium: high school graduate, high: college graduate. b) AD= Alzheimer’s Disease; VD= Vasculair Dementia; FTD= Fronto Temporal Dementia;  
MCI/D= Mild Cognitive Impairment/Dementia 
 
The first domain, “involved people and their roles”, 
relates to the categorized user requirements: participation of 
the person with dementia in decision-making as a central 
user requirement named by all interested parties; roles of 
informal caregivers, case managers, and other professionals; 
self-management and autonomy; and organization of care 
around the person with dementia. The different parties 
involved have their specific roles in the network. They all 
focus on preserving the self-management and autonomy of 
the person with dementia for as long as possible. The degree 
of this preservation depends on the endurance capacity of the 
network. Furthermore, the degree of preserving self-
management and autonomy changes over time as informal 
care givers and professional caregivers take over from 
persons with dementia when the disease progresses. 
Participation of people with dementia and self-management 
and autonomy were the only two categories of user 
requirements where all participants contributed to. 
The second domain, “timeline”, refers to the categorized 
user requirements: decision history and anticipation. One 
side of the timeline shows the decision history: information 
addressing decisions, values, and preferences of the network 
members in the past. Knowledge of decision history gives 
valuable information that can support network members in 
coping 
with 
current 
problems 
and 
decisions. 
This 
information is not always available. Reasons stated for this 
342
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. FIRST SET OF USER REQUIREMENTS: IDENTIFIED TOPICS 
Topics (experienced problems and decisions by participants) identified in decision-making in dementia 
Topics 
Problems 
Decisions 
Social contacts 
Decreasing social contacts of PWDa). PWD 
Lonesomeness of PWD. PWD 
Incomprehension of the neighborhood. PWD, IC 
Gender differences in social skills. PWD  
Sensitiveness of the word ‘dementia’. IC, CM, OFC 
PWD and IC avoid situations and people: shame about the 
disease dementia. CM, OFC 
Church attendance of PWD. PWD, IC, CM 
No invitation of PWD at home. IC 
 
Daily activities 
Loneliness of PWD. IC, CM, OFC 
Lack of adequate daily activities of PWD. IC, CM, OFC 
Starting day care. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Increasing day care. IC, CM, OFC 
Mobility 
(Limitation of) mobility of PWD with driving. PWD, IC, CM, 
OFC 
(Limitation of) mobility of PWD with cycling. IC, CM, OFC 
(Limitation of) mobility of PWD with walking. IC, CM, OFC 
Driving. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Cycling. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Going outside alone/walking. IC, CM, OFC 
Scoot mobile. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Traveling with public transport. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Living 
Bureaucracy of indication institutions. IC, CM 
Stay at home. IC 
Registration for nursing home/home for the aged. IC 
Location: where register/admission (which home and which 
village/town). IC 
Admission to an home for the aged/nursing home. IC 
Internal removals. IC, CM, OFC 
Timely admission to a nursing home of PWD during timely 
holiday/drop out of IC. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Forced admission to a psychiatric institution. IC 
Safety 
Wandering of PWD. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Unsafe behavior of PWD with gas-tap; smoking; electricity. IC, 
CM, OFC 
Measures that limit PWD’s liberty. IC, CM, OFC 
Enclosure of gas-tap; smoking; electricity. IC, CM, OFC 
Personal alarm device. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
Future 
Life of IC after admission (to a nursing home) of the PWD. IC 
Discussing the future with the PWD is difficult. IC, CM 
Uncertainty regarding the future, for the PWD as well as the IC. 
IC, CM 
Settle things early to enable the PWD to co-decide: 
authorization, advanced directives/last will and testament. IC 
Delay of decisions. It’s difficult to look in an early stage to the 
future. IC, CM 
Fear of PWD of early death of IC (and conversely). PWD, IC 
Resuscitation. IC 
Timely setting things (e.g., authorization). IC 
Euthanasia wish/statement. IC 
Advance care planning. IC, CM 
Care 
Supply and demand of care do not match. IC 
Accessibility of care. IC 
Availability of care. IC 
Bureaucracy of care and welfare. IC, CM 
Supply of well-being and activities is not used. CM 
Call in CM in the dementia process is often too late. CM 
Too many organizations appeal to the PWD and the IC. This 
leads to commotion and conflicting advices. CM, OFC 
Timing: it is difficult to get PWD at the right moment in a good 
(and preferred) situation. CM 
Lack of relief centers in own region. Distance between family 
and PWD. Family does not want to travel too far. IC, CM 
Involved professionals (too many with conflicting opinions). IC 
Lack of realistic options; no real choice. IC 
Attention to financial part and consequences of care for PWD. 
IC 
Household assistance. PWD, IC, CM, OFC 
(Increase of) home care (washing, showering, care, clothing, 
medication). IC, CM, OFC 
Housekeeping: checking refrigerator, medication, nutrition. IC, 
CM, OFC 
Finances 
Financial and economic consequences for IC influence decision-
making. IC 
Availability of finances. IC 
Settle/handling finances. PWD, IC 
Handling administration. PWD, IC 
Handling mail. PWD, IC 
Autonomy 
Encroachment of autonomy of PWD. PWD 
Increasing dependence of PWD. PWD, IC, CM 
 
Involvement of 
person with 
dementia 
How to manage the PWD when he/she can’t co-decide 
anymore? IC 
Involvement of the PWD in decision-making depends on the 
stage of dementia. IC, CM 
Single PWD don’t want to burden their children. They don’t 
want to appeal on them. PWD 
 
Participants in 
decision-making 
Unclearness about who decides. IC, CM, OFC 
Involvement (yes/no) of  PWD in decisions. IC, CM, OFC 
 
Communication 
Lack of communication between members of the care network. 
CM, OFC 
 
343
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Diverging views of IC on situation PWD. CM 
Different views of involved ones regarding discussion point. CM 
The decision has unexpected consequences. PWD, IC, CM 
Not everything is expressed regarding the discussion point by 
involved ones. CM 
Promises that cannot be honored by IC. CM 
Uncooperative family systems. CM 
Family members are not on the same wavelength. CM, OFC 
The meaning of a decision has not been well expressed. IC 
Information 
Lack of timely and available information (e.g., authorization). 
IC 
Lack of (the same) information. IC 
Insufficient information and/or conflicting information. IC 
 
Professionals 
Balancing of the CM between interest PWD–IC. CM 
Burden of IC changes at some point in overburdening (no 
sliding scale). CM 
Lack of consultative/advisory experts. IC 
CM is available but in need of education. IC 
Relation with General Practitioner (not at hand and not well 
informed). PWD, IC 
Involvement of CM in the dementia process is too late. CM 
Lack of overview of the system of PWD/IC by CM (PWD or IC 
stop this). CM 
Lack of attention regarding the IC after the initial phase of the 
dementia process. IC) 
Formal caregivers are solution minded. PWD experience their 
help as invasive. PWD, IC 
 
Burden of 
informal caregiver 
(Over)burdening of IC. IC, CM, OFC 
Overburdened IC have unrealistic expectations of relief work. 
CM 
Overburdening is not always visible and can lead to a crisis 
decision. CM 
Feelings of guilt and powerlessness of IC. IC, CM 
Mourning process of IC. IC, CM 
Feelings of shame of IC about the disease and therefore avoiding 
situations and people. CM 
Difficulties with decision-making of IC. IC, CM 
Coping with difficult behavior of the PWD. IC, CM 
 
Vulnerability of 
informal caregiver 
Vulnerability of the IC/partner. What if IC is forced to stop 
caregiving? IC 
IC/spouse sometimes does not permit required care for PWD 
because breakthrough of daily routines. CM 
 
Options 
There is no choice. IC 
Limited offer of options. IC, CM 
Formal caregivers offer familiar care that is quickly available 
and effective. CM 
 
Timing 
Timing of admission (to a nursing home) is too quick/too slow. 
IC, CM 
What is the right moment to make a decision? IC, CM 
Sometimes people are not ready to face certain problems or to 
make certain decisions. CM, OFC 
Early diagnose, yes/no? An early diagnosis has negative aspects 
(no car driving; no change of insurance company; consequences 
for income). IC, CM 
 
a)PWD = people with dementia, IC = informal caregivers, CM = case managers, OFC = other formal caregivers 
 
are lack of discussion within the network, replacement of 
professional caregivers, and a lack of information recording. 
The other side of the timeline shows anticipation: early 
discussion of possible problems in the future, and important 
values of network members, specifically of the person with 
dementia. This enables network members to support and 
decide in line with the wishes and needs of the person with 
dementia and the endurance of the informal caregivers. 
The third domain, “information and communication”, 
including the categorized user requirements of information, 
communication, and support, seems to be more generic. 
These user requirements are lubricants for SDM in care 
networks of people with dementia and are therefore 
indispensable. Network members often do not have the same 
information starting point. There is a lack of information 
exchange between network members, and network members 
do not always have access to the same information. 
Furthermore, important information within the network is 
not (always) shared; interaction between all network 
members is not self-evident. Interaction between network
344
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

members is characterized by a one-on-one contact, rather 
than interaction between all network members “around the 
table”. Moreover, informal caregivers need the support of 
fellow sufferers.   
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this multiple methods study with an iterative 
participatory design, we determined the user requirements 
for a new interactive web tool based on experienced 
problems and decisions (social contacts, daily activities, 
mobility, safety, living, future, care, and finances), and needs 
and preferences of participants (participation of the person 
with dementia in the decision-making, insight into the 
decision history, anticipation of possible future problems and 
decisions, and the degree of self-management and autonomy 
preservation of the person with dementia among others). The 
extensive and thorough research procedure for identifying 
user requirements resulted in divers and rich user 
requirements.  
Most identified user requirements address aspects of 
well-being. User requirements addressing care, financial 
matters, and future are recognized by Livingston and 
colleagues [4]. Zwaanswijk and colleagues [5] emphasize 
experienced problems with social networks. In both studies 
only the informal caregivers were interviewed about their 
needs. Van der Roest and colleagues [6] interviewed both 
informal caregivers and  people with dementia. Most 
important needs they experienced address daytime activities, 
company and information. Each of these studies affirms 
some of the topics that are identified in this study that 
involved not only the perspectives of informal caregivers 
and/or people with dementia but also the perspectives of case 
managers and other professionals.  
In our study, people with dementia described fewer 
problems than informal and professional caregivers. This is 
in line with findings of van der Roest [6]  and de Boer and 
colleagues [36]. They suggest that this discrepancy could be 
due to different perspectives; informal caregivers and 
professional caregivers experience and rate problems 
differently from people with dementia (e.g., behavioral 
problems). People with dementia seem to be very capable of 
describing what is important to them: their values (e.g., loss 
of control, autonomy, and independence). De Boer and 
colleagues [36] consider also, as in our study, the 
contribution of people with dementia as very valuable to 
improve care to the experience and wishes of people with 
dementia.  
Results show that identified problems are more related to 
well-being, whereas decisions (in the sense of solving 
problems) are more related to care. This discrepancy may be 
due to the focus of professionals on care. Most professional 
caregivers and case managers in dementia care have a 
professional background in nursing. This might influence the 
options they provide. It can be argued that, if professional 
caregivers focus more on well-being, the options they offer 
will also likely be more focused on well-being. Improving 
person centeredness in dementia care may support such an 
attitude change of professional caregivers [37]. For the new 
interactive web tool it is of importance that we should take 
into account the character of problems and decisions in order 
to avoid a mismatch.  
The user requirements show no conflicts. However, some 
user requirements are complementary or overlapping. Ten 
clustered topics of experienced problems with no decision 
counterpart (e.g., communication, information, role of 
professionals, and involvement of person with dementia) 
overlap with user requirements based on the needs and 
preferences. 
Furthermore, 
the 
contributions 
that 
the 
participants made to the user requirements differ. Only two 
items were stated by all participants: “participation of the 
person with dementia in decision-making” and “self-
management and autonomy”. The informal caregivers 
contributed broadly; they gave input to all user requirements. 
In this study, people with dementia participated in the 
development. They made varying contributions. The 
information they provided could not always be easily derived 
from their answers. This might be due to the abstraction level 
of our study object: decision making. Nevertheless, people 
with dementia contributed to the requirements: participation 
of the person with dementia in decision-making, self- 
management and autonomy, anticipation, social contacts, 
mobility, living, and daily activities. Comparison of the user 
requirements with national dementia care standards show 
that they are compatible with important domains of these 
care standards such as participation of people with dementia 
in decision-making as long as possible, monitoring the well-
being of the person with dementia and the endurance 
capacity of informal caregivers, the case manager as a 
coordinator, the importance of information exchange, and 
communication with all those involved [38][39][40][41][42]. 
Participation of end users in the development of the 
interactive web tool is a key feature in our study. A previous 
review showed that participation of end users, and especially 
people with dementia, may contribute to the development of 
a user-friendly and usable interactive web tool [27]. We 
therefore conducted this study with maximum participation 
of the end users. To maximize inclusion of people with 
dementia researchers invested in the relationship with them 
by spending time with them [33]. This provided us with 
valuable user requirements. People with mild to moderate 
dementia were well able to participate in interviews and 
focus groups and could express their preferences. This 
affirms Whitlatch and colleagues’ assertions [20]. The 
recruitment of people with dementia for the interviews was 
sometimes difficult. Informal caregivers and formal 
caregivers tended to shield them from participating. They 
were sometimes afraid that participation would be too 
intrusive for the person with dementia. This is in line with 
Savith & Zaphiris and Wilkinson [43][44]. Another reason 
for non-participation of people with dementia and informal 
caregivers was the risk of overburdening of the informal 
caregiver. The people with dementia who participated in the 
study enjoyed the conversations and stressed the importance 
of their participation. They hope that their contribution will 
benefit future dementia patients.  
345
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV. SECOND SET OF ADDITIONAL USER REQUIREMENTS: NEEDS AND PREFERENCES 
Additional domains and categories of user requirements addressing needs and preferences of participants 
Domains of requirements 
 
Categories of user 
requirements 
User requirements addressing needs and preferences of end users 
Involved persons and their 
role 
 
 
 
 
 
Participation of the 
person with dementia 
in decision-making 
 
The tool:  
- facilitates involvement of the person with dementia when discussing issues and decisions. 
- facilitates acting in accordance with the uniqueness of the person with dementia.  
- gives insight into explicit choices about the participation of the person with dementia. 
- strengthens the position of the person with dementia in decision-making.  
- supports and strengthens the person with dementia as a (co-) decider. 
Self-management and 
autonomy 
 
The tool: 
- supports the wishes of the person with dementia about self-control and independency. 
- facilitates a gradual takeover of tasks appropriate to the needs of the person with dementia 
 
Role informal 
caregivers 
The tool: 
- facilitates the monitoring of the limits of informal caregivers regarding their burdening. 
- supports informal caregivers in deciding in accordance with the wishes of the person with  
  dementia. 
- monitors the (possibly changing) need of informal caregivers in coordinating activities. 
Role case manager 
 
The tool: 
- facilitates the role of the case manager  
- provides the case manager with supporting methods (e.g., network analysis, options). 
- monitors the activities and agreements made by the case manager. 
- facilitates the case manager to involve the person with dementia as co-decider. 
- supports the case manager in strengthening the communication in the network. 
Other professionals 
 
The tool: 
- facilitates adding other professionals (e.g., GPs) to the network. 
- facilitates one medical contact for the person with dementia and the informal caregiver. 
Organization around 
the person with 
dementia 
The tool: 
- facilitates efficient access to underlying (care) possibilities. 
- detects errors and delays in the settlement of processes and procedures. 
- facilitates the alignment of roles and self-management tasks within the care network. 
Timeline 
 
Anticipation 
 
The tool: 
- facilitates timely information about possible future issues and decisions within the network. 
- facilitates timely discussion about possible future issues and decisions within the network. 
Decision history 
 
The tool: 
- offers information about decisions made with regard to medical, care and welfare aspects.  
- supports providing insight into what was discussed by whom and from what perspective. 
Information and  
communication 
 
 
Information 
 
The tool: 
- provides relevant and consistent information to network members about: dementia in  
  general; the issues that may occur regarding the disease dementia;  experience knowledge  
  of network members; information about regional dementia provisions. 
- supports the accessibility to the same information for all network members. 
- facilitates the professional (case manager) as a signpost regarding information. 
Communication 
 
The tool: 
- facilitates an open communication between all network members. 
- facilitates exchange of information between network members. 
- facilitates case managers in maintaining a regular contact with the family. 
- facilitates the network members to be informed about what is going on within the network. 
 
Support 
 
The tool: 
- facilitates sharing experience knowledge of network members. 
- facilitates professionals in supporting network members proactively. 
- supports decision-making, timing of decisions, and the implementation of decisions. 
- supports the participation process of the person with dementia. 
 
346
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Aims of the interactive web tool facilitating SDM in 
dementia are open communication, transparency, deciding 
together step-by-step, and giving voice to the person with 
dementia. The user requirements determined in this study 
contribute to these aims and can be used in outcome metrics 
of the current pilot study: does the interactive web tool 
enable what it promises regarding topics of decision making 
and preferences of end users?  
 
A. Strengths and limitations 
This study has some methodological limitations. A first 
limitation concerns the fact that we did not quantify the 
occurrences of problems and decisions because we were 
interested in diversity.  Several methods, in sequence, 
were used to determine the content of a new SDM interactive 
web tool. In order to gain as much information as possible, 
we gathered all the views of the respondents that related to 
decision making and their situation. This highlighted a wide 
range of needs and preferences, and problems and decisions. 
The frequency of occurrence was not a criterion for 
acceptance or refusal. Although there was some overlap, 
many single problems were inventoried.  
The strength of this study lies in its extensive and 
thorough approach. Data triangulation, using multiple 
methods, in-depth and comprehensive data collection, 
thorough analyses, and the iterative participatory approach 
strengthen the results of this study. Furthermore, the findings 
complement each other; similar results came from several 
data sources. We paid special attention to thorough design 
and procedure of the study, especially with regard to the 
vulnerability of people with dementia. Attendance of the 
principal investigator at a day care center for six days made 
people with dementia more at ease in the focus group 
meeting. Nurse education can support this change by 
focusing increasingly on gerontology and well-being. This 
change nowadays is perceived in the Netherlands that are 
transforming from a welfare state to a participation society 
[45]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
With the iterative, participatory, and sequential approach 
we identified needs and preferences of participants, as well 
as experienced problems and decisions. This resulted in user 
requirements for a user-friendly interactive web tool that 
facilitates SDM in care networks of people with mild to 
moderate dementia. People with dementia and their informal 
and professional caregivers made valuable contributions. 
Decision making in dementia care networks addresses 
predominantly problems of the well-being of people with 
dementia and informal caregivers. Eight categories of 
problems and decisions addressing decision-making in 
dementia are identified: social contacts, daily activities, 
mobility, living, safety, future, care, and finances. Additional 
identified user requirements for the new interactive web tool 
concern: the participation of the person with dementia in 
decision-making, insight into decision history, anticipation of 
future problems and decisions, communication, information, 
and the degree of self-management, and autonomy 
preservation of the person with dementia and the informal 
caregivers over time. The next steps will be designing, 
developing, and improving the interactive web tool in 
collaboration with the end users, then testing it in 
experiments. In due course, a pilot study and its evaluation 
will follow. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all participants of the 
individual interviews and focus group interviews for their 
contribution. 
This work is supported by The Dutch Foundation 
Innovation Alliance (SIA RAAK [Regional Attention and 
Knowledge Circulation] PRO), Zorgpalet Hoogeveen 
(Residential care organization for older adults) and 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Span, C. Smits, L. M. Groen-van de Ven, A. Cremers, J. 
S. Jukema, M. J. F. Vernooij-Dassen, et al., "Developing 
eHealth technology for people with dementia: towards a 
supportive decision tool facilitating shared decision making in 
dementia," The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2013) 
IARIA, Feb. 2013, pp. 69-72, ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3 
[2] M. Prince, R. Bryce, and C. Ferri, "World Alzheimer Report 
2011," 
Available 
at: 
http://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2011.p
df. Last access date 20-10-2014. 
[3] C. Ferri, M. Prince, C. Brayne, H. Brodaty, L. Fratiglioni, M. 
Ganguli, et al., "Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi 
consensus study," Lancet, vol. 366, pp. 2112-2117, 2005. 
[4] G. Livingston, G. Leavet, M. Manela, D. Livingston, G. Rait, 
E. Sampson, et al., "Making decisions for people with 
dementia who lack capacity: qualitative study of family carers 
in UK," BMJ, vol. 341, 2010. 
[5] M. Zwaanswijk, A. P. A. v. Beek, J. Peeters, J. Meerveld, A. 
L. Francke, and S. Van Beek, "Problemen en wensen van 
mantelzorgers van mensen met dementie: een vergelijking 
tussen de beginfase en latere fasen van het ziekteproces 
[Problems and needs of informal caregivers of persons with 
dementia: a comparison between the initial stage and 
subsequent stages of the illness process]" Tijdschrift voor 
Gerontologie en Geriatrie, vol. 41, pp. 162-171, 2010. 
[6] H. G. van der Roest, F. J. M. Meiland, H. C. Comijs, E. 
Derksen, A. P. D. Jansen, H. P. J. van Hout, et al., "What do 
community-dwelling people with dementia need? A survey of 
those who are known to care and welfare services," 
International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 21, pp. 949-965, 2009. 
[7] R. 
M. 
Epstein 
and 
R. 
L. 
Street, 
"Shared 
Mind: 
Communication, Decision Making, and Autonomy in Serious 
Illness," The Annals of Family Medicine, vol. 9, pp. 454-461, 
September 1, 2011. 
[8] M. von Kutzleben, W. Schmid, M. Halek, B. Holle, and S. 
Bartholomeyczik, 
"Community-dwelling 
persons 
with 
dementia: What do they need? What do they demand? What 
do they do? A systematic review on the subjective 
experiences of persons with dementia," Aging & Mental 
Health, vol. 16, pp. 378-390, April 2012. 
347
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] S. L. Dupuis, J. Gillies, J. Carson, and C. Whyte, "Moving 
beyond patient and client approaches: Mobilizing ‘authentic 
partnerships’ in dementia care, support and services," 
Dementia, vol. 11, pp. 427-452, 2011. 
[10] K. Cubit, "Informed consent for research involving people 
with dementia: A grey area," Contemporary Nurse, vol. 34, 
pp. 230-236, 2010. 
[11] L. Nygård, "How can we get access to the experiences of 
people with dementia? Suggestions and reflections.," 
Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol. 13, pp. 
101-112, 2006.  
[12] H. L. Menne, S. S. Tucke, C. J. Whitlatch, and L. F. Feinberg, 
"Decision-Making Involvement Scale for Individuals With 
Dementia and Family Caregivers," American Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease & Other Dementias, vol. 23, pp. 23-29, 
2008. 
[13] G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, and P. Kinnersley, "Shared decision-
making in primary care: the neglected second half of the 
consultation.," British Journal of General Practice, vol. 49, pp. 
477-482, 1999. 
[14] D. Stacey, F. Légaré, S. Pouliot, J. Kryworuchko, and S. 
Dunn, "Shared decision making models to inform an 
interprofessional perspective on decision making: A theory 
analyis," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 80, pp. 164-
172, 2010. 
[15] F. Légaré, D. Stacey, S. Pouliot, F. P. Gauvin, S. Desroches, 
J. Kryworuchko, et al., "Interprofessionalism and shared 
decision-making in primary care: a stepwise approach 
towards a new model," Journal of Interprofessional Care, vol. 
25, pp. 18-25, 2011. 
[16] C. A. G. Wolfs, M. E. de Vugt, M. Verkaaik, M. Haufe, P. J. 
Verkade, F. R. J. Verhey, et al., "Rational decision-making 
about treatment and care in dementia: A contradiction in 
terms?," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 87, pp. 43-
48, 2012. 
[17] G. Makoul and M. L. Clayman, "An integrative model of 
shared decision making in medical encounters," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 60, pp. 301-312, 2006. 
[18] P. D. A. Ottawa Hospital Research Institute. Available: 
http://decisionaid.ohri.ca/index.html. Last access date 24-11-
2-14. 
[19] E. Duncan, C. Best, and S. Hagen, "Shared decision making 
interventions for people with mental health conditions," 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010. 
[20] J. Whitlatch, Menne, H, "Don’t forget about me. Decision 
making by people with dementia," Journal of the American 
Society on Aging, vol. 33, pp. 66-71, 2009. 
[21] Alzheimer Europe, Alzheimer in Europe Yearbook 2008. 
Available 
at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_information/reporting/docs/2008
_dementiayearbook_en.pdf, Last access date 24-11-2014.  
[22] J. Peeters, J. de Lange, I. van Asch, S. P., M. Veerbeek, A. M. 
Pot, et al., "Landelijke evaluatie van casemanagement 
dementie [National evaluation of case management in 
dementia]", NIVEL, Utrecht 2012. 
[23] T. Koch, S. Iliffe, J. Manthorpe, B. Stephens, C. Fox, L. 
Robinson, et al., "The potential of case management for 
people with dementia: a commentary," International Journal 
of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 27, pp. 1305-1314, 2012. 
[24] A. M. O'Connor, H. A. Llewellyn-Thomas, and A. B. Flood, 
"Modifying Unwarranted Variations In Health Care: Shared 
Decision Making Using Patient Decision Aids. A review of 
the evidence base for shared decision making.," Health 
Affairs Web exclusive, pp. 63-72, 2004. 
[25] Med-Decs. De internationale verzamelplaats voor hulp bij 
medische keuzen [Med-Decs. The international meeting-place 
for medical choices support]. Available: http://www.med-
decs.org/nl/. Last acces date 24-11-2014. 
[26] F. Meiland, A. Reinersmann, S. Savenstedt, B. Bergvall-
Kareborn, M. Hettinga, D. Craig, et al., "User-Participatory 
Development of Assistive Technology for People with 
Dementia - From Needs to Fucntional Requirements. First 
Results of the COGKNOW Project," Non-Pharmalogical 
Therapies in Dementia, vol. 1, pp. 71-91, 2010. 
[27] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. J. F. J. Vernooij-Dassen, J. 
Eefsting, and C. Smits, "Involving People with Dementia in 
the Development of Supportive IT Applications: a Systematic 
Review," Ageing Research Reviews  vol. 12, pp. 535-551, 
2013. 
[28] S. Visser, T. Haaker, R. Menko, and M. Hettinga, "From 
Buzz to Business: eHealth Innovation Matrix”. Abstract 
submitted and accepted for Med-e-Tel 2012, Luxembourg, 
April 18-20, 2012. 
[29] J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. A. H. Van 
Limburg, S. M. Kelders, B. J. Brandenburg, H. C. Ossebaard, 
et al., "Introducing a holistic framework for eHealth 
technologies," Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 13 
(4):e111, 2011. 
[30] A. Bryman, Social Research Methods, third edition ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
[31] S. D. Lambert and C. G. Loiselle, "Combining individual 
interviews and focus groups to enhance data richness," J Adv 
Nurs, vol. 62, pp. 228-37, Apr 2008. 
[32] M. Bloor, J. Frankland, M. Thomas, and K. Robson, Focus 
Groups in Social Research. London: Sage Publiations Ltd, 
2002. 
[33] K. Murphy, F. Jordan, A. Hunter, A. Cooney, and D. Casey, 
"Articulating the strategies for maximising the inclusion of 
people with dementia in qualitative research studies," 
Dementia, January 8, 2014. 
[34] B. Reisberg, S. H. Ferris, M. J. de Leon, and T. Crook, "The 
global deterioration scale for assessment of primary 
degenerative dementia.," American Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 
139, pp. 1136-1139, 1982. 
[35] H. Beyer and K. Holzblatt, Contextual Design. Defining 
Customer-Centered Systems, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
2010. 
[36] M. E. de Boer, C. M. Hertogh, R. M. Dröes, I. I. Riphagen, C. 
Jonker, and J. A. Eefsting, "Suffering from dementia - the 
patient's perspective: a review of the literature," Int 
Psychogeriatr. , vol. 19, pp. 1021-1039, 2007. 
[37] P. J. Doyle and R. L. Rubinstein, "Person-Centered Dementia 
Care and the Cultural Matrix of Othering," The Gerontologist, 
August 6, 2013. 
[38] L. J. Boomsma, D. F. R. Boswijk, A. Bras, A. H. M. 
Kleemans, J. M. G. A. Schols, A. W. Wind, et al., "Landelijke 
Eerstelijns Samenwerkings Afspraak Dementie [National 
dementia collaboration agreement]”, Huisarts & Wetenschap, 
vol. 52, pp. S1-S5, 2009. 
[39] L. J. Boomsma, M. De Bont, C. Engelsman, J. Gussekloo, C. 
Hartman, A. Persoon, et al., "Landelijke Eerstelijns 
Samenwerkings Afspraak Dementie [National dementia 
collaboration agreement]”, Huisarts & Wetenschap, vol. 48, 
pp. 124-126, 2005. 
[40] Richtlijn Diagnostiek en medicamenteuze behandeling van 
dementie [Directive diagnostics and medical treatment of 
dementia], K. v. d. G. CBO, 2005. Available at: 
http://www.platformouderenzorg.nl/uploads/files/guidelines/d
ementie1.pdf. Last access date 20-11-2014. 
[41] E. Moll van Charante, M. Perry, M. J. F. Vernooij-Dassen, D. 
F. R. Boswijk, J. Stoffels, L. Achthoven, et al., "NHG-
Standaard 
Dementie 
(derde 
herziening) 
[General 
 
348
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

practitionars’ dementia standard]" Huisarts & Wetenschap, 
vol. 55, pp. 306-317, 2012. 
[42] AlzheimerNederland and Vilans, "Zorgstandaard Dementie," 
ed 
[Dementia 
care 
standard], 
2012. 
Available 
at:  
http://www.alzheimer-
nederland.nl/media/19342/Alzheimer%20Nederland_Brochur
e_Goede_Zorg_Dementie_LR.pdf. Last access date 24-11-2-
14.  
[43] N. Savitch and P. Zaphiris, "Accessible websites for People 
with Dementia: a Preliminary Investigation into Information 
Architecture," in ICCHP, 2006, p. 8. 
[44] H. Wilkinson, “Including people with dementia in research: 
methods and motivations”. In: The perspectives of people 
with dementia, research methods and motivation. London: 
Jessica Kingsley, 2002. 
[45] C. H. M. Smits, H. K. van den Beld, M. J. Aartsen, and J. J. F. 
Schroots, "Aging in The Netherlands: State of the Art and 
Science," The Gerontologist, September 2, 2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
349
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

