Improving Cross-Curricular Skills in Web Services: Virtual vs. Attendance 
Environments 
Guadalupe Ortiz  
Quercus Software Engineering Group 
Centro Universitario de Mérida, UEX 
Mérida, Spain 
gobellot@unex.es 
 
 
Abstract— Web services is a mainly practical software 
engineering subject which is followed by Computer Science 
and Telecommunication Engineering students at the University 
of Extremadura. It is an advanced topic and therefore it is 
taught in the last years of the engineering, in which the student 
already has the capacity of learning a lot of concepts by 
themselves. Although the transmission of the main theoretical 
and practical concepts of the subject in question must remain 
the main focus, the improvement of students’ general skills 
claims for special attention with a view to business 
requirements. Besides, the mobility of teachers and students 
among European universities has increased notably, which is a 
very positive experience for both communities. In this regard, 
new educational alternatives have to be found for this purpose, 
not only to provide the possibility of studying a subject abroad, 
but also to improve cross-curricular skills. It is also a reality to 
be taken into account that an increasing number of students 
are already working in the industry while following up their 
studies. E-learning environments are the perfect answer to 
these requirements, where a varied range of activities and 
methodologies can be used to follow the subject virtually as 
well as promote general cross-curricular skills such as 
addressing 
an 
audience, 
team 
work 
and 
preparing 
documentation. In this sense this paper describes the author’s 
experiences with e-learning environments in the situations 
described above and compares them with previous experiences 
in which only attendance lectures where available for students.  
Keywords- Virtual Environments; Attendance Environments;  
Web Services; Teaching Experience; Cross-Curricular Skills.  
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Web Services is a mainly practical subject, specially 
focused on the development of distributed applications 
which will be implemented and will communicate with each 
other under the Service-Oriented Architecture. It is an 
advanced subject which is followed by advanced students, 
that is, students in their last year of the Computer Science or 
Telecommunication Engineering degree. In this scope, it is 
quite common that students start working before they have 
finished the degree, or even that they start studying a new 
one once they have started working and this induces that the 
subject students might have schedule problems to attend the 
lectures on a regular basis due to their work commitments. 
On the other hand, the mobility of teachers and students 
among European universities has increased notably: 
regarding the teachers they often have to attend several 
conferences to exchange their research ideas with other 
experts in the matter and it is also becoming quite common 
for teachers to go for research or teaching stays abroad for 
several months. In the case of students, the most common 
situation is that they are awarded an Erasmus scholarship and 
spend at least one year in a foreign university. Both positions 
are very positive for teachers and students and shouldn’t be 
avoided for the sake of not missing lectures.  
On the other hand, the European Higher Education Area 
(EHEA) demands the inclusion and improvement of student 
cross-curricular skills [2, 6]. The lack of experience of 
technical professors in this area, as well as the innovation of 
this proposal, makes it difficult the correct adoption of the 
named capacities by the students. Even more, since most of 
the cross-curricular capacities involve the interaction with 
other persons, the development of such abilities in a non-
attendance situation becomes a real challenge. 
In this regard, we have to look for new alternatives under 
the scope of the EHEA, so that education can be followed up 
without a mandatory requirement of attendance to lectures, 
and which, at the same time, lets us improve students’ cross-
curricular skills. Both tasks are already a challenge, but when 
faced together the challenge is even bigger. Education 
through e-learning environments was already approached by 
several authors in various interesting approaches [3, 4, 7, 9, 
12] and we can also find some comparisons between virtual 
and attendance environments [1, 5, 8, 14]; however, most of 
them do not consider cross-curricular skills.  
In this paper, we are going to see how this problem was 
tackled for an optional subject called Web Services offered in 
the Computer Science and Telecommunication Engineering 
at the University of Extremadura in Spain. We will describe 
the experience of the author and what the results obtained 
were. We will extend our previous work in [11] by 
comparing this experience with previous years experiences, 
in which virtual environments where not available, 
evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of virtual lectures 
versus attendance ones. 
110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

This paper is organized as follows: chapter 2 describes the 
subject Web Services according to its professional profiles 
and associated skills. Then, chapter 3 explains briefly the 
virtual environment 
available at the University 
of 
Extremadura. Chapter 4 explains the activities which were 
developed in a virtual and attendance mode in the scope of 
the mentioned subject during different academic years. Then, 
chapter 5 discusses the results of the experience and compare 
the two teaching ways presented. Finally, chapter 6 
summarizes our proposal. 
II. PRELIMINARIES 
In this section we are going to describe the subject in which 
the e-learning experience has being carried out and which are 
its curricular and cross-curricular skills in order to analyse in 
the following sections how virtual environments could be 
used to improve such skills and carry out lectures virtually. 
Web Services 
is particularly 
connected to three 
professional 
profiles: 
design 
and 
development 
of 
telecommunication 
services, 
design 
of 
distributed 
applications oriented to the administration and electronic 
commerce and teaching and research for the development of 
new technologies and services. The skills specific to the 
qualification which are mainly linked to this subject are to 
know and design tools related to security in communications 
and 
networks, 
designing 
communication 
software 
incorporating the new technologies TIC to productive 
processes in the business and knowing and applying 
scientific and technological base knowledge to adapt to 
technological changes.  
Specifically, the content taught in this course is 
enumerated below: 
Unit 1. Web Services Introduction 
 
1.1. Web Services Overview 
 
1.2. The Interoperability Problem: Walking toward 
the Web Services 
 
1.3. Service-Oriented Architectures. 
 
1.4. Adapting Architectures. 
 
1.5. Web Service-Oriented Architecture. 
 
1.6. Web Services Applications. 
 
1.7. Types of Web Services. 
Unit 2. Web Service Standards 
 
2.1. SOAP 
 
2.2. WSDL 
Fig 1. Activities available in the UEX Moodle environment 
111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

 
2.3. UDDI 
Unit 3. Web Service Compositions 
 
3.1. Choreography 
 
3.2. Orchestration 
 
3.3. Enterprise Service Bus. 
Unit 4. Web Service Modeling 
 
4.1. WSDL-based Approaches 
 
4.2. Service Component Architecture 
 
4.3. Model-Driven Architecture 
Unit 5. State of Art of the Web Services. 
 
5.1. Platforms 
 
5.2. Advantages and Drawbacks 
 
5.3. Limitations 
Unit 6. Building and Deploying Web Services with Java-
based platforms.  
Unit 7. Building Web Services with .NET 
Unit 8. Building Web Service Clients for Mobile Devices. 
In any case, the content of the subject is not relevant for 
the purpose of the paper, but the cross-curricular skills and 
skills are. 
The cross-disciplinary skills related to the professional 
profiles to which this subject is normally linked are the 
following: development I+D+I, design and analysis of 
telematics applications and services, managing telematics 
products 
and 
services, 
application 
of 
the 
learned 
technologies and their integration into the socioeconomic 
structure, interaction with users and responsibility for own 
learning. 
Based on these skills, the objectives established with regards 
to the academic and disciplinary abilities are the following: 
• To introduce the student to the Web service technology, 
their standards and their development tools as well as the 
way to model and compose them.  
• Besides, students have to be able to research on the 
named technologies and to be able to acquire and apply 
new knowledge in the area.  
 After studying the general personal skills of the degree and 
the specific disciplinary ones considered in this subject we 
concluded that suitable objectives with regards to personal 
and professional skills are the following:  
• To develop the ability to understand, and enable others to 
understand, knowledge related with Web service 
technology, to be able to learn themselves about the 
named technology. 
• To be able to work as a team effectively. 
• To be able to acquire Web service related knowledge 
when provided in English.  
III. THE VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT 
This section will describe the virtual environment adopted in 
the University of Extremadura (UEX) and the different 
modules which are available in it [16]. 
The University of Extremadura has embraced Moodle 
[15] and has offered to the university community several 
configurations depending on what the virtual environment is 
going to be taken advantage of. It is important to mention 
that not all Moodle modules are available for its use in the 
University of Extremadura system, therefore, according to 
Fig 2. Resources and activities 
112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

the university rules, we have had to limit the use to those 
modules habilitated in this system. 
Particularly, for the degree subjects, there are currently 
several virtual elements available, enumerated in the 
following lines - and some of them shown in the left-hand 
side of Figure 1: 
• Files repository and resources: the teacher can upload any 
file and may or may not make it available for the students 
at any moment. 
• Forums: the teacher can create several forums. For each 
of them he may decide between three different 
possibilities: forums in which only the teacher can write, 
forums in which the teacher is the only person authorized 
to start a topic and the students can comment on it and 
those where both teacher and students can start a topic. 
• Wikis: the tutor can create wikis so that students can 
interact with them. The platform saves the historical data 
of the wiki so that the teacher can evaluate the students’ 
progress. Usefulness of wikis has been described in 
previous works such as [13]. 
• Questionnaires: the teacher can elaborate several types of 
questionnaire in this platform –true/false, multiple 
choice, etc- The students can see at the end of their 
attempt the mark they got and also what would be the 
right answers. Limited slots of time can also be 
established for these activities. 
• Delivery activities: some tasks may be requested by the 
students and uploaded onto the platform. They may or 
may not be set as “visible” for the rest of the students. 
• Glossaries: the teacher can propose to elaborate a 
glossary for each lesson or for a general topic, so that the 
students can inspect on detail the meaning of the main 
terms used in the dealt scope and check them whenever 
they need to. 
There are more resources and activities available, as we 
can see in Figure 2, but we are not going to describe all of 
them since they are not relevant to this paper. 
IV. ACTIVITIES 
In this section we are going to describe the different 
activities followed during the course Web Services: 
Subsection  A in virtual environments and Subsection B in 
attendance ones.  
It is important to mark that the different types of 
activities were being selected during the academic year: 
since it is a very dynamic subject, depending on the topic of 
the day and the previous experiences with the students, the 
more appropriate activities were introduced.  
A.  Activities in Virtual Environments 
For the Moodle configuration, first of all, we opted for a 
weekly distribution. This way, the topic that is being worked 
during every week of the course could be easily be identified 
by those students who cannot attend the lectures. In this 
regard, every week there were available different kind of 
documents and activities. For instance, as depicted in Figure 
3, first week we only have a planning of the subject and a 
global glossary, but in second week (Figure 4), we can 
already find several documents for theoretical and practical 
Fig 3. Forums and first week activities 
First Week 
Activities 
Forums 
113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

lectures and additional activities, which will be described 
later on this paper. 
We can also see in the very top of Figure 3 that we have 
two available forums: 
• News: this forum let the teacher to comment any new 
about the subject. In this sense this forum may be used 
not only for indicating which activities to be done are 
new, but also to establish reminders for those students 
who can not follow the subject with continuity. Besides, 
it is very helpful for those students who can not attend 
the lectures so that they do not have the feeling of being 
uninformed. 
• Students: this forum is especially useful for students to 
post their opinions, comments and questions for the 
whole participants of the course. This way it may be the 
students who answer these questions to their partners or 
who provide comments or suggestions through this 
platform. 
Figure 4 shows us the current development of the initial 
weeks of the course. Since we had to give them a theoretical 
and practical foundation of the course, we provided them 
with several deliverable documents with this purpose 
(Lesson 1, Lesson 2, etc). These documents are explained 
and discussed in the classroom, but can also be followed up 
by the students who cannot attend them. We can also see that 
Fig 4. Activities in the initial weeks of the course 
114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

for every lesson we proposed two interactive activities to the 
students: wikis and glossaries: 
• A wiki was created for every lesson so that the students 
could enlarge their knowledge on the topics treated 
during the lesson in question. The work is done 
individually but shared with the remaining participants 
on the course so that the knowledge is built in a 
collaborative way. Since there is a unique document in 
the wiki, the students have to read what was inserted in 
the document by their partners and add new information 
to it. It may be that some of the advanced knowledge 
included in the wiki has already been discussed during 
the lectures, and this is a way to make this information 
available to the non-attendance students. On the other 
hand, the latest may also add a different point of view on 
the advanced knowledge or, even if they are working in 
the industry, a more business-oriented vision. 
• Besides they were also provided with a glossary per 
lesson. The glossary is also a constructive activity which 
has to be built in a collaborative way. The students will 
add all the definitions they consider important for the 
understanding of the lesson. It is a hard work to be 
developed by an only person, but when built in 
conjunction with the remaining partners is a light 
workload which reports a great compilation of definitions 
which suppose a wonderful help when studying the 
lessons. 
Finally activities A, B and C are activities to be done in 
groups of 3 to 4 persons. This work is developed during the 
classroom schedule so that the teacher can observe the 
performance on the group. The students works this way in a 
more relaxed scope and feel confident to go one step forward 
in their opinions on the lesson, what definitely improve their 
knowledge. Later on, the group will present the conclusions 
they have obtained to the remaining of the classroom. 
Besides, they will make these conclusions available in the 
virtual platform for the non-attendance students.  
Once the basis knowledge has been discussed and 
assumed by the students, it is time for them to work on their 
own. For this purpose they will develop several works (see 
Figure 5): 
• On the one hand, they have to do various practical 
exercises with several development platforms (Axis, 
Systinet, .and Net). In order to do it they are provided 
with various documents – in English- with the instructions 
for installing the software, basic examples to get 
familiarized with the platform and the information related 
with the exercise to be developed.  This information is 
available in the wiki and therefore is accessible for both 
the attendance and non-attendance students. The questions 
related with these activities can be done through the 
platform forum, so that other students who may have the 
same questions can see their answers. 
Fig 5. Advanced weeks activities. 
115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

• On the other, they have to do a work in a team “outside” 
the classroom schedule. This allows students who cannot 
attend lectures due to their work schedule, to meet their 
classroom colleagues at a suitable time, therefore 
improving the interaction among the classroom students. 
Special groups are done for those students who are 
abroad: they will have to do separate parts of a work and 
then to integrate their parts with each other through 
virtual or collaborative tools. 
The practical exercises results will be delivered to the 
teacher through the platform, so that he will be able to revise 
them using the online platform by giving marks and making 
suggestions that will be available for the students who are 
participants of the online course. In regard with the work in 
team, the final document and implementation will also be 
available in the virtual environment, so that the remaining 
students can benefit from their colleagues research to learn. 
Besides, every team will do their work presentation to their 
partners and teacher, explaining the obtained results, 
generating a final discussion on the topic. Students who 
cannot attend to the scheduled presentation will be allowed 
to do a virtual presentation and to answer to the questions the 
remaining students may do through the platform. Finally, 
non-attendance students will comment the remaining works 
in a forum. The authors will also be able to answer through 
the forum in question (top week of Figure 6). 
At the end of the course all the students can follow a final 
questionnaire, in which to check the knowledge they have 
acquired in the subject (shown in lower week of Figure 6). 
The main purpose of this questionnaire is the students to 
realize that they do know how to answer some questions 
about a topic they did not know at the beginning of the year. 
The result of the questionnaire is a minimum part of the 
assessment of the student. Assessments are built based on 
their fruitful participation in all the activities proposed in the 
virtual environment. 
B. Activities in Attendance Environments 
Even though there is not always a clear correspondence 
between activities in virtual environments and in attendance 
ones, we explain here how do it in our Web Service module. 
Table 1 shows the equivalences described below simplified. 
Further information on attendance activities can be found at 
[10]. 
First of all, news and forums, which are easily addressed 
through a virtual tool, are implemented in attendance 
environments by simple advices or comments during 
lectures. This implies that for most of them no written 
evidence is saved. 
On the other hand, attendance activities are mainly based 
on magisterial lectures. Web Services, being a third year 
subject, needs fewer magisterial lectures than for instance a 
first year subject. The same theoretical information that was 
provided through the virtual platform for the students to 
download and read it is provided here during the lecture and 
briefly explained to them. Afterwards, a discussion on the 
topic replaces the quiz we proposed for the virtual platform. 
A written test could have been followed for this purpose; 
however, since in the attendance environment we have the 
chance to discuss openly, we considered it more beneficial 
for students than the traditional written test. 
Besides, in order to elaborate knowledge in common, 
wikis can be replaced by team work. The team can discuss 
on the topic during the lecture and afterwards go on 
Fig 6. Final week activities. 
116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

searching additional information to complement the original 
one. With this information they can elaborate a final 
document which can be presented and discussed with the 
remaining students during the following lecture.  
Regarding glossaries, they can be implemented by 
different work groups and then distributed in the classroom. 
It is a nice option to have a printed glossary to discuss during 
the lecture and make notes on it, but I would say it is even 
better to build it gradually in the virtual platform and keep it 
saved for the rest of the academic year. 
Additionally, several activities can be carried out in this 
format during the lectures such as discussion and debates. In 
this sense, the teacher may propose several topics for 
discussion and then students have argument their proposed 
solutions. This way, they improve the skill of addressing an 
audience strictly speaking, versus the option to do it through 
their participation in a virtual forum. Role plays are in the 
same line, once the roles are assigned and the problem is 
described by the teacher, performance can be developed 
during the lecture time. This activity could also be conducted 
through virtual forums, but with extra difficulty. Finally 
through judgment simulation, professional behaviours can be 
judged.  
Students should also be able to present the learned topics 
correctly; to do so first of all they can elaborate a 
presentation through slides and present them in the slot time 
proposed for it during the lectures. Afterwards a discussion 
can be followed up. The advantage here is that the discussion 
is followed up exactly after the presentation when the topic 
presented in still fresh in their mind; in the virtual 
environment, the discussion lasts more time and the ideas are 
not fresh for everybody in order to establish a fruitful debate. 
However, virtual option provide the students with the 
possibility of reading again those parts of the presentation in 
which they are interested or they have doubts and they have 
more time to assimilate its contents to get ready for 
discussion. 
 
Virtual Activities 
Attendance Activities 
News and forums 
Advices and comments 
Theoretical deliverables 
+ quiz 
Magisteral lecture + 
discussion/test 
Wikis 
Team work 
Virtual glossary 
Work group glossary 
Virtual forum 
Open discussion/role play 
Presentation slides + 
Presentation + discussion 
forum 
Group research 
Group research 
Laboratory tasks + forum 
questions 
Laboratory tasks + alive 
questions 
Virtual test 
Written tests 
 
Table 1. Equivalence between virtual ad attendance activities 
Concerning group research, in any case is done outside 
the classroom, so its functioning is quite similar to the 
analyzed in the virtual environment. The only difference is 
that the exposition of the developed work is not virtual. In 
this case the same considerations described in the previous 
activity apply here. 
Regarding laboratory activities, the teacher can provide 
the students with the main principles and some helpful 
information and references at the beginning of the lab task. 
Then the students can start with the task during the lab 
scheduled lecture and ask any doubts they have. Afterwards 
they go on with their task on their own. Thus, the main 
difference here is that doubts are asked presently instead of 
through the virtual environment. 
Theoretical exam and practical exam can be carried out 
in the traditional way, in a present session.  
V. 
RESULTS OF THE LEARNING EXPERIENCES 
In this section we are going to describe the first 
impression from the results that were derived from the 
teaching procedure in the virtual environment (subsection 
A), then we will compare the results with the ones obtained 
when teaching the same subject in an attendance 
environment (subsection B) and finally we will summarize 
the lessons learned. 
A. First Evaluation of the Results using Virtual 
Environments 
With the teaching methodology followed through the use 
of the virtual environment we obtained the following results: 
• First of all, the students could successfully improve their 
cross-curricular activities, thanks to their practice during 
the virtual environments, in which they had to acquire 
knowledge by themselves (in English or Spanish), to talk 
to an audience (small when working in teams, bigger with 
the whole course), working in team (with and without 
supervisors), etc. 
• Students who were working and had schedule problems to 
attend the lectures or students who were abroad, that in 
other situation wouldn’t have been able to follow the 
117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

subjects, finished it normally and even they got good 
marks. Most of time happens that working students 
experience in the industry gives them quite a higher view 
on the subject-related knowledge and therefore, even 
though they have the handicap of not being able to attend 
the lectures, they normally are very successful with the 
subject.  
• On the other hand, we are all aware that most of the 
students are reluctant to participate during the lectures. 
The virtual environment makes this labour easier for 
them, since they can take their time to express what they 
think and then write it in the forum or in the wiki. 
Besides, once they get comfortable with the interactive 
activities, and especially when they know that the 
participation is mandatory, they start providing very 
interesting comments and analysis. 
• Eventually, although they have to work harder from the 
very beginning of the academic year, they realize that they 
learn and acquire more concepts more easily than they 
used to. They soon feel confident enough to ask any 
doubts; and this is not quite a usual atmosphere in the 
university scope, even through a virtual environment.  
Once the year ended, the results showed that all the 
students who followed regularly the subject passed it with a 
good mark. The ones who decided not to participate in the 
weekly activities did not even show up in the exam. Besides, 
the students showed a great improvement in cross-curricular 
skills and self-learning from the beginning to the end of the 
year, especially in talking to an audience. In this regard 
students cross-curricular skills were evaluated through their 
participation and behaviour in the different activities 
proposed during the module; the results obtained were 
around 10% better than in previous years, in which they 
followed a unique final assessment. Therefore, we can affirm 
that the methodology presented improved not only cross-
curricular skills, but also efficiency in learning the subject 
contents through virtual e-learning environments. 
B. Comparing Results using Virtual versus Attendance 
Environments 
On the one hand we can compare the marks obtained by 
the students. According to the Spanish scale, marks are 
subdivided in the groups shown in Table 2, where marks 
below 5 are failed, and 10 is the best mark which can be 
obtained. 
 
Value 
NP 
[0,5) 
[5,7) 
[7,9) 
[9,10) 
10 
Mark 
NP 
S 
A 
N 
S 
MH 
 
Table 2. Equivalence between Numeric Assessments and Final Marks 
The marks obtained by students in two consecutive 
courses, the first with attendance lectures and the second 
with virtual ones, are shown in Figure 7. In it we can see that 
the percentage of students who decided not to follow the 
subject and not to present their tasks is bigger in the 
attendance mode (NP). Some of these students were already 
working in the industry and they could not attend lectures, 
therefore it was not easy for them to follow the subject. The 
students in that situation in the virtual subject, could follow it 
through Internet and finish the subject successfully. 
Fig 7. Percentage of  Marks obtained by Students in Virtual And Attendance Environments. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Percentage
NP (%)
A (%)
N (%)
S (%)
MH (%)
Marks
Percentage of Marks Obtained by Students
Attendance Env.
Virtual Env.
118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

We can also appreciate in the mentioned figure that the 
marks are significantly better in the virtual environment 
academic year (nearly two points over the attendance year). 
We consider that this figure is due to the freedom the 
students feel in order to participate in the activities when 
working with a virtual tool. We all know students may feel 
insecure of themselves and are reluctant to participate 
actively during lectures because of this reason. When they 
have the option to meditate or document their opinion about 
a subject previous to their participation (i.e in a virtual 
forum) they feel more confident and their participation 
increases. 
We can also analyze how they worked and improved the 
cross-curricular skills mentioned in Section II, taking into 
account that assessments related to cross-curricular skills are 
based on the evaluation of their activities in the virtual tool 
or during lectures: 
• To develop the ability to understand, and enable others to 
understand, knowledge related with Web service 
technology, to be able to learn themselves about the 
named technology: in both experiences the students had 
to present their research on a specific topic to their 
colleagues. Even though, in virtual environments they got 
better abilities in expressing their opinions and refuting 
others arguments with good criteria, in attendance 
environments they got better improvement on their 
ability to address an audience. This fact is reflected in 
Figures 8.1 and 8.2, respectively.  
• To be able to work as a team effectively: in both cases 
they did it properly; they demonstrated to be able to 
coordinate and deliver a task in the team both having 
virtual and attendance learning. Nevertheless, it could be 
appreciated a slightly better distribution of tasks and roles 
in the attendance option, as shown in Figure 9. 
• To be able to acquire Web service related knowledge 
when provided in English: in this case, having a virtual or 
non-attendance environment does not influence the 
result, since the texts that they have to read and the 
knowledge they have to acquire by themselves in English 
is the same. Thus the percentage is the same for both 
values in Figure 10. 
C. Lessons Learned Through the Experiences. 
Students’ first reaction to any change in the educational 
methodology is always negative since they feel very secure 
doing what they have always done (mainly attending 
magisterial lectures and studying on their own for a written 
exam).  
Fig 8.1. Debate Ability Improvement. 
Debate
35%
65%
Attendance Env.
Virtual Env.
Speech
67%
33%
Attendance Env.
Virtual Env.
Fig 8.2. Speech Ability Improvement. 
Fig 8. Debate and Speech Ability Improvement in 
Virtual and Attendance Environments. 
Fig 9. Team Work Ability Improvement in Virtual and 
Attendance Environments. 
Team
55%
45%
Attendance Env.
Virtual Env.
Fig 10. English Ability Improvement in Virtual and 
Attendance Environments. 
English
50%
50%
Attendance Env.
Virtual Env.
119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Initiatives for the improvement of cross-curricular skills, 
implement new methodologies which make them participate 
more during lessons, being especially encouraged by the 
virtual format, therefore bringing them back from their 
passive behaviour. Obviously, this also implies a very 
negative attitude on their part when moving on to a new 
methodology. Nevertheless, once they get used to it and once 
hearsay has run from one year to another, they understand 
there is no other option and face the subject with a much 
more positive attitude.  
However they still have their preferences: it was 
noticeable that they got used to develop tasks in groups after 
two or three lessons; however those activities which were 
developed casually (role play, judgements, PBL, etc) still 
somehow scared them since they are not used to them and 
feel out of their comfort zone, therefore lacking confidence 
to complete the tasks naturally.  
In any case, after the experience one can decide which 
activities work better for the subject and type of students in 
question, so some of them may not be used some years, to be 
included other years when the circumstances are more 
appropriate. An activity which may result in an interesting 
experience is to organize a simulation of a research 
conference and assign the different common roles in 
conferences to different groups of students (program 
committee, organizing committee, authors, keynotes and so 
on), the topics being the contents of the subject. This way, as 
they learn the main concepts of the subject, they work as part 
of a team and have to talk to an audience. If the experience 
works it can also be very fulfilling for them to see how they 
have been able to organize an event with the whole group. 
Eventually, although they have to work harder from the 
beginning of the academic year, they realize that they learn 
and acquire more concepts more easily than they used to. 
They soon feel confident enough to ask any doubts and to 
make comments in the forums, even to spontaneously rebate 
about a topic to one of their partners; and this is not quite a 
usual atmosphere in the university scope, even through a 
virtual environment. This change of mentality alone would 
make the effort of improving the teaching methodology 
worthwhile, however, as we well see in the following 
section, this is not the only improvement. 
On the other hand, they seemed to be very surprised 
when they were told that they did not have to attend lectures 
regularly in the virtual subject, and they even thought that 
they might not learn the subject contents properly. However, 
as soon as they started doing the virtual activities, they 
realized that they still had to work hard on the subject and 
that indeed they were going to acquire the correspondent 
knowledge. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Virtual environments may not be suitable to any subject, 
especially if consider cross-curricular skills as specific 
targets to be met. There is no doubt that these skills will 
improve our students’ training and education, but they make 
even more difficult to follow a subject objectives in a virtual 
scope.  
However, the greater mobility for both students and 
teachers and the increase of working student made us 
consider this option.  In this regard, we have presented a case 
study in which we followed the subject Web Services 
through a virtual environment and compared its evolution 
with the experience of teaching the same subject in an 
attendance way. The results summarized in the previous 
section let us assert that with our proposal not only do we 
work cross-curricular skills, but we also dynamize the 
subjects in question in a virtual environment, providing the 
possibility of choosing  the subject to those who cannot do it 
presently, and not interrupting lectures during possible 
teacher absences. Besides, e-learning activities let us focus 
on students’ personal work, and improve their cross-
curricular skills, which are useful for their development both 
at professional and personal level. These methodologies 
make them participate more during lessons, being especially 
encouraged by the virtual format, therefore bringing them 
back from their passive behaviour.  
In our future work we plan to follow additional 
experiment with other modules taught at the University. 
 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work has been developed thanks to the support of 
MICINN under contract TIN2008-02985. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Adams, L. L., Glenn, L. M. & Adams, N. L. (2006). Online education 
in the broader context: Are live mathematics classes superior to 
online? Indiana Journal of Economics and Business, Special Issue, 
pp. 129-137 
[2] Allegre, C., Berlinger, L., Blackstone, T. & Rüttgers, J. (1998) 
Sorbonne 
Joint 
Declaration. 
http://www.bologna-
berlin2003.de/pdf/Sorbonne_declaration.pdf 
[3] Bitterberg T., Hildmann, H., Branki, C. UsingResource Management 
Games for Mobile Phones to Teach Social Behaviour. Proc of Int. 
Conf. Techniques and Applications for Mobile Commerce. Glasgow, 
Uk, 2008. 
[4] Comai, S.; Preciado, J.C; Linaje, M. ; Ortiz, G., Sanchez, F. A system 
for teaching Web engineering concepts in a supervised way using rich 
internet applications. Int. J. Learning Technology, Vol. 4, Nos. 1/2, 
2009. 
[5] Donovan, J., Mader C.E. & Shinsky, J. (2006). Constructive student 
feedback: Online vs. traditional course evaluations. Journal of 
Interactive Online Learning, 5(3), pp. 286-296 
120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

[6] Einem, C., Ade, J., Schmith, G., Zeman, E., Mmia, A., Lukas, 
T.Vestager, M., Allegre, C.,Rask, M., Erdsiek-Rave, U., Catenhusen, 
W-M., Kiss, A., Arsenis, G., Dowling, P., Sigurdardottir, G., Kokek, 
T., Zecchino, O., Hennicot-Schoepges, E., Platelis, K., Hermans, L., 
Galea, L., Winkler, W., Lelletun, J., Marga, A., Grilo, E.M., Zgaga, 
P., Ftacknik, M., Bladh, A., Fernández Díaz, D.J., Blackstone, T.,  
Kleiber, C. (1999). The Bologna Declaration of 19 June 1999. 
http://www.bologna-berlin2003.de/pdf/bologna_declaration.pdf 
[7] Gerval, J.-P.; Popovici, D.-M.; Tisseau, J., Educative distributed 
virtual environments for children. 2003. Proc. Int. Conf. on 
Cyberworlds. Volume 4, Issue , 3-5 Dec. 2003. 
[8] Gibson, J.W. A Comparison Of Student Outcomes And Student 
Satisfaction In Three MBA Human Resource Management Classes 
Based On Traditional Vs. Online Learning. Journal of College 
Teaching & Learning Volume 5, Number 8, August 2008. 
[9] Jalobeanu, M. Romanian Network Resources and Internet Education, 
Turkiye First International Distance Education Symposium, Baskent 
Ogretmenevi, Ankara 1996. 
[10] Ortiz, G. Alternatives to Lecturing. Proc of International, Technology, 
Education and Development Conference. Valencia, Spain, 2007. 
[11] Ortiz, G. Teaching Web Services with Virtual Environments: 
Improving Cross-Curricular Skills. VEWAEL Track at International 
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services. Venice, 
May 2009. 
[12] Popovici, D.M,  Gerval, J.P. Gueguen, P. EVE - An Educational 
Virtual Environment. Proceedings of Virtual Reality International 
Conference (VRIC2005), Laval, France.  
[13] Silverstein, D. Improving Student learning by encouraging reflection 
through class wikis. American Society for Engineering Education, 
AC2009-493, 2009. 
[14] Shou, S. B. (2007). Student attitudes and competency in statistical 
reasoning in introductory business statistics classes: A comparison of 
traditional and online delivery methods (dissertation). Idaho State 
University. 
[15] Moodle http://docs.moodle.org/en/Main_Pag 
[16] Virtual 
Campus 
at 
the 
University 
of 
Extremadura. 
http://campusvirtual.unex.es/
 
121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

