122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Design and Assessment for Hybrid Courses: Insights and Overviews 
 
 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup 
Computer Science and Information Technology 
Armstrong State University 
Savannah, Georgia, USA 
Felix.Hamza-Lup@armstrong.edu  
Stephen White 
School of Human & Health Sciences 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
Stephen.White@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract - Technology is influencing education, providing new 
delivery and assessment models. A combination between online 
and traditional course, the hybrid (blended) course, may present 
a solution with many benefits as it provides a gradual transition 
towards technology enabled education. This research work 
provides a set of definitions for several course delivery 
approaches, and evaluates five years of data from a course that 
has been converted from traditional face-to-face delivery, to 
hybrid delivery. The collected experimental data proves that the 
revised course, in the hybrid delivery mode, is at least as good, 
if not better, than it previously was and it provides some benefits 
in terms of student retention. 
Keywords – Hybrid Courses; e-Learning; Distance Education; 
Course Evaluation; Course Assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The abundance of computing power and the widespread 
availability of the Internet had a tremendous impact on society 
for the past decades. Education as a fundamental branch of 
social activity has been rapidly reshaping itself adapting to the 
informational era. The online teaching technology, like any 
novel approach, presents both advantages and disadvantages, 
appropriate use and misuse. This article presents the recent 
evolution of teaching styles vis-a-vis technology focusing on 
defining and assessing hybrid delivery methods. The research 
builds on previous work [1], adds additional related work 
studies, as well as an additional year of experimental data and 
discussions. 
Studies in the United States (i.e., The Gartner Group 
Research Institute) anticipated that the world’s e-Learning 
sales would grow 14.5% annually from 2006 to 2011 [2]. Over 
a similar timescale, government policies in the United 
Kingdom also indicated that the effective use of technology-
assisted student-focused learning is essential for the future of 
higher education [3-6]. In a review of higher education and the 
future role of the university, Ernst & Young [7] have 
suggested that “… campuses will remain, but digital 
technologies will transform the way education is delivered 
and accessed, and the way ‘value’ is created by higher 
education providers, public and private alike.” 
Large scale as well as smarter use of technology in 
teaching is widely seen as a promising way of controlling 
costs [8]. When compared to other service industries, higher 
education stands out as being particularly affected by what has 
been described as the “cost disease” [9]. Universities have 
large costs for infrastructure and labor, with reliance on 
expensive face-to-face provision. The urgent need to boost 
university productivity has been noted by many [10-12]. 
Moreover, cost reductions are demanded by students (as they 
want to spend less time and lower the costs of traveling to the 
main campus) and improved time flexibility, specifically for 
full-time or part-time working students. 
Face-to-face lectures are accepted as being a very 
inexpensive way of presenting new ideas and concepts to 
students. Additionally, lecturing has been described as an 
ineffective tool for promoting theoretical understanding [13], 
as it rarely stimulates student thinking beyond the short-term 
memory [14][15]. The passive role assumed by students in 
lectures is too focused on the subject being delivered, rather 
than the learners and their individual needs [16]. But, teaching 
the same content can be made more interesting, and students 
can become active, independent learners, if different delivery 
methods (including multimedia) are used [17].  
Implemented proficiently, the online and the hybrid 
(blended) provision has the capacity to lower costs and at least 
sustain, 
if 
not 
boost 
student 
outcomes 
[18-20]. 
Hybrid/blended learning can ease some of the economic strain 
on students, as it reduces commuting expenses and allows for 
a flexible timetable that may better accommodate the 
students’ personal circumstances [21]. Cost simulations, 
although speculative, have indicated that adopting hybrid 
models of instruction in large introductory courses has the 
potential to reduce costs quite substantially [8]. 
This article presents in Section II a set of definitions for 
the terms in common use in educational delivery, and provides 
clarifications on the use and meaning of these terms. The 
choice for hybrid/blended learning is described in Section III, 
followed by the  “Fundamentals of the Internet and the World 
Wide Web” (CSCI 1150) course description in Section IV. 
The methodology for data collection is detailed in Section V, 
with Section VI exploring the evaluation of said data in terms 
of student outcomes and attrition rates. The relationship 
between assessment weighting and online student interactions 
in discussion forums is also measured and analyzed. Section 
VII identifies the limitations of this study and concludes that 
the CSCI 1150 course, in hybrid delivery mode, continues to 
provide as good, if not a better provision, than the previous 
traditional face-to-face delivery method.  

123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
UNDERSTANDING HYBRID (BLENDED) LEARNING 
The growth of e-Learning has blurred the boundaries of 
educational modes [22]. Higher education institutions and 
academics use a wide range of terms to describe ways in 
which students may engage with their studies, including on-
campus, face-to-face, off-campus, open education, distance 
education, external study, online education, e-Learning, 
flexible learning, blended learning and hybrid. Both Lund and 
Volet [23] and Schlosser and Simonson [24] have suggested 
that there is limited consensus on the meanings of these terms, 
and a degree of confusion for academics, administrators and 
students exists within the university sector. For each learning 
environment listed above, there are distinct attributes that help 
locate and define them in a typological structure. For example, 
an on-campus mode relates to “courses that deliver material 
face-to-face and students interact with instructors face-to-
face” [25], whilst distance learning (or education) is the 
various forms of study at all levels which are not under the 
continuous, immediate supervision of instructors collocated 
with their students. These forms of study, nevertheless, benefit 
from the planning and guidance of a supporting educational 
organization (Holmberg, cited in [24]). Still considering the 
location of delivery, Howland and Moore [26] suggest that an 
online course is “one in which no more than one face-to-face 
meeting is required”. Offering a slightly contrasting view, 
Bollinger and Wasilik [27] consider a course to be online “if 
80% or more of the content is delivered via the Internet”. With 
the advent of technology in education, the boundaries of what 
learning environment fits within a mode of enrolment fades 
and misunderstandings arise. 
While initial observations of computer-based learning 
have noted that “e-Learning is a confused and confusing field, 
fragmented into multiple disciplines and emphases” [23], a 
general definition is provided by Pollard and Hillage [28] who 
suggest 
e-Learning 
represents 
“the 
delivery 
and 
administration of learning opportunities and support via 
computer, networked and web-based technology to help 
individual performance and development”. Kruse defines it as 
the use of technology to deliver learning programs and 
training programs through CD-ROMs, the Internet, local area 
networks (LANs), and wireless (WiFi) networks to promote 
active learning [29]. E-Learning and Computer-based 
Learning can be seen as broader than Online Learning as they 
do not always require web-based connectivity [30] since 
learning activities can occur on stand-alone devices.  
The term Blended Learning is being used with increasing 
frequency in academic writing but there is no consensus on its 
meaning [31]. An alternative term, Hybrid, is defined as being 
of “mixed character; composed of different elements” [32], 
and Blended is defined as “an unobtrusive or harmonious part 
of a greater whole” [33]. Blended Learning has been described 
as a hybrid instructional approach combining aspects of e-
Learning and a traditional classroom environment [30] and 
defined as “courses that deliver material both face-to-face and 
online” and where “students interact with instructors both 
online and face-to-face” [25]. Many colleges offer hybrid 
courses, which combine traditional face-to-face with online 
instruction. Previous research proves that this combination 
may promote learner-centered and active learning [34]. 
To understand the position and better define Hybrid (or 
Blended) learning we are looking at the possible 
categorizations of instructor-student interactions on different 
dimensions, e.g., space and time. Hence, instructor-student 
interaction can be categorized based on the geographical 
location/space as: 
 
• 
Local (face-to-face): the instructor and the students share 
the same physical location, usually the classroom on the 
university campus grounds. 
 
• 
Remote (distance): the instructor and the students do not 
share the same physical location. Students in this case 
can conveniently attend courses from home - the “living 
room” vs. the “classroom” paradigm.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Time-distance diagram: local vs remote, synchronous vs 
asynchronous and applications used for the remote case. 
 
The second dimension and an important categorization 
used for learning methods is based on the interaction time (or 
interaction style) among the course participants: students and 
instructor, as illustrated in Figure 1. 
For synchronous interaction, the students and instructor 
are present and interact at the same time. Such interaction can 
occur in the traditional face-to-face setup or in a remote setup. 
Anohina [35] describes synchronous online learning as a 
method to bring a learning community together at the same 
time without distance being a barrier to interactions. Time 
flexibility can be an issue here. Web conferencing 
applications such as Blackboard Collaborate, Citrix Go-To 
Meeting, 
Adobe 
Connect, 
Google 
Hangout, 
and 
Videoconferencing are used in such synchronous interactions. 
In case of asynchronous interaction, the students and 
instructor are not present at the same time. This type of 
interaction is not common in a traditional face-to-face setup 
but it is more common in a remote (distance) setup. It brings 
together the learning community without distance or time 
being a barrier to interaction. Learning management systems 
such as Desire-to-Learn (D2L), Blackboard, Moodle, Sakai, 
Blackboard Collab, 
Go-To Meeting, 
Google Hangout 
D2L, Moodle, 
Sakai, Discussion 
Forums, E-mail 

124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and others are used to deliver asynchronous online learning 
using a variety of tools (e.g., discussion forums). 
A third dimension is possible based on the use of a 
computing system: computer-based learning (CBL) uses 
software running from DVDs, remote servers (the “cloud”) or 
downloaded to student computer for instruction. Many 
textbooks now come with CBL modules, which can stand 
alone or be incorporated into online course delivery. Non-
computer based learning involves any device that is not a 
computer (e.g., DVD/video player, other devices). 
From the above categorizations, a hybrid course (as 
illustrated in Figure 2) is defined as a course in which the 
instructor and student is partially remote and partially in the 
same physical location. A hybrid course does not necessarily 
use a computer and the Internet but, with the wide spread of 
these technologies, we find that it is very common for the 
hybrid course to be computer and Internet based. 
Research shows that the hybrid mixture of on-campus and 
off-campus activities is difficult to explain to prospective 
students [36]. A potential solution to the confusion is to define 
courses specifically by their construction. The public 
University System of Georgia (USG) [37] defines the 
following course types: 
 
• Fully online: All or nearly all the class sessions are 
delivered via technology (96% to 100% online).  
• Partially online: Technology is used to deliver more than 
50% of class sessions (51% to 95% online).  
• Hybrid: Technology is used to deliver at least one class 
session and up to 50% of class sessions.  
• Campus (or on-site): No class sessions are replaced by 
online technology. 
The relationship between traditional, online, and hybrid 
courses, is displayed in Figure 2. Armstrong State University 
part of USG, defines three types of programs based on the 
level of online interaction [38]: 
 
• 
Online program: includes only fully online courses. 
Does not included partially online or hybrid courses. 
Fully online programs are meant for those who live far 
from campus or may have jobs that prevent them from 
attending campus classes. 
• 
Blended program: includes partially online and fully 
online courses.  Blended programs are ideal for students 
who live on or near campus but work part-time.  
• 
Campus/On-site program: this program is ideal for 
students living on or near campus who attend class part-
time or full-time. These programs can be ideal for full-
time students who benefit from the structure of face-to-
face instruction. There are three types of campus/on-site 
courses: hybrid courses, technology-enhanced courses 
and “no technology” courses. 
III. 
THE CHOICE FOR HYBRID LEARNING 
During lectures students usually assume passive roles as 
listeners while the instructor distributes information. 
Educating in this way is too focused on what is being 
delivered, rather than the learners and their needs.  
White et al. [39] demonstrated that traditionally delivered, 
subject-intense courses can be converted to a ‘blended/hybrid’ 
delivery approach with “as good, if not better, outcomes”, if 
they are well-designed with high quality content and regular 
interaction. 
Figure 2. Hybrid courses in relation to traditional and online delivery 
 
Internet/Online 
WWW 
Intranet 
Not Online 
DVDs, HDDs, 
Memory Sticks 
Computer 
Based 
Non-Computer 
Based 
CD/DVD Player 
Tape VHS 
Phone 
With 
Technology
e-Learning 
Without 
Technology 
 
Books 
Student & 
Tutor   
REMOTE 
Internet/Online 
WWW 
Intranet 
Not Online 
Presentations, 
DVDs, Storage 
Devices 
Computer 
Based 
Non-Computer 
Based 
CD/DVD Player 
Tape VHS 
With 
Technology 
Without 
Technology 
 
Tutor only 
Student & 
Tutor 
COLOCATED 
 
HYBRID COURSE 

125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As observed in the e-Learning Ladder [16], a 
constructivist theory, the student, rather than the instructor, 
should be the focus, and he must ‘construct’ new knowledge 
through analysis, experience and understanding. The Ladder 
further identifies that opportunities for learners to be active in 
creating their own knowledge and understanding can be 
offered through Web 2.0, and more recently Web 3.0 
technologies, such as: discussion boards or forums and 
various types of social media applications. These applications 
allow students to retrieve information, as well as provide a 
platform to create and own the data within them. These tools 
can be used as an alternative or in addition to traditional 
lectures resulting in a learner-centered environment [40]. 
There are also indirect benefits in using technology-
enhanced learning, such as the development of students’ 
computer skills. However, this is directly relevant to one 
problem commonly associated with e-Learning, because just 
as with any genre of course, learners need to have the 
appropriate resources in order to be successful. These 
resources in an e-Learning context can be classified as 
‘External’ to the learner, such as slow Internet connections or 
older computers, and ‘Internal’ to the learner, which may be a 
lack of the necessary computer skills. Without these resources, 
accessing the course materials can be difficult and the 
learners’ performance can be significantly hindered [41]. 
Anxiety can set in leading to lack of motivation [42], which 
may ultimately result in students becoming frustrated and 
giving up on that particular learning environment [43]. 
However, it has also been identified that an initial lack of 
confidence can be quickly replaced by positive excitement 
once the initial experience of e-Learning has taken place and 
the technology involved mastered [44]. 
The goal of a blended learning experience is “to provide a 
mix of both on-line and face-to-face experiences which 
support each other in achieving desired learning outcomes” 
[45]. Many universities experiment with a blended learning 
model as part of their teaching strategy, but “the term is still 
relatively new, therefore, leaving many to question how the 
mixing of online and mobile learning with face-to-face 
interaction will actually improve student experience now and 
in the long term” [46]. This hybrid mixture of on-campus and 
off-campus activities [36] is difficult to explain to prospective 
students. 
Combined with the need to be self-motivated and more 
independent, hybrid learning is most definitely no easier than 
the face-to-face course. Nor is it for all students. For this 
reason, among others, it is imperative that hybrid learning be 
carefully crafted from a pedagogical standpoint. That begins 
with the effective definition of the course goals and objectives. 
Goals are broad, generalized statements about what is to be 
learned, and they can be taught of as targets to be reached. The 
objectives are the base upon which one can build lessons and 
assessments that meet the overall course goals. From this solid 
foundation, the course content and student assessment has to 
be designed and implemented in a completely different 
fashion than for the traditional face-to-face course.  
Bowen et al. [8] aimed to estimate the costs associated 
with course delivery under different circumstances. Whilst 
acknowledging that the simulations are admittedly speculative 
in nature and subject to considerable variation depending on 
how a particular campus organizes its teaching, they suggest 
that significant cost savings are possible. In particular, they 
estimate savings in compensation costs for the hybrid model 
ranging from 36% to 57% compared to the traditional model. 
These simulations confirm that hybrid learning offers 
opportunities for significant savings, but the degree of cost 
reduction depends on exactly how hybrid learning is 
implemented, especially the rate at which instructors are 
compensated and section size. A large share of cost savings is 
derived from shifting away from time spent by expensive 
professors toward computer-guided instruction. Their 
simulations substantially underestimated the savings from 
moving toward a hybrid model in many settings, because they 
did not account for space costs. It is difficult to put a dollar 
figure on space costs because capital costs are difficult to 
apportion accurately to specific courses, but the difference in 
face-to-face meeting time implies that the hybrid course 
requires 67% to 75% less classroom use than the traditional 
course. In the short run, institutions cannot lay off tenured 
faculty or sell or demolish their buildings. In the long run, 
however, using hybrid models for some large introductory 
courses would allow institutions to expand enrolment without 
a commensurate increase in space costs, a major savings 
relative to what institutions would have to spend to serve the 
same number of students with a traditional model of 
instruction. In other words, the hybrid model need not just 
“save money”; it can also support an increase in access to 
higher education. It serves the access goal, both by making it 
more affordable for the institution to enroll more students, and 
by accommodating more students because of greater time and 
space scheduling flexibility. 
IV. 
HYBRID COURSE DESIGN 
The course that we evaluate, CSCI 1150, had traditionally 
been taught face-to-face, in both the spring and fall semesters 
of 2010. In 2011, a Desire-to-Learn (D2L) online version of 
the course was developed. D2L is a web-based course 
management system that students were already familiar with. 
The content was made available online, within PDF slides that 
closely followed the associated textbook. The main reason of 
the slides approach was to provide structural guidance for the 
content in the textbook. Students were also provided with 
access to various interaction tools, both synchronous and 
asynchronous (e.g., e-mail, chat, discussion forums) as well as 
a set of assessment tools (e.g., online quizzes, online 
assignments and online exams).  
The course content has been refined in subsequent years 
from 2012 to 2015, to include additional required reading 
material, as well as a better-defined set of discussion forums 
(one discussion forum per textbook chapter), where students 
were encouraged to interact during the semester. This 
refinement aimed to provide fresh stimuli to the course, in 
order to promote students’ learning through questioning, 
investigating, challenging, seeking feedback, and learning 
through interactions with peers and tutors [47]. Technologies 
such as discussion forums can provide the opportunity for 
learners to be active in creating their own knowledge and 

126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
understanding by allowing them to create, own, retrieve and 
exchange information within them [48] in a time flexible 
manner. The face-to-face sessions were then used to explore 
the course content, and the online interactions, in order to 
further develop the students’ understanding. This overall 
course design may be seen as consistent with the “flipped 
classroom” approach [49], and is presented in a 50:50 ratio, 
causing it to be described as Hybrid delivery under the 
University System of Georgia definition [37]. 
From spring 2012, the course assessment has also been 
completed online, with each element assigned a proportion of 
the overall grade: Assignments were weighted at 40%, 
Quizzes weighted at 10%, the Midterm exam at 25% and the 
Final exam at 25%. The grading scheme was further 
supplemented from fall 2013, with the online forum 
interactions being rewarded 2% of the weight, reducing the 
Midterm and Final exams to a weight of 24% each. The online 
interaction (based on discussion forums) weight has 
subsequently been increased to 10% of the final grade for the 
spring semester of 2014, causing the Midterm and Final 
exams weights to be reduced to 20% each. For the spring 2015 
semester, the online interaction weight was further increased 
to 15% of the final grade by reducing the quizzes weight from 
10% to 5%. These adjustments were driven by the need to 
increase student-to-student interaction, and to measure how 
increasing reward affects that interaction as well as student 
learning in a hybrid setup. 
A. Automatic vs. Manual Grading  
A course management system like D2L provides 
advantages to both the faculty and the student. It is possible to 
automate the process of quiz and exam delivery as well as 
grading, subsequently freeing significant faculty time and 
providing timely feedback to students. Freeing faculty time is 
of upmost importance in a current complex higher education 
system that requires teaching, service as well as research 
activities from the faculty. 
The online quizzes for the hybrid course were designed to 
be administered quickly (on average they are timed to 30 
minutes each) and contained about ten questions each. The 
questions were automatically and randomly selected from a 
database of 3000+ questions, all of the same difficulty level. 
The quizzes were automatically graded, immediately after the 
deadline, providing students with instant access to both the 
grade and the correct solutions. Then, students can use this 
information to identify where they went wrong and what 
concepts they misunderstood in each chapter. The results of 
the quizzes was then discussed both online and in the face-to-
face session, both with the instructor and student peers. 
The drawback in automating the process of delivery and 
grading comes from the fact that some type of problems, such 
as those requiring essay-type answers, are difficult to 
automate, as they require manual grading for optimum 
accuracy, as well as to provide constructive personalized 
feedback. For this reason, the manually graded assessment 
components have a greater weighting in the overall final grade 
and includes personalized detailed feedback from the 
instructor for each student.  
B. Deadlines and Penalties 
     Each assessment component has strict completion 
deadlines. Assignments have to be completed in three weeks, 
with a deadline enforced through the D2L submission system. 
Late submission was not accepted, and failure to submit an 
assignment would almost certainly result in dropping a grade 
point, as the assignment weight was 10% of the final grade.  
For the quizzes, each weighted at only 1% (respectively 
0.5% for the spring of 2015) of the final grade, there is a two 
to three weeks’ timeframe during which each quiz can be 
taken, providing the students with time flexibility in their 
learning schedule, but keeping them on track with the rest of 
the course pace. Therefore, quizzes are designed to keep the 
students on track with their learning of the course content, 
providing them with early and progressive feedback 
concerning their course progress.  
As previously identified, the Midterm and Final exams 
were also given online, with a strict 12-hours window where 
they are ‘live’ and can be taken. Each exam consists of 10 
problems, with 80% of the responses being essay type, 
therefore, requiring manual grading. Each exam is weighted 
at 20%, with no late submissions allowed. Specific D2L 
technologies like the Respondus LockDown Browser™ mode 
as well as the tight time-frame is used to hinder student 
cheating. A LockDown Browser prevents users from being 
able to cheat by printing, copying or browsing other websites 
while taking the tests. Once the test has started, the computer 
remains locked until the test is completed and submitted for 
grading, hindering cheating attempts. 
The final element of assessment, is based on the 
interactions among students in a set of discussion forums. 
Students are allowed to post information and ask questions for 
one month in each forum. After the expiration date (which is 
set and announced for each forum) the students can still read 
the posts, however, they cannot post new content. The ability 
to read the forums content is important since it provides 
students with a continuous source of information. Particularly 
for slower (or problem) students it is important to provide 
means to catch up with the rest of the class without disturbing 
the pace of the course for the entire class. 
 The discussion forums contributions were weighted at 
10% of the final grade, with the posts content evaluated 
subjectively by the instructor; being measured both 
quantitatively and qualitatively. As mentioned for spring 
2015, the online interaction weight through the forums was 
further increased to 15% of the final grade and the outcomes 
measured. Further increase in the discussions forums weight 
may be beneficial to student-student interaction and may 
positively affect student learning as some students are 
sometimes eager to explain the concepts they understood to 
their peers.  
C. Interaction  
Besides the face-to-face interactions in class, two types of 
written discussions are frequently used in a hybrid course: 
synchronous and asynchronous. Whereas synchronous 
discussion requires participants to log in at a predetermined 

127
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
time and simultaneously join the discussion, asynchronous 
activities allows users to organize, read, and post messages at 
their own pace, as dictated by their preferred schedule.  
Where online/hybrid course designers have opted for the 
use of discussion forums, they play an important role, often 
making up the major part of the students’ activities and 
providing evidence of attendance, class participation, and 
sometimes assessment [50-53]. The delayed element to 
asynchronous communication, can allow participants more 
time to consider their responses, promoting deeper 
consideration and reflection of the subject [54][55]. In spite of 
this, it has also been argued that scholarly thinking regarding 
assessment of online discussion has not kept pace with the 
growing popularity of such practices [56]. 
The asynchronous interactions in the CSCI 1150 hybrid 
course employ the e-Mail system, a News system, and the 
Discussion Forums, the latter consisting of one primary thread 
per textbook chapter. The News system is an efficient tool for 
the instructor to provide students with updates about the 
course, however, it is a unidirectional communication tool - 
from instructor to students.  
Online synchronous interaction was implemented in CSCI 
1150 through a Chat channel. It has been observed that the 
chat channel is mainly used immediately prior to the Midterm 
and Final exam period, serving as an emergency notification 
tool for the students if or when something goes wrong with 
the online exam session.  
The other synchronous interaction occurred in the 
traditional in-class face-to-face meetings. As part of the 
Hybrid course, students meet with their instructor once a 
week, for a 75-minute session, where they can discuss and 
ask/answer questions. Attendance is not mandatory and it has 
been observed that by the middle of the semester only an 
average of 60% of the students attend these sessions mainly 
due to their part-time, full-time work schedule or other family 
commitments. 
Online interaction through the spring and fall of 2014 was 
stimulated through the relationship between this activity and 
the assessment. Ten percent (10%) of the final grade was 
awarded for the discussion forum posts, with each student 
being expected to provide at least three posts per discussion 
thread, each being a paragraph of 200 words or more, as well 
as responding to classmates’ questions providing original 
answers and/or alternate solutions. At the end of the semester, 
the student with the highest number of quality posts receives 
a further 10% towards his/her final grade; the other students 
receive lower additional percentages, representative of their 
contributions. A further increase to 15% of the final grade was 
implemented for spring 2015, as previously mentioned, and 
the effects of this assessment policy were measured and 
analyzed. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY 
The CSCI 1150 course, “Fundamentals of the Internet and 
the World Wide Web”, is a service course at Armstrong State 
University, Georgia, US.  The course was observed over a 
period of four and a half years, through seven semesters 
(spring and fall, 2011 to spring 2015). Each semester 
consisted of two or three sections of the course hence 50 to 75 
students were observed each semester (as further illustrated in 
Section VI). The course was delivered by traditional face-to-
face methods in 2011, and was then converted to the Hybrid 
delivery mode for the 2012-2015 time frame. There is no 
entry, prerequisite requirement for the course. 
The average class size was 25, and the students included 
in the data collection ranged from 19 to 42 years of age, with 
a female to male ratio of 1.7 to 1. The analysis of the 
experimental data is straightforward. The outcomes for 
students previously undertaking the course in the traditional 
face-to-face format are compared to the outcomes for students 
undertaking the hybrid format.  
The data collected consists of the students’ final grades, 
failure rates and withdrawal rates. To further evaluate the 
hybrid delivery method, the students’ asynchronous 
interactions are also investigated. The rate and volume of 
posts in the online discussion forums are analyzed in 
consideration of the changes in the course structure and 
assessment strategy. The number of read post in the forums as 
well as the number of written contributions in the discussions 
forums are collected and analyzed in the light of the various 
grading weights imposed. 
VI. 
COURSE EVALUATION 
The final outcomes for the students assessment are 
displayed in Figure 3, and these show no significant difference 
between the traditional face-to-face course that was delivered 
in 2011, and the subsequent hybrid delivery mode, with the 
course mean grade fluctuating between a B grade and a C 
grade (except for the anomalous D mean for the spring 
semester of 2011, course section 1).  
 
TABLE I. MEAN AND MEDIAN GRADES FOR SECTIONS 
 
 
Mean 
Grade 
Median 
Grade 
Spring 2011 Section 1 
D 
D 
Spring 2011 Section 2 
C 
C 
Fall 2011 Section 1 
C 
C 
Fall 2011 Section 2 
B 
B 
 
 
 
Spring 2012 Section 1 
B 
B 
Spring 2012 Section 2 
C 
C 
Spring 2012 Section 3 
C 
C 
Fall 2012 Section 1 
C 
B 
Fall 2012 Section 2 
C 
B 
Spring 2013 Section 1 
C 
C 
Spring 2013 Section 2 
C 
B 
Spring 2013 Section 3 
B 
B 
Fall 2013 Section 1 
B 
B 
Fall 2013 Section 2 
C 
C 
Spring 2014 Section 1 
C 
B 
Spring 2014 Section 2 
B 
B 
Fall 2014 Section 1 
C 
B 
Fall 2014 Section 2 
C 
B 
Spring 2015 Section 1 
C 
B 
Spring 2015 Section 2 
C 
B 

128
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
There is, though, some suggestion, that the course 
outcomes may be improving, with a median of grade B 
appearing more regularly in the recent hybrid courses as 
illustrated in Table I; but whether this is due to the delivery 
method, or some external factor, cannot be determined 
precisely.  
As mentioned earlier, the goal of a blended/hybrid 
learning experience is “to provide a mix of both on-line and 
face-to-face experiences which balance and support each 
other in achieving desired learning outcomes” [45].  Our 
results show that students taking the hybrid course format pay 
no “price” for this mode of instruction in terms of exam 
scores, and overall performance, proving that it is possible to 
hybridize certain courses without negative impact on learning. 
On the contrary, positive outcomes are possible for both the 
student and the instructor, resulting in time flexibility and cost 
savings on both sides. 
In other sectors of the economy, the use of technology has 
increased productivity, measured as outputs divided by inputs, 
and has even often increased output.  Bowen et al. [8] showed 
that a hybrid-learning system did not increase outputs (student 
learning) but could potentially increase productivity by using 
fewer inputs. When considering the course attrition rates, it is 
important to note that students are allowed to withdraw 
without penalty before an identified deadline – usually just 
Figure 4. Course Attrition by Percentage of Total Enrolled Students (showing declining attrition) 
Figure 3. Total Number of Students, Number of Each Final Grade and Number of Withdrawals, per Section. (Grades A-D, F=Fail, W=Withdrawn) 

129
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
after the Midterm exam. This allows failing students to leave 
with a “clean record”, meaning they can retake the course in 
the future, should they wish to. Despite this, there is positive 
indication that attrition rates are reducing, as illustrated in 
Figure 4. However, this is unlikely to improve significantly 
under the current withdrawal policy. 
As previously identified, asynchronous interactions 
through the e-mail system are primarily exchanged around 
(one or two days, before and after) a major deadline for an 
assignment or exam. For example 76.5% of the e-mails 
received for sections 1 and 2 during the spring semester of 
2014, were specifically targeted on questions around major 
assessment components. Students also tend to interact little 
amongst themselves using the e-mail system, with only 36% 
of the e-mails on average being sent for student-to-student 
communications for the same semester. For the spring 
semester of 2015 similar data was obtained: 74.4% of the e-
mails received were specifically targeted on questions around 
assignments and exams. Student to student communication 
using the e-mail system amounted to approximately 34% of 
the total e-mails exchanged, showing that students prefer to 
communicate through other means (e.g., face-to-face, 
discussion forums etc.). 
For the online interactions measured only through the 
discussion forums (from fall 2012 to spring 2015), a 
quantitative analysis of the forum contributions in terms of the 
number of written (authored) posts as well as the number of 
read posts reveals, somewhat unsurprisingly, that there is a 
direct dependency between the grading weight of the online 
interaction and the number of posts in the forum. Evidence 
shows that the higher the forum contribution weight is in the 
final grade, the higher the volume (and quality, in the 
instructor’s opinion) of forum posts made by the students, as 
clearly illustrated in Figure 5. Specifically, one can observe a 
significant jump in the interest of “reading” the colleagues 
contributions, as well as a more moderate jump in the number 
of written contributions. This behavior could be explained by 
the fact that once the students use the forums, pushed by the 
grade constraint, they actually only then discover its contents 
value in solving assignment problems. This factor stimulates 
them to continue reading their colleagues posts and 
collaborate for problem solving. Stimulating such behavior, 
where student-student interaction is promoted, generates a 
superior learning environment where students become active 
learners. Active learning engages students in doing things and 
thinking about the things they are doing, becoming in this way 
problem solvers. A subjective, qualitative analysis of the 
forum posts advocates that students engage through these 
forums in higher-order thinking tasks such as analysis, 
synthesis, and evaluation. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, Hybrid/Blended learning is discussed in the 
context of the existing terminology. The design, as well as the 
main components of a course that was transformed from a 
traditional face-to-face format to a hybrid one, is described.  
Figure 5. Relationship between the Forums Weight (2% to 15% of the Final Grade) and the Number of Read and Written Posts for each Semester, for 
each Course Section. 

130
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The course analysis and evaluation focuses on the 
outcomes for students that undertook the course in the 
traditional format, and the outcomes for students undertaking 
the revised hybrid formats. We show that students in the 
hybrid format pay no “price” for this mode of instruction in 
terms of pass rates, exam scores, or performance. Moreover, 
they can be motivated to interact online with slight 
adjustments in the grading policy, which promotes 
participation, interaction and improves students’ computer 
skills while, at the same time, engages them in active learning. 
The evidence supports the hypothesis that well-designed 
interactive hybrid systems in higher education, have the 
potential to achieve at least equivalent if not better educational 
outcomes as traditional courses, while opening up the 
possibility of freeing up significant resources on both sides: 
student and instructor. These resources (e.g., time, classroom 
space and financial) could be redeployed more productively. 
This alone is cause for the hybrid style of course delivery to 
be recommended.  
In spite of all these benefits caution must be taken when 
choosing courses to be hybridized. Not all the courses are fit 
for hybridization, moreover significant man-hours and 
resources may be required to develop the proper hybrid 
version for a course. Such cost considerations have not been 
investigated in this research and depend not only on the course 
content but also on the institution policy for course 
development.  
An assumption, from the administrative point of view, is 
that the hybrid course sections can be larger and accommodate 
more students. In general this is a wrong assumption and also 
a dangerous one, since it creates the false illusion of 
immediate Full Time-Equivalent (FTE) improvement for 
faculty. Special care must be taken, as some studies [57] 
suggest that having 15 students per section is a good starting 
number for courses that have online exposure while their face-
to-face equivalent would accommodate twice as much, around 
25 to 30 students. Therefore, one should not rush into 
conclusions that hybrid mode delivery would automatically 
accommodate more students per class section. 
As future work, the course structure will continue to be 
reviewed, in consideration of student outcomes, to promote 
higher final outcomes. 
We would like to mention that this is a relatively limited-
scale study and the data was drawn from a specific course, 
with a medium number of participants oscillating from 50 to 
75 participants per semester, depending on the number of 
sections taught. The study may have been influenced by 
factors specific to the student groups, which are not 
immediately evident from the findings. Also, experiences 
external to the course content and delivery may have 
contributed to student outcomes and opinions. In the near 
future we will provide additional data as this hybrid course 
continues to be taught at our university. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F.G. Hamza-Lup and S. White, “Hybrid Course Delivery: 
Impact on Learning and Assessment,” 7th International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, Feb. 24-
27, Lisbon, Portugal, 2015, pp.48-54. 
[2] T.  Eid, “Forecast: e-learning suites and management system 
software, worldwide, 2006-2011,” [Online]. Available from: 
www.gartner.com/DisplayDocument?id.543327, 2015.11.16.  
[3] Department for Education and Employment (DfEE), “The 
future of higher education,” HMSO, London, 2003. 
[4] Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). 
“Enhancing Learning and Teaching Through the Use of 
Technology. A revised approach to Hefce's strategy for e-
Learning,” [Online]. Available from: www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/ 
hefce/2009/09_12/, 2015.11.16. 
[5] Department for Education and Skills (DfES), “Towards a 
unified e-learning strategy,” HMSO, London, 2003. 
[6] Department of Health (DoH), “Working Together Learning 
Together: A Framework for Lifelong Learning for the NHS,” 
HMSO, London, 2001. 
[7] Ernst and Young,  “University of the future: A thousand year 
old industry on the cusp of profound change,” Melbourne, 
Australia: Ernst and Young, 2012. 
[8] W. G. Bowen, M. M. Chingos, K. A. Lack, and T. I. Nygren. 
“Online learning in higher education,” Education Next, vol. 
13(2), 2013, pp. 58-64. 
[9] W. J. Baumol,  “Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: The 
anatomy of urban crisis,” The American Economic Review, 
vol. 57(3), 1967, pp. 415-442. 
[10] B. Massy,  “Initiatives for containing the cost of higher 
education,” Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 2013. 
[11] T. A. Sullivan, C. Mackie, W. F. Massy, and E. Sinha, 
“Improving measurement of productivity in higher education,” 
Washington: National Academics Press, 2012. 
[12] B. G. Auguste, A. Cota, K. Jayaram, and M. C. A. Laboissiere, 
“Winning by degrees: The strategies of highly productive 
higher-education institutions,” [Online]. Available from:  
www.mckinseyonsociety.com/winning-by-degrees, 
2015.11.16.  
[13] J. K. Knight and W. B. Wood, “Teaching more by lecturing 
less,” Cell Biology Education, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 298-310. 
[14] P. Ramsden, “Learning to Teach in Higher Education,” 
Routledge Falmer, London and New York, 2003. 
[15] R. Cannon, “Lecturing,” Higher Education Research and 
Development Society of Australiasia, Campbelltown, 1992. 
[16] W. C. Kinshuk, “Cyber Schooling Framework: Improving 
Mobility and Situated Learning,” The 5th International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2005. 
[17] H. L. Lujan and S. E. DiCarlo,  “Too much teaching, not 
enough learning: what is the solution?,” Adv. Physiol Ed., vol. 
30, 2005, pp.17-22. 
[18] C. Twigg,  “Improving quality and reducing costs: The case for 
redesign,” Saratoga Springs: National Center for Academic 
Transformation, 2005. 
[19] M. Staton, “Disaggregating the components of a college 
degree,” American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., 
2012. 
[20] A. Norton, J. Sonnemann, and C. McGannon,  “Online 
technology and higher education,” Parkville: The Grattan, 
2013. 
[21] L. Rowell, “How Government policy drives e-learning,” E-
learning 
Magazine, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
www.elearnmag.acm.org/featured.cfm?aid=1872821, 
2015.11.16.  
[22] H. Forsyth, J. Pizzica, R. Laxton, and M. J. Mahony,  “Distance 
education in an era of eLearning: challenges and opportunities 
for a campus-focused institution,” Higher Education Research 
and Development, vol. 29, 2010, pp.15-28. 
[23] C. Lund and S. Volet, “Barriers to studying online for the first 
time: 
Students' 
perceptions,” 
Planning 
for 
Progress, 
Partnership and Profit, EdTech Conference, July 1998. 

131
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24] L. A. Schlosser and M. R. Simonson, “Distance education: 
definition and glossary of terms,” Greenwich, Connecticut: 
Information Age Publishing, 2009. 
[25] G. D. Caruth and D. L. Caruth, “Distance education in the 
United States: From correspondence courses to the Internet,” 
Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, vol. 14, 2013, 
pp. 141-149. 
[26] J.L. Howland and J.L. Moore, “Student perceptions as distance 
learners in Internet-based courses,” Distance Education, vol. 
23, 2002, pp. 183–195. 
[27] D.U. Bolliger and O. Wasilik, “Factors influencing faculty 
satisfaction with online teaching and learning in higher 
education,” Distance Education, vol. 30, 2009, pp. 103–116. 
[28] E. Pollard and J. Hillage, “Exploring e-learning,” Report 376. 
Brighton: Institute for Employment Studies, 2001. 
[29] K. Kruse, “e-Learning alphabet soup: a guide to terms,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from; 
www.purpletrain.com/news/ 
20030929_ 01.htm, 2015.11.16. 
[30] K. L. Smart and J. J. Cappel, “Students' perceptions of online 
learning: A comparative study,” Journal of Information 
Technology Education, vol. 5, 2006, pp. 201-219. 
[31] R. T. Osguthorpe and C. R. Graham, “Blended learning 
environments, ” Quarterly review of distance education, vol. 4, 
2003, pp. 227-233. 
[32] Oxford dictionaries. “Hybrid,” [Online]. Available from:  
www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/hybrid, 
2015.11.16. 
[33] Oxford dictionaries. “Blend,”. [Online]. Available from: 
www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/blend, 
2015.11.16. 
[34] Y. J. Dori and J. Belcher, “How does technology-enabled 
active learning affect undergraduate students' understanding of 
electromagnetism concepts?,” Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, vol.  14, 2005, pp. 243-279. 
[35] A. Anohina, “Analysis of the terminology used in the field of 
virtual learning,” Educational Technology & Society, vol.8. 
(3), 2005, pp. 91-102. 
[36] M. Hannay and T. Newvine, “Perceptions of distance learning: 
A comparison of online and traditional learning,” Journal of 
Online Learning and Teaching, vol. 2(2), 2006, pp.1-11. 
[37] USG, “Distance Education Resources,” [Online]. Available 
from:  www.usg.edu/facultyresources/resources/distance_edu 
cation_resources,  2015.11.16.  
[38] ASU, “Course and Program Definitions,” [Online]. Available 
from: 
www.armstrong.edu/images/office_online_learning/ 
ArmstrongCourseProgramDefinitions.pdf, 2015.11.16. 
[39] S. White and A. Sykes, “Evaluation of a Blended Learning 
Approach Used in an Anatomy and Physiology Module for 
Pre-registration Healthcare Students,” The 4th International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, 2012, 
pp. 1-9, ISBN: 978-1-61208-180-9.   
[40] J. Stephenson, C. Brown, and D. Griffin, “Electronic delivery 
of lectures in the university environment: An empirical 
comparison of three delivery styles,” Computational and 
Educational, vol. 50(3), 2008, pp. 640−651. 
[41] H. Peng, C. C. Tsai, and Y. T. Wu, “University students' self-
efficacy and their attitudes toward the Internet: the role of 
students' perceptions of the Internet,” Educational Studies, vol. 
32(1), 2006, pp. 73-86. 
[42] S-W. Chen, J. Stocker, R-H. Wang, Y-C Chung, and M-F. 
Chen, “Evaluation of self-regulatory online learning in a 
blended course for post-registration nursing students in 
Taiwan,” Nurse Education Today, vol. 29(7), 2009, pp. 704-
709. 
[43] B. Art and E. Lisa, “Designing and delivering effective online 
nursing courses with evolve electronic classroom,” Journal of 
Computer Information Nursing, vol. 26(5), 2008, pp. 54-60. 
[44] C.S. 
Bond, 
“Nurses, 
computers 
and 
pre-registration 
education,” Nurse Education Today, vol. 29(7), 2009, pp. 731-
734. 
[45] P. Ginns and R. Ellis, “Quality in blended learning: Exploring 
the relationships between on-line and face-to-face teaching and 
learning,” The Internet and Higher Education, vol. 10, 2007, 
pp. 53-64.  
[46] IQPC Australia, “How will a blended learning model improve 
student experience?,” [Online]. Available from: www.blended-
learning.com.au/uploadedFiles/EventRedesign/ 
Australia/2012/August/21475001/Assets/Microsoft20Word20
20Blended20Learning20and20Student20Experience.pdf, 
2015.11.16. 
[47] C. T. Philip, K. P. Unuh, N. Lachman, and W. Pawlina, “An 
explorative learning approach to teaching clinical anatomy 
using student generated content,” Anatomical Sciences Ed., 
vol. 1, 2008, pp. 106-110. 
[48] T. O'Reilly. “What is Web 2.0?,” [Online]. Available from: 
www.oreilly.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-
web-20.html, 2015.11.16. 
[49] B. Tucker, “The flipped classroom,” Education Next, vol. 12, 
2012, pp. 82-83. 
[50] S. D. Brookfield and S. Preskill, “Discussion as a way of 
teaching,”  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2005. 
[51] D. S. Knowlton, “Evaluating college students' efforts in 
asynchronous discussion: a systematic process,” In A. 
Orellana, T. L. Hudgins, and M. Simonson (Eds.), “The perfect 
online course: Best practices for designing and teaching”, 
2009, pp. 311-326.  
[52] National Education Association. “A survey of traditional and 
distance 
learning 
higher 
education 
members,” 
NEA 
Publication No. FGK56700. Washington DC: National 
Education Association, 2000. 
[53] M. Parry, “Online programs: profits are there, technological 
innovation 
is 
not,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/online-programs-
profits-are-there-technological-innovation-is-not/8517, 
2015.11.16. 
[54] S. C. Herring, “Computer-mediated discourse,” In: D. Tannen, 
D. Schiffrin, and H. Hamilton (Eds.), Handbook of discourse 
analysis, Oxford: Blackwell, 2001, pp. 612-634. 
[55] D. M. Poole, “Student participation in a discussion-oriented 
online course: a case study,” Journal of Research on 
Computing in Education, vol. 33(2), 2000, pp.162-177. 
[56] A-C. Cheng, E. J. Jordan, D. L. Schallert, and The D-Team, 
“Reconsidering assessment in online/hybrid courses: knowing 
versus learning,”. Computers and Education, vol. 68, 2013, 
pp.51-59. 
[57] J. V. Boettcher, “Designing for Learning - How Many Students 
Are Just Right in a Web Course?,” [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.designingforlearning.info/services/writing/ 
number.htm, 2015.11.16. 
 
 
 
 

