138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Electronic Nose using a Protein-Biosensor and a Camera-Based Application 
 
Noor Alrabeeah1, Omar Osman1, Ali Hage-Diab1,3, Houssein Hajj-Hassan2,3, Hassan M. Khachfe1,2,3,  
1 Department of Biomedical Engineering  
2 Department of Biological & Chemical Sciences 
3 Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research & Applications (LIBRA) 
Lebanese International University  
 Beirut - Lebanon 
{31230440, 11310051}@students.liu.edu.lb, {ali.hagediab, houssein.hajjhassan, hassan.khachfe}@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
     Abstract – Human’s olfactory system has a large number of 
receptors that respond only to a limited number of molecules. 
Since human noses are subject to fatigue, inconsistency and 
lack the sensitivity to low-concentration molecules, scientists 
have developed the Electronic nose (E-nose). E-nose is a device 
that identifies the specific components of volatiles and analyzes 
the chemical makeup to identify them. Regarding the 
applications of this device, they include, but not limited to, 
detection of odors specific to diseases for medical diagnosis and 
are used for the detection of gas leaks for environmental 
protection. An E-nose consists of both, a mechanism for 
chemical detection through an array of electronic sensors and 
mechanism for pattern recognition like that of the neural 
network. As for chemical detection and relating to the previous 
work of our fellow colleagues and major development of the E-
nose by scientists at Tufts University, our E-nose developed 
here consists of a Biosensor, which is a protein extracted from 
animals and a labeling component that is a chemical dye that is 
suitable compatible to the protein used. As for the electronic 
part of the prototype that is responsible for the detection of 
color change of the dye during the interaction with the odors, it 
is made up of an application programmed for this specific 
purpose that ensures proper detection of RGB (red, green and 
blue) value color change. Several trials were, and will be, 
further performed to validate the interaction between 
Biosensors and odor samples, in both liquid and solid phases.  
 
Keywords – E-nose; Volatiles; Biosensors; Chemical dye; RGB 
values 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The olfactory system is one of the most intelligent 
sensory systems to be developed in the mother’s womb. The 
primary pathway consists of two components, the olfactory 
epithelium and the olfactory bulb. Olfaction means the sense 
of smell. The main organ involved in olfaction is the nose, 
which has millions of receptors for smelling that are present 
within olfactory epithelium. This epithelium has three kinds 
of cells: basal, supporting, and olfactory receptor cells [1][2]. 
Olfactory receptors are bipolar neurons that are made up of 
dendrites and an axon that ends at the olfactory bulb. The 
most important part of this receptor is the olfactory hairs that 
respond to chemicals that are breathed in. When odorants 
enter the nose, the olfactory hairs that are present inside the 
nose become activated, generating the potential that then 
initiates the response [3]. Signals move from the olfactory 
cells to the olfactory bulb and move on to different parts of 
the brain, depending on what kind of signals.  
     Human sniffers are costly when compared to electronic 
noses. Electronic noses are quick and use reliable new 
technology of gas sensors. One major point is detection of 
hazardous or poisonous gas that is not possible with human 
sniffers that could be overcome by electronic devices. 
     Scientists thought of coming up with a device to 
overcome these complications. The solution to these 
difficulties would also advance the relationship between 
biology and technology. An e-nose is a device that identifies 
the specific components of an odor and analyzes its 
chemical makeup to identify it. Electronic noses have been 
around for several years but have typically been large and 
expensive. Current research is focused on making the 
devices smaller, less expensive, and more sensitive [4]. 
     A next-generation artificial nose developed by Tufts 
neuroscientists [4] uses DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) to 
detect odors, and possible applications range from medical, 
to commercial, and to defense. Researchers at Tufts have 
pioneered the use of DNA molecules to detect millions of 
odors. In early versions of the electronic nose, airborne 
odors passed over a square of silk screen treated with a 
mixture of a reactive polymer (a large molecule comprising 
a chain of smaller ones) and a fluorescent dye. If any 
property of the odor, its molecular shape, polarity or charge, 
interacted with the polymer, the fluorescent dye would glow 
in response. The trouble was, for each odor they wanted to 
detect, the researchers had to find, mainly through trial and 
error, the specific polymer that could serve as a sensor. Over 
15 years, the Tufts team and researchers elsewhere 
discovered 20 to 30 polymers capable of detecting a handful 
of odors. Tuft’s University device where it could be tailored 
to be used in the food and beverage industry, ensuring high 
quality products and detecting possible contaminants [5]. 
     As for the medical field, other researchers have come up 
with a device, later called Nano Artificial Nose (Na-Nose) 
[6]. In the absence of clear surrogate clinical markers that 
could discriminate between various sources of respiratory 

139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
infections, over-treatments with antibiotic prescriptions are 
evidenced in a large portion of the treated cases. There has 
been an increasing interest in recent years in improved 
methods for diagnosis of many metabolic and infectious 
diseases. These new methods are expected to be non-
invasive and inexpensive, while allowing: (1) screening of 
high-risk populations for emerging diseases; (2) early 
detection and prediction of diseases; and (3) evaluation and 
monitoring of therapy efficacy. 
     A prototype of cross-sensitive nanowire-based sensors to 
be integrated in the ‘Nano Artificial Nose’ was trained to 
detect target disease related mixtures of biomarkers. 
Advanced development of the Nano Artificial Nose disease 
detection capabilities is present for the detection of the 
following indications (bacteria and other pathogens) from 
exhaled breath: Streptococcus; Methicillin resistant (MRSA); 
Staphylococcus; etc. Na-nose technology detects specific 
disease biomarkers based on a change in the blood chemistry 
or metabolic activity (which is reflected in the chemical 
composition of the exhaled breath and cell/tissue headspace) 
rather than by other forms of imaging or invasive blood 
analysis [6]. 
Relating to Tuft’s University scientists’ work, our 
prototype was initially intended to mimic the structure and 
functionality of the earlier projects. During experimentations, 
some modifications were performed that made way into what 
advancements in materials used in this project and 
composition of testing procedures along with the results.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
represents the materials used, the requirements and device 
design, the project working process and the methods used. 
Afterwards, in Section III, experiments, results and data 
analysis are described. Then, in Section IV, results are 
discussed and explained. Finally, in Section V, a conclusion 
summarizes 
the 
requirements 
of 
this 
project 
and 
enhancements that meet the market requirements.  
 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
E-Nose technology joins several analysis techniques that 
make way to understanding the structures and composition 
of odors. Figure 1 below shows the simplicity of the system; 
it is composed of the color sensor (middle), Arduino circuit 
(bottom) that acts as the brain of the system, and the required 
sample (upper images) to be tested. Following, Figure 2 
illustrates the diagram of the device that consists of a 
chamber containing the fan and battery, biopolymer sensor, 
and odor receiving duct that is analyzed using a programmed 
application that recognizes the color change. Figure 3 
describes the LIU (Lebanese International University) E-
nose Application screens. 
The following diagram describes the initial method of 
detecting change in color of the Biopolymer. It consists of 
the Arduino Uno microcontroller, which acts as the brain of 
the system and communicates between the color sensor and 
computer. 
     The color sensor identifies the RGB spectrum of colors 
of the biopolymer, and then the results are visualized on the 
computer after being converted and processed by the 
Arduino. The experiment conducted is performed in both, 
the liquid and solid phase of the biopolymer.  
     This experiment was a proof of concept of the 
experiment done by Tufts University and the initial step of 
the upcoming experiments. 
     The diagram illustrated in Figure 2 describes the second 
and main method for detecting color change. The fan acts in 
drawing the odors from one part of the chamber with the 
least amount of turbulence towards the biopolymer sensor. 
After the biosensor and odor interact, change in color of the 
sensor composition is recorded by the phone camera. The 
phone flash light acts in transmitting visible light towards 
the sensor and the camera in receiving the light reflected. 
The data is analyzed and processed by an application 
programmed for this specific project. The application 
identifies the RGB spectrum, records the received data 
through an image taken, and saves the results in the phone 
library.  
 
Figure 1. Color Sensor and Arduino Block Diagram. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. LIU (Lebanese International University) E-Nose Block 
Diagram. 
 
 
 

140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
     Throughout the experiments performed on both methods, 
it was found more specific, accurate, and easier to choose 
the phone camera to identify and detect the color change. 
     The application is divided into four main screens. Screen 
1 is the cover page of the application, which we can get 
started from. Screen 2 is the testing phase of the application. 
The user inputs the two images; the first one is that of the 
biosensor prior to interaction with the odor, then image two 
is taken after the fan draws the odor towards the biosensor 
and interacts with it. We display the images, one and two, 
and the ball is dragged to a pre-specified point that relates to 
the location of the biosensor in the chamber. The specified 
point relevant to the ball location is where the RGB values 
are extracted and are then saved. Then the results are sent to 
screen 3; the results screen. Each image taken on screen two 
has its RGB values saved here and displayed. In addition to 
the RGB values and normalized values, the time at which 
each image was taken is saved and displayed on this screen. 
Finally, in screen 4, a graphical diagram displays the change 
in RGB values before and after the interaction took place. 
 
     LIU E-nose application serves as the image processing 
software programmed using MIT (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology) App inventor [7]. The software makes use of a 
typical phone with 13-megapixel rear autofocus, a wide 
aperture for extra light reaching image sensor, and an LED 
(light emitting diodes) flash. Software attains RGB values at 
fixed distance from the samples as well as exact focused 
point in all the tubes to minimize light differences and have 
more precise results. 
A.    Proteins 
     One major factor that describes these chosen proteins is 
their amphipathicity. Amphipathicity describes the surfaces 
on a protein, particularly the alpha helix, which mean that 
one surface of the alpha helix has hydrophilic amino 
acids while the opposite face has hydrophobic (or lipophilic) 
amino acids. 
     Bovine Serum albumin (BSA) is the most abundant 
plasma protein in mammals. SA is a multifunctional protein 
with extraordinary ligand binding capacity. Albumins 
exhibit a high degree of cross-reactivity due to significant 
sequence and structure similarity of SAs from different 
organisms [8]. 
     LDH (Lactate Dehydrogenase) is an enzyme found in 
nearly all living cells and is composed of four subunits 
(tetramer). LDH in humans uses His(193) as the proton 
acceptor, and works in unison with a coenzyme, and 
substrate binding residues [11]. The His(193) active site, is 
not only found in the human form of LDH, but is found in 
many different animals, showing the convergent evolution 
of LDH. A dehydrogenase is an enzyme that transfers a 
hydride from one molecule to another [9]. 
     ALP (Alkaline phosphatase), from bovine intestinal 
mucosa, is most stable in the pH range 7.5-9.5. The enzyme 
has a broad specificity for phosphate esters of alcohols, 
amines, pyrophosphate, and phenols and it requires zinc, 
and magnesium or calcium divalent ions for activity. These 
characteristics give rise for the stability and structure 
suitable for the project’s main application [10]. 
B. Dye     
     In this experiment, it is required to monitor color change. 
This factor is not present for the protein alone but requires 
an additional color label that facilitates monitoring this 
change. The label used here is the coomassie blue dye that is 
used to glows after an interaction between the biopolymer 
and certain odors takes place. The coomassie is the most 
suitable and commercially available colorant for this 
experiment. 
C. Organic Oils: 
          To limit the specificity of the odors used in this 
experiment, we used three types of odors that are: a) widely 
abundant in all homes, b) cheap and available, and c) are 
considered essential oils that minimize the quantity of these 
oils used. In the beginning of the experiments, coconut and 
rose water oils are used, but since they have certain 
limitations, (high viscosity of coconut oil, rose water being 
non-colorless) those factors influenced false results. To 
avoid these aspects, we used tea tree oil that is colorless, has  
low viscosity like that of water’s, and has concentrated 
scents. 
 
 
Figure 3. LIU E-Nose Application Stages: (a) Screen 1, (b) Screen 2, 
(c) Screen 3, (d) Screen 4. 
 
 
 

141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. PREPARATION STEPS 
A. Experiment 1: LDH – Coomassie using LIU E-Nose 
Application:  
B. Experiment 2: ALP – Coomassie Solid State against 
Exhaled Volatiles 
     In this experiment, a different approach was followed. 
Using the same procedure as the ones studied earlier, but 
without adding the organic oils to the samples, instead the 
Whatman papers only contained 5g/l concentration of ALP 
protein and 5 ul dye volume.  
     The odors now used are human breaths. The approach 
here was to monitor the change in color of the protein-dye 
mixture due to their interaction with chemical gases exhaled 
from a certain individual. Prior to any exhale, the color of 
the paper was recorded and noted down. Then, at one hand, 
the individual was asked to exhale with ordinary breath and 
noted down the difference in the color as shown in Figure 5, 
right column. On the other hand, the same patient was asked 
to chew a gum for 3 min then exhale with the same pressure 
and volume as that of the first trial and recorded the results 
afterwards. 
     The two trials showed positive results to the interaction 
between the protein and the exhaled gases. Additional 
experiments were held using the prototype and the LIU E-
Nose application to validate the previous results. 
     The biosensor was situated in the specified location on 
the biosensor-odor slider inside the chamber, as shown in 
Figure 6. Using the application, the first image was taken 
before any interaction with the biosensor and then the 
second image was taken after an individual exhaled on the 
biosensor; knowing that the same person was chosen to 
perform both previous experiments; data was received and 
saved by the application. 
 
C. Experiment 3: ALP – Coomassie Interaction with Tea 
Tree Oil in Liquid Phase 
 
1) Use an Analytical Balance to weigh 3.5mg of ALP 
(alkaline phosphatase) protein 
2) Dilute with 0.67ml distilled water at 33ºC to obtain 
5.2g/l concentration 
3) Take 10ul prepared ALP and add to it 5ul coomassie 
dye and 5ul tea tree oil and pour in 1.5ml eppendorf 
tubes 
4) Prepare reference tubes containing: 
a) 10ul ALP protein with 5ul coomassie dye (control 
tube) 
b) 5ul coomassie dye with 5ul tea tree oil 
c) 5ul coomassie dye 
5) Mix the combinations for 2 min using a vortex mixer 
6) Place the sampled tubes in a water bath at 33ºC for 30 
min 
7) Record the change in color at the end of the experiment, 
each tube with respect to the reference tube containing 
the protein-dye mixture, using the phone camera 
8) Analyze and compare the results using the LIU E-Nose 
application 
 
Figure 4. LDH - Coomassie - Oils (liquid and solid) Preparation. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. ALP vs Exhaled Volatiles in Solid Phase. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. ALP and Coomassie Blue Dye in the Chamber. 
 
 

142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. RESULTS 
     Combining the previous installments and procedures, 
several experiments were performed to identify and allocate 
the appropriate combination of ingredients. And in order to 
assess the most suitable experiment, comparison was 
performed between the different proteins, odors, and even 
phases of mixtures. Different proteins give rise to which is 
most suitable to use. From different odors, we can clear out 
some artifacts and specify which has the least effect on 
other components. Whereas from different phases, liquid or 
solid, we can somehow reach a state of testing very similar 
to how the natural nose works. 
A. Experiment 1 results: 
1)  Results in liquid phase: 
 
     Using a 5-50 µl pipette, prepare the previous mixtures 
with the values of each paper listed beside it; noting that the 
liquid prepared solutions are the same as those of the solid 
phase ones. 
     As for the LDH protein and dye, it is the main biosensor 
through which results of the other added odors are 
compared. The lighter mixture, rose water, that is added to 
the previous biopolymer mixture, shows different RGB 
values, both visualized by the application as well as the 
naked eye. These results give rise to verifying the different 
interactions between the protein-dye mixture and different 
odors. But what if the change in color was due to the oil 
interacting with the dye? The previous question is answered 
through taking other prepared dye samples and adding the 
oils to them. The results of these two different samples are 
visualized while comparing Figures 7 and 8. 
          Figure 9 shows that the interactions between the dye 
and organic samples are different than those with the 
protein-dye mixture. This verifies that the original color of 
oils factor is well studied, and error possibility is 
significantly minimized that allows studying the interaction 
between the protein-dye mixtures with added organic oils. 
 
2) Results in solid phase: 
 
     Another experiment was conducted in the dried-up phase 
of the protein and dye on Whatman paper. The procedure is 
described as adding the given quantity of protein onto the 
paper, then dropping the quantity of dye onto the protein. 
Following, the organic oils are finally added to the previous 
mixture.       
     Consider the previous preparations in Figures 10 and 11, 
having the same volume and concentration of the protein 
and dye, oil added after a period of 5 min shows different 
recorded RGB values between the two. Whereas, when 
adding different organic oils, each composition reacts in a 
specific manner with respect to the oil used.  
 
Figure 8. Testing in liquid phase (LDH protein + Coomassie Blue 
Dye). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Testing in liquid phase (LDH + Dye+ Rose Water). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. LDH + Dye in Solid Phase. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. LDH + Dye + Rose Water. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 9. Rose Water Oil + Dye in Liquid Phase. 

143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Experiment 2 results: 
     As shown in Figure 12, the results screen from the 
application, the trials showed positive outcome to the 
interaction between the biosensor and the exhaled gases. In 
the following graphical diagram of Figure 13, we can 
visualize the change in color as enlisted in the results screen 
previously.   
     In this experiment, the same preparation steps, conditions 
and materials of that of the previous experiment were used. 
The approach was to perform the test 30 times on the same 
biosensor and by the same given individual. After every 
trial, the setup was flushed by a reference gas in order to 
return the RGB values to the baseline. Following that, a 
period of 2 minutes was taken (recovery period) to make 
sure the biosensor returns to the initial state (baseline) 
before the interaction with the odors. 
Pre-exhalation: 
     Repeatability of RGB values before exhalation was 
consistent with an error of less than or equal to 5%  this 
validates that: 
 - the baseline of RGB values was maintained after each 
exhalation 
 - the odors absorbed by the proteins are rid due to flushing 
reference gas for a recovery time of 2 minutes 
 
Post-exhalation: 
     Error percentage was too high since breathing wasn't 
consistent (pressure, volume, temperature, and pH of 
exhaled breath) were not the same in all exhalations. 
C. Experiment 3 results:  
     Figure 14 shows the different results obtained from the 
experiment at the same time. It shows the prepared samples 
with a label with its content above each tube, while the RGB 
values are listed below the tubes. Detailed explanation of 
the results is further mentioned in the discussion.  
 
 We keep the following conditions of the samples constant: 
 
Temperature using water bath 
 
pH levels using ALP; stable pH 
 
Volume and concentrations using pipettes, balance, 
and dilution factor 
 
Figure 12.  RGB Values before and after the Exhaled Gases. 
 
Figure 13. Graphical Diagram Displays the Change in RGB Values 
before and after the Interaction. 
 
TABLE I. STATISTICS OF EXPERIMENT PERFORMED 30 TIMES. 
 
Red
Green
Blue
Red
Green
Blue
Trial 1
63
59
154
76
75
165
Trial 2
62
58
154
73
72
164
Trial 3
62
58
156
72
71
165
Trial 4
63
57
153
75
69
162
Trial 5
64
58
153
77
70
163
Trial 6
64
59
152
78
73
160
….
….
….
….
….
….
….
Trial 25
62
60
152
71
76
166
Trial 26
63
57
154
75
74
164
Trial 27
65
58
153
74
73
162
Trial 28
63
58
154
76
75
167
Trial 29
64
59
155
70
76
170
Trial 30
63
59
154
71
72
168
Average
63.16667 58.33333 153.6667
74
73 164.6667
Mean Average
63
58
154
74
73
165
% error
4.761905 5.172414 2.597403 10.81081 8.219178 6.060606
STD
0.897527 0.849837 1.105542 2.483277 2.198484 2.687419
before exhale
after exhale
 
 
Figure 14. RGB Values of the Prepared Samples in Liquid Phase. 

144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
We used alkaline phosphatase as the protein due to its key 
features: 
 
4 hydrophobic pockets are necessary to interact 
with the acquired odors 
 
Stable pH levels reduce odors’ pH influence 
 
Temperature stability (up to 80 degrees) [11]. 
 
     We choose tube 1 to the left as the reference and control 
to compare the color change of the rest of the tubes to it.   
Following is the protein and dye interacting with tea tree oil, 
transparent and low viscosity organic oil with a specific 
chemical structure.  
     To eliminate the effect of dilution that might be the 
reason of the lighter blue color of the sample, we add in the 
3rd tube the same volume of the tea tree oil same as that of 
tube 2 and notice that there is difference in color as 
compared to the mixture with the organic oil. Thus, another 
factor is studied, and this showed positive results. 
     In the following tubes, 4 and 5, we tested for the 
interaction between the organic oils and dye. It is required to 
validate that the interaction is with the protein and not the 
dye. Comparing the results of the tube 4 to tube 2, and tube 
5 to tube 3, the dye did not quite change its color, which 
made us conclude that there is minimal interaction between 
the oils and dye. 
V. RELATED WORK 
     Recent advances demonstrate that proteins, ORs 
(olfactory receptors) or OBPs (odorant-binding proteins), 
can be employed as molecular recognition units in gas-
phase biosensors. The interactions between odorant 
molecules and these proteins are a source of inspiration for 
designing peptides with tunable odorant selectivity [12]. 
    
     Peptides represent a simple and low-cost option for 
biosensors that can be biologically or synthetically 
produced. Initially, OBP biosensors were tested against 
volatiles and odor solutions, with measurements of analytes 
in gas phase only reported by the end of the 2000s. These 
peptides are considered easier to place and stabilize on 
sensor surfaces than ORs [12]. 
      
     Some methods for testing of VOC (Volatile Organic 
Compounds) were used. Each had a certain significance in 
respect to the peptides used as biosensors. The following 
table, Table II, summarizes the strategy used, from relevant 
biosensor to the equivalent VOC and the type of transducer 
specific for this method. Each testing group had specific 
support; each had a specific-to-biosensor material to be 
mounted on. 
 
     The different methodologies mentioned in the following 
table are relevant to the different techniques of testing 
VOCs throughout the years of advancements of volatiles’ 
identification. 
 
Following are some explanations to the different transducers 
used above: 
- 
Dielectric 
spectroscopy 
measures 
the 
dielectric 
properties of a medium as a function of frequency. It is 
based on the interaction of an external field with the 
electric permittivity of the sample [17]. 
- 
A thin-film bulk acoustic resonator (FBAR) is a device 
consisting of a piezoelectric material sandwiched 
between two electrodes and acoustically isolated from 
the surrounding medium [18]. 
- 
A carbon nanotube field-effect transistor (CNT) refers 
to a field-effect transistor that utilizes a single or array 
of carbon nanotubes as the channel material instead of 
bulk silicon structure [19]. 
- 
A piezoelectric sensor is a device that uses the 
piezoelectric effect to measure changes in pressure, 
acceleration, temperature, strain, or force. Then these 
factors are converted to electrical signals for 
identification [20]. 
      
     Using biological recognition units such as insect/ animal- 
based proteins in sensing devices improves their selectivity 
and sensitivity towards defined targets, with proven 
pronounced expression in samples analyzed in liquid states. 
The behavior of these biosensors in testing analytes in the 
gas phase is also recommended to attempt and compare. 
Means 
of 
mimicking 
the 
actual 
olfactory 
system 
functionality gives rise to complementing real-life scenarios.     
     Based on the techniques discussed in similar projects, 
there are several challenges present that inspire future 
developments. These challenges may include drawbacks of 
low stability and high promiscuity towards VOC molecules, 
resulting in low selectivity. The difficult, expensive, and 
time-consuming handling of membrane proteins may have 
led to the pursuit of simpler and more robust biomolecules 
as recognition agents; therefore, gas-sensing biosensors 
based on the soluble proteins [21]. 
 
TABLE II: BIOSENSORS AND TRANSDUCERS FOR A SPECIFIC VOC 
Protein 
Protein 
Origin 
Transducer 
VOC 
Support Reference 
pOBP 
Pig OBP 
Si-substrate with 
interdigitated 
electrodes (EIS) 
Ethanol; 
methanol 
Silicon 
[13] 
AaegOBP22 Mosquito 
Aedes 
aegypti 
ZnO film bulk 
acoustic 
resonators 
(FBAR) 
N,N-diethyl-
meta-
toluamide 
(DEET) 
Gold 
[14] 
mOR174-9 Mouse OR 
CNT (carbon 
nanotubes) 
transistors, 
Current-gate 
Voltage 
Acetophenone
, Others 
Carbon 
Nano-
Tubes 
[15] 
NQLSNLSF
SDLC 
(dORp61) 
Dogs OR 
Piezoelectric 
multiarray 
analyzer 
Trimethylamin
e (TMA); 
ammonia; 
acetic acid; 
ethyl acetate; 
methanol 
Gold 
Surface 
[16] 
 

145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
     Some similarities in application were found in the 
technology used in the previous experiments while being 
compared to the project under study.  
A)  OR response to VOCs may be distorted due to the 
presence of the lipidic fraction of the membrane such as 
phospholipids. LIU e-nose proteins used act in binding 
odors to the phospholipids of proteins used.  
B) OBPs can withstand high temperatures before 
experiencing denaturation, and after unfolding they 
frequently refold, restoring their initial structure. Stability of 
pOBP increases at higher temperatures [22]. Researchers 
used animal proteins to test for the affinity of interaction 
between biosensors and volatiles and studied their influence 
while relating to different temperatures. On the other hand, 
our project used alkaline phosphatase protein that 
incorporates temperature stability prior to and after 
interaction with volatiles.  
C)  A detailed analysis of the VOC-binding pocket from 
OBPs was tested, even though the target VOC is different. 
Here, testing included the study of binding pockets from 
OBPs while ours discusses the pockets of ALP structure and 
their interaction with and immersing of VOCs at the site of 
structural pockets. 
      
     Over the last 5 years, there has been an increase in OBP- 
and peptide-based biosensors. Certainly, using membrane 
protein receptors as ORs is more challenging, expensive, 
and time consuming, when compared with soluble and 
robust proteins such as OBPs. An investment in the 
expansion of tested VOCs for the development of gas 
biosensors is required, as recent examples report a very 
limited number and chemical diversity of VOC targets. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
     Electronic noses were originally used for quality control 
applications in the food, beverage and cosmetic industries. 
Current applications include detection of odors specific to 
diseases for medical diagnosis, and detection of gas leaks 
for environmental protection [23]. 
     The advancement of e-noses may be coupled with 
different sensor technologies, such as optical sensors, 
conductive polymers, and in our case biopolymers. 
     Initiating our analysis, a color sensor is used, combined 
with an arduino that controls and acquires data received by 
the sensor. First experiments showed detection of color 
change of the RGB values while stabilizing surrounding 
conditions to prevent artifacts from influencing our results. 
Yet, after maintaining constant light, temperature, and 
sample settings, inadequate results were obtained. Any little 
light disruptions, as well as inappropriate distance of sensor 
from samples caused false results. In addition, reflections 
off objects placed in the surroundings, either sample or 
sensor, did have a wrong impact on the results. Thus, 
another detection method is to be used after several trials 
performed earlier. CCD (charge-coupled device) camera is 
considered more convenient than the color sensor due to its 
high efficiency, as well as the broad availability of this 
sensor. Combined with a microcontroller or analyzing unit, 
this arrangement makes way to detecting the RGB value 
changes more accurately than that of the color sensor, as 
well as proper analysis of the results.  
     It is validated that DNA interacts with odors as 
mentioned 
in 
Tuft’s 
University 
experiments. 
The 
experiments conducted here are through using proteins as 
biopolymers instead of DNA. It is known that protein 
normally binds lipids. Most odors are hydrophobic that 
make them candidates to bind to the hydrophobic pockets 
available in the protein structures used here [24]. 
     The specific influences of conditions that might affect 
the interaction of the protein with the samples are avoided. 
Temperature is maintained constant at 37 degrees, using a 
water bath. The first experiments included the use of LDH 
and BSA proteins. Several trials were conducted on these 
proteins. In addition, to prevent any pH fluctuations, ALP is 
used instead of the previous proteins for its high affinity to 
bind lipids without changing pH levels. Setting pH at a 
specific value is required, for we are not probing the change 
in pH, but we shall see odor sensitivity.  
     In order to visualize color change, a labeling substance is 
used.  The marker used here is the coomassie blue dye. To 
detect the color change after an interaction between the 
biopolymer and certain odors, the dye fluoresces and 
changes its degree that facilitates the visualization of the 
interaction occurring between the protein and volatiles. The 
coomassie blue dye associates with basic and aromatic 
amino acids, thereby causing shift in absorbance during 
protein determination [25]. 
      
     The volatiles used in this experiment are coconut oil, 
rose water oil, cloves oil and tea tree oil. Coconut oil has 
high viscosity that prevented proper mixing with proteins. 
Rose water and cloves oils already have a non-transparent 
color thus they will affect the RGB values analysis. We used 
the tea tree oil, a transparent, low viscosity, and essential 
organic oil with a specific chemical structure is then used. 
     Binding of hydrophobic entities like odors may induce 
structural changes to protein due to the presence of 
hydrophobic pockets that may change their optical 
characteristics. Such interaction with lipids will induce 
structural changes down to the helical structure of proteins 
(Angstroms measurement unit) that affect their color nature, 
e.g.: globin proteins that change color from dark red to light 
violet 
based 
on 
structural 
change; 
cytochromes, 
hemoglobin, etc. 
     Optical activity of substance changes based on its 
modification in structure impacts transparency vs. opacity as 
well as color vs. color change. 
     The detected difference of the RGB values can be 
visualized both using the naked eye, as well as by using the 
application. The application uses the camera that is set to 
measure RGB values so there is no need for any pre-
processing. 

146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII. CONCLUSION 
     As a conclusion, the focus of this project is to mimic the 
functionality of the olfactory system using materials 
available in every lab. This makes way to producing a cost-
effective and easy to use device to perform the necessary 
function. The experiments were performed on similar 
materials as that of Tuft’s University then deviated the 
attention onto using, proteins instead of DNA, as the sensors 
for odor identification. It was validated that each gaseous 
and liquid phased molecules and odors interact differently 
when in contact with different proteins. This variance is 
used to check for better repeatability, sensitivity, and 
stability. This is analyzed by using a developed LIU E-nose 
application that records and displays the values of change in 
color post protein-odor interaction. Further practice shall 
lead to a better understanding of the specific interaction with 
given odors that can lead to notable discoveries in the field 
of diseases’ testing and identification as well as in other 
daily-life fields. 
     Current research is focused on making the devices 
smaller, less expensive, and more sensitive. The previously 
mentioned are crucial factors to the analysis and odor 
identification. The smaller the device, the more user friendly 
it is. Being more affordable increases the number of users, 
as well as ensures better testing of daily-life products, and 
more importantly better disease identification. Thus, further 
practice shall lead to a better understanding of the specific 
interaction with given odors that can lead to notable 
discoveries in the field of diseases’ testing and identification 
as well as in other daily-life fields. The possibilities are 
almost endless.     
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Alrabeeah, O. Osman, A. Hage-Diab, H. Hajj-Hassan, and 
H. Khachfe, “A Cost-Efficient, Camera-Based Electronic 
Nose,” The Sixth International Conference on Global Health 
Challenges (GHC 2017) IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-604-0, 
Nov. 2017. 
[2] A. Vokshoor, F. Talavera, S. Batuello, and A. Meyers, 
“Olfactory System Anatomy,” September 5, 2013.  
[3] A. Menini, “The neurobiology of olfaction,” editor Boca 
Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2010. 
[4] S. Chen, Y. Wang, and S. Choi, “Applications and 
Technology of Electronic Nose for  Clinical Diagnosis,” Open 
Journal of Applied Biosensor, pp. 39-50, 2013. 
[5] J. Mitchell, “Picking up the scent,” Tufts Journal, August 
2008.  
[6] NoCamels Team, “NaNose: The Breathalyzer Test That 
Sniffs Out Lung Cancer Before It,” June 19,2014.  
[7] H. 
Abelson, 
“Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology 
Application Inventor,” (2012-2017).  
[8] K. Majorek, P. Porebski, M. Chruszcz, S. Almo, and W. 
Minor, “Crystal structure of Bovine Serum Albumin,” New 
York Structural Genomics Research Consortium, January 4, 
2012. 
[9] RS. Holmes, E. Goldberg, “Computational analyses of 
mammalian lactate dehydrogenases: human, mouse, opossum 
and platypus LDHs,” Computational Biology and Chemistry. 
33 (5): pp. 379–385, October, 2009.   
[10] Kim EE, Wyckoff HW, “Reaction mechanism of alkaline 
phosphatase based on crystal structures. Two-metal ion 
catalysis,” Journal of Molecular Biology. 218 (2): pp.449–
464. doi : 10.1016/0022-2836(91)90724-K. PMID   2010919, 
March 1991. 
[11] L. Zhang, R. Buchet, and G. Azzar, Biophys j, “Phosphate 
Binding in the Active Site of Alkaline Phosphatase and the 
Interactions 
of 
2-Nitrosoacetophenone 
with 
Alkaline 
Phosphatase - Induced Small Structural Changes,” pp: 3873-
3881, 2014. 
[12] G. Arménio,  J.M.Barbosa, R. Oliveira, and C.A.Roque, 
“Protein- 
and Peptide-Based 
Biosensors 
in 
Artificial 
Olfaction,” Trends in Biotechnology, Volume 36, Issue 12, 
pp. 1244-1258, December 2018. 
[13] S. Capone, “Electrical characterization of a pig odorant 
binding protein by impedance spectroscopy,” Proc. IEEE 
Sens., 2009, pp. 1758-1762, 2009. 
[14] X. Zhao, “Protein functionalized ZnO thin film bulk acoustic 
resonator as an odorant biosensor,” Sens. Actuators B Chem., 
163, pp. 242-246, 2012. 
[15] B.R. 
Goldsmith,“Biomimetic 
chemical 
sensors 
using 
nanoelectronic readout of olfactory receptor proteins”, ACS 
Nano, 5, pp. 5408-5416, 2011. 
[16] T. Wu, Y. Lo, J. Biotechnol, “Synthetic peptide mimicking of 
binding sites on olfactory receptor protein for use in 
“electronic nose,” 80, pp. 63-73, 2000. 
[17] F. Kremer, A. Schonhals, and W. Luck, “Broadband 
Dielectric Spectroscopy,” Springer-Verlag, 2002. 
[18] S. Dixit, “Film Bulk Acoustic Wave (FBAR) Resonator,” 
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 
Volume 5, Issue 2, 1 ISSN 2250-3153, February 2015.   
[19] R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. Shea, T. Hertel, and Ph. Avouris, 
“Single- 
and 
multi-wall 
carbon nanotube 
field-effect 
transistors,” Applied Physics Letters. 73 (17): p. 2447, 1998. 
[20] G. Gautschi, “Piezoelectric sensorics,” Springer Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York. p. 3, 2002. 
[21] C. Wu, “Biomimetic sensors for the senses: towards better 
understanding of taste and odor sensation,” Sensors (Basel), 
p. E2881, 2017. 
[22] S. Paolini, “Porcine odorant-binding protein: structural 
stability and ligand affinities measured by fourier-transform 
infrared 
spectroscopy 
and 
fluorescence 
spectroscopy,” 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1431, pp. 179-188, 1999. 
[23] M. Rouse, “Electronic nose (e-nose),” March 2016.  
[24] J. Kauer, J. White, “Representation of odor information in the 
olfactory system: from biology to an artificial nose,” Sensors 
and Sensing  in Biology and Engineerin, Berlin, 2002. 
[25] A. Ninfa, D. Ballou, Benore, Marilee, “Fundamental 
Laboratory 
Approaches 
for 
Biochemistry 
and 
Biotechnology,”  p. 113, 2009.  
 

