111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Integrated Framework of Knowledge Management and Knowledge Discovery 
to Support E-health for Saudi Diabetic Patients 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract--In the last decade, the government of Saudi Arabia 
has given high priority to developing and implementing e-
healthcare services and technologies. However, it has met a 
number of barriers in implementing its healthcare 
initiatives. This paper describes these barriers and proposes 
an e-health knowledge management framework to overcome 
these barriers by integrating developments from knowledge 
management with knowledge discovery techniques. This 
framework should assist in the delivery of competitive e-
healthcare services and improve intellectual capital to 
provide smart health services in the country. The proposed 
framework will be applied to the domain of diabetes mellitus 
address the difficulties that diabetic patients encounter. 
 
Keywords - knowledge management; knowledge discovery; 
Saudi Arabia; diabetes mellitus; self-management; diabetes 
education. 
I. BACKGROUND 
The integration of knowledge management and 
knowledge discovery can play an important role in 
supporting e-health [1]. Eysenbach defines e-health as ‘an 
emerging field in the intersection of medical informatics, 
public health and business, referring to health services and 
information delivered or enhanced through the internet and 
related technologies’ [2]. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO) e-health refers to‘...the use, in the 
health sector, of digital data - transmitted, stored and 
retrieved electronically- in support of healthcare, both at 
the local site and at a distance’.  
In the last few decades, the Saudi Arabian government 
has given a high priority to improve its e-health services. 
A number of new initiatives have emerged focusing on 
many aspects of healthcare, ranging from creating 
electronic files for patients, statistical monitoring of 
infectious diseases, connecting all hospital systems using 
technologies of cloud computing and monitoring the 
arrival of pilgrims and vaccines given to each pilgrim in 
their home country [3].  However, the implementation of 
these initiatives has been impaired by many problems 
outlined as illustrated in Figure 1: 
 
Non-connectivity 
of 
information 
systems.  
Though some regional directorates and central 
hospitals are using information systems [4], there 
is no effort to connect these information systems 
in order to build up a national healthcare system 
[5]. 
 
Lack of technical expertise and computer skills. 
Computer 
skills 
of 
healthcare 
staff 
and 
professionals are deficient due to their lack of 
experience in using computer applications [6]. No 
guidelines are provided to handle electronic 
medical records (EMRs), and the staffs complain 
about poor maintenance of computers, networks, 
slow computers and old terminals.  
 
Failure of adoption Health Information Services 
(HIS). There are critical issues associated with 
planning 
and 
adopting 
HIS, 
and 
its 
implementation in Saudi Arabia; some of these are 
caused by the poor technical support and over 
running with respect to time and budget [6][7].  
 
Human 
barriers. 
This 
problem 
has 
been 
considered as the major reason for failing to adopt 
health information systems in Saudi hospitals [8]. 
Human barriers include negative beliefs of 
healthcare professionals towards technologies and 
lack of trust by medical staff towards computer 
based medical solutions. Therefore, many medical 
staff resists the change from traditional to 
computer based healthcare services. 
 
Cultural barriers. Cultural factors contribute to 
the failure in adopting e-health because of limited 
human interaction [7]. Aldraehim and Edwards [9] 
explain that Saudi Arabian people are extremely 
influenced by their culture and, therefore, they 
prefer physical interaction to virtual contact. 
 
Medication safety. According to Aljadhey et al. 
[10], medication safety raises two major e-health 
issues. The first issue refers to communication 
gaps 
among 
healthcare 
institutions, 
which 
contribute to medical mishaps and patients’ 
medical historical issues. The second issue is 
limited use of technology whose consequences 
occur in illegible handwriting. Computerised 
Provider Order Entry (CPOE) can solve this 
problem; however, this is being adopted slowly.  
 
Financial barriers. Transmitting traditional paper 
medical records to electronic system can be very 
costly [11]. Such high expenditure, which needs to 
be spent on the adoption of IT in health, may lead 
to the slow uptake of e-health applications. 
 
Security and privacy. This focuses on the easiness 
in accessing EMRs of patients due to the fact that 
some medical records of patients can be 
disseminated to others without permission of the 
patient or the doctor [6]. 
Saleh Almuayqil1, 2 
1College of Computer Science and Information 
Aljouf University 
Skaka, Saudi Arabia 
e-mail: saleh.naif@ju.edu.sa 
 
Anthony S. Atkins2, Bernadette Sharp2 
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University 
Stafford, UK 
e-mail: {a.s.atkins, b.sharp}@staffs.ac.uk 
 

112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
This paper is structured as follows. Section I presents 
the background regarding e-health barriers in Saudi 
Arabia. Section II explains the role of knowledge 
management and knowledge discovery in healthcare. 
Section III provides insights regarding barriers that can 
hinder the SECI model utilization in the Saudi Arabian 
context. Section IV introduces the proposed framework to 
overcome e-health barriers in Saudi Arabia. Section V 
introduces the domain of application. Section VI describes 
the difficulties faced by diabetic patients. Section VII 
discusses the self-management and education approach to 
overcome these difficulties. Section VIII describes the 
feasibility of the internet in diabetes self-management and 
education. Section IX explains how an integrated 
framework can be used to help patients of diabetes and 
their health careers in managing those difficulties. Finally, 
Section X summarises the main directions adopted by this 
project. 
II. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
Nowadays, patients and health practitioners are 
connected to hospitals, clinics and pharmacies; they share 
knowledge in order to reduce administrative costs and 
improve the quality of care. Although the focus tends to be 
on managing health records and interoperability of IT 
healthcare systems, knowledge management plays an 
important role in providing high quality and effective 
healthcare 
system. 
It 
also 
allows 
the 
capture, 
representation and dissemination of knowledge of 
healthcare professionals such as their strategies, practices 
and insights. This knowledge is the power that enables 
organisations and individuals to select the best actions and 
strategies [12]. Utilisation of best practices provides 
significant advantage for organisations in term of 
competition and efficiency. Individuals keep their 
knowledge in their brain and those individuals have the 
brainpower or intellectual capital that every organisation 
desires [13]. Furthermore, their knowledge helps identify 
current problems as well as achieve desired results [14]. 
Consequently, many top managers have recognised the 
importance of capturing and managing knowledge of its 
healthcare professionals and developing systems to 
improve their services.  
Knowledge management is a useful mechanism to 
capture the intellectual capital of organisations, and 
healthcare establishments, in particular, so that they can 
deliver the best quality of care. It can help healthcare 
professionals cope with the fragmented and distributed 
nature of medical knowledge, the challenges caused by 
information overload and the importance to access local 
knowledge in making clinical decisions [15]. Additionally, 
it can provide healthcare practitioners with educational and 
training initiatives in terms of professional development 
and changing environment preparation [20][21][22]. 
Finally, dissemination of medical knowledge and best 
practices enable social learning initiatives where evidences 
can be disseminated to clinicians, nurses, and other 
healthcare 
workers 
[23][24][25] 
at 
national 
and 
international levels as well as to rural areas.  
Knowledge management can provide a dynamic 
process of capturing, storing, sharing and creating both 
types of knowledge, explicit and tacit [22]. Explicit 
knowledge is communicable in systematic language 
whereas tacit knowledge is obtained through experience 
and cannot be articulated [23]. Nonaka and Takeuchi [23] 
suggested that knowledge changes from explicit to tacit 
and vice versa in two dimensional learning environments 
through 
four 
processes, 
namely 
Socialisation, 
Internalisation, Externalisation, and Combination, known 
as SECI (as illustrated in Figure 2), and represented in the 
form of a spiral. Socialisation enables the conversion of 
tacit knowledge via interaction among individuals, and can 
be achieved through shared experience. Internalisation 
enables converting explicit knowledge to tacit knowledge, 
while externalisation enables tacit knowledge to be 
converted to explicit knowledge. It makes tacit knowledge 
understandable and can be recorded or saved by 
visualising it in an explicit form. Combination is the 
process of ‘systematizing concepts into a knowledge 
system’ [23]; for example, people synthesise different 
sources of explicit knowledge through  meetings, 
conversations and exchange of documents [16][27]. 
Nonaka concluded that knowledge is continuously created 
a third dimension, which account for  restructuring the 
existing knowledge through the synergy of these four 
processes. However, a number of issues have been raised 
regarding Nonaka’s premises; consequently, other models 
have been developed and/or extended Nonaka‘s basic 
ideas. For example, Nissen [24] developed the knowledge 
flows model to capture the organisational knowledge 
dynamics and added two further dimensions to Nonaka: 
life cycle and flow time. Harsh [25] proposed a third 
dimension, which accounts for knowledge reusability and 
where technology and human interaction can play a 
significant role in management of data, information and 
knowledge. Yao et al. [26] argued that SECI assumes that 
the only source of corporate knowledge originates from the 
staff within the organisation. 
 
  
Figure 1. E-health Barriers in Saudi Arabia 

113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2. SECI Model [23] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the healthcare sector, patients as well as healthcare 
workers significantly contribute to knowledge creation and 
knowledge 
sharing. 
However, 
tacit 
and 
explicit 
knowledge, which are embedded in people, are constantly 
updated and new knowledge is  acquired from external 
sources through  the analysis and knowledge discovery of 
patients data and databases, and scientific documents  
Knowledge discovery is another emerging discipline 
aimed at identifying valid, novel, understandable and 
useful patterns in data, texts, images, and other media [27]. 
It uses statistical and artificial intelligence techniques to 
analyse and process large amount of data [28] without 
or/at least less human intervention [29]. Data mining is a 
subfield of knowledge discovery, which discovers novel 
and valid trends/associations using machine learning 
techniques [30]. Typical applications of data mining in 
healthcare include monitoring high risk of diabetic 
individuals, so that appropriate messages can be 
communicated to them [31],  predicting length of stay of 
patients with spinal cord injuries [32], and predicting 
hypertension from patient medical records with eight other 
diseases [33]. According to Berger and Berger [34] data 
mining is a useful approach for dealing with the rapid 
expansion of medical knowledge and healthcare data. 
Whilst knowledge discovery can support the discovery 
of new knowledge from patients’ healthcare data, 
knowledge management provides a forum to share and 
disseminate this new acquired knowledge and to combine 
it with the explicit and tacit knowledge acquired from 
healthcare practitioners. Such integration can address some 
of the problems discussed above and improve the quality 
and performance of healthcare services. Furthermore, it 
can assist healthcare organisations in making strategic 
effective decisions [35]. Hwang et al. [36] demonstrated 
how association rules can be applied to extract knowledge 
from patients’ medical records along with medical rules of 
tumor associated diseases, and to develop guidelines for 
clinicians. Then, these guidelines can be shared among 
healthcare practitioners through a knowledge management 
system and deliver a better quality healthcare to patients. 
 
III. 
SECI MODEL ISSUES 
Even though the SECI model has always proved to be 
powerful tool to manage and share knowledge, it has been 
widly criticised and has been suggested that the model is 
not universally valid. Nonaka and Takeuchi [23] and other 
scholars suggested that each mode can take place by 
specific tools and conditions need to be there to make the 
knowledge conversion processes happen. For example, 
socialisation can take place via observation and 
experience when individuals are willing to share 
knowledge. According to Tyagi et al. [37], trust, respect 
and mutual understanding among resources during 
communication are important requisites for socialisation. 
Moreover, M. Glisby and N. Holden [38] mentionned 
other factors that must be provided in order to perform 
socialisation. Those factors are strong affiliation to the 
organisation, cooperative working environment instead of 
competitive, developing relationships with those who 
share the same fate, external sharing of knowledge 
facilitated 
by 
networks 
of 
partnerships 
between 
organisations and close interrelationships. To externalise 
knowledge, on the other hand, group commitment must 
occur among individuals in their workplace. In addition, 
participation of internal competent members and external 
experts in the training programs and seminars with little 
external control (i.e., minimal pressure from shareholders) 
are required for successful completion of externalisation 
[37] [38]. For the combination mode, Nonaka and 
Takeuchi 
stressed 
the 
importance 
of 
lack 
of 
interdepartmental rivalry, polychromic task orientation, 
high personal commitment and permanent occupancy. 
Internalisation mode can take place where there is 
minimal risk of mistakes occurring among individuals. 
This stage of knowledge conversion can be performed via 
job rotation, which encourages movement of  members of 
staff in the organisation and thereby innovates knowledge 
transfer and increases motivation [39]. 
The overwhelming success for the SECI model in 
Japanese organisations is well-documented. However, the 
SECI model when applied to other countries does not 
necessarily indicate success as there are different cultural 
factors, which can influence the outcome of the 
knowledge conversion of the model; According to Schein 
[40], Nonaka and Takeuchi insist that the knowledge 
creation process needs social interaction, which is 
influenced by cultural norms. Factors of organisational 
culture, such as trust and the style of the organisation 
structure, are important to ensure knowledge sharing [39]. 
When considering factors suggested by Nonaka and 
Takeuchi for SECI model implementation it is important 
to appreciate how much these factors are influenced 
specifically by Japanese culture. Close interrelationships 
between organisations, which is significant factor for 
socialisation, is a specific characteristic of the Japanese 
culture only [38]. Low external control and group 
commitment, which are necessary requirements for 
externalisation, are features of the Japanese culture 
[76][79]. 
High 
personal 
commitment, 
permanent 

114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
occupation and other conditions essential for combination 
are typical Japanese practices and, therefore, combination 
may have difficulties when implemented in other cultures 
[42]. The same concept also applies to internalisation. 
Intensive job rotation is a typical Japanese practice 
because Japan focuses on developing generalists rather 
than 
specialists 
in 
particular 
domains. 
So, 
the 
experimental learning or ‘learning by doing’ is widely 
accepted in the Japanese organisations, which constitute 
the context of internalisation [38].  
Several studies have examined the validity of SECI 
model in different cultures. T. Andreeva and I. Ikhilchik 
[42] analysed the implementation of this model in the 
Russian context. Dialogues with senior management were 
seen to be problematic in Russian companies because of 
the authoritarian leadership style and the prevalence of 
top-down communication, where employees do not 
directly communicate with senior managers or they are 
inhibited for fear of reprisal. These issues constitute a 
barrier for utilising the externalisation mode successfully 
in the Russian context. Furthermore, more effort is needed 
to perform combination in Russian organisations because 
of the presence of the concentrated authority and 
decision-making. In another study published by Weir and 
Hutchings [43], combination and internalisation do not  
work in the Chinese culture, in the way suggested by 
Nonaka and Takeuchi, due to the presence of 
interdepartmental rivalry  and the risk of making 
mistakes. 
In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), the culture is 
formed by three factors: religion, tribal or family systems 
and the Arab culture [7]. Islam influences the Saudi 
Arabian culture by setting moral principles among people 
in the country. Family is extremely valued in the Saudi 
Arabian culture as it provides security to its members. 
Members of the KSA family are expected to have good 
relationships with their relatives and this collectivism 
style ensures assistance, such as job opportunities, to be 
given to family members through the family leaders. 
Their belief is also influenced by the Arabic culture, 
which implies that all members in the family perform 
their roles in order for the family to continue its standing 
in society. Furthermore, the father in this culture is 
responsible for the family and always has the authority 
[44]. It is also a high power distance culture and has high 
level of uncertainty avoidance, collectivism and feminism 
[45]. In another study, cultural dimensions such as 
extreme power distance, masculinity, low uncertainty 
avoidance, and extreme individualism hinder the process 
of knowledge sharing [46]. Therefore, the process of 
externalisation and internalisation may be hindered in the 
Saudi Arabian culture. Weir and  Hutchings [43] reviewed 
the utilisation of the SECI segments and concluded that 
socialisation and combination can be achieved in the 
Saudi Arabian world  although there is tendency to keep 
knowledge among themselves unless there is a need for 
communication and if they trust their colleagues. This can 
impact the sharing of tacit knowledge and its 
externalisation. Internalisation does not work effectively 
because of the lack of confidence and trust from the 
information outlined from the knowledge holder because 
work life is still influenced by Saudi family culture and is 
not completely separated from the work environment. 
Although, job rotation is adopted in KSA, it is not widely 
practiced and tends to focus on developing deeper 
experience in the same field rather than widening an 
employee’s competence in different domains. 
Solutions have been suggested to adapt the SECI 
model to the Arabic culture at the organisational and 
national levels [39]. These suggestions can be used to 
improve successful utilisation of Nonaka's' model in KSA. 
 Socialisation. KSA citizens are seen to be pre-
socialised [43]. Accomplishing strong relationships 
between 
top 
managers 
and 
employee 
will 
emphasise 
socialisation 
in 
Saudi 
Arabian 
organisations. Trust is important in this stage of the 
SECI model. Therefore, religious and social 
events, such as Ramadan festivities, graduations 
and 
weddings, 
can 
reinforce 
trust 
among 
colleagues. Establishing a reward system has also 
an impact on the socialisation mode. It reinforces 
knowledge 
sharing 
when 
considering 
the 
employees’ different needs and objectives [47]. 
Rewards for knowledge sharing can be tangible or 
in incorporeal forms. Self-worth is an example of 
an incorporeal reward which means the individual 
who shares knowledge has the feeling of being 
valued and it includes personal acknowledgement 
and recognition in applying shared knowledge 
[47].  
 Externalisation. Improving office design in the 
organisations in the Saudi Arabian context will 
allow higher interaction and communication 
between staff. This will give the opportunity for 
discourse in the work environment. Motivation can 
play its significant role to encourage knowledge 
discourse among colleagues in organisations. 
Rewards such as incentives should consider 
knowledge sharing behaviour among individuals. 
As 
group 
commitment 
is 
prerequisite 
for 
externalisation, workshops and seminars can be 
used to improve loyalty to work place among 
members. This will help to separate private life 
from 
work 
life. 
Likewise 
in 
socialisation, 
organisations can take advantage of the religious 
and social events to enhance trust and accomplish 
good relationships among members in order to 
strengthen externalisation. 
 Combination. As an Arabic community, KSA 
culture is seen to have concentrated authority and 
decision-making. A useful solution to overcome 
this barrier would be to expand the level of 
participation in decision-making. This action will 
enable information flow vertically among all 

115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3. Components of e-Health Knowledge Management 
System 
members regardless of their importance or position 
in the organisation. 
 Internalisation. The literature review has suggested 
that job rotation has been adopted slowly in the 
Saudi Arabian culture. Increasing the adoption of 
such a solution by moving individuals in the 
organisation, can improve knowledge transfer, 
expertise, and increases motivation. Saudi Arabian 
organisations 
normally 
give 
their 
members 
opportunities to engage in training courses, which 
is distributed equally among members in the 
organisation to ensure internalisation is being 
implemented. 
IV. 
 E-HEALTH KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
FRAMEWORK 
It is important here to recognise that despite significant 
advantages in applying knowledge management in the 
healthcare sector, there are a number of barriers primarily 
caused by the absence of clear knowledge management 
strategy related to deficiency of effective team working, 
cultural barriers, poor IT infrastructure, degree of sectorial 
professionalisation, and political conflicts [41][42][43]. 
Finn and Waring [51] illustrated the importance of 
effective team working and stated that ‘architectural 
knowledge’ is fundamental for efficient team practice to 
ensure the delivery of safe and effective care to patients. 
As mentioned earlier, cultural barriers play also a negative 
role as some cultures do not encourage knowledge sharing; 
this constitutes an obstacle to knowledge management 
processes [52]. The healthcare sector tends to be mono-
disciplinary and relationships of professionals within this 
sector are highly standardised, hence there is a resistance 
among doctors to share their findings and initiatives [49]. 
Strong governmental regulations and political and 
management conflicts can also hinder knowledge sharing 
among healthcare practitioners [53]. Guven-Uslu [50] 
described the clinician-managerial conflict as one of the 
important obstacles; the priority of managers is to 
minimise cost whereas the first priority of clinicians is to 
provide best care for patients.  
To address the above issues, we propose a holistic 
framework approach to the healthcare knowledge 
management; this approach is still inspired by the SECI 
model of Nonaka, although we are aware of the critical 
issues associated with the two dimensional approach to 
knowledge management. One of those issues relates to the 
fact that the SECI model is embedded within the Japanese 
context and culture. Similarly, our framework must take 
into consideration the Saudi Arabian context, which is 
strongly influenced by the Arabic culture when applying 
the SECI model of Nonaka and Takeuchi [24][43]. Some 
of these issues are discussed later in this paper. 
This framework is primarily designed to address the 
barriers highlighted above from the four perspectives: 
Business, 
Human, 
Financial 
and Technology. 
By 
integrating 
knowledge 
discovery 
into 
knowledge 
management we aim at identifying, extracting and 
organising tacit and explicit knowledge related to 
problems and solutions from multiple sources and at 
providing a forum for generating and sharing current and 
new knowledge by linking tacit and explicit knowledge to 
a specific medical domain. The proposed framework, 
referred herewith as e-health knowledge management 
system, is initially tailored to address the healthcare issues 
in Saudi Arabia and is dedicated to the diabetes mellitus 
domain, described in Section IV; this will allow us to 
evaluate the viability and performance of the proposed e-
health knowledge management system. 
This section describes the four components of our 
framework (as illustrated in Figure 3). The Business 
component focuses on organisational issues and aims at 
extracting and managing the barriers associated with the 
failure of adopting health information services and medical 
safety, such as poor technical support and unrestricted 
access to medications.  
The Human component deals with the human barriers 
in relation to the use of technology from the healthcare 
workers and the cultural barriers from the patient 
perspectives; this will address the negative beliefs of 
healthcare professionals and patients towards the use of 
virtual contact and interaction with technological devices. 
The role of patients in the process of knowledge 
production and the computing skills of both, the healthcare 
professionals and patients, are critical to the success of our 
framework. To this end, the Technology component 
manages the non-connectivity issues and focuses on the 
technical expertise and computer skills, security and 
privacy issues. This component includes training aspects to 
address the limited/lack of computer skills among 
healthcare staff and professionals and their patients. 
Finally, the Financial component attempts to elicit the 
constraints 
and 
policies 
associated 
with 
the 
implementation, maintenance and monitoring of healthcare 
information services, namely the high cost of transmitting 
from traditional patients’ paper records to electronic 
records. The proposed framework will elicit some of these 
problems and propose solutions and made available to the 
community via a dedicated knowledge management 
system (as illustrated in Figure 4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. E-health Knowledge Management System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This approach is to be applied to support the diabetes 
community, which is increasing at an alarming rate in 
Saudi Arabia. Elicitation of their problems and issues 
faced is to be accomplished through interviews and 
protocol analysis, and via statistical data mining analyses 
extracted from the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
dataset. Using machine-learning techniques such as 
association rules and decision tree we can elicit typical 
issues and problems faced by the diabetes community and 
relate them to the four components presented in Figure 3.  
The new discovered knowledge can then be expressed in 
terms of recommendations and best practices to support 
both, healthcare professionals and the diabetes community.    
The aim of the knowledge management system is to 
provide relevant knowledge not only to healthcare 
professionals who may be seeking or sharing best 
practices, strategies, guidelines and policies, but also to 
patients who need to contact specific healthcare services or 
professionals for advice or help. The proposed system will 
also provide access to academic papers related to specific 
problems to keep healthcare professionals up-to-date with 
new findings.  
V. 
DOMAIN OF APPLICATION 
Diabetes mellitus, which is one of the highest chronic 
diseases that affect patients from different genders, ages 
and weights, is to be used to validate our proposed 
framework. It can have severe complications such as 
stroke [47][48], heart attack [55], heart failure [56], kidney 
failures [55], Alzheimer disease [57] and mortality [58]. 
It is estimated that 382 million people have diabetes in 
the world, and by 2035, this will rise to 671 million. The 
number of patients who are suffering from diabetes 
mellitus is increasing in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
(KSA). According to Shaw, Sicree, and Zimmet [59], KSA is 
in the third place among the top 10 countries for diabetes 
prevalence. In 2010, the prevalence percentage for 
diabetes mellitus in Saudi Arabia was 16.8% among adults 
in the ages of 20-79 years old. This percentage is expected 
to rise in 2030 to reach 18.9% [59]. In another statistics, 
there were 3.8 million cases of diabetes in Saudi Arabia in 
2014, this number represents 20.5% of the prevalence of 
this disease among adults in the country [60].  
There are twenty health regions distributed among all 
regions in KSA, providing services to more than 3 million 
diabetic patients, belonging to different ages, gender, and 
weight. The number of diabetic outpatients visiting the 
healthcare centers (HCC) is 1,891,765. This number of 
diabetic patients represents 6.4% of the overall number of 
visits to all HCC in KSA and put diabetic patients in third 
place in the scale of all outpatients visits in the kingdom 
[61].   
Over 96% of all Saudi medical healthcare budgets are 
attributed to diabetes by Saudi citizens and 4% incurred by 
non-Saudi nationals. The national healthcare financial 
burden has reached $0.87 billion, excluding (i) indirect 
costs 
such 
as 
absenteeism, 
lost 
productivity, 
unemployment 
from 
disease-related 
disability, 
lost 
productivity due to early mortality by disease, and (ii) 
healthcare 
system 
administrative 
costs, 
cost 
of 
medications, clinician training programs, and research and 
infrastructure development [62]. The proposed framework 
will include the financial costs and its impact on human 
and barriers components into the framework. It will also 
attempt to overcome the barriers by utilising technology 
components.  
A number of data mining applications have focused on 
diabetes. For example, Meng et al. [63] produced a model 
to detect diabetes using 12 risk factors and Chang, Wang, 
and Jiang [64] used risk factors to identify hypertension 
and hyperlipidemia. Suh et al. [65] developed the 
WANDA system to remotely help monitor blood glucose, 
weight, and blood pressure. HealthOrg is an application to 
monitor high risk diabetic individuals so that appropriate 
message can be communicated to patients [31]. Roch et al. 
[66] recognise the need and the challenges that healthcare 
professionals and researchers face in developing a much 
needed comprehensive knowledge management support 
system for diabetes care. To the best of our knowledge, no 
integration of data mining and knowledge management for 
diabetes has been attempted. 
VI. 
DIFFICULTIES FACED BY KSA DIABETIC 
PATIENTS 
Beside the many health related complications 
associated with this disease, diabetic patients also face 
difficulties and challenges related to the control and the 
management of diabetes, and adherence to appropriate 
dosage of their medication. As Péres et al. [67] report, 
some of these challenges include difficulties in controlling 
their eating habits, doubts in time schedules and  correct 
usage and dosage of their medications, leading sometimes 
to their refusal to take insulin [68]. For example, most 
patients are not able to remember their blood glucose and 
blood pressure target. They also face problems in 
identifying medications and understanding prescriptions, 
especially when patients asked to change medication [69]. 
In addition, indicated patient deficiency in adherence to 
lifestyle measures and pharmacologic therapies as one of 

117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the most common reasons cited for failure to achieve 
glycaemic goals. According to Onwudiwe et al. [69], 
inadequate health literacy can lead to an inefficient use of 
health services.  
VII. DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT AND 
EDUCATION 
Diabetes education and self-management are two 
research studies which have been highly studied to 
understand the difficulties and issues that diabetic patients 
may encounter every day. Funnell et al. [70] defined 
diabetes self-management education as the constant 
procedures for facilitating the needed knowledge, skills 
and ability for diabetes self-care for the overall purpose of 
supporting self-care behaviour. Diabetes education aims 
at increasing the knowledge of diabetic patients about 
their disease and health condition and at empowering 
them to have control over their condition [71]. In addition, 
diabetes self-management education have other objectives 
including supporting informed decision-making, problem-
solving and active cooperation with the healthcare team, 
and to improving clinical outcomes, health condition, and 
quality of life [70]. Blonde [68] stresses the importance of 
ongoing medical nutrition therapy and self-management 
education which must be made available to all patients 
with diabetes. Furthermore, Onwudiwe et al. [69] claimed 
diabetes education, knowledge and self-management as 
the key to successful diabetes management. Funnell and 
Anderson [72] stated that patients are to be responsible for 
95% of diabetes management, which should be carried out 
at patients' home through self-care. Therefore, patients of 
diabetes are to be given sufficient knowledge about their 
disease and guidelines to control it.  
Self-management of diabetes includes guidelines and 
activities related to diet control, exercise, blood glucose 
testing, foot care and reduction of smoking [73]. Such 
knowledge can assist patients in dietary habits, enable 
self-monitoring of accurate glucose and weight [74]. In 
other words, self-management of diabetes and diabetes 
education can not only reduce the risks of diabetes 
complications and enhance patients' health and life but 
also it can bring financial benefits such as reducing 
patients' visits to hospitals and minimising healthcare 
professionals' consultations.  
Successful utilisation of diabetes self-management and 
education has been implemented in some developed 
countries. In the United Kingdom, for instance, the 
National 
Institute 
of 
Clinical 
Excellence 
(NICE) 
guidelines recommend diabetes education programs to be 
offered to diabetics and their healthcare providers, to 
assist them in best managing the condition [75]. For 
example, DESMOND [76] offers short courses through 
presentations and workshops and provides diabetics 
patients with the skills and knowledge needed to enable 
them to control their conditions. The Canadian Diabetes 
Association (CDA) offered diabetes self-management 
program for people with diabetes in Canada. This 
program offers many services to diabetic patients to help 
them self-manage their condition and live healthier with 
diabetes. Examples of the services CDA provides are 
virtual health coaching, educational events about diabetes 
such as exhibitions and keynote speakers, learning series 
about diabetes risk factors and symptoms, and food skills 
to guide different ethnic groups in Canada in how to 
prepare healthy food [77]. 
Such programs are required to be introduced to 
healthcare centres and support diabetic patients in KSA. 
We believe that our knowledge management system can 
play a significant role in eliciting the best practices from 
various healthcare organisations and disseminating them 
through appropriate means to patients and healthcare 
providers.  
VIII. E-HEALTH SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION 
SUPPORT  
Internet is used increasingly by people who suffer 
from chronic diseases in order to self-manage their 
illnesses and learn from other patients’ experiences [78]. 
The literature review conducted by Ziebland and Wyke 
[79] revealed seven domains for accessing health 
experiences of others on the internet; (1) searching for  
information, (2) feeling supported, (3) maintaining 
contacts with others, (4) undergoing health services, (5) 
learning to communicate the story, (6) visualising disease, 
and (7) affecting behaviour. In terms of diabetes mellitus, 
Ramadas et al. [80] discuss the intervention of web-based 
technology for managing type 2 diabetes. They review 13 
web-based results on positive impact of such intervention 
on the management of the disease. Another study showed 
how web-based diabetes management system helped its 
users reduce their glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) [81]. It 
offered 
educational 
programs 
related 
to 
diabetes 
management, exercise, nutrition and recommendations for 
the patients with type 2 diabetes based on the information 
they enter such as their medications and glucose levels.  
Official report shows promising indication for using 
internet services for health related issues in KSA. Internet 
penetration in KSA has risen  from 13% in 2005 to 63.7% 
in 2014 and the number of internet users has reached over 
19 million [82], showing common use of the internet in 
search for health associated information [83]. However, 
the literature review does not provide evidence of internet 
usage by Saudi diabetic patients. This confirms the critical 
need to provide self-management education not only to 
support diabetic patients to cope with their daily 
difficulties but also help healthcare professionals provide 
quality and consistency of care to their diabetic KSA 
patients. 
IX. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
FRAMEWORK FOR DIABETES 
The above difficulties and challenges is the motivation 
behind the development of the proposed e-health 
framework, which can help address the gaps of diabetes 
self-management and education in KSA. This framework 
is to be implemented in a web-based (portal) system to 
provide a tailored knowledge  management approach to 

118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(i) help diabetic patients self-manage and monitor their 
health conditions and (ii) support healthcare providers to 
share best practices.   
To this end, a survey is carried out to analyse and 
understand the current difficulties and issues of KSA 
faced by both, diabetic patients and healthcare providers 
at the healthcare centres.  The results of the survey are to 
be data mined to elicit useful trends and discover crucial 
issues and needs that need to be addressed through the 
knowledge management framework. The proposed 
framework is based on the SECI model aimed at 
converting and disseminating both types of knowledge: 
tacit through the data mining approach and explicit 
through the elicitation of problems via the survey and 
face-to-face interviews with both stakeholders: patients 
and healthcare professionals.  The framework is designed 
to provide a web-based assistance to patients in 
monitoring and providing tailored guidelines and support 
related to diet, medication usage and schedule, and 
recommend appropriate exercises.   Patients, through the 
internalisation model, are "learning by doing" and through 
externalisation healthcare providers are disseminating 
their best practices. Socialisation and combination modes 
aim at facilitating the exchange of knowledge, practices 
and concerns among diabetic patients and healthcare 
professionals through a dedicated web-based forum to 
help diabetic patients meet with others sufferers, discuss 
various issues and learn from each other.  
The framework that integrates data mining and 
knowledge management can become the vehicle for social 
media for diabetics and their health carers; it can also 
reduce isolation and depression, which are often faced by 
diabetic patients. The feasibility of social media and its 
contribution to knowledge management is identified by  
Ray [46]. Twitter, Facebook, Blogs and other means of 
communication, which have become extremely popular in 
among citizens in KSA, can be easily integrated into the 
proposed framework.   
X. 
CONCLUSION 
Knowledge management and knowledge discovery are 
two well-developed disciplines. However, to the best of 
our knowledge, there has been no methodical attempt at 
integrating them within the SECI model to address critical 
healthcare issues in KSA. The aim of this research project 
is to bridge this gap and consequently improve the 
healthcare services and provide a forum for both, 
healthcare professionals to deliver the best healthcare to 
their patient, and diabetic patients to overcome their 
problems and difficulties in managing their medical 
condition. The first stage of this research has focused on 
eliciting the barriers associated with the KSA diabetic 
patients and their healthcare providers. The development 
of the proposed integrated framework requires the need to 
understand any issues and challenges faced by IT 
specialists in KSA in developing the system across the 
healthcare centres. The specific domain of diabetes 
mellitus is used to validate the ambitious proposed e-health 
knowledge management framework. The paper has 
outlined the difficulties of applying Nonaka's SECI model 
to other countries as the model is based on Japanese 
organisations. It has suggested practical solutions for use 
in KSA for knowledge transfer within the segments of the 
SECI model. The proposed framework is designed to meet 
the recent government initiatives of the Saudi Ministry of 
Health in improving the national healthcare of its citizens. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by Aljouf University, Saudi 
Arabia and the Knowledge Management Research team at 
the School of Computing at Staffordshire University, UK. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Almuayqil, A. S. Atkins, and B. Sharp, “Knowledge 
Management Framework for E-Healthcare in Saudi Arabia,” 
in eTELEMED 2015, 2015, pp. 112–117. 
[2] G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?,” Journal of medical 
Internet research, vol. 3, no. 2, p. E20, 2001. 
[3] P. Ram, “New Strategic Initiatives–A Case Study of the Saudi 
Health Ministry,” International Journal of Academic Research 
in Economics and Management Sciences, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 236, 
2014. 
[4] M. Almalki, G. FitzGerald, and M. Clark, “Health care system 
in Saudi Arabia: an overview,” Eastern Mediterranean Health 
Journal, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 784–793, 2011. 
[5] M. Altuwaijri, “Electronic-health in Saudi Arabia. Just around 
the corner?,” Saudi medical journal, pp. 171–178, 2008. 
[6] M. Khalifa, “Barriers to Health Information Systems and 
Electronic Medical Records Implementation. A Field Study of 
Saudi Arabian Hospitals,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
21, pp. 335–342, Jan. 2013. 
[7] M. Aldraehim, S. L. Edwards, J. Watson, and T. Chan, 
“Cultural impact on e-service use in Saudi Arabia : Results 
from Questionnaire,” in Information Society (i-Society), 2012 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 230–236. 
[8] M. Altuwaijri, “Implementation of computerized physician 
order entry in National Guard Hospitals: assessment of critical 
success factors,” Journal of Family and Community Medicine, 
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 143–51, Sep. 2011. 
[9] M. Aldraehim and S. Edwards, “Cultural impact on e-service 
use in Saudi Arabia: the need for interaction with other 
humans,” International Journal of Advanced Computer 
Science, vol. 3, 2013. 
[10] H. Aljadhey, M. A. Mahmoud, M. A. Hassali, A. Alrasheedy, 
A. Alahmad, F. Saleem, A. Sheikh, M. Murray, and D. W. 
Bates, “Challenges to and the future of medication safety in 
Saudi Arabia: A qualitative study,” Saudi Pharmaceutical 
Journal, Sep. 2013. 
[11] M. Amatayakul, “Keys to successful EHR implementation,” 
Healthcare financial management, vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 104–
104, 2010. 
[12] I. Nonaka, “A Dynamic Teory of Organizational Knowledge 
Creation.pdf.” 1994. 
[13] J. Liebowitz, “Knowledge management and its link to artificial 
intelligence,” Expert systems with applications, vol. 20, pp. 1–
6, 2001. 

119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[14] Shu-hsien Liao, “Problem solving and knowledge inertia,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 21–31, 
Jan. 2002. 
[15] D. Nicolini, J. Powell, P. Conville, and L. Martinez-Solano, 
“Managing knowledge in the healthcare sector. A review,” 
International Journal of Management Reviews, vol. 10, no. 3, 
pp. 245–263, Sep. 2008. 
[16] S. Antrobus, “Developing the nurse as a knowledge worker in 
health--learning the artistry of practice,” Journal of advanced 
nursing, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 829–35, Apr. 1997. 
[17] C. Kenner and J. H. Fernandes, “Knowledge management and 
advanced nursing education,” Newborn and Infant Nursing 
Reviews, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 192–198, Sep. 2001. 
[18] H. M. G. Martins, D. E. Detmer, and E. Rubery, “Perspectives 
on management education: an exploratory study of UK and 
Portuguese medical students,” Medical Teacher, vol. 27, no. 6, 
pp. 493–498, Jan. 2005. 
[19] J. Lathlean and A. le May, “Communities of practice: an 
opportunity for interagency working,” Journal of clinical 
nursing, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 394–8, May 2002. 
[20] J. Gabbay and A. le May, “Evidence based guidelines or 
collectively constructed ‘mindlines?’ Ethnographic study of 
knowledge management in primary care,” BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.), vol. 329, no. 7473, p. 1013, Oct. 2004. 
[21] M. R. Tagliaventi, “The role of networks of practice, value 
sharing, and operational proximity in knowledge flows 
between professional groups,” Human Relations, vol. 59, no. 
3, pp. 291–319, Mar. 2006. 
[22] G. Ni, W. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Zong, and M. Xie, “Research on 
the Knowledge Management System of the Vicarious 
Management Corporation,” 2010 International Conference of 
Information Science and Management Engineering, pp. 62–
67, Aug. 2010. 
[23] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The knowledge-creating company: 
How Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation. 
Oxford university press, 1995, p. 62. 
[24] C. Bratianu, “A critical analysis of the Nonaka’s model of 
knowledge dynamics,” in Proceedings of the 2nd European 
Conference on Intellectual Capital, 2010, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 
193–200. 
[25] O. K. Harsh, “Three dimensional knowledge management and 
explicit 
knowledge 
reuse,” 
Journal 
of 
Knowledge 
Management 
Practice, 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tlainc.com/articl187.htm. 
[Accessed: 
22-Jun-
2014]. 
[26] W. Yao, J. Chen, J. Hu, and Y. Wu, “Diagnosis for Nonaka: 
The critique of SECI theory,” Management of Technology 
(ISMOT), 2012 International Symposium on, pp. 417–420, 
Nov. 2012. 
[27] Y. Feng, “Towards knowledge discovery in Semantic era,” 
2010 Seventh International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and 
Knowledge Discovery, no. Fskd, pp. 2071–2075, Aug. 2010. 
[28] D. Delen, G. Walker, and A. Kadam, “Predicting breast cancer 
survivability: a comparison of three data mining methods,” 
Artificial intelligence in medicine, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 113–27, 
Jun. 2005. 
[29] M. Grobelnik and D. Mladenic, “Automated knowledge 
discovery in advanced knowledge management,” Journal of 
Knowledge Management, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 132–149, 2005. 
[30] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “From data 
mining to knowledge discovery in databases,” AI magazine, 
pp. 37–54, 1996. 
[31] H. Koh and G. Tan, “Data mining applications in healthcare,” 
Journal of healthcare information management, vol. 19, no. 2, 
pp. 64–72, Jan. 2011. 
[32] M. R. Kraft, K. C. Desouza, and I. Androwich, “Data mining 
in healthcare information systems: case study of a veterans’ 
administration spinal cord injury population,” in Proceedings 
of the 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, 2003, 2003. 
[33] F. Huang, S. Wang, and C.-C. Chan, “Predicting disease by 
using data mining based on healthcare information system,” in 
2012 IEEE International Conference on Granular Computing, 
2012, pp. 191–194. 
[34] A. M. Berger and C. R. Berger, “Data mining as a tool for 
research and knowledge development in nursing,” Computers, 
informatics, nursing : CIN, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 123–31. 
[35] X. Li, Z. Zhu, and X. Pan, “Knowledge cultivating for 
intelligent decision making in small & middle businesses,” 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2479–2488, 
May 2010. 
[36] H. Hwang, I.-C. Chang, F. Chen, and S. Wu, “Investigation of 
the application of KMS for diseases classifications: A study in 
a Taiwanese hospital,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 
34, no. 1, pp. 725–733, Jan. 2008. 
[37] S. Tyagi, X. Cai, K. Yang, and T. Chambers, “Lean Tools and 
Methods 
to 
Support 
Efficient 
Knowledge 
Creation,” 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 35, no. 
2, pp. 204–214, 2015. 
[38] M. Glisby and N. Holden, “Contextual constraints in 
knowledge management theory: the cultural embeddedness of 
Nonaka’s knowledge-creating company,” Knowledge and 
Process Management, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 29–36, Jan. 2003. 
[39] A. I. Al-Alawi, N. Y. Al-Marzooqi, and Y. F. Mohammed, 
“Organizational culture and knowledge sharing: critical 
success factors,” Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 11, 
no. 2, pp. 22–42, 2007. 
[40] E. H. Schein, organizational culture and leadership, 3rd ed. 
2004. 
[41] G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, 
Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations Across Nations. 
SAGE, Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi, 2001. 
[42] T. Andreeva and I. Ikhilchik, “Applicability of the SECI 
Model of knowledge creation in Russian cultural context: 
Theoretical analysis,” Knowledge and Process Management, 
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 56–66, Feb. 2011. 
[43] D. Weir and K. Hutchings, “Cultural embeddedness and 
contextual constraints: knowledge sharing in Chinese and 
Arab cultures,” Knowledge and Process Management, vol. 12, 
no. 2, pp. 89–98, Apr. 2005. 
[44] H. Barakat, The Arab World: Society, Culture, and State. 
Berkeley: Univeristy of California Press, c1993 1993, 1993. 

120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[45] B. Bjerke and A. Al-Meer, “Culture’s consequences: 
management in Saudi Arabia,” Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 30–35, 1993. 
[46] D. Ray, “Overcoming cross-cultural barriers to knowledge 
management using social media,” Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 45–55, Feb. 
2014. 
[47] B. O. A. K.-S. INITIATIVE, “Sharing Knowledge: Problems, 
Root Causes, and Solutions,” Knowledge Management in 
Practice: Connections and Context, p. 277, 2008. 
[48] T. 
Sensky, 
“Knowledge 
management,” 
Advances 
in 
Psychiatric Treatment, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 387–395, Sep. 2002. 
[49] E. Ferlie and L. Fitzgerald, “The nonspread of innovations: the 
mediating role of professionals,” Academy of management 
journal, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 117–134, 2005. 
[50] P. Guven-Uslu, “Uses of Performance Metrics in Clinical and 
Managerial Networks,” Public Money and Management, vol. 
26, no. 2, pp. 95–100, Apr. 2006. 
[51] R. Finn and J. Waring, “Organizational Barriers to 
Architectural Knowledge and Teamwork in Operating 
Theatres,” Public Money and Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 
117–124, Apr. 2006. 
[52] D. P. Lorence and R. Churchill, “Incremental adoption of 
information security in health-care organizations: implications 
for 
document 
management,” 
IEEE 
transactions 
on 
information technology in biomedicine : a publication of the 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 9, no. 
2, pp. 169–73, Jun. 2005. 
[53] G. Currie and O. Suhomlinova, “The Impact of Institutional 
Forces Upon Knowledge Sharing in the UK NHS: The 
Triumph of Professional Power and the Inconsistency of 
Policy,” Public Administration, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 1–30, Mar. 
2006. 
[54] H. S. Jørgensen, H. Nakayama, H. O. Raaschou, and T. S. 
Olsen, “Effect of blood pressure and diabetes on stroke in 
progression,” Lancet, vol. 344, no. 8916, pp. 156–9, Jul. 1994. 
[55] J. a D. R. N. Appuhamy, E. Kebreab, and J. France, “A 
mathematical model for determining age-specific diabetes 
incidence and prevalence using body mass index,” Annals of 
epidemiology, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 248–54, May 2013. 
[56] S. A. Hunt, W. T. Abraham, M. H. Chin, A. M. Feldman, G. 
S. Francis, T. G. Ganiats, M. Jessup, M. A. Konstam, D. M. 
Mancini, K. Michl, J. A. Oates, P. S. Rahko, M. A. Silver, L. 
W. Stevenson, and C. W. Yancy, “2009 focused update 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Heart Failure in Adults: a 
report 
of 
the 
American 
College 
of 
Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines: develope,” Circulation, vol. 119, no. 14, 
pp. e391–479, Apr. 2009. 
[57] Penn Medicine, “Brain Insulin Resistance Contributes to 
Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease,” 2012. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uphs.upenn.edu/news/News_Releases/2012/03/ins
ulin/. [Accessed: 13-Mar-2014]. 
[58] S. L. Murphy, J. Xu, K. D. Kochanek, and V. Statistics, 
“National Vital Statistics Reports Deaths : Final Data for 
2010,” vol. 61, no. 4, 2013. 
[59] J. E. Shaw, R. a Sicree, and P. Z. Zimmet, “Global estimates 
of the prevalence of diabetes for 2010 and 2030,” Diabetes 
research and clinical practice, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 4–14, Jan. 
2010. 
[60] International 
Diabetes 
Federation, 
“Saudi 
Arabia 
| 
International Diabetes Federation,” 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.idf.org/membership/mena/saudi-arabia. [Accessed: 
19-Sep-2014]. 
[61] Ministry of Health, “Health Statistical Yearly Book 1432,” 
2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdsi.gov.sa/english/. 
[Accessed: 29-Jan-2014]. 
[62] A. K. Alhowaish, “Economic costs of diabetes in Saudi 
Arabia,” Journal of family & community medicine, vol. 20, no. 
1, pp. 1–7, Jan. 2013. 
[63] X.-H. Meng, Y.-X. Huang, D.-P. Rao, Q. Zhang, and Q. Liu, 
“Comparison of three data mining models for predicting 
diabetes or prediabetes by risk factors,” The Kaohsiung 
journal of medical sciences, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 93–9, Feb. 
2013. 
[64] C.-D. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and B. C. Jiang, “Using data 
mining techniques for multi-diseases prediction modeling of 
hypertension and hyperlipidemia by common risk factors,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 5507–
5513, May 2011. 
[65] M. Suh, J. Woodbridge, T. Moin, M. Lan, N. Alshurafa, L. 
Samy, B. Mortazavi, H. Ghasemzadeh, A. Bui, S. Ahmadi, 
and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Dynamic Task Optimization in Remote 
Diabetes 
Monitoring 
Systems,” 
2012 
IEEE 
Second 
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics, Imaging 
and Systems Biology, pp. 3–11, Sep. 2012. 
[66] A. Rocha, A. Martins, J. C. Freire Junior, M. N. Kamel 
Boulos, M. E. Vicente, R. Feld, P. van de Ven, J. Nelson, A. 
Bourke, G. ÓLaighin, C. Sdogati, A. Jobes, L. Narvaiza, and 
A. Rodríguez-Molinero, “Innovations in health care services: 
the CAALYX system,” International journal of medical 
informatics, vol. 82, no. 11, pp. e307–20, Nov. 2013. 
[67] D. S. Péres, M. A. dos Santos, M. L. Zanetti, and A. A. 
Ferronato, “Difficulties of diabetic patients in the illness 
control: feelings and behaviors,” Revista Latino-Americana de 
Enfermagem, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1105–1112, Dec. 2007. 
[68] L. Blonde, “Current challenges in diabetes management,” 
Clinical cornerstone, vol. 7, no. Cvd, 2005. 
[69] N. C. Onwudiwe, C. D. Mullins, R. A. Winston, F. T. Shaya, 
F. G. Pradel, A. Laird, and E. Saunders, “Barriers to self-
management of diabetes: a qualitative study among low-
income minority diabetics,” South African Journal of Diabetes 
and Vascular Disease, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 61–65, 2014. 
[70] M. M. Funnell, T. L. Brown, B. P. Childs, L. B. Haas, G. M. 
Hosey, B. Jensen, M. Maryniuk, M. Peyrot, J. D. Piette, D. 
Reader, L. M. Siminerio, K. Weinger, and M. A. Weiss, 
“National standards for diabetes self- management education,” 
Diabetes Care, vol. 32, no. SUPPL. 1. 2009. 
[71] M. M. Funnell and R. M. Anderson, “Empowerment and Self-
Management of Diabetes,” Clinical Diabetes, vol. 22, no. 3. 
pp. 123–127, 2004. 
[72] M. M. Funnell and R. M. Anderson, “The Problem With 
Compliance in Diabetes,” JAMA, vol. 284, no. 13, p. 1709, 
2000. 

121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[73] D. J. Toobert, S. E. Hampson, and R. E. Glasgow, “The 
summary of diabetes self-care activities measure: Results from 
7 studies and a revised scale,” Diabetes Care, vol. 23, no. 7, 
pp. 943–950, 2000. 
[74] T. Deakin, C. E. McShane, J. E. Cade, and R. D. R. R. 
Williams, “Group based training for self-management 
strategies in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus,” The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews, no. 2, p. CD003417, 
Jan. 2005. 
[75] M. Alotaibi, “An Intelligent Mobile Diabetes Management and 
Educational System for Saudi Arabia (SAED),” Kingston 
University, London, 2014. 
[76] M. J. Davies, S. Heller, T. C. Skinner, M. J. Campbell, M. E. 
Carey, S. Cradock, H. M. Dallosso, H. Daly, Y. Doherty, S. 
Eaton, C. Fox, L. Oliver, K. Rantell, G. Rayman, and K. 
Khunti, “Effectiveness of the diabetes education and self 
management for ongoing and newly diagnosed (DESMOND) 
programme for people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: 
cluster randomised controlled trial,” BMJ (Clinical research 
ed.), vol. 336, no. 7642, pp. 491–495, 2008. 
[77] “Programs & Support Services 
| Canadian Diabetes 
Association.” [Online]. Available: http://www.diabetes.ca/in-
your-community/programs-support-services. [Accessed: 29-
July-2015]. 
[78] S. Ziebland, M. Lavie-Ajayi, and G. Lucius-Hoene, “The role 
of the Internet for people with chronic pain: examples from the 
DIPEx International Project,” British Journal of Pain, vol. 9, 
no. 1, pp. 62–64, Nov. 2014. 
[79] S. Ziebland and S. Wyke, “Health and illness in a connected 
world: how might sharing experiences on the internet affect 
people’s health?,” Milbank Quarterly, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 219–
249, 2012. 
[80] A. Ramadas, K. F. Quek, C. K. Y. Chan, and B. Oldenburg, 
“Web-based interventions for the management of type 2 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of recent evidence,” 
International journal of medical informatics, vol. 80, no. 6, 
pp. 389–405, Jun. 2011. 
[81] H.-S. Kwon, J.-H. Cho, H.-S. Kim, B.-R. Song, S.-H. Ko, J.-
M. Lee, S.-R. Kim, S.-A. Chang, H.-S. Kim, and B.-Y. and 
others Cha, “Establishment of Blood Glucose Monitoring 
System Using the Internet,” Diabetes Care, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
478–483, 2004. 
[82] “CITC 
Annual 
Reports,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.citc.gov.sa/English/Reportsandstudies/Reports/Pag
es/CITC_Annual_Reports.aspx. [Accessed: 31-May-2015]. 
[83] K. M. AlGhamdi and N. a Moussa, “Internet use by the public 
to search for health-related information,” International journal 
of medical informatics, vol. 81, no. 6, pp. 363–73, Jun. 2012.  
 

