103
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Monitoring the use of impaired hand by a new low cost device during daily life 
activities with a real-time visual feedback 
Nour El Hoda Saleh1, Ali Hage-Diab2, Ghadir Salhab1, Bilal Debs2, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan2, Hassan Khachfe2, 
Ahmad Rifai Sarraj1, Soha Saleh1,2,3 
1. Department of Physical Therapy, School of Public Health, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon 
2. Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lebanese International University, Beirut, Lebanon 
3. Human Performance and Engineering Lab, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, NJ 
nour_40@hotmail.co.uk, ali.hagediab@liu.edu.lb, ghadirsalhab@hotmail.com, bilal.debs@hotmail.com, 
mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb, hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb, ahmadrifai@optl.org, saleh.soha@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— Hand movement tracking devices are important for 
monitoring impaired hand function during daily life activities. 
The study presented the design of a finger movement 
evaluation device to record hand movement in daily life 
activities. It also investigates the feasibility of using such a 
device 
for 
rehabilitative 
purposes. 
Finger 
Movement 
Evaluation Device (FMED) was developed for these purposes 
and was tested on six stroke subjects who used it at home for 
two days. Based on the results of the feasibility study and 
subjects’ request to use the device for a longer period of time, a 
home-based therapy pilot study on one stroke survivor was 
done. Results show a high patient acceptance of using FMED, 
with an ability to use acquired data to extract quantitative 
information about finger movement. However, the clinical 
training trial shows that the first version of the device is not 
practical for intensive use and its performance is not stable. 
These preliminary findings lead to designing a new version of 
the device using different hardware and setup.  
Keywords- data glove; finger movement impairment; stroke; 
home-based therapy 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This paper extends the paper [1] that was presented at the 
4th International Conference on Global Health Challenges.   
In the field of stroke rehabilitation, evaluating the use of 
impaired hand during daily life requires the use of motion-
tracking devices like the Finger Movement Evaluation 
Device [1]. Stroke is the major cause of neurological 
disability all over the world [2]. However, upper extremity 
(UE) motor impairment, specifically hand paresis, is the 
most disabling and persisting residual impairment after this 
event [3] and it is evident that it limits basic activities of 
daily living [4]. For this reason, the role of stroke 
rehabilitation is to promote independence in daily life 
activities [5]. Moreover, the use of outcome measures (OMs) 
in neurological physical therapy is essential to evaluate the 
improvement of function during rehabilitation [6]. Therefore, 
an essential issue in the assessment after stroke is to 
determine how much of the impairment of upper extremity is 
the source of loss of function, and if the selected 
rehabilitation intervention improves the daily activities of 
stroke survivors. 
Numerous standardized clinical measures are available 
for clinicians to evaluate UE function after stroke. However, 
these measures are rarely used in clinical practice because of 
time constraints, high level of difficulty, lack of equipment, 
and lack of knowledge regarding OMs [7]. Besides, most of 
these measures do not collect information about the use of 
UE in the Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) and do not 
provide 
clinicians 
with 
quantitative 
and 
objective 
information about patients' use of impaired limb during the 
day [8]; thus, they do not reflect how patients function in 
their daily life and real world [9]. The use of assessment 
tools at home and community is essential for evaluating UE 
function during daily activities in order to improve 
therapeutic intervention and avoid having patients stop using 
the impaired limb due to pain or absence of confidence and 
eventually lose the ability to use it due to the learned non-use 
phenomena [10].  
Wearable measurement devices and home monitoring 
devices provide clinicians with additional assessment 
opportunities such as collecting hand posture and movement 
data when individuals perform daily activities outside the 
clinic [11]. Despite their importance in measuring the 
fingers' range of motion during dynamic tasks [12], different 
limitations 
exist; 
they 
are 
expensive, 
heavy 
and 
uncomfortable to be worn in daily life outside the clinic [13, 
14] and do not provide long-term monitoring [13]. 
Preliminary research in the area of hand glove devices 
has focused primarily on testing protocols that evaluated the 
characteristics of glove devices [11-13, 15-18]. None of them 
has explored the use of these devices to monitor the impaired 
UE function during daily life. 
This article describes the design, development, and 
testing of a low-cost device for the assessment of finger 
movement during daily activities. Section II provides a 
review of evaluation measures of hand function after stroke. 
Section III describes the device design and implementation. 
Section IV describes the methodology of feasibility studies. 
Sections V elaborates on the results and discussion, followed 
by conclusions provided in Section VI. 
 

104
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
EVALUATION MEASURES OF  HAND  FUNCTION 
AFTER STROKE 
A. Clinical Measures 
Numerous clinical measures are disposable to clinicians 
to use in clinic for the evaluation of upper extremity 
functions after stroke, that either measures self-report or 
performance. Performance measures include different 
clinical tests, frequently the Action Research Arm Test 
(ARAT) [20], Box and Blocks Test (BB) [21], Chedokee 
Arm and Hand Activity Inventory (CAHAI), Jebsen-Taylor 
Hand Function Test (JTT), [22] Nine- Hole Peg Test [23], 
and the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT) [24]. The most 
cited self-report measures include the Stroke Impact Scale 
(SIS) and the Motor Activity Log (MAL) [25]. However, all 
of these clinical measures of motor function do not provide 
data about how the person functions in their daily life [19]. 
B. Quantitative Tools 
Probably the most commonly used evaluation procedure 
is the measurement of joint range of motion (ROM) [26] 
using mechanical or electronic goniometers [12]. The range 
of motion (ROM) is defined by the ability to move the 
joint(s), and can be evaluated as active and passive ROM 
[27]. 
The complex structure of the hand negatively affects the 
accuracy of any hand ROM measurement [12]. Moreover, 
goniometry is related to static ROM measurement, but the 
hands are used principally in complex and dynamic tasks. 
Hence, ROM measurements using goniometry cannot predict 
the effective ability of the hand to perform functional tasks 
[28]. 
C. Hand Movement Data Gloves 
In order to overcome the limitations of clinical measures 
and traditional goniometry and understand how individuals 
interact in the real world, there is a need for quantitative 
measures of finger joint motion over longer periods of time 
at home [15].  In principle, the use of glove devices 
establishes an objective procedure to measure hand function 
independent of examiner subjective interpretation [29]. 
Examples of data gloves in the market include the Cyber 
glove (Immersion Corporation, San Jose, CA), the Data- 
Glove Family (Fifth Dimension Technologies (5DT), Irvine, 
CA), the SIGMA Glove [16], the Human Glove [12], the 
shadow monitor [28, 30, and 15], the Wü glove [31], the 
Smart Glove [17], and the Neuro-Assess Glove [18]. 
Some of these systems are commercially available but 
are not feasible for use on individuals with severe hand and 
finger impairments and/or neurological disorders. This is due 
to the fact that these devices are too complex (some require 
specific software and extra accessories) and unaffordable to 
be owned by individuals for personal use [15]. 
D. Home-Based Therapy and Visual Feedback 
Home-based upper limb therapy can be more beneficial 
than conventional therapy used in rehabilitation centers. 
Theoretically, home-based rehabilitation permits a repeated 
practice of occupationally embedded tasks in the individual’s 
own environment [35]. This is perhaps more advantageous 
than hospital-based or outpatient treatment in accordance 
with the “specificity of learning” principle [36], which 
predicts that the learning of a new skill is improved when 
conditions of practice match those of the task in real life 
[35]. The FMED can be used in home-based upper extremity 
rehabilitation therapy as it is low-cost, lightweight, and easy 
to use. Furthermore, it is equipped with LEDs, which 
provide visual feedback, and can track the use of the 
subjects’ upper extremities during daily life and supervise 
the exercises of home-based therapy to ensure that patients 
are following the instructions of their clinicians at home. The 
FMED’s entity with visual feedback makes it suitable for 
home rehabilitation in that it engages and motivates patients 
during their exercises at home. Thus, an evaluation of the 
efficacy of the use of this device in the home-based stroke 
rehabilitation is essential. In addition, there are indications 
that integration of augmented feedback and exercises can 
stimulate the learning process in rehabilitation therapy by 
making patients more conscious of their performance [37]; 
hence, the use of FMED in therapy programs can add an 
important value to the rehabilitation efficacy.  
III. 
THE FMED : AN OVERVIEW 
A. Finger Movement Evaluation Device (FMED) 
Figure 1 represents the first prototype of the Finger 
Movement Evaluation Device worn by a volunteer. FMED 
was designed to act as an offline electronic goniometer that 
measures the angle of finger flexion of two joints 
simultaneously. The device includes two bending sensors 
(SpectraSymbol®, UT, USA) that can be placed on two 
fingers' MCP joints (for example, index and middle fingers) 
at a time using VelcroTM. Only two joints can be tracked with 
this prototype in order to reduce the cost of the device and 
allow the user to focus on two fingers at a time with the 
freedom of choosing which joints to track. Figure 2 
illustrates the main parts of the device. A voltage regulator 
circuit was implemented to downregulate the power from a 
12V (6500 mAh) rechargeable battery to 5V. A dc-dc 
converter was implemented before the voltage regulator to 
convert 12V to 7V in order to avoid too much heat 
dissipation in case the voltage regulator downregulates from 
12V to 5V. A charged battery (12V, 6500 mAh) was used to 
power the device for more than 48 hours.  
The microcontroller (ATmega2560) reads input from the 
bending 
sensors 
through 
a 
voltage 
divider 
signal 
conditioning circuit. This is a low-power complementary 
metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) 8-bit microcontroller 
that supports a real Read-While-Write Programming 
mechanism. The microcontroller processes the data and 
saves the values of each joint on an SD card in real time. The 
raw data is saved on the SD (Secured Digital) card in 
addition to the fractionation angle (difference in angle 
between the two joints). This device also gives patients a 
real-time feedback of their movement using a set of light-
emitting diodes (LEDs) indicating the level of finger flexion 
in increments of 10º (10º, 20º, 30º, 40º, 50º, 60º, 70º, 80º, 
90º) and fractionation in increments of 5º (5º, 10º, 15º, 20º, 

105
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
25º). The main electronics of the device were chosen to be 
surface-mounted in order to reduce the size and weight of the 
device.  
 
Figure 1.  
Prototype 1 of FMED. A. Glove worn by a volunteer. B. 
Device Hardware showing the set of LEDs for real-time visual feedback 
 
Figure 2.  
Main components of FMED 
B. Characterization of the Sensor 
Two procedures were used to characterize the linear 
relationship between sensor resistance and bending angle.  
Test 1: A healthy volunteer who bends his index finger 0 
degrees, 45 degrees, and 90 degrees wore the glove. Data 
was collected 4 times at each angle to check the 
repeatability of resistance at these fixed positions. The 
results show instability in the performance of the sensor on 
the mid-angle, which is around 450 (See Figure 3).   
Test 2: A customized hardware was developed to read the 
accuracy and repeatability of the bending sensors. The 
device specifically mimics the actions of a finger joint. A 
stepper motor, a protractor, and flex sensor holder were 
assembled to work as a hinge. Materials needed for this 
testing device (Flex Sensor Testing Device, FSTD) are 
stepper motor, stepper motor driver, sensor and motor 
holder, and a protractor. The stepper motor uses a 12V input 
and allows rotation with increments of 2 degrees. The 
stepper motor driver is a driver board that includes three 
main electronic chips: the NE555 precision timer, L297 
stepper motor controller, and L298 dual full-bridge driver.  
 
 
Figure 3.  
Top. Testing the sensor values at three angles, 0, 45, and 90 
degrees. Bottom. Results of one trial, the sensor's values are not stable at 45 
degrees. 
The device was used to test the relationship between 
collected data (based on sensor impedance) and bending 
angles from 0 to 90 degrees (by increments of 2 degrees).  
Five trials were collected for the two used sensors. The 
results with the best and worst linear relationship between 
recorded value and protractor angle are shown in Figure 4.  
C. Collected Data 
As mentioned in the last section, the device saves the 
values of the variation of angles for sensors 1 and 2 (for 
example, index and middle finger flexion angles) and the 
individuation (difference between angles recorded by sensor 
1 and sensor 2) versus time. A customized Matlab® 
algorithm was written to process this data. The first 
processing step was to calculate differences between 
adjacent elements of the dataset in order to detect movement  

106
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Upper  two panels show the customized device and the 
setup to record sensor value at a range of 0 to 90 degrees. Lower two 
panels show the results of two trials. 
episodes (change in flexion and individual angles). A 
threshold of 2º was used to count the episodes of movement 
(flexion angle exceeding a 2º predefined threshold). The ratio 
of counted samples over the whole dataset provided the 
Ratio of Movement (RaOM) values of each finger.  
The other parameter that was calculated is related to the 
mean of difference in the angle between the two fingers 
(individual finger movement). Episodes or consecutive 
samples where there was a difference in flexion between 
index and middle fingers were reported. These episodes were 
counted to derive the Integral of Individuated Movement 
(IIM) episodes value. This value indicates how much the 
subject was moving the index finger independent of the 
middle finger and vice versa.  IIM reflects how much the 
patient is capable of controlling one finger independent of 
the other during executing a functional task. The parameters 
(RaOM and IIM) calculated based on the recorded data were 
used as the main outcomes of FMED to effectively quantify 
the amount of movement during the day.  
 
IV. 
USING FMED  IN HOME-BASED THERAPY 
A. Feasibility Study 
1) Subjects 
Subjects with stroke were recruited from multiple 
rehabilitation centers in Beirut, Lebanon. Six individuals 
with a clinical diagnosis of stroke in the chronic phase (three 
males and three females, mean age 49.33±8.1 > 6 months 
post-stroke) participated in the study.  
Subjects were included because they had residual upper 
extremity impairments (Upper extremity Fugl-Meyer [FM] 
scores, with a range of (45-56)/66; and with mean flexion 
fingers ROM ± 1 standard deviation: 73.3 ±7.4 degrees). 
Table I presents the patient’s demographic and clinical 
characteristics. 
Inclusion criteria were chosen to give a nearly 
homogenous group of subjects between 40-60 years, with a 
similar representation of both sexes, and approximately same 
degree of hand function deficit. The participants signed 
informed consents approved by the Lebanese University, 
school of health ethical review board.  
2) Protocol of the Feasibility Study 
Subjects were trained for a few minutes on how to wear 
the device at home and turn it on or off. Subjects wore the 
glove at home for two days. In the first day, they were 
instructed to wear the glove in the impaired hand and use it 
like they usually do during daily activities and remove it 
before sleeping. In the second day, they received a call in the 
morning from the study personnel and were instructed to do 
specific activities using their impaired hand during the day in 
addition to their daily routine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

107
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. SUBJECTS’ DEMOGRAPHICS AND CLINICAL INFORMATION 
 
Subject 
Age 
Gender 
Months since CVA 
Fingers' Average ROM 
CVA side 
FM UL 
section (0-66) 
S1 
40 
M 
8 
70 
L 
49 
S2 
60 
F 
8 
60 
L 
50 
S3 
45 
F 
12 
80 
L 
56 
S4 
53 
M 
48 
70 
L 
50 
S5 
58 
F 
6 
80 
L 
45 
S6 
40 
M 
24 
80 
R 
52 
Average 
49.33 
  
 
73.3 
  
50.33 
SD 
8.12 
  
  
7.45 
  
3.61 
SD: standard deviation. CVA: cerebrovascular accident. ROM: Range of Motion. FM: Fugl Meyer.  
 
 
 
The list of activities is as follows: 
• 
Stacking cups and dishes on shelves, organizing 
the laundry, and other different household tasks 
with the impaired hand (especially if subject 
usually does such tasks normally) 
• 
Trying to write using the impaired hand 
• 
Using a remote control with the impaired hand 
when watching TV 
• 
Getting dressed with the use of the impaired 
hand like zipping and buttoning 
• 
Combing his/her hair using the impaired hand 
• 
Working on the PC using the impaired hand 
• 
Tying shoes using the  impaired hand 
• 
Using the impaired hand while using the phone 
• 
At night, removing the glove before sleeping.  
The research team did not supervise the patient at home; 
however, the device recorded the data from the subject’s 
movement on the SD card.  After collecting the FMED 
device from the subjects on the following day, they 
completed a user feedback questionnaire, and the data was 
saved on the SD card were collected for offline analysis. 
User acceptance of the device and patient feedback were 
evaluated based on a user feedback questionnaire [13] 
presented in Table III and an open-ended discussion, 
performed after using the device for two days. The 
participants were supposed to answer a list of 11 questions 
on a scale of 1 to 7; 1 meaning strongly disagree, 7 meaning 
strongly agree, and 4 meaning neutral. The study personnel 
was mainly interested in knowing whether the device was 
comfortable or not and if it was effective in engaging the 
subjects and motivating them to do more home daily 
activities. The recorded data was inspected for quality and 
movement quality parameters. The RaOM and IIM 
parameters were calculated in order to inspect if these 
parameters changed in the second day after the study 
personnel had asked the participants to do extra exercises. 
B. Two Weeks Home-Based Therapy 
The feasibility study shows the subjects’ interest to use 
FMED for an extended period of time. Hence, the device 
was used in a two-week therapeutic intervention for a stroke 
survivor suffering from hand movement impairment and 
limited range of motion. 
The training protocol is summarized in Table II. The 
participant was instructed to practice a set of exercises at 
home and use the device during exercise to receive real-time 
visual feedback of index and middle finger range of motion 
and individuation angle between the two joints. Wolf Motor 
Function Test (WMFT) [24] was used to evaluate functional 
movement before and after the training.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Feasibility Study 
This section presents the results of the user feedback 
questionnaire and the recorded data. Table III lists the 
questionnaire questions and mean responses to each 
question, the results of the t-test performed between the 
mean responses to each question, and a hypothesized mean 
of 4 [neutral score]. Results show a significant difference 
from the neutral score (p<0.001). In the open-ended 
discussion, subjects expressed high satisfaction and reported 
that the visual feedback by the LEDs was engaging and 
motivating in moving the impaired hand more than usual. 
They also expressed their willingness to use FMED at home  
 
TABLE II. LIST OF EXERCISES TO DO AT HOME 
 
Day 
Training Type 
Monday 
Finger movement flexion/ extension 
exercising 
Tuesday 
Drawing, connecting dots 
Thursday 
Mirror training 
Friday  
Weight lifting 
Saturday 
Functional exercises  (door 
unlocking brushing teeth, tying shoes, etc) 

108
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for a therapeutic intervention because of their desire to 
intensify their hand use during daily activities. 
Figure 3 shows the results of data collected from the 
device during the two days. The subjects were doing a 
minimal impaired hand finger flexion activity around 60% of 
the time while using the device (RaOM range 0.55 – 0.61 
over the two days). It should be noted that the activity 
initially reported on day 1 might not accurately reflect the 
regular activity of the participants without using the device; 
while wearing FMED, subjects might be moving more than 
they usually do, knowing that they are being watched. This is 
known as the Hawthorne effect [32]. However, the 
participants are stroke survivors and have movement 
impairments; thus, the Hawthorne effect will not increase the 
movement score beyond a subject's true functional 
capability, although it might increase the amount of his or 
her movement in comparison to regular days. This brings us 
back to another argument: it is helpful if these individuals 
with movement impairments feel they are being watched so 
that they move more according to their functional capability. 
In addition, by being watched and getting positive visual 
feedback of their movement (like the feedback by the LEDs 
in FMED), the subjects become more engaged in daily life 
functional activities, more than they averagely do. This is 
believed to be helpful in avoiding the learned non-use 
phenomena in stroke survivors in which the less the 
individuals use their impaired limbs, the harder it gets for 
them to recover their motor skills due to brain remodeling 
over time [9]. These results are promising due to their effect 
in validating the use of the FMED and other similar devices 
in patients with an impaired hand. This study demonstrates 
that the FMED can be a useful tool to track and monitor the 
use of paretic hand during daily activities in home 
environment. It was demonstrated that it is feasible as well as 
accepted by patients with stroke. Additionally, it was shown 
that this device could be used to motivate patients to improve 
their hand movements in daily life and more importantly, do 
exercises at home (home-based therapy). 
 
 
Figure 5.  
A. Average value of range of motion angle for each joint 
during the two days, B. Integral of Individuated Movement for the two 
days of testing the device  
B. Two Weeks Home Based Therapy Study 
This section discusses the results of a two-week clinical 
intervention on one stroke subject. The subject was given a 
set of exercises to do at home based therapy on pre-assigned 
schedule and she was asked to use FMED while performing 
the exercises.  
TABLE III. USER FEEDBACK QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS 
Question 
Average 
SD 
t-value 
p-value 
I felt comfortable as the glove was put on 
6.33 
0.82 
7.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
	  
<	  0.001	  
I did not feel like my fingers were put into any uncomfortable position as the glove was put on 
6.33 
1.21 
4.7 
I felt any restriction to movement with this glove is similar to other gloves I have worn 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
I would feel comfortable wearing this glove in public 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
I felt comfortable performing the activities in this study 
6.50 
0.84 
7.3 
I feel I can do most of my daily activities (except those involving water) while wearing this glove 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
The glove did not feel too tight (it did not make my hands or fingers tingle) 
6.83 
0.41 
17.0 
I feel like I can bend my fingers just like I can without wearing the glove 
6.83 
0.41 
17.0 
The glove did not feel too hot or too cold 
6.50 
1.22 
5.0 
I did not feel like my fingers were put into any uncomfortable position as the glove was removed 
6.33 
1.03 
5.5 
I felt comfortable as the glove was removed 
6.33 
0.82 
7.0 
Average 
6.55 
0.20 
 

109
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) Clinical Assessment  
The WMFT clinical score for the set of 17 timed 
exercises was 174 seconds before the two-week training and 
106 seconds after training, showing a 61% improvement in 
clinical score.  
2) Movement Kinematics Assessment 
The data shown in Figure 4 was collected in 1 week of 
using the device during the home-based therapy. The 
collected data corresponds to 12326 seconds of device use, 
which is equivalent to around 205 minutes (3.4 hours). This 
concludes that the subject complied with therapist’s 
instructions to do 30 minutes of exercising, 5 days a week. 
RaOM values were 0.89 and 0.87 for index and middle 
fingers respectively, implying that the subject was exercising 
while using the device. Values 0.89 and 0.87 imply that 
during exercising, the subject was performing a minimal 
impaired hand index finger and middle finger flexion during 
89% and 87% of the exercising time, respectively.  
Visual observation of the data also shows that the subject 
was active during the recording time. The average flexion 
angle of the recorded data was 61.5 degrees for the index 
finger and 60.5 degrees for the middle finger. However, in 
the first half of the dataset, the sensors’ values ranged from 
50 to 100 degrees while in the second half, the sensor’s 
values were between 0 and 50. This indicates that the linear 
relationship between bending angle and recorded voltage 
changed during the experiment, either due to a change in the 
setup or location of the sensor on the finger joint, or damage 
to the sensor’s material due to excessive use for hundreds of 
repetitions. In this design of the device, a routine calibration 
was not required, which was a major limitation that leads to 
corruption in the data collection during the experiment.  
 
At the end of 2nd week of training, the subject reported 
that the LEDs were not always flashing. Inspection of the 
data shows improper functioning of the device during 
training. Similar to week 1 data, the sensors’ values were 
abnormally high due to an error in calibration. However, the 
device did not record all episodes of movement. The total 
recorded time was less than 30 minutes so the conclusion 
was that this set of data was corrupted and was discarded 
from further analysis. Another conclusion was that the flex 
sensor is not useful for this application; monitoring the use of 
an impaired hand in a home-based therapy protocol, due to 
the uncertainty in the performance of the sensor after an 
excessive number of repetitions. This conclusion led to 
recommendations for the creation of a new design of FMED 
and the termination of the clinical study to avoid wasting 
time and resources.  
Based on the results of the feasibility and clinical study, a 
new vision for the device was deduced. Accordingly, a new 
prototype of the device was designed using customized 
stretch sensors, 5 of which were used to track the 5 MCP 
joints of the hand in addition to a 6th sensor used to track 
thumb abduction/adduction movement. The sensors were 
designed by Dr. Ali Hage-Diab at LIU using graphite 
powder as conductive material soaked in alcohol and 
laminated with oil. 
 
 
!
!
 
Figure 6.  
. A. Data recorded by FMED during the first week of 
training. B. Segment of data shown in A. scaled out to show details of 
finger flexion. 
The sensor was named GO (Graphite Oil) sensor. 
Detailed description of its design is published in [33]. Sensor 
performance was tested and results show a linear relationship 
with bending angle (see Figure 7A). Testing also shows 
sharp step response of the sensor with bending (see Figure 
5B) and repeatability that is better than the flex sensor used 
in the first prototype (see Figure 8). In this version of FMED, 
Atmega2560 microcontroller was replaced with Atmega328. 
In addition, the real-time visual feedback circuitry was 
replaced with an LED bar that displays the average of whole-
hand finger flexion angle during movement. A calibration 
procedure was designed so that every time a user would wear 
the device, he or she had to keep the hand in a flat position 
for 5 seconds and then switch it to a fist position for another 
5 seconds. FMED saves the numbers (for each finger) that 
are acquired during flat position as minimum input values 
corresponding to 0 degrees bending angle. Similarly, the 
values recorded during the fist position are assigned to 90 
degrees bending angle. Input data between the minimum 

110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(during flat) and maximum (during fist) values are mapped 
to a range of angles between 0 and 90 degrees. 
 
Figure 7.  
Repeatability test of the sensors. A. Results of the GO 
sensor. B. Results of the Flex sensor used in the 1st prototype of FMED 
 
 
Figure 8.  
A. Results of Linearity test of the GO sensor. B. Results of 
the step response test of the GO sensor where the sensor is flexed from 0 to 
60 degrees. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
FMED allows clinicians to evaluate the improvement of 
hand function in the context of home environments. It can be 
a useful tool to complement the role of standardized outcome 
measures by assessing hand use in real life so that clinicians 
are not limited to the clinical setting. The high rate of 
acceptance of FMED by the participants in this study and 
high enthusiasm of patients to continue using it for therapy 
due to the presence of visual feedback, suggested the need to 
test the usability of FMED in a home-based rehabilitation 
therapy intervention so that it can be produced with a very 
low cost (~$100). 
Home-based therapy study on one stroke survivor 
showed high competency; however, it revealed issues in the 
initial design of FMED, specifically weakness in the 
performance of the flex sensors. An important modification 
on FMED, as stated previously in this study, involves 
replacing the flex sensors with the stretch (GO) sensor and 
increasing the number of sensors to 6 to measure all five 
finger flexion angles and thumb abduction/adduction 
movement. The new prototype of the FMED is under 
development and testing.  
Low cost, user-friendly, and low weight are the main 
advantages of FMED in comparison to other hand motion 
tracking gloves that are available in the market. The presence 
of visual feedback setup also allows FMED to be useful as a 
therapeutic tool and not just as a movement recording device. 
In the future, the second version of the device will be used in 
a clinical study to evaluate FMED as both an assistive tool 
during home-based therapy of impaired hand function and as 
a research tool that captures significant data of stroke 
survivors’ use of their impaired hands during daily life 
activities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors would like to thank Ali Ibrahim and Ashraf 
Fouani for their help in testing the GO sensors. Authors 
would also like to thank Houssam Yassine for his help in 
recruiting the subjects for the first feasibility study.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. H. Saleh, B. Debs, E. Mousallem, A. Hage-Diab, M. Hajj-Hassan, 
H. Khachfe, H. Yassine, A. Rifaii Sarraj, S. Saleh, “A Finger 
Movement Evaluation Device to Monitor the Use of Paretic Hand 
During Daily Life Activities,” The Fourth International Conference 
on Global Health Challenges, Nice, France, pp. 45-50,  2015.4th  
[2] 
G. R. Williams, "Incidence and characteristics of total stroke in the 
United States," BMC Neurol, vol. 1, p. 2, Dec 18 2001. 
[3] 
A. Turolla, M.  Dam, L. Ventura, P. Tonin, M. Agostini, C. Zucconi, 
et al., "Virtual reality for the rehabilitation of the upper limb motor 
function after stroke: a prospective controlled trial," J Neuroeng 
Rehabil, vol. 10, p. 85, 2013. 
[4] 
R. Goulding, D. Thompson, and C. Beech, "Caring for patients with 
hemiplegia in an arm following a stroke," Br J Nurs, vol. 13, pp. 534-
539, May 13-26 2004. 
[5] 
J. C. Chen and F. Z. Shaw, "Progress in sensorimotor rehabilitative 
physical therapy programs for stroke patients," World J Clin Cases, 
vol. 2, pp. 316-326, Aug 16 2014. 

111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[6] 
K. Potter, G. D. Fulk, Y. Salem, and J. Sullivan, "Outcome measures 
in neurological physical therapy practice: part I. Making sound 
decisions," J Neurol Phys Ther, vol. 35, pp. 57-64, Jun 2011. 
[7] 
D. U. Jette, J. Halbert, C. Iverson, E. Miceli, and P. Shah, "Use of 
standardized outcome measures in physical therapist practice: 
perceptions and applications," Phys Ther, vol. 89, pp. 125-135, Feb 
2009. 
[8] 
D. Rand, J. J. Eng, P. F. Tang, J. S. Jeng, and C. Hung, "How active 
are people with stroke?: use of accelerometers to assess physical 
activity," Stroke, vol. 40, pp. 163-168, Jan 2009. 
[9] 
R. G. Navarathnam, I. Y. Wang, D. Thomas, and P. L. Klineberg, 
"Evaluation of the transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator for 
postoperative analgesia following cardiac surgery," Anaesth Intensive 
Care, vol. 12, pp. 345-350, Nov 1984. 
[10] R. P. Allred, S. Y. Kim, and T. A. Jones, "Use it and/or lose it-
experience effects on brain remodeling across time after stroke," 
Front Hum Neurosci, vol. 8, p. 379, 2014. 
[11] L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, E. P. Elovic, X. Luo, Y. Jia, and D. G. 
Kamper, "Measuring finger flexion and activity trends over a 25 hour 
period using a low cost wireless device," Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med 
Biol Soc, vol. 1, pp. 6281-6284, 2006. 
[12] L. Dipietro, A. M. Sabatini, and P. Dario, "Evaluation of an 
instrumented glove for hand-movement acquisition," J Rehabil Res 
Dev, vol. 40, pp. 179-189, Mar-Apr 2003. 
[13] L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, X. Luo, Y. Jia, and D. G. Kamper, "A 
low cost instrumented glove for extended monitoring and functional 
hand assessment," J Neurosci Methods, vol. 160, pp. 335-348, Mar 15 
2007. 
[14] S. Wise, W. Gardner, E. Sabelman, E. Valainis, Y. Wong, K. Glass, 
et al., "Evaluation of a fiber optic glove for semi-automated 
goniometric measurements," J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 27, pp. 411-424, 
Fall 1990. 
[15] L. K. Simone and D. G. Kamper, "Design considerations for a 
wearable monitor to measure finger posture," J Neuroeng Rehabil, 
vol. 2, p. 5, Mar 1 2005. 
[16] N. W. Williams, J. M. Penrose, C. M. Caddy, E. Barnes, D. R. Hose, 
and P. Harley, "A goniometric glove for clinical hand assessment. 
Construction, calibration and validation," J Hand Surg Br, vol. 25, pp. 
200-207, Apr 2000. 
[17] K. Li, I. M. Chen, S. H. Yeo, and C. K. Lim, "Development of finger-
motion capturing device based on optical linear encoder," J Rehabil 
Res Dev, vol. 48, pp. 69-82, 2011. 
[18] N. P. Oess, J. Wanek, and A. Curt, "Design and evaluation of a low-
cost instrumented glove for hand function assessment," J Neuroeng 
Rehabil, vol. 9 : 2, 2012. 
[19] C.E Lang, M.D Bland, R.R Bailey, S.Y Schaefer, R. L Birkenmeier, 
"Assessment of upper extremity impairment, function, and activity 
following stroke: Foundations for clinical decision making," J Hand 
Therapy, vol. 26, no 2, pp. 104-114,  2013.  
[20] M. McDonnell, "Action research arm test," Aust J Physiother, vol. 54, 
no 3 : 220, 2008.   
[21] M.J Mulcahey MJ, S. Kozin, L. Merenda, J. Gaughan, F. Tian, G. 
Gogola, "Evaluation of the box and blocks test, stereognosis and item 
banks of activity and upper extremity function in youths with brachial 
plexus birth palsy," J Pediatr Orthop. vol. 32, suppl 2, pp. S114-122, 
2012. 
[22] S.R Barreca, P.W. Stratford, C.L Lambert, L.M. Masters, D. L. 
Streiner, "Test-retest reliability, validity, and sensitivity of the 
Chedoke arm and hand activity inventory: a new measure of upper-
limb function for survivors of stroke," Arch Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 
86, pp. 1616-1622,  2005. 
[23] G. K. Oxford, K. A. Vogel, V. Le, A. Mitchell, S. Muniz, M. A. 
Vollmer, "Adult norms for a commercially available Nine Hole Peg 
Test for finger dexterity," Am J Occup Ther, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 570-
573, 2003.  
[24] D. M. Morris, G. Uswatte, J. E. Crago, E. W. Cook, E. Taub, "The 
reliability of the wolf motor function test for assessing upper 
extremity function after stroke," Arch Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 86, no. 
6, pp. 750-755,  2001. 
[25] G. Uswatte, E. Taub, D. Morris, K. Light, P. A. Thompson, "The 
Motor Activity Log-28: assessing daily use of the hemiparetic arm 
after stroke," Neurology, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 1189-1194,  2006. 
[26] R. L. Gajdosik, R. W. Bohannon, "Clinical measurement of range of 
motion. Review of goniometry emphasizing reliability and validity," 
Phys Ther, vol.67, no. 12, pp. 1867-1872, 1987. 
[27] R. M. de Carvalho, N. Mazzer, C. H. Barbieri, "Analysis of the 
reliability and reproducibility of goniometry compared to hand 
photogrammetry," Acta Ortop Bras, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 139-149, 2012. 
[28] L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan , X. Luo, Y. Jia ,G. Kamper, "A low 
cost instrumented glove for extended monitoring and functional hand 
assessment," J Neurosci Methods, vol.160. pp. 335-348, 2007.  
[29] S. Wise, W. Gardner, E. Sabelman, E. Valainis, Y. Wong, K. Glass, 
"Evaluation of a fiber optic glove for semi-automated goniometric 
measurements," J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 411-424, 1990.  
[30] L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, P. Elovic, X. Luo , Y. Jia , G. Kamper, 
"Measuring Finger Flexion and Activity Trends over a 25 Hour 
Period using a Low Cost Wireless Device," Conf Proc 28th IEEE Eng 
Med Biol Soc. New York, NY, 2006. 
[31] R. Gentner, J. Classen, "Development and evaluation of a low-cost 
sensor glove for assessment of human finger movements in 
neurophysiological settings," J Neurosci Methods, vol. 178, no. 1, pp. 
138-147, 2009 
[32] F. Sciurba, S. I. Rennard, "Rationale for a redundant formulary. The 
hawthorne effect and the art of medicine," Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med, vol. 191, pp. 1224-5, Jun 1 2015. 
[33] O. Osman, I. H. Ahmad, A. Hage-Diab, “Thoracic Kyphosis Alert 
System,” Conf Proc Adv in Biomedical Engineering, Beirut, 
Lebanon, 2015. 
[34] AJ. Turton,  P. Cunningham, E. Heron, F. Van Wijck, C. Sackley, C. 
Rogers, et al. “Home-based reach-to-grasp training for people after 
stroke: study protocol for a feasibility randomized controlled trial,” 
Trials. 2013 April; 14(109). 
[35] L. Proteau, R. G. Marteniuk, L. A. Lévesque, “Sensorimotor basis for 
motor learning: evidence indicating specificity of practice”. Q J Exp 
Psychol A. 1992 April; 44(3)(557-75). 
[36] A. Henderson, N. Korner-Bitensky, M. Levin, “Virtual reality in 
stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review of its effectiveness for 
upper limb motor recovery," Stroke Rehabil. 2007 March-April; 
14(2)(52-61).  
[37] M. K. Holden, “Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation: 
review,” Cyberpsychol Behav. 2005 June; 8(3)(187-211). 
 
 
 
 
 

