Remote Laboratory Access and Network simulation Tools for Students with Vision
Impairment
Iain Murray
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Curtin University of Technology
Perth Australia
i.murray@curtin.edu.au
Helen Armstrong
School of Information Systems
Curtin University of Technology
Perth Australia
h.armstrong@curtin.edu.au
Abstract—The
delivery
of
laboratory
exercises
to
students that are unable to attend in person due to physical
disabilities is a significant issue. Both Netlab and Packet
Tracer are inaccessible to many students who use assistive
technology, particularly those with vision impairment. This
paper presents the development of an accessible, cost
effective, remote laboratory and describes the modification
to laboratory sessions necessary for the blind to undertake
Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) laboratory
sessions remotely and with full accessibility. Also discussed
is the development of an accessible network simulator,
iNetSim, illustrating possible methodologies that may be
applied to make existing simulation packages accessible to
those with severe vision impairment.[1]
Keywords-component;
Networking
laboratories,
vision
impaired, accessible eLearning
I.
INTRODUCTION
The image of a vision impaired person holding a job on
an IT Help Desk or in computer network administration
seems a bit far-fetched: computers are vision driven and the
vision impaired person would have difficulty seeing the
user’s screen to diagnose and fix any problem. Quite to the
contrary, vision impaired people are ideal for this job role.
Whilst computers have cables, plugs and plenty of ports,
once they are installed computer networks need little
physical attention. The attention they do require is of a
logical nature, establishing and maintaining connections and
access to the data required by the users. Users on business
networks constantly need assistance from computer network
professionals and this usually takes place via the IT Help
Desk. Vision impaired people may have mobility problems
and require extensive orientation and mobility training for
each locale that they are required to work in. However
technical support jobs require logical knowledge and skills,
not physical mobility, making IT Help Desk positions ideal
for vision impaired people .Research undertaken by Curtin
University in conjunction with the Association for the Blind
in Western Australia has shown that accessible e-learning
environments can be developed to aid vision impaired adults
achieve industry standard qualifications in IT networking.
As computers become more ensconced in our private and
business lives the need for useful IT knowledge rises.
Industry standard training provides skills and knowledge for
the vision impaired to maintain any computer network –
their networks at the office as well as their home networks.
This
paper
describes
an
accessible
e-learning
environment
designed
to
deliver
advanced
IT
skills
remotely, to legally blind students. The aim was to convert
industry standard training written for the sighted into
accessible formats for the vision impaired and deliver the
learning materials in ways more suited to adult students
with vision disabilities. The components of the learning
environment, with particular emphasis on remote laboratory
access, network topology graphics and simulators, are
discussed together with the successes and problems faced in
the hope that others may learn from our experience.
II.
SCOPING THE PROBLEM
Vision impaired (VI) adults continue to face problems in
gaining employment. In the US the 2006 Disability Status
Report
(www.disabilitystatistics.org)
reported
an
employment rate of only 47.5% for people with any sensory
disability [2]. The 2002 Household Economic Studies
reported a 55.3% employment rate for persons with
communications disabilities, including vision impairment
[3]. A further study on vision impaired youth employment
levels reported a 28% employment rate for out-of-school
youth [4,5] reports 25% of vision impaired in the UK are in
employment and “younger people tend to be better qualified
and there is a high correlation between qualification level
and employment”. Unemployment rate for vision impaired
people in European countries in 2000 remained around 75%
[6].
In each of these studies the employment figures for those
with a vision disability were consistently lower than those
77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

for sighted individuals. Major contributors to this situation
are suggested to be inability to access further education and
the digital divide created by the emergence of computers
[7,8]. This raises the question ‘Can vision impaired adult
learners gain equivalent grades to sighted learners if
specialist education was accessible’? If so, such training
would increase their employability, giving opportunities for
financial independence and a more ‘normal’ lifestyle.
A study of factors relating to employment of vision
impaired in Turkey reports that education, gender, age,
marital status and Braille literacy were significant factors
that predict the probability that a vision impaired individual
would be employed [9]. The low rate of unemployment in
the vision impaired population has been the focus of much
research and the main barriers to employment are reported
to be the lack of employment skills, transportation, housing
and
access
to
information
[10,11,12,13].
Although
education and training is not the sole answer to the problem,
post-secondary education and training has also been found
to be a significant factor for obtaining employment in
numerous other studies across the globe [14,15].
Capella-McDonnall’s [16] study of factors relating to the
VI gaining competitive employment reports four significant
factors; vocational education as a rehabilitation service
resulting in an educational certificate or degree, having
worked since the onset of the impairment, reason for
applying for vocational rehabilitation related to obtaining a
job and a high quality relationship between the counselor
and the VI client. Capella-McDonnall [16], p312) states “the
effect of completing an educational program is powerful
because the odds of attaining competitive employment were
more than nine times greater for those who obtained an
educational certificate or degree compared to those who did
not receive education as a service at all.”
Access to higher education and training in specialized
skills in preparation for employment is also restricted to
those who suffer from vision disabilities. The situation
faced by vision impaired students attempting to gain
contemporary advanced IT training and education was
investigated by the authors. Although attempts have been
made to increase accessibility of their training materials the
major providers such as Cisco, Microsoft, Oracle, etc. still
fall short in providing a fully accessible on-line environment
for the vision impaired. Our analyses resulted in the
following list of problems:

Lack of student mobility to attend classrooms and
navigate around a large university campus.

Location in remote areas where education and training
services are not available

Inability
to
see
the
whiteboard
in
classrooms,
necessitating the lecturer to explain in narrative form
the concepts being illustrated

Sighted lecturers unaware of the needs of vision
impaired students

The inaccessibility of graphic and visual teaching and
learning
materials
and
limited
access
to
textual
materials

Inability to access laboratory exercises and inability to
carry out tasks without the assistance of a sighted
person

Inability to access written examination questions and
answer in the traditional manner

Inability to access interactive media, drag and drop, and
similar electronic teaching tools

Inability to access simulation software and common
operating system such as Linux.
This posed a challenge, as several vision impaired
students at Curtin University of Technology were studying
Cisco technologies in their undergraduate degrees, and these
problems were major hurdles to their completion of their
courses
of
study.
This
project
examined
accessible
alternatives to address each of these difficulties.
III.
REMOTE LABORATORIES IN EDUCATION
The past decade has shown an increase in the uptake of
remote laboratories for the delivery of practical exercises
and
distance
learning
in
electrical
engineering
and
computer-based education. The discussion as to the viability
and effectiveness of real laboratories, virtual laboratories
and remote laboratories is active with no resolution reached
thus far. Gustavsson [17] claims there is nothing that will
replace
synchronous
learning
through
face-to-face
interaction.
This
is
a
brave
claim
as
it
assumes
a
homogenous student group.
Enthusiasts of hands-on
learning propose that working with real equipment results in
much more information and many more cues [18], however
the difference between preference and effectiveness needs to
be considered. The study by Corter and colleagues [18]
comparing remote and hands-on laboratories reported more
than 90% of the student respondents rated the remote labs to
be comparable or better than the hands-on labs. Ma and
Nickerson [19] argue that although automated (simulated
and remote) laboratories allow professors to teach large
student numbers, automation may remove the serendipity
associated
with
traditional
laboratory
learning.
The
flexibility of remote laboratories enables students to utilise
the laboratory in different locations and at numerous points
in times [20], as well as those with special needs [21]. A
comparison of remote, real and virtual laboratories by
Nedic, Machotka and Nafalski [22] found that remote labs
also offer students a tele-presence in the laboratory, the
performance
of
experiments
on
real
equipment,
collaboration,
learning
by
trial
and
error
plus
the
opportunity to perform analysis on real experimental data.
The main characteristic of remote laboratories when
78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

compared
to
hands-on
(also
referred
to
as
‘real’),
simulations and virtual laboratories, is that students obtain
the
data
and
learning
experience
by
controlling
environments separated by geographical distance. The
majority of these environments are offered via the Internet
for easy access by students. The perception of reality by the
student is at the core [23,24] and the aim is to immerse the
students into the learning experience so that no difference
from
physical
presence
is
perceived.
Colwell
and
Colleagues [21] argue that practical work is imperative for
learners of science to develop both their conceptual and
procedural understanding.
Vision impaired students use screen reading software to
convert the text displayed on the screen into audio output, or
screen
magnification
software.
This
use
of
assistive
technologies necessitates a different design of educational
materials for the vision impaired, and especially laboratory
exercises to concrete the learning by experience.
However, the design and development of laboratory
exercises in distance learning for vision impaired students
using assistive technologies requires a careful consideration
of
accessibility
issues.
Accessible
materials
and
environments require careful planning and deployment of
navigation
mechanisms,
structure,
content
design
and
communication methods, and the approach needs to be
highly learner- centered [25]. A key factor in the design of
learning environments is that the environment should not be
the cause of any unnecessary frustration to the student, and
should include the facilities to permit easier interpretation of
the material, and also support direct interaction enabling
students to spend their full cognitive resources on the task
rather than the interface [26].
The use of remote laboratories has contributed to the
offering of advanced transgeographic education being an
affective means of eradicating ethnocentrism, xenophobia
and cultural divides [27]. The divides caused by disabilities
could also be added to that list, provided the remote learning
environments incorporate essential accessibility features.
With the majority of on-line learning materials in the
science and technologies incorporating a vast amount of
vision driven features, barriers to learning are erected for
vision impaired students. These are characterized by a
predominance of graphics, images and animation in the
presentation of learning materials. The presentation of e-
learning
materials
ranges
from
highly
textual
with
accompanying images through to computerized exercises
and games incorporating a high concentration of visual
features to assist comprehension. All these components
provide accessibility problems for vision impaired students.
A diagram or picture clearly illustrates the concepts being
introduced to sighted students, however, rarely are there
detailed explanations of the diagram or picture in the
supporting text. Blind students cannot see these diagrams
and students with acute vision disabilities also have great
difficulty
comprehending
what
is
being
taught.
The
inaccessibility of learning materials is highly evident in not
only higher education environments, but also in on-line
industry standard training courses.
IV.
CISCO ACADEMY FOR THE VISION IMPAIRED (CAVI)
Curtin University of Technology commenced offering
the Cisco Network Academy Program to mainstream
(sighted) students as part of the Bachelor of Technology
(Computer Systems & Networking) degree program in
2002. Shortly after, four vision impaired students expressed
an interest in entering the Bachelor of Technology program.
These students faced significant problems with accessibility
to the Cisco course on-line materials as much of these
materials
were
not
accessible
to
non-sighted
users.
Extending the Cisco courses to vision impaired students
posed numerous teaching and learning challenges.
The Cisco Academy for the Vision Impaired (CAVI) has
been delivering the Cisco Academy Programs to blind and
vision impaired students since 2003, with up to 9 students
per year from the local area. In 2007 the program was
expanded to include students located in other parts of
Australia and the U.S.A, with 25 vision impaired students
enrolled in that year. In 2008 the enrolments of legally blind
students exceeded 120, from countries including India, Sri
Lanka, Canada, Egypt, Australia and the U.S.A. During the
intervening period, a number of vision impaired students
entered the Bachelor of Technology (Computer Systems &
Networking) course at Curtin University with the total
number of vision impaired students (in the CAVI program)
increasing to 146 in the year 2008. In order to achieve the
practical components of the CCNA courses, remote access
to router and switch bundles was required. A description of
the remote laboratory established for these students together
with teaching tools developed and an accessible network
simulation application follows.
A.
The Mechanics of Delivering the Curricula
The Cisco curriculum is “media rich”, with much of the
content delivered as Flash and interactive web pages. This
style of delivery is often unsuitable for vision impaired
persons.
The arrangement of frames is inaccessible to
screen review applications (speech output), but more
importantly the curriculum relies heavily on visual keys to
illustrate
learning
objectives.
Several
problems,
not
apparent to most sighted users, are also inherent in the
curriculum design. The first problem is that the diagrams
are extremely difficult to access or even explain to a person
who has been blind since birth. The second problem is that
the arrangement of frames and the lack of correct ALT
labels (text equivalent buttons) add to the complexity of the
presented material.
The vision impaired students also
advise they have no way of accessing the content of
79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

interactive sessions and find the supporting text confusing
and misleading. To overcome these issues many supporting
applications and documents were created but are beyond the
scope of this document.
The CAVI program utilizes blind instructors to deliver
the Cisco course materials with the support of a sighted
teaching
assistant.
Blind
instructors
have
first
hand
experience of the difficulties encountered by the vision
impaired students and understand the most effective ways of
presenting
the
materials.
The
classroom
environment
consists of a laboratory containing a network of PCs fitted
with assistive technologies, routers and associated network
equipment. Classes run two full days per week over the
academic year. Local students physically attend classes and
remote students log in (via the Internet) to a virtual
classroom to listen to the lectures and participate in the
tutorial exercises. The virtual classroom provides the
facilities for students to talk to one another as well as
communicate with the instructors, similar to a normal
classroom environment. The lectures are recorded and made
available as audio files on the project website along with
other teaching materials for access by the students at any
time.
It may be argued that the most difficult issue in
delivering e-learning to blind students is that of explaining
the meaning of graphical information. To overcome this
issue, textual descriptions were created for all graphics used
in the courses, including the curriculum, laboratory manuals
and on-line exams. An example textual description is given
in the excerpt below and refers to the diagram in Figure 1,
graphic 2 of 4 in the text description.
Page has 4 graphics
Graphic 1 shows the segmentation with routers. There
are four hubs and one router in the picture. Router is in the
middle connected to hubs in four corners, three stations
(PC) are connected to each hub.
Segmentation with routers provides:
More manageable, greater functionality, multiple activate
paths
Smaller broadcast domain
Operates at layer 3
Graphic 2 show routers connected by WAN technologies.
There are 10 routers in the graphic. Four of them are
connected to each other in a square shape (each one corner
of a square). If we name these routers from 1 to 4 clockwise
starting from the left top, router number 1 is connected to
router number 2 with ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode).
Router number 2 is connected to router number 3 with
T1/E1 and T3/E3. Router number 3 is connected to router
number 4 with ATM. Router number 4 is connected to
router number 1 with T1/E1 and T3/E3.Each of these four
routers are connected to other routers.
Router number 1 is connected to two other networks one
a cable modem via a router and other one X.25 via other
router.
Router number 2 is connected to a dial-up modem via a
router.
Router number 3 is connected to SDMS via a router and
to xDSL via another router.
Router number 4 is connected to ISDN network via a
router.
There are antenna signal to router number 3 and
satellite signal to ISDN router connected to router number
4.
Figure 1: Example diagram from CCNA2 version 3.1 section 1.1.3
Further details of the teaching aids used in the project
can be found in Murray [28] and on the project website
http://www.cucat.org.
V.
THE REMOTE LABORATORY USER EXPERIENCE
Laboratory exercises form a significant portion of the
curriculum. In order for students situated remotely to access
and participate in the laboratory sessions, a functional,
remotely accessible network topology was developed. The
configuration illustrated was developed for the CCNA
version 3.1 curriculum, with work currently underway to
reconfigure for Discovery and Exploration curricula to be
delivered in 2009. Laboratory equipment generally consists
of three routers and two switches. The configuration may be
described as two branch offices, say Perth and Sydney,
connected together via the ISP or Internet cloud. The edge
routers are configured by the students to allow connectivity
via the middle router (cloud or ISP). Local students interact
directly with the routers’ configuration via serial (console)
interfaces. A problem exists when attempting to allow
remote students access to “real” routing hardware. The
routers may not be placed on production networks for
obvious reasons and initial configurations must be entered
via the console connection. Therefore requirements for a
remote lab must allow students to perform:
80
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/


Initial configuration via the console cable

Remote power cycling of network equipment and
workstations

Connectivity tests

Advanced router and switch configuration.
One such system does exist, Netlab, developed and
distributed
by
NDG
(http://www.netdevgroup.com/),
however the cost of this system is a major factor hindering
its adoption. Additionally, the java based applications in
Netlab, including the booking system, telnet client to interact
with the network hardware and server system are not
accessible by screen readers (software utilized by blind
computer users to convert on-screen information to audio or
Braille
output).
The
CAVI
system
developed
costs
significantly less than the Academy Edition of Netlab.
Whilst it does not offer advanced features such as equipment
booking it performs all the required functions for the vision
impaired class applications. In its most simple form, it
consists of the standard CCNA laboratory bundle: 3 routers
and 2 switches, with several virtualized Linux PC servers
running FTP, HTTP, Telnet and other associated services; all
may be accessed by their serial ports (see Figure 2).
Figure 2: Standard router bundle (top) & Switch Bundle (bottom)
A standard serial port or console switch is used to access
the devices in the laboratory bundle. Remote students may
telnet into the console server (a device that allows Ethernet
to multiple serial port connections), accessing the routers,
switches and Linux servers from any locality worldwide.
The use of Linux on the host and server machines is
necessary as the command line may be accessed through the
serial ports allowing the students to connect directly to the
server hosting the multiple virtual machines. Users may then
telnet to the virtual machines and access the command line
via the screen reader. Virtualized GUI based operating
systems are not easily accessible to the assistive technology
when installed behind the console switch.
The physical layout of the remote laboratory equipment is
depicted in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Teaching environment (top) and physical remote laboratory
equipment layout (bottom)
Figure 4 illustrates an active telnet session logged into
the remote bundle. As the routers are on their own network,
with remote access attaching only to the serial ports, this
system does not offer any security risk to the institution
utilizing it. Once the student has authenticated with the
console switch (simple plain text password) a list of
available equipment is displayed, as shown in Figure 5.
81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 4: Active console session
[Murray-2:~] iainmurray% telnet 134.7.43.171
Trying 134.7.43.171...
Connected to 134.7.43.171.
Escape character is '^]'.
Enter Password: ********
PORT STATUS: Version 3.0, Site ID: Curtin -o o- --oo o- -o oo -o
PORT |
NAME
|
PASSWORD
| STATUS | MODE | BUFFER
COUNT
-----+------------------+------------------+--------+--------+--------------
09 | Router1
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
10 | Router2
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
11 | Router3
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
12 | WKS1
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
13 | WKS2
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
14 | WKS3
| (defined)
| Free | Any |
0
Figure 5: Remote bundle equipment list
Several commands are available and are listed in Table 1.
Connection to equipment is made via the /C n command,
where n = required equipment port number.
TABLE I.
CONSOLE SWITCH COMMAND MENU
Display Options
/S /SD
Port Status
/W
Port Parameters (who)
/J
Site ID
/H
Command Menu (Help)
Control
<Enter>
Enter Command Mode
/x
Exit Command Mode
/C n
Connect to Port (n: Port# or name)
As the booking system was incomplete at the time of
writing, a virtual classroom was utilized as a method of
ensuring students knew if the equipment was in use. When
undertaking a laboratory, students logged into the Ventrilo
server (a voice communication application designed for on-
line gamers) and entered the appropriate channel, as shown
in Figure 6. In this way students not only can tell if a
particular bundle is in use but may also conduct laboratory
sessions collaboratively with other students.
Power
cycling
of
equipment
is
undertaken
by
authenticating first to the console switch and connecting to
the remote power switch. The power switch may then be
used to power down individual devices within the bundle.
This is usually done with a secondary telnet session,
allowing access to the router/switch to be power cycled and
therefore the boot process to be interrupted (as in the case of
password recovery laboratories). Each device may be
powered on, off or rebooted. Figure 7 illustrates the process
of remotely rebooting a router.
Figure 6: Ventrilo session (note users in the “Pod 1” channel)
Figure 7: Remotely rebooting the router
Once connected via telnet, students may configure
routers, switches and workstations in the same manner as if
physically present. One such session is shown in Figure 7.
Although this system allows laboratories to be completed,
including e-Labs it has several shortcomings. These include
the lack of a formal booking system, leading to students
attempting to access the limited resources while others are
engaged in laboratory sessions and it does not give students
experience with the physical cabling of network systems. To
82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

assist students with understanding the physical aspects of
cabling, recorded audio demonstrations of the physical
features of cables, connectors and their locations on switch
and router hardware are conducted. In these demonstrations,
a local vision impaired student conducts a supervised cable
lab,
describing
in
detail
what
they
“feel”
and
how
connections are made, in much the same manner as video is
utilized for sighted students.
VI.
INETSIM NETWORK SIMULATOR FOR APPLE OS X
iNetSim is a accessible network simulator, created to
allow both vision-impaired and sighted users to complete
CCNA
2
laboratory
sessions
without
access
to
the
networking hardware [30]. Existing software used in the
CCNA course for network simulation and laboratory
practice (Packet Tracer) and the eLabs is not accessible to
those with impaired vision as it utilizes images of network
topology, allows only mouse selection of network devices
and tools and is incompatible with screen reading software.
In contrast, iNetSim has been developed to be accessible by
blind and vision impaired users in addition to those with
normal vision. All user interface and network topology
elements are accessible via the
Apple screen reader
(VoiceOver) keyboard shortcuts and provide a meaningful
response when read by VoiceOver. Network simulators
usually rely on the use of a mouse to add simulated
communication
links
between
devices,
place
network
devices on the work area canvas, select configuration
options and view simulation results. To connect two devices
with a communications link, the user must generally click
on icons for the simulated devices and drag the connection
to its end point, another network device under normal
circumstances. As this is usually not possible for vision-
impaired users, iNetSim also incorporates the use of tables
for connecting devices. Tables are used to alter a device’s
location in the topology area, and configure ports and links.
Tables are used as navigation with speech prompts, as these
can be accessed with VoiceOver shortcut keys and cursor
keys. iNetSim can be used solely with the keyboard,
therefore the eye and hand issues faced by vision-impaired
students can be avoided. As a GUI is also available, sighted
iNetSim users can alternatively use a more traditional drag-
drop mouse-based interface.
The system is capable of representing several generic
network devices including routers, switches, hubs and PCs.
Each device must be configured via a command line for
correct
operation.
Figure
8
illustrates
the
application
running with the textual command line terminal session to
Router0 open. Note that the IP address on Router0, interface
S1 is set to the same value as in the port table (highlighted)
under the main canvas. Selecting values from the drop down
boxes or edit fields in the main application window has the
same effect as entering the command line configuration.
Changes
made
with
either
method
will
be
reflected
throughout
the
application.
This
allows
rapid
basic
configuration to be undertaken by the instructor so that
students may concentrate on the particular task in the
session.
Each device may have several ports of different types
including Ethernet, serial and console. The user creates a
connection by specifying two ports to connect and a cable
type. Removing a connected port disables the connection the
same way unplugging a cable would in a real network. The
command line interface to devices also provides control and
feedback over the simulation. The interface acts in a similar
way to the operating system for that device type (e.g. a
generic DOS-like system for PCs and Cisco IOS for
routers). A subset of the commands applicable to CCNA 2
allows the user to display and modify device configuration,
establish routing protocols and ping, Traceroute or telnet to
other devices. iNetSim maintains a representation of routing
tables to simulate these tasks correctly.
A completed laboratory is depicted in the screen capture
illustrated in Figure 8. Note the configuration entered in the
terminal screen matches the configuration in the tables and
the successful pings from both the routers and workstations.
A.
Packet Tracer Accessibility
iNetSim was successful in its aim of illustrating that
network simulators may be made fully accessible if
accessibility is built into the design stage of application
development. However, maintaining and building a separate
simulator for use by the vision impaired is not feasible. Any
such application would lag development and features of
commercial, well resourced projects such as Packet Tracer,
hence it was decided to develop an external application to
connect to Packet Tracer utilizing the newly released APIs
and multi user features. Initial development has aimed at
examining the flexibility and ability of the framework
underlying the Packet Tracer application development
environment. The information obtained was then used to
decide on the feasibility of an external application for vision
impaired people, allowing them to use and manipulate the
Packet Tracer software package to carry on networking
simulation, particularly where the CCNA curriculum is
concerned.
Although Packet Tracer is not intended as a substitute for
real equipment, it allows students to practice using a model
of
the
Cisco
Internetwork
Operating
System
(IOS)
command line interface and provides visual, drag-and-drop
problem solving using virtual networking devices. This
hands-on capability is a fundamental component of learning
how to configure routers and switches from the command
line. Students can see how to configure and connect
networking hardware while confirming systems design.
Instructors can create their own self-evaluated activities that
present immediate feedback to students on their proficiency
83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

in completing assignments.
Starting
from
version
5.0
onwards,
Packet
Tracer
supports external applications as well as user connections.
In the case of multiuser connections, an instance of Packet
Tracer on computer A can communicate with another
instance of Packet Tracer on computer B. Therefore, users
in different places can have collaborative and competitive
network building, using the real network to carry the virtual
packets.
Based on Packet Tracer Messaging Protocol (PTMP) and
Inter Process Communication (IPC) the external application
developed communicates with an established Packet Tracer
instance on the same computer or another on the network,
thus it is only necessary that the developers maintain an
accessible client that communicates with the commercial
simulation software.
Figure 8: External application communicating with an instance of Packet Tracer
VII.
PACKET TRACER EXERCISES AND ELABS
The combination of access to real network hardware and
a practice environment in the simulation software has shown
to be a valuable resource. CAVI has converted Discovery
Packet Tracer exercises and eLabs (from CCNA version
3.1) to a format that may be run on the remote bundles so
that students receive a similar learning experience to that of
their sighted peers. These conversions include descriptions
of
graphics
and
network
topologies,
starting
router
configurations that are pasted into the routers and accessible
instructions on laboratory procedure. eLabs are utilized to
communicate a single learning outcome from the curriculum
chapter being currently studied without the necessity of the
student creating multiple complex router configurations.
Vision impaired students took significantly longer than their
sighted counterparts to complete each eLab due to the
necessity of connecting to the remote bundle, pasting
configurations
into
the
required
network
prior
to
commencing the laboratory session. However, students
found that completing a set of eLabs reduced this setup time
considerably. Trials of eLabs with instructors, both vision
84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

impaired (n=3) and sighted (n=4) established that there was
no perceived difference in the user experience once
configurations were copied to laboratory equipment. On a
scale of 0-5 where 0 = of no use, 5 = very useful, students
(n=13) rated the usefulness of eLabs at an average of 4.6
(median = 4.5). The disadvantage of eLabs is primarily in
the preparation involved, each piece of equipment used in a
particular session required a configuration file to be created
and tested. Instructions needed to be transcribed from the
Flash files, tested by qualified personnel and altered to suit
use on the remote bundle. In excess of 180 individual files
were created. A further disadvantage is in cases where a
large number of network devices are required, simplified
topologies were used due to restrictions on the quantity of
network devices in the remote bundle.
VIII.
CONVEYING GRAPHICAL NETWORK TOPOLOGIES TO
THE BLIND
A.
Network Dominoes
The concept of a tactile method of displaying network
devices and interconnections was initially well received by
students in the pilot study. A survey of totally blind users of
the Network Dominoes (see Figure 9) showed that students
rated the usefulness highly at 4.4 out of 5 (n=6). An
interesting item was raised in the comments section of the
survey, as detailed in the following quote.
“The network dominoes are interesting for showing
students what the network shapes look like. This can be
useful for if they have a sighted person without any
networking knowledge trying to explain a diagram to them,
they are able to tell the sighted person what the shapes
are.”
The ability to identify standard graphic icons is of
obvious import given that it is expected that students will be
in mainstream employment and required to interact with
their sighted peers. Whilst the network dominoes achieved
the desired result of communicating topologies, it was
decided to discontinue their use in the later iterations of the
courses. The primary concern with the network dominoes
became apparent with the inclusion of students undertaking
the courses remotely. Remote students would connect the
dominoes in the manner that they thought was correct, but
on occasion was significantly different to the intended
topology. As the instructors have no method of checking the
said
topology,
being
both
blind
and
geographically
separated from the tactile topology, errors in construction
would
not
be
identified
and
thus
lead
to
possible
misconceptions by students. A secondary issue was that of
cost, both in production of the full range of network device
objects and that of distribution of multiple sets. If the cost of
production could be reduced, use of these devices should be
explored in future trials.
Figure 9: Network Dominoes
B.
Tactile Diagrams
PIAF, Picture in a Flash, is an assistive technology
device that uses a controlled heat source to imprint images
or diagrams onto heat sensitive paper which then swells to
reproduce a raised representation of the image. The output
of PIAF is intended to allow the vision impaired to see by
feeling tactile graphics. While in many situations this
product provides a satisfactory solution to gaining an
appreciation of an image or basic diagram it does not meet
the requirements necessary to impart understanding of
detailed
information
taken
from
complex
technical
diagrams. As Dulin [29] identified, raised line drawings
may increase the blind individual’s spatial cognition and
communicate
information
from
graphics
that
would
otherwise be inaccessible, several issues were noted when
utilizing this media in the context of technical drawings.
Many of the network diagrams, in order to fit on the A4
capsule paper, required the network device icons to be of
limited dimensions (approximately 30mm by 30mm) the
tactile resolution of the human senses made it difficult to
identify
or
differentiate
between
similar
objects,
for
example hubs and switches. A significant number of tactile
diagrams were produced, utilizing the PIAF system, in the
pilot study stage of the research (in excess of 150 individual
diagrams and charts). Totally blind students within the pilot
study were surveyed (n=6) on the suitability and usefulness
of this style of graphic representation with the disappointing
results, given the cost and time taken in production. Overall
on the scale of 0 to 5 an average result of 2.4 (mean of 2.0)
was returned. The physical bulk and material cost of tactile
pictures made it difficult and inefficient to distribute up-to-
date
material
to
remote
students,
particularly
when
compared to electronic text descriptions.
PIAF along with the tactile assistive technology devices
suggested as being useful to vision impaired students proved
to be unsatisfactory in meeting the needs of the vision
impaired student studying to the Cisco course materials. The
complexity of images and diagrams in the required teaching
materials and the individual health issues of students proved
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

these devices/methods unsatisfactory. Given the logistical
difficulties of shipping significant quantities of tactile
pictures and overlays to various countries the costs become
prohibitive as the class size increases.
Figure 10: PIAF Tactile Printer and Nomad (Source:
http://www.brailleworldindia.com/braille__tactile_graphics.htm#PIAF)
The challenges relating to teaching materials focused
directly
on
how
best
the
students
could
gain
an
understanding of course materials. While not all, many
complex computer related technical images and diagrams
rely on the use of color, which is difficult to represent on
tactile media. The main difficulty with these devices or
tactile media was that the demands being placed on them
were inconsistent with their ability to meet teaching
requirements.
Figure 11: iNetSim with command line terminal session open. The text in the floating window shows the text read by VoiceOver
IX.
STUDENT RESULTS
The following discussion covers an analysis of how
effectively and efficiently problems defined in relation to
remote teaching of vision impaired students were addressed.
[29] Definitions of effectiveness and efficiency as the basis
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

for these evaluations are:
•
Effectiveness is evaluated by determining how well
the solution achieves the given objectives. In this context
effectiveness is measured by determining whether the vision
impaired students studying the converted e-learning courses
achieved
the
same
outcomes
as
able-bodied
students
studying the unconverted courses.
•
Efficiency
is
evaluated
by
determining
any
increase or decrease in the level of the resources used to
achieve the stated objectives. In this context efficiency is
measured by ascertaining whether the difference in costs for
teaching methods and tools between the vision impaired
accessible environment and the traditional Cisco e-learning
environment is minimal for the same level of output.
Each mode of presentation is evaluated via a ranking of 0
through 5, where 0 denotes “no use whatsoever”, 3 gives the
same or similar outcomes or resources, and 5 shows a
significant increase in outcomes or significant decrease in
resources. An acceptable solution should rate at least 3 and a
summary of the ratings is presented in Table 2.
TABLE II.
EFFECTIVENESS OF SOLUTIONS
Requirements
Potential Solution
Effectiveness
(same outcomes)
Efficiency
(more or less resources)
Comments
1. Lack of
student
mobility
Virtual
classroom
4
5
Highly scalable
without increasing
resources
Remote
Bundle
5
4
Slightly more
complex to use.
Reduces cost of
distributing
multiple
laboratory pods.
Equipment
available 24/7
2. Inclusion
of remote
students
Virtual
classroom
4
5
No realistic
limitations on
lecture size
7. Cannot
access
laboratory
exercises
e-Labs
3
3
Labour intensive
conversion
process.
Remote
labs
5
4
No access to
physical cabling.
24/7 availability
of equipment.
Lower cost to
small Academies
(shared resource)
iNetSim
3
2
Proof of concept
only.
Network
dominos
3
2
High production
cost and bulk.
10. network
topology/
simulation
software
Network
dominos
2
2
High production
cost and bulk. Not
interactive and do
not simulate the
operating system.
iNetSim
3
2
Modification of
Packet Tracer
user interface to
overcome the
access issues.
Overall results for students in the 2007 intake are shown
in Table 3 and Figure 12.
TABLE III.
STUDENT RESULTS
Course
Demographic
n
Comments
CCNA 1
Population
214,499
Average across
all questions
Vision Impaired
24
Sighted
19
CCNA 2
Population
67,601
Average across
all questions
Vision Impaired
23
Sighted
19
ITE 1
Population
61,386
Average across
all questions
Vision Impaired
23
Sighted
19
ITE 2
Population
28,484
Vision Impaired
22
Sighted
32
Figure 12: Student Examination Results
As can be noted by the graph in Figure 12, the vision
impaired group consistently scored better across the full
range of courses when compared to the sighted groups. The
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

population group may not be representative as no level of
support,
availability
of
resources
and
other
relevant
information is available for this group. The sighted group
may be directly compared as they consisted of students
taught at Curtin University of Technology as part of their
coursework in the Bachelor of Technology (Computer
Systems and Networking) and as such had a comparable
educational background and access to resources such as
laboratory equipment and information.
X.
CONCLUSIONS
Whilst the use of the remote bundle overcomes many of
the limitations imposed by delivering CCNA laboratories to
remote blind and vision impaired students, further work is
required to improve functionality and ease of use. A method
of booking and authentication of users is currently under
development as part of a “front end” web portal to
streamline the connection to network devices.
iNetsim
was
successful
in
proving
that
network
simulators may be made accessible. However, it is now
considered that, with the availability of Packet Tracer API’s
and the Packet Tracer Messaging Protocol a possible way
forward
in
accessibility
is
to
develop
an
accessible
extension (a user interface) that communicates with Packet
Tracer. This would have the benefit of utilizing the superior
Packet Tracer library of devices and protocols and the
support and continuing development without duplication of
resources.
The
solutions
presented
in
this
paper
assist
in
overcoming the laboratory issues involved
in remote
delivery to vision impaired students however there are many
significant obstacles in accessibility that have also been
addressed in the CAVI project [31]. The CAVI classes offer
a holistic environment tailored to cater for blind and low
vision students without compromising course quality and
student
outcomes.
Using
the
environment
and
tools
established
by
CAVI
students
with
severe
vision
impairment are able to undertake the same Cisco courses as
their sighted counterparts.
REFERENCES
[1] Murray, I. and Armstrong, H. 2009. Remote Laboratory Access
for Students with Vision Impairment. In Proceedings of the 2009
Fifth international Conference on Networking and Services -
Volume 00 (April 20 - 25, 2009). ICNS. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington,
DC,
566-571.
DOI=
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICNS.2009.107
[2] Rehabilitation Research and Training Centre on Disability
Demographics and Statistics (2007). 2006 Disability Status Report.
Ithaca,
NY.
Cornell
University.
Available
at:
http://www.disabilitystatistics.org
[2] Steinmetz, E. (2006) Americans with Disabilities: 2002
Household Economic Studies, Current Population Reports (issued
May 2006), Dept Commerce, U.S. Census Bureau. Available at:
http://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/p70-107.pdf
[4] Wagner, M., Newman, L., Camelo, R., Garza, N & Levine, P.
(2005) after high school: a first look at the postschool experiences
of youth with disabilities. A report from the National Longitudinal
Transition Study -2 (NLTS2) Menlo Park, CA, SRI International.
Available
at
www.nlts.org/reports/2005_04/nlts2_report_2005_04_complete.pdf
[5] Dryden, G. (2000). Training, rehabilitation and employment for
visually impaired people in the UK, Royal National Institute of the
Blind,
Available
at:
http://www.euroblind.org/fichiersGB/emploidryden.htm
[6] Osoian, C. Zaharie, M & Stegerean, R. 2008, Overcoming
Barriers to employment for visual impaired persons in the
Romanian labor market, Studia Universitatis Babes Bolyai –
Oeconomica, Issue 1, pages 34-44
[7] Department of Training & Employment. (2000). Building
Diversity
Project
2000.
Western
Australian
Department
of
Training and Employment, Government of Western Australia.
[8] Hollier, S., (2007). The Disability Divide: A Study into the
Impact of Computing and Internet-related Technologies on People
who are Blind or Vision Impaired, PhD Thesis, Curtin University
of Technology, Perth, Western Australia
[9] Bengisu, M., Izbirak, G. & Mackieh, A., 2008. Work-Related
Challenges for Individual who are Visually Impaired in Turkey,
Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 102, 284-294
[10]
Crudden,
A.
&
McBroom,
L.W.,
1999.
Barriers
to
employment: A survey of employed persons who are visually
impaired, Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 93, 341-350
[11] Crudden, A., Sansing, W. & Butler, S., 2005. Overcoming
barriers to employment: Strategies of rehabilitation providers,
Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 99, 325-334
[12]
Moore,
J.E.
&
Wolffe,
K.E.,
(1997),
Employment
considerations for adults with low vision, In A.L. Corn & A.J.
Koenig (Eds)., Foundations of Low Vision: clinical and Functional
Perspectives, pp 340-362, AFB Press, New York
[13] O’Day, B., (1999). Employment Barriers for people with
visual impairments, Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 93,
627-642
[14] Kirchner, C., Schmeidler, E., & Todorov, A. (1999). Looking
at employment through a life span telescope: Age, health and
employment status of people with serious visual impairment,
Mississippi State: Mississippi State University Rehabilitation
Research and Training Center on blindness and Low Vision.
[15] Lee, I.S., & Park, S.K., (2008). Employment Status and
Predictors Among People with Visual Impairments in South
Korea: Results of a National Survey, Journal of Visual Impairment
& blindness, 102, 147-159
[16] Capella-McDonnall, M.E., 2005. Predictors of competitive
Employment for Blind and Visually Impaired consumers of
Vocational Rehabilitation Services, Journal of Visual Impairment
& Blindness, 99, 303-315
[17] Gustavsson, I, Remote Laboratory Experiments in Electrical
Engineering
Education,
Fourth
IEEE
International
Caracas
Conference on Devices, Circuits and Systems, Aruba, IEEE Press,
April 2002
[18] Corter, J.E. Nickerson, .J.V, Esche, S.K. and Chassapis, C,
Remote Versus Hands-On Labs: A Comparative Study, 34th
ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, Savannah, GA,
IEEE Press, October 2004
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

[19] Ma, J. and Nickerson, J.V. Hands-On, Simulated and remote
Laboratories: A comparative Literature Review, ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 38, no. 3, article 7, September 2006
[20] Canfora, G, Daponte, P. and Rapuano, S.
Remotely
Accessible Laboratory for Electronic Measurement Teaching,
Computer Standards and Interfaces, vol. 26, no. 6, 2004, pp 489-
499
[21] Colwell, C, Scanlon, E and Cooper, M Using Remote
Laboratories to Extend Access to Science and Engineering,
Computers & Education, vol. 38, 2002, pp 65-76
[22] Nedic, Z, Machotka, J and Nafalski, A, Remote laboratories
versus Virtual and Real laboratories, 33rd ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in
Education, Boulder, CO, 2003
[23] Bentley, F., Tollmar, O, Demirdjian, D. , Oile, K. and Darrell,
T.
Perceptive
Presence,
IEEE
Computer
Graphics
and
Applications, vol 23, no. 5, 2003, pp 26-36
[24] Biocca, F., Inserting the Presence of Mind into a Philosophy
of Presence: A response to Sheridan and Mantovaniand Riva,
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol 10, no. 5,
2001, pp 546-556
[25] Pearson, E.J. and Koppi, T., Inclusion and Online Learning
Opportunities: Designing for Accessibility, ALT-J, vol. 10, no. 2,
2002, pp 17-28
[26] Bergström, L, Grahn, K.J. and Pulkkis,G, A Virtual Learning
Environment for Mobile IP, Issues in Informing Science and
Information Technology, vol. 3, 2006, pp 83-101
[27] Buzzetto-More N.A. , Navigating the Virtual Forest: How
Networked
digital
Technologies can
Foster
Transgeographic
Learning,
Issues
in
Information
Science
and
Information
Technology, vol. 3, 2006, pp 104-147
[28] Murray, I (2009), eLearning Modalities and the Vision
Impaired, PhD Thesis, Curtin University of Technology, Perth,
Western Australia
[29] Dulin, D, 2007, Effects of the use of raised line drawings on
blind people's cognition, European Journal of Special Needs
Education, Volume 22, Issue 3, pp 341 - 353
[29] J. Hope, B. vonKonsky, I. Murray, L. C. Chew and B.
Farrugia,
A Cisco Education Tool Accessible to the Vision
Impaired, ASSETS06, Portland, Oregon USA, October 23-25,
2006, pp235-236
[31] Armstrong, H and Murray, I, Remote and Local Delivery of
Cisco Education for the Vision-Impaired, ITiCSE 2007, Dundee
Scotland, 25-27 June 2007, pp78-81
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

