257
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Student Views on Academic Reading and its Future in the Design and Engineering 
Disciplines 
 
Kimberly Anne Sheen and Yan Luximon 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong, SAR 
e-mails: Kimberly.Sheen@connect.polyu.hk 
yan.luximon@polyu.edu.hk
 
 
Abstract - Electronic textbooks are becoming a common 
educational tool, but there is little research on the student 
desires, which will affect the effectiveness of this tool.  This 
paper aims to add to the current research by outlining students’ 
reading habits in physical and electronic textbooks and 
identifying what students feel they need to study using future 
electronic textbooks.  This paper describes a series of focus 
groups with a total of thirty design and engineering students.  
Findings illustrated the different ways in which these disciplines 
approach their academic readings and that future electronic 
textbooks require some discipline specific components.  There 
were some similarities in views and ideas, such as being able to 
insert their own images into the textbooks and the desire for less 
text and more interactive components to facilitate their 
learning.  Identifying design criteria based on discipline needs 
and including student input based on their task needs will assist 
in designing future electronic textbooks that will meet academic 
reading requirements. 
Keywords - focus group; electronic textbooks; academic 
reading; design education; engineering education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Electronic textbooks are becoming more prevalent in 
higher education.  Still, students are not as excited about this 
trend as many universities.  While 60% of students reported 
using electronic textbooks during their academic studies, with 
half being required to by their instructors, student preference 
for physical textbooks has not waned [1,2].  In fact, many 
studies have shown that student preferences of some 
components, such as search functions and long blocks of text, 
negatively impacted student’s opinions on electronic 
textbooks [1,3].   
While electronic textbooks are starting to evolve past 
simple Portable Document Format (PDF) representations of 
the physical text, they are in their infancy.  It has been 
individual schools creating their own interactive electronic 
textbooks, which are shifting away from the textbook 
metaphor [4] and creating this evolution.  This shift from the 
textbook metaphor will allow for additional materials and 
components, which will enhance and assist with the reading 
task [5].  Yet, creating this type of electronic textbook for 
individual courses is time consuming and impractical on a 
larger scale due to the number of courses offered worldwide 
and the ever changing course material.  On the other hand, 
electronic textbooks coming from major publishers do not 
tend to use diverse components that would be more suitable 
for the disciplines they serve and instead use components that 
would be appropriate for all areas of study.  Although different 
disciplines are known to approach their education in different 
ways [6], it is still in broad practice to create this type of 
electronic textbook.  Regardless of creating electronic 
textbooks specifically tailored for courses or broader 
textbooks, there is still the challenge of selecting and creating 
new supplemental materials and components for this new type 
of electronic textbook [7].   
Not only would academics and publishers find creating 
new content difficult, advancing technology and the use of 
electronic textbooks may have altered the ways in which 
students use textbooks.  Students can now easily read in cafes 
or while travelling [8], moving away from the desks and tables 
that used to confine students.  Being able to study in more 
locations may seem positive, but without normal study aides 
such as highlighters and notebooks, students may find 
themselves slipping from the deep reading required during 
revision, which allows for in-depth comprehension and recall 
[9] to surface reading, which provides students with a more 
limited understanding of the materials [10].  While some 
components included in current electronic textbooks seem 
similar to the support activities students employ during 
reading, they are noticeably different.  For example, many 
students take notes in the margins of their physical textbooks 
to support their studying.  While electronic textbooks 
commonly offer notation software, notes are typically not 
displayed on the screen and require clicking on a small icon to 
later revisit (see Fig. 1).  This could cause the students to miss 
their notes or interrupt their reading process leading them to 
become distracted.  In fact, electronic annotation software is 
used less often than traditional note taking done with a  
 
Figure 1. Example of note taken in a Kindle electronic textbook [15]. 
 

258
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
physical textbook [11].  The lack of tangibility associated with 
electronic textbooks also negatively affects the reading task 
[12].  Past research has stated that electronic textbooks should 
enhance current physical active reading activities while 
presenting an interface that is easy to use [13]. 
Currently, the components that are used to support 
academic reading are being designed for future electronic 
textbooks with limited understanding of the students and their 
habits [14].  While educators should be designing the content 
within electronic textbooks, students are the central user of 
electronic textbooks and know their own study behaviors and 
what additional tools they need to feel comfortable with the 
material.  This could lead to new textbooks not being able to 
fully support students’ study habits and not only failing the 
student but becoming something that is looked on with distain. 
The purpose of the focus groups outlined in this paper was 
to identify components that are important to students during 
their studies from the task requirements reported by students, 
something that limited in the current discussion.  Since each 
discipline has different approaches to studying and different 
needs, focus groups were separated based on the two 
disciplines studied: engineering and design.  This allows for a 
better understanding of how these groups of students approach 
their studies.  It also assists in identifying what type of 
supplemental content needs to be created and what tools need 
to be included to support academic reading in these different 
disciplines.  This paper also aims to bring a deeper 
understanding to the data from an earlier survey released at 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University [16].  It also provides 
insights into how students complete their academic readings 
in physical and electronic mediums and how they envision 
their future electronic textbooks based on their discipline 
specific needs.  The rest of this paper is organized the 
following way.  Section II describes the method employed in 
this paper.  Section III presents the results of the focus groups.  
Section IV discusses the results within the literature and in a 
more general context.  Section V presents the main 
conclusions and presents some future areas that should be 
explored.   
II. 
METHOD 
Focus group method was chosen to uncover current and 
future student needs and approaches related to academic 
reading, and was used identify task related design criteria for 
future electronic textbooks [7].  The focus group method 
allows for internal validity, a better understanding of the 
phenomenon that would not be possible through methods that 
use quantitative analysis, and assists in understanding truly 
complex issues [17], which are necessary in this type of 
research. 
A. Participants 
Students were recruited from The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University.  There were two requirements for participation.  
The first, students need to be enrolled in either an 
undergraduate level design or engineering program.  The 
second, the students needed to have prior experience using 
electronic textbooks during their academic studies.  Once 
students volunteered for participation, they were placed into 
three person focus groups made up of participants only from 
their discipline.  While the disciplines of the students 
remained the same, the different programs within that 
discipline were mixed.  For example, computer science, 
electronic engineering, and product engineering falls within 
the Engineering Discipline at the university, so all of those 
groups of students were included in engineering focus groups.  
Design students’ programs also varied with students from 
programs such as product design, communication design, and 
multimedia design.  Overall, five focus group sessions from 
the design programs and five from the engineering programs 
were conducted.  Thus a total of thirty students participated in 
these focus groups.  After three focus group sessions, 
homogeneity was reached [19, 20, 21] but sessions continued 
for two more focus groups per discipline so that findings 
would be more significant.  Total student participants were 16 
males and 14 females aged between 18 and 23.  Engineering 
focus groups consisted of a total of 11 males and 4 females.  
While design focus groups consisted of 5 males and 10 
females.  The increased number of males in the engineering 
department and increased number of females in the design 
department reflect the distribution of genders in these faculties 
with design disciplines being more female heavy and 
engineering being more male heavy. 
B. Session Design 
Each focus group session was designed to last 
approximately one hour.  The sessions were made up of 
sixteen semi-structured interview questions, which were 
followed up with unscripted questions related to the answers.  
Based on the similarities between the answers, many follow-
up questions were the comparable.  Students also participated 
in two activities during the session.  The first activity asked 
them to express how they define current electronic textbooks.  
The second activity asked them to envision their future 
electronic textbooks, without considering the limitations of 
current technology.  In this activity, students were asked to 
include components they wanted in their discipline specific 
electronic textbooks and then asked questions about how they 
would interact with these new textbooks.  During both 
activities, students were given markers and paper and allowed 
to complete them with little oversight from the moderator.  
Each session was audio taped and later transcribed.  The 
papers from the activities were kept for analysis and examples 
appear later in this article. 
C. Data Analysis 
Once each session was transcribed, the data was coded.  
The codes used in this research were grounded in the data [18] 
and used to organize the data into recurring topics and 
subtopics for easier analysis, description of the results and 
development of theory.  Some of the codes, which emerged 
from the data are as follows: task requirements, technical 
requirements, preference, technical issues, ergonomics issues, 
and habits. 

259
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. 
RESULTS 
 
The semi-structured interview questions investigated the 
habits, task requirements, and preferences of students in 
regards to textbooks.  The questions were broken up into three 
segments: one on physical textbooks, the next on electronic 
textbooks, and finally future electronic textbooks.  The same 
questions were used for both design and engineering focus 
groups, although follow up questions differed slightly based 
on the responses given by students.  During the future 
electronic textbook segment, students were also asked for 
feedback on ranking data gained from an earlier survey [16].  
Two activities were also completed by students, one during 
the electronic textbook segment and one at the end of the 
future electronic textbook section, which wrapped up the 
focus group sessions. 
A. Physical Textbooks 
The questions regarding physical textbooks mostly dealt 
with student habits regarding physical textbook reading.  
Habits and preferences are diverse for many reasons; 
however, trends did emerge when analyzing the full 
transcriptions of the focus groups.  When design students were 
asked about the frequency of their use of physical textbooks, 
answers ranged from 20% to 90% of their time reading.  
However, these initial responses are deceiving.  Students later 
admitted during the sessions to underestimating their use of 
physical textbooks because they frequently printed out the 
electronic versions and initially included them in their 
estimates of electronic textbook usage.  Overall, design 
students’ usage of electronic textbooks was much closer to the 
higher percentage.  Most often, these students reported to 
completing their academic readings in the physical form while 
at a desk at home in the morning before lectures or late night.  
Other locations design students reported competing their 
physical academic readings were home on the sofa, while 
traveling, and in the classroom.  The majority of design 
students did not wish to read while traveling.  When asked to 
expand on this, students reported the issue of dizziness as the 
main cause of their decision, although they also reported a 
dislike of carrying heavy books or a large amount of papers 
influencing the decision.  They reported using the textbooks 
as the main source of learning concepts and reported looking 
past the required readings to find other resources regarding the 
concepts.   
On average, engineering students reported using physical 
textbooks less than 50% of their time while doing academic 
readings, although two participants out of 15 claimed to use 
them almost 80% of the time and two state that they would go 
out of their way to use electronic textbooks as much as 
possible.  How often engineering students did academic 
reading varied from only during exam times to one hour per 
day in the afternoons and evenings.  This large discrepancy 
translated into their average time spent with a physical 
textbook.  Those who reported only reading for revision 
would spend upwards of five hours reading per instance over 
the entire day.  Most often, engineering students believed that 
reading should be done when it was required and not 
necessarily to look at concepts outside of what they are taught.  
Engineering students placed high emphasis on quiet when 
completing their studies.  Those that had a quiet home 
environment reported to working at their desks at home, while 
the rest believed that the school library was the ideal quiet 
environment to keep them away from distractions.  No 
engineering students reported using physical textbooks while 
travelling.  All engineering students reported that the main 
purpose of their academic reading was to review what they 
had learned during the lecture and if required reading for their 
homework assignments. 
Investigation into the task requirements of academic 
reading in a physical textbook was undertaken as a part of 
these focus groups.  Students were questioned about what 
types of supporting activities they did during physical 
textbook reading to help them comprehend and engage with 
the material.  Design students reported different supporting 
activities such as summarizing important points from the text 
into lists, highlighting, and searching for more information by 
keywords.  These students make notes in the margins of the 
text, or if on a separate piece of paper, they attach it to the 
original text.  They reported to using the margins of the text 
when the book was their own, whereas if it was a library book, 
they would use post-its or other paper.  Most students reported 
that their notetaking was more visual in nature and included 
things like sketches and timelines.  When searching for more 
information or other resources regarding the concepts, 
students reported using Google.  Similarly, engineering 
students reported taking notes in the margins, underlining, 
highlighting, looking over drafts from class, and looking up 
definitions in the dictionary.  Engineering students also 
reported doing practice exercises, something that based on the 
requirements of their discipline were novel. 
Students also reported some ergonomics issues and other 
considerations when deciding to use physical textbooks.  Both 
groups of students reported that physical textbooks are very 
difficult to carry around and hold in their hands.  The expense 
of physical textbooks when compared to electronic textbooks 
was also a recurring topic.  Yet, they believe that physical 
textbooks are not only much more convenient to take notes in, 
but they also support the more visual type of notetaking (see 
Fig. 2) that they require, which then assists in their 
comprehension and recall of the material.  In addition, 
students reported the impression that they were reading more 
deeply and remembered the information more easily because 
they avoided distractions afforded by electronic devices, such 
as the constant connection to the Internet.  There was also a 
sense of accomplishment when it came to finishing physical 
page. 
Figure 2. Example of visual notes that a design student made. 
 

260
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Electronic Textbooks 
1) Definition 
Before answering questions similar to those asked during 
the physical textbook segment, each focus group was asked to 
complete an activity in which they defined the term electronic 
textbook.  The five Design student focus groups defined 
electronic textbooks in the following ways: 
1. “A tool for learning without physical barriers.  It 
contains lots of text, with additional elements 
including pictures, audio, and video.”   
2. “A gadget that allows us to learn wherever we 
are.” 
3. “A portable smart device, which is eco-friendly 
and able to store varied books with internet 
support.” 
4. “A digital content that allows easy access by 
different media and can be easily modified and 
shared.” 
5. “Allows a user to read through electronic 
devices (examples: computer, tablet, & phone), 
which 
provides 
more 
interactions 
and 
information by images, notes, which is more 
interesting, attractive, and convenient than 
traditional printed textbooks.” 
 
While the definitions themselves vary, they give insight 
into what the students view as the most important aspects of 
electronic textbooks.  Students placed emphasis on the 
portability and diversity of the devices.  The components of 
the aspects of the textbook itself is more limited and described 
simply as books or text with a few other aspects defined. 
During this process, they also highlighted several 
components as important to their current electronic textbooks 
such as text, animations, images, video, dictionaries, and 
infographics.  Text was considered especially vital to the 
electronic textbook as students felt that without text, the 
textbook loses its main purpose.  They also highlighted some 
ways that electronic textbooks have enriched their learning 
experience such as facilitating communication, increased 
mobility, and increased interaction between the reader and the 
text.   
The five Engineering student focus groups defined 
electronic textbooks in the following ways: 
1. “A portable device, which includes all notes or 
text, video, and pictures into one appliance.  It is 
cheap, environmentally friendly, and convenient 
when comparing to the physical textbook.”   
2. “A textbook, which does not print out on paper 
physically, but can be viewed and edited via 
electronic device like computer, phone, tablet.  It 
has basic features as physical textbook and 
advanced features such as video, audio, tests, 
and animation.” 
3. “A softcopy that provides us useful content 
academically.” 
4. “A textbook in a soft copy version. It’s the same 
as a physical textbook.” 
5. “A non-physical reading material, displayed by 
electronic devices.  The reading experience 
depends on the user interface of the software.” 
 
Once again, definitions differed between groups, but 
similarities emerged.  The groups believed that the electronic 
textbook was very similar to its physical counterpart, however 
many groups defined it as including additional advanced 
features as well. 
Engineering students placed value on the electronic 
textbook’s ability to search for keywords and additional 
components such as animations, video, and images that help 
facilitate their learning.  They believe that the main purpose 
of electronic textbooks is to help students revise concepts 
they’ve learned in the classroom. 
2) Usage 
The questions regarding electronic textbooks mostly dealt 
with student habits regarding electronic textbook reading.  
Overall, design students reported that they spent significantly 
less time reading in electronic textbooks.  When students did 
report reading in electronic textbooks frequently, they 
qualified that they were doing a physical reading from the 
electronic form.  This happened most often when the readings 
were more than just a few pages.  More flexibility was 
reported when reading with electronic textbooks, yet design 
students still reported reading most often in the classroom at 
their desk during the lecture.  The reason they reported doing 
so was so that they may better understand the concepts that 
the professor is discussing.  They reported that the average 
time they spend with an electronic textbook at times increases 
to usage during the entire day if they are working on a project.  
The majority of the time they access electronic textbooks they 
will use laptops, but if they had access to tablets they would 
do the reading on that device.  They will use the phone if they 
need to do a short reading and they feel the convenience 
outweighs the limitations such as discomfort during reading 
and dizziness.  They reported the preference for laptops was 
to avoid eye fatigue and also that when they wanted to save 
pages or chapters; there is more storage space in their 
computers than on their phones.  Engineering students 
reported that they spent on average less than half of their time 
reading in electronic textbooks at home or while travelling in 
the afternoon and evenings.  The increase in reported reading 
during traveling was because of the convenience electronic 
textbooks afford.  The students access their electronic 
textbooks on laptop computers most of the time with only a 
few tablet owners reporting reading on that device.  Phones 
were considered an extreme option and only used while 
travelling or when absolutely necessary for revision 
immediately before an exam.   
Investigation into the task requirements of academic 
reading in an electronic textbook was undertaken as a part of 
these focus groups.  Students were questioned about what 
types of supporting activities they completed during their 
electronic 
textbook reading 
to 
help 
facilitate 
their 
comprehension of the material.  Design students reported 
using highlighting tools, music to help them focus, and 
Microsoft Word or the comment function to take notes.  While 
design students reported taking notes while reading electronic 

261
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
textbooks, they reported taking less notes than when using 
physical textbooks.  Reasons for the limited notetaking were 
reported as difficulties with the annotation components and 
the fact that the components do not support the more visual 
types of notes, which they feel better facilitate their learning 
than text only notes.  Engineering students reported using built 
in encyclopedia functions, dictionaries, search functions, 
highlighting, and screen capture functions most often.  When 
they did take notes, they reported to either hand writing them 
or putting them in a separate Word document because they 
would not refer back to the textbook later.  Several students 
stated that they do not take any notes when they move to an 
electronic textbook because of the inconvenience caused by 
the medium. 
Even though students were not explicitly asked about 
physical and cognitive ergonomics issues related to electronic 
textbooks, both engineering students and design students 
brought this subject up.  Both groups cited eye fatigue as a 
major concern associated with the use of electronic textbooks, 
so students prefer regulating electronic textbook usage to very 
short readings.  One student described the situation succinctly, 
“If I need to read a long article, for example 20 pages, I would 
print it out instead of looking at the monitor. But if I only read 
for just one or two pages, I then will just read it on the 
monitor.”  The eye fatigue would, in turn, caused what 
students described as dizziness or issues reading the text 
closely.  Many students reported skipping lines while reading 
or reading the content that was only based on the exact 
concept they need to understand and not complete the full 
reading.  Design students also discussed how they would 
rather print long readings instead of viewing them online to 
facilitate their learning, believing that the addition of too many 
components may destroy their creativity.  While engineering 
students stressed electronic textbooks were easier to carry and 
allowed for more mobility when completing their readings.  
They also reported to printing any long electronic readings 
they may have to complete. 
Students also reported several technical issues and other 
aspects, which influence their interaction with electronic 
textbooks.  Design students repeatedly reported the battery on 
their mobile devices as negatively impacting their academic 
reading.  They also reported the time it takes to scroll through 
the text as a hindrance to their reading.  Finally, they 
complained about the small size of the text and described how 
it made reading more difficult.  Both groups of students also 
discussed how the ease of sharing and downloading electronic 
textbooks facilitated their learning.  Also the usage of 
electronic textbooks allowed them to avoid the inconvenience 
of going to the library, identifying the call number, finding the 
book, waiting in lines, and then carrying it with them, which 
was a common complaint for both groups of design and 
engineering students.  Accessing the texts online minimized 
the time it took for students to be able to begin their readings.  
The ability to quickly and easily go from one text to another 
was another reported convenience to electronic textbooks.  In 
line with this, students reported that it was easier to identify 
new resources based on keyword searching.  When they were 
able to identify a core concept they needed to learn, they 
would type it into the library website or Google to find more 
resources that referenced that concept.  And while students 
discussed their dislike of reading electronic textbooks on their 
phones, they reported the positive affect on their time 
management.  Students stated that using electronic textbooks 
on their smartphones allowed them to read in bed, read when 
they had spare time while waiting for friends, or read while 
stuck in unexpected traffic.  In addition, students reported that 
the ability to take digital notes makes them less likely to lose 
said notes.  Some students reported taking pictures of their 
physical notes to avoid this, while other students only took 
screenshots of pages or sections of the textbook that they 
though would be valuable to them later.  Students also 
discussed how cost, mobility, and environmental friendliness 
made using electronic textbooks more desirable.   
While many of these technical advances were reported to 
have a positive influence on academic reading and resulted in 
some positive perceptions, students reported many issues.  
When taking notes, students felt that typing instead of writing 
made it more difficult to remember and digest the concepts 
they needed to learn.  Engineering students also wished for the 
ability to draw or write manually in their electronic textbooks, 
but reported that the current technology that allows these 
actions are buggy and slow making them unusable.  The 
search functions that students found exceptionally helpful, 
they also reported as harmful to their reading.  Students from 
both disciplines stated that they missed information when they 
tried to quickly complete their readings to avoid eye fatigue 
by searching for and only reading the sentences regarding the 
required concepts.  Both groups of students felt that this 
negatively impacted their understanding of the material as a 
whole and put them at a disadvantage.  Another major issue 
that came up with every student regarding electronic 
textbooks was distractions.  Notifications from social media 
and messaging applications were reported as a major issue, 
which hindered focus during their academic reading sessions.  
Students also found that they lost time and focus when 
searching for keywords they found within their books online; 
they reported finding themselves playing online games or 
watching hours of YouTube videos simply by switching to 
their browser. 
C. Future Electronic Textbooks 
The future of electronic textbooks was investigated in 
many ways.  Overall, design students reported that they would 
be more likely to use electronic textbooks if they were more 
interactive.  They also desire more features such as accurate 
text to speech, improved bookmarks that used a sentence or 
word to mark a place, manipulatable images, and improved 
responses from the technology when attempting to select or 
highlight text.  Design students also reported a desire for 
improved text displays, which would reduce eye fatigue, such 
as e-ink technology or the ability to select the colors and 
contrast between text and background based on individual 
preference.  Engineering students also agreed that they would 
be more likely to use electronic textbooks that were more 
interactive.  They believed that this type of electronic textbook 
would facilitate their learning, speed up their work progress, 
and make them more efficient students.  They wanted less text 
and more components such as 3D and manipulatable pictures 

262
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and videos to help illuminate the concepts.  The majority of 
the groups suggested ways of doing this that are not feasible 
with the current technology available commercially.  
Frequently both disciplines requested holographs or 
projection systems for the images so that they would be able 
to interact with them in what they described as a more 
interesting or detailed way.  These students also placed large 
emphasis on better annotation tools.  They felt that a more 
natural input for annotation would help facilitate their learning 
of the materials and if they could write with their finger or a 
pen and have the information be recorded within the electronic 
textbook that it would be ideal for their learning experience.  
Both disciplines thought that electronic textbooks would be 
improved by shorter blocks of text.  Some students even 
believed that simple summaries of the main concept would 
assist them during their academic readings. 
When students were presented with information regarding 
the answers from the previous survey, design students agreed 
that the top five components chosen were appropriate (see 
Table I).  They believed that text was more vital to the learning 
experience than students in the survey rated it, but agreed that 
the readings they have to read are diverse and that a lot of it 
seems unimportant to them, which could have influenced the 
ranking.  Students reported that multimedia ranking first was 
understandable based on their discipline but thought that the 
importance of the information from the text should not be 
subverted.  Design students also reported that the findings of 
the undesirable components from the survey were valid (see 
Table II).   
 
TABLE I. COMPONENTS DESIRED BY STUDENTS 
 
Rank 
Desired Components 
Design Students 
Engineering Students 
1 
Multimedia 
Text 
2 
Bookmarks 
Highlighting Tool 
3 
Highlighting 
Multimedia 
4 
Text 
Bookmarks 
5 
Translation, Dictionary, and 
Encyclopedia 
Annotation 
 
While students liked the idea of speech to text in their 
electronic textbooks, they eventually decided that the benefits 
of the tool were not appropriate for electronic textbooks 
because the note taking required for academic reading requires 
more thought than afforded by speech to text tools.  Only one 
group felt that link to experts for answers to questions should 
be included in electronic textbooks.  These students felt that 
this tool could combat the limited amount of time they have 
with their course tutors.  The other four design focus groups 
did not believe this component was necessary at all.  
Engineering students thought survey respondents had 
overestimated the importance of text and underestimated 
components such as 3D images.  The student participants felt 
that these were the core features that should be included in 
future electronic textbooks and that they are in line with the 
traditional conventions that are already in place.  They 
believed that this type of response was because respondents 
chose components they were more familiar with and could 
envision.  Other than that, students believed the other 
components chosen as desirable and undesirable were valid.  
They especially agreed with the inclusion of a time 
management system as an undesirable component as they felt 
it would cause added unnecessary pressure to their reading 
experience. 
 
TABLE II. COMPONENTS UNDESIRED BY STUDENTS 
 
Rank 
Undesired Components 
Design Students 
Engineering Students 
1 
Hide Unimportant Aspects 
Hide Unimportant Aspects 
2 
Speech to Text 
Time Management System 
3 
Time Management System 
Speech to Text 
4 
Link to Experts 
Text to Speech 
5 
Text to Speech 
Project or Print Annotations 
 
After this general information was gathered, students were 
asked to complete the final activity in which they were given 
free rein to create the perfect representation of an electronic 
textbook for their discipline.  As this was without the 
constraints of current technology, many of the solutions 
students presented would not be fully functional at this time.  
Design students produced results that were more visual in 
nature.  The majority of focus groups provided sketches of 
their visions of future electronic textbooks, keeping notes on 
functionality and features surrounding the sketch while the 
other groups provided more descriptions on the functions with 
sketches supporting those (see Fig. 3). 
Their electronic textbooks often took inspiration from 
applications such as Adobe Illustrator’s interface and included 
the ability to add notes or photos directly inline, shorten forms 
of the text with emphasis on important concepts rather than of 
paragraphs, adjustable line spacing and text size, a table of 
contents, video, audio, adjustable images, bookmarks, the 
ability to synchronize across devices, translations, a 
dictionary, and an encyclopedia.  They felt that highlighting 
and annotation tools would no longer hold as much 
importance future electronic textbook because there would be 
much less text but still included them.  Yet, both groups of 
students felt they were still vital to the learning experience and 
included them.  They did stipulate that the current rigid 
structure of these two components were no longer acceptable.  
Highlighting needed to be more free form and easier for 
students to accomplish, whereas annotation tools needed to 
have a better physical input.  Typing notes into the annotation 
tool was considered to be a hindrance in learning the material.  
Students felt that handwriting better suited their notetaking 
styles.  They reported that this type of notetaking would allow 
them to draw their own pictures or create lists in bullet point 
forms to better recall and comprehend the materials.  Students 
also often built in the ability to hide unimportant content 
automatically by extending the text by clicking on the bullet 

263
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
point text. Many similar components appeared in the 
engineering future electronic textbook, yet the representation 
all groups of engineering students chose to convey their 
textbook was a list form (see Fig. 4).  This electronic textbook 
also relied on less text, but included some discipline specific 
aspects like interactive equations. 
 
Figure 3. Two examples of the future electronic textbook by Design Students. 
 
Figure 4. Two examples of the future electronic textbook by Engineering Students.
 
 

264
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This section discusses the findings from the focus group 
sessions as a whole and in relation to past literature. 
A. Student Usage 
Student usage of physical and electronic textbooks 
differed in both disciplines in all aspects of use.  However, 
both disciplines of students felt that current electronic 
textbooks did not meet their needs as well as the physical 
textbooks did.  They described usage of electronic textbooks 
as something that was encouraged by peers, faculty, or 
necessitated by circumstance.  Faculty support of the use of 
electronic textbooks for their courses has been found to 
generally increase student usage of electronic textbooks [22].  
The mobility offered to students by electronic textbooks do 
change where and when they do their studies, something that 
students did describe as a convenience that outweighed many 
of the limitations of electronic textbooks.  In line with 
previous studies, even with this ease of downloading and 
mobility, students still reported that they preferred physical 
textbooks [2].  In addition, even with the increase mobility, 
students tended to access their electronic textbooks on the 
more cumbersome technology that is harder to use while 
mobile, which is in line with previous literature that found that 
users of stationary computers such as desktops were more 
likely to have experienced reading with an electronic textbook 
[22].  Similar to what past research has uncovered about this 
phenomenon, students reported not wanting to read long 
blocks of text in an electronic textbook [3] and that feelings of 
nostalgia [23] make it difficult for them to adapting to the new 
medium.  Nearly all of the focus group participants reported 
that they would print out long readings, rather than printing 
them on the screen.  If printing of the materials was not a 
function that was built into the electronic textbook, students 
would go so far as to find a work around.  Students discussed 
going out of their way to find copies of the textbooks that 
lacked Digital Rights Management (DRM) restrictions and 
even to taking screenshots of the pages and later printing 
them.  Printing out pages from electronic textbooks allows for 
students to continue to experience the four affordances of 
spatial flexibility, manipulability, tangibility, and tailorability, 
which students are nostalgic about in regard to print textbooks 
[12]. 
Supporting activities also changed for many students.  
They found themselves taking notes less, several going so far 
as to report no longer engaging in any supporting activities, 
and, as past research has found, they were becoming frustrated 
with built in functions such as bookmarking, highlighting, and 
annotation tools [11].  Repeatedly, students reported taking 
notes in the physical form was easier and allowed them to see 
their notes with the concepts, which later assisted in revising 
the material.  Those that took electronic notes would do so in 
a Word document so that they may include outside material 
along with their summaries of important concepts, such as 
pictures or links to other reference material.  They then 
reported that they would not go back to the textbook where 
their notes could be taken in context of the larger material. 
In addition to the change in supporting activities, the 
addition of the inherent distractions during reading of 
electronic textbooks is a serious issue that needs to be 
addressed.  Students stressed that certain components added 
to enhance electronic textbooks or the simple act of switching 
to a browser to search for a keyword adds time on to the total 
reading experience and that past research has informed us will 
interrupt their deep reading and overall comprehension of the 
materials [24].  By investigating current use of both types of 
textbooks, the differences in usage, issues that may arise and 
understanding the reasoning behind the usage design 
recommendations, such as shortening blocks of text and 
finding opportunities to incorporate aspects reminiscent of the 
four affordances, such as the ability to see notes on the page 
instead of hidden within an icon, can be made for future 
electronic textbooks.  Also this type of comparative 
investigation allows for an understanding of technical and 
ergonomic issues, which emerge from the shift in mediums 
that can then be designed to avoid. 
B. Future Textbooks 
Student preference for design attributes of electronic 
textbooks was similar in both disciplines of design and 
engineering, yet several components differed.  Overall, all 
students agreed that text should be limited to the most 
important information presented in a shortened paragraph or 
bullet point form.  More information could then be accessed 
through hovering over the text or similar interaction.  Students 
also felt that creating textbooks that were more interactive 
would facilitate their learning and allow them to truly 
understand and engage with the material.  Based on student 
responses, making this type of change would rectify the shift 
in reading style away from what scholars identify as surface 
reading back to deep reading [9, 10], which past research has 
proven necessary for succeeding academically.  While these 
reported changes may make electronic textbooks more 
appropriate for the type of reading required, previously 
reported interaction may have been influenced by current 
ideas of electronic textbooks like the students in the focus 
groups reported with the past survey results [16].  In addition, 
student enthusiasm for these components may later wane, but 
previous studies show that should do little to the effectiveness 
of the components [25]. 
Because of the issues associated with students’ dislike of 
long blocks of text and subsequent effect on reading quality, 
it is recommended that designers incorporate short blocks of 
text [26] with extended information hidden.  The loss of 
information in long form can be supplemented with 
components such as multimedia or other engaging 
components.  Although limiting the text may make the 
information easier to students to digest and read, changes still 
need to be made regarding the supporting tasks.  The common 
request for electronic textbooks to include a more natural 
input method for notetaking, which would be closer to 
handwriting has been already implemented in some e-reading 
applications such as Evernote (see Fig. 5), this technology is 
still reported to be cumbersome and not available in many of 
the applications students use during their academic reading.  
Based on student feedback during the focus group sessions, 

265
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
more advanced and user friendly versions of this component 
would be well received and assist in encouraging students to 
use electronic textbooks.  Many of the students also reported 
desiring a stylus to take notes.  While this may make taking 
notes more reminiscent of taking notes with physical pen and 
paper, it may create additional complications, which were not 
previously present in electronic textbooks.  Examples of this 
would be creating a situation where the stylus has to be 
replaced when a student misplaces them, causing an additional 
expense or making taking notes when completing academic 
reading whilst traveling more difficult than it was previously 
reported. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Example of notes taken in an electronic text in Evernote. 
 
C. Comparison of Disciplines 
While there were many similarities in responses on the 
components and format in which future electronic textbooks 
were presented from both engineering students and design 
students, there were some fundamental differences.  One of 
these differences was highlighted during the second activity 
in which it became apparent that while similar requirements 
may be requested, the ways in which students think and 
interact with each other and academic materials are different.  
Design students felt comfortable creating a visual 
representation of what they thought their perfect discipline 
specific future electronic textbook was and worked together 
from the start to create their ultimate proposal, each of them 
adding to the proposed textbook as they saw fit.  This can be 
associated with the nature of design being undertaken as a 
team project, especially as taught at this university.  On the 
contrary, engineering students presented their answers in a list 
form and instead of compromising and discussing opinions 
during the creation process, waited until after their individual 
lists were made to try and unify their answers.  They also 
requested that one student write the final list and would only 
switch designated writers if they felt they did not support the 
inclusion of a component as strongly as another student.  This 
could be attributed to the often solitary nature of engineering 
projects, at least in the early stages of work. 
When examining the differences in component inclusion, 
the discipline requirements become apparent.  While both 
groups of students wanted to be able to add their own photos 
to the text inline or with obvious icons to remind them of their 
inclusion and have text represented in bullet form, engineering 
students did not feel that taking their own notes were 
absolutely necessary in the new textbook and questioned the 
requirement for inclusion of this tool, though including it later 
in their final recommendations.  When asked about their 
hesitance surrounding the inclusion of the component, they 
stated that the information was now in point form and they no 
longer needed to take notes but could still see value in the 
inclusion of the component.  On the contrary, design students 
felt no hesitance surrounding the component and still wanted 
to take their own notes, indicating that this was a requirement 
based on the interdisciplinary and creative aspects of the 
design process.  Engineering students also requested the 
component interactive equations to be included in their future 
textbook, which is consistent with a discipline that requires 
the use of equations in their work over those that do not, such 
as design.   
Based on the educational requirements of both disciplines 
of students, it is important to ensure that components change 
based on the needs of the students and the concepts that the 
electronic textbook is trying to convey to their readers.  
Researchers have called for this in the past, requesting that 
textbooks are coherent and the content is tailored to the reader 
groups who will be using them [27].  This concept should be 
extended to the components that will be used in electronic 
textbooks.  Hartley proposed in the past that “changing the 
way we write textbooks is one way in which we can make a 
major improvement in the quality of instruction” and 
proposed that electronic textbooks could do this with different 
examples for different readers [27].  This already accepted 
idea, can be extended from the content design and into the 
technical design.  Some educators are already calling for 
digital textbooks, which bring together different types of 
content such as multimedia and text to create an electronic 
textbook that will be more interactive [28], which is echoed in 
the responses of the student participants in the focus groups. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall, students believe that future electronic textbooks 
need to be improved to become more interactive to facilitate 
their learning and help them fully engage with the material.  
Some examples of changes that both engineering and design 
students believed would be beneficial to their academic 
reading process were 3D and manipulatable images, 
multimedia related to the concepts, and better annotation 
tools, which allow them to add more than just textual notes 
related to the topic.  Also, students from both disciplines were 
not averse to changes in textbooks, which are currently outside 
of commercial technical capabilities such as holographic 
images. Although, students can agree on these components, 
when comparing two similar disciplines that share many 
fundamental characteristics with differences in approaches, it 
becomes apparent that we need to adopt an approach to 
textbook design that tailors electronic textbooks to meet 
discipline specific needs.   
From the findings of these focus group sessions, some 
design criteria can be identified for future electronic 
 

266
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
textbooks.  The future electronic textbooks need to become 
more interactive, discipline specific, and with less text.  Also, 
discipline specific components are vital, such as interactive 
equations in engineering textbooks, to better facilitate the 
understanding of their work and engaging with the material. 
While design recommendations such as these have 
important applications to industry and academia, more 
research should be conducted to truly verify the practical 
validity and educational repercussions of the components 
suggested.  The educational perspective should also be 
investigated to understand the use of electronic textbooks as a 
teaching aid.  This perspective is best investigated on an 
individual basis because of the changing opinions on 
appropriate classroom instruction techniques of the individual 
instructors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University for their support.  This research was 
supported by the Research Grants Council for the Hong Kong 
PhD Fellowship Scheme (1-904Z). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. A. Sheen and Y. Luximon, “Focus Group Study on Student 
Perception of Electronic Textbooks,” ACHI 2016, The Ninth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2016, pp. 110-115. 
[2] A. Denoyelles, J. Raible, and R. Seilhamer, “Exploring 
students’ e-textbook practices in higher education,” Educause 
Review. [Online]. July 2015. Accessed November 2016.  
Available 
from: 
http://er.educause.edu/articles/2015/7/exploring-students-
etextbook-practices-in-higher-education 
[3] M. Kropman, H. P. Schoch, and H. Y. Teoh, “An experience in 
e-learning: using an electronic textbook,” Beyond the comfort 
zone: Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE Conference, 2004, 
pp. 512-515. 
[4] N. K. Herther, “Ebooks everywhere: the digital transformation 
of reading,” Searcher, vol. 19(6), pp. 22-31, 2011. 
[5] B. Shneiderman, Designing the user interface: Strategies for 
effective human computer-interaction. Boston, MA: Addison 
Wesley Longman, 1998. 
[6] D. A. Kolb, “Learning styles and disciplinary differences,” in 
The modern American college, A. W. Chickering Ed. London: 
Joseey-Bass Limited,  pp. 232-255, 1981. 
[7] J. Defazio, “Challenges of electronic textbook authoring: 
writing in the discipline,” Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 352, pp. 8-14, 2012. 
[8] G. Fairbairn and S. Fairbairn, Reading at university. 
Buckingham, England: Open University Press, 2001. 
[9] B. J. Phillips and F. Phillips, “Sink or skim: textbook reading 
behaviors of introductory accounting students,” Issues in 
Accounting Education, vol. 22(1), pp. 21-44, 2007. 
[10] J. Bowden and F. Marton, The university of learning. London: 
Psychology Press, 2003. 
[11] K. O'Hara and A. Sellen, “A comparison of reading paper and 
on-line documents.” Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
Atlanta, GA, 1997, pp. 335-342. 
[12] A. Sellen and R. Harper, The myth of the paperless office. 
Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2003. 
[13] R. McFall, “Electronic textbooks that transform how textbooks 
are used.” The Electronic Library, vol. 23(1), pp. 72-81, 2005. 
[14] X. Tian and B. Martin, “Value chain adjustments in educational 
publishing,” Publishing Research Quarterly, vol. 29(1), pp. 12-
25, 2013. 
[15] D. C. Mauk and J. Oakland, American civilization: an 
introduction. London: Routledge, 2014. 
[16] K. A. Sheen and Y. Luximon, “Relationship between academic 
discipline and user perception of the future of electronic 
textbooks,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 5845-5850, 
2015. 
[17] S. R. Vaughn, J. S. Schumm, and J. M. Sinagub, Focus group 
interviews in education and psychology. Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publications, 1996. 
[18] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, The discovery of grounded 
theory: strategies for qualitative research. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction Publishers, 2009. 
[19] L. Millward, “Focus groups,” in Research Methods in 
Psychology, G. Breakwell, S. Hammond, and C. Fife-Shaw, 
Eds. London: Sage Publications, pp. 274-292, 1995. 
[20] R. Krueger, Focus Groups: A Practical Guide for Applied 
Research, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, pp. 36-
45, 1994. 
[21] D. Stewart and P. Shamdasani, Focus groups Theory and 
Practice. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1990. 
[22] J. R. Miller, A. W. Nutting, and L. Baker-Eveleth, “The 
determinants of electronic textbook use among college 
students,” American Economist, vol. 58(1), pp. 41-50, 2013. 
[23] B. E. Massis, “E-book readers and college students,” New 
Library World, vol. 111(7/8), pp. 347-350, 2010. 
[24] S. Aamodt, “Does the brain like e-books? A test of character,” 
Room for Debate: A New York Times Blog. [Online]. March 
2016. 
Accessed 
November 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
http://roomfordebate.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/10/14/does-the-
brain-like-e-books/?_r=0 
[25] M. Bode, M. Khorami, and D. Visscher “A Case Study of 
Student and Instructor Reactions to a Calculus E-Book,” 
PRIMUS, vol. 24(2), pp. 160-174, 2014. 
[26] P. F. Chong, Y. P. Lim, and S. W. Ling, “On the design 
preferences for ebooks,” IETE Technical Review, vol. 26(3), 
pp. 213-222, 2009. 
[27] J. Hartley, “Textbook design: current status and future 
directions,” International Journal of Educaitonal Research, vol. 
14(6), pp. 533-541, 1990. 
[28] Z. Miners and T. Z. Freedman, “A Kindle for every student,” 
US News. [Online]. August 2009. Accessed November 2016.  
Available 
from: 
http://www.socialsmarts.com/USNewsandWorldReportKindle
Aug20092.pdf
 

