Experiences and Preferences of Patients Regarding a Rheumatology Interactive 
Health Communication Application: A qualitative Study 
 
Rosalie van der Vaart1, Constance H. C. Drossaert1, Erik Taal1, Mart A. F. J. van de Laar1,2 
1 IBR: Research Institute for Social Sciences and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
2 Department of Rheumatology, Medisch Spectrum Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
r.vandervaart@utwente.nl, c.h.c.drossaert@utwente.nl,  
e.taal@utwente.nl, m.a.f.j.vandelaar@utwente.nl 
 
 
Abstract – Interactive Health Communication Applications 
(IHCAs) can make a valuable contribution to rheumatological 
care. The development of online health applications is moving 
quickly, and positive results have been shown. Yet solid 
research on use and acceptance of different information, 
communication and participation tools by patients is still 
lacking. In this qualitative study, we examined the health-
related internet use of patients with rheumatic diseases, their 
motives for using or not using certain applications, and their 
needs and preferences with regard to a rheumatology IHCA.  
We conducted semi-structured individual interviews with 
eighteen patients, who were selected from a hospital’s patient 
panel. Participants were diagnosed with eight different forms 
of rheumatism and their mean age was 50.7 years. The 
interviews were analyzed by two independent researchers. 
Results show that the applications most preferred by 
participants were: information provision on both medical and 
support topics, online communication with their doctor and 
insight in their personal health records. Patient support groups 
were less valued, as were participation tools such as symptom 
monitoring and online exercise programs. Patients reported 
clear preferences and pre-conditions that should be fulfilled in 
order for them to use the applications.  A large discrepancy 
was found between patients’ current use and their future 
preferences with respect to information about care and 
support, online access to medical health records and having 
online contact with their doctor. In conclusion, patients see 
great value in an IHCA provided by their own hospital, since it 
could increase reliability of the provided information, and 
would give them the confidence to use the application. Overall 
a rheumatology IHCA should contain communication and 
participation tools, both linked to the hospital, and information 
about disease, care and practical support. The reported 
motives and preconditions of the respondents outline key issues 
which should guide the development of an online application. 
 
Keywords – IHCA, rheumatism, patients, preferences. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The internet is making an increasing impact on today’s 
health care and the expectations about the effects of internet 
applications in health care are high. First, internet 
applications could support the growing need for health care 
resulting from both our aging population and the increasing 
number of people who suffer from one or more chronic 
diseases. Second, internet applications offer the opportunity 
to extend the patients’ role in delivering health care [2][3]. 
Accordingly, 
such 
applications 
could 
support 
the 
transformation of the patient from passive receiver of care 
into an active participant in the management of one’s illness, 
which is considered highly desirable in chronic health care 
[4][5][6].  
Presently, patients with various chronic diseases can go 
online to find information, self-tests, and self-help tools or to 
get in contact with peer patients. In addition, health care 
organizations and health care providers are increasingly 
developing their own web applications for their patients. 
These applications sometimes provide – besides the above 
mentioned tools – opportunities for online contact with 
health professionals and/or access to patients’ personal 
health records. Overall, three main categories of online 
health 
care 
applications 
can 
be 
distinguished: 
(1) 
information, (2) communication and (3) participation. 
Information applications mostly hold the provision of disease 
information 
and 
care 
information. 
Communication 
applications concern facilities for communication with peers 
or with health professionals. Participation – a broad area – 
concerns applications aimed at symptom monitoring, self-
management and access to medical health records.  
 
A. Interactive Health Communication Applications 
Interactive Health Communication Applications (IHCAs) 
are operational software programs which combine the 
provision of health information with at least one of the 
above-mentioned 
communication 
or 
participation 
applications. Patients with chronic diseases, such as 
rheumatism, can benefit particularly from IHCAs, since such 
patients are often considered to be on an ‘illness journey’: as 
patients progress through their journey, they might have 
different needs with respect to information, self-management 
and support needs [7][8][9]. An IHCA has the potential to 
meet these multiple needs because it provides a wide range 
of information, communication and participation tools. It is 
accessible independent of time and place, and its content can 
be patient tailored – which also supports the patients’ 
personal illness journey [3][10]. Moreover, the information 
143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

can be presented in accessible formats, such as video and 
audio clips, and graphics. Above all, two recent systematic 
reviews suggest that chronic health care IHCAs are effective 
in improving knowledge, perceived social support, and 
health behavior for various kinds of chronic diseases, as 
asthma, diabetes and heart failure [11][12]. 
 
B. Lack of supply and acceptance 
Despite these benefits, online applications for rheumatic 
patients remain scarce. Murray’s systematic review included 
24 randomized controlled trials on IHCAs, but no 
rheumatology application [11]. Another systematic review of 
online self-management systems by Solomon also did not 
include a rheumatology application in any of the 28 articles 
reviewed [13]. Our own literature search revealed only one 
study about a website for patients with rheumatic diseases 
that combined information, patient-provider communication 
and health assessment tools [14]. Other existing online 
rheumatism applications are single applications focusing 
mainly on participation, such as symptom monitoring, 
exercise support, or overall self-management [15][16][17]. 
Whereas IHCAs thus seem to be effective, it is still 
unclear which combination of tools contributes to these 
successes [18]. Moreover, not all applications on an IHCA 
are equally well used [19]. It seems that simply developing 
and implementing online applications does not suffice. 
Roughly, the often experienced lack of acceptation seems to 
be related to the patient on the one side, and to the 
technology on the other side [20][21]. Usability problems 
often occur; applications are not being developed patient-
centered and are not being tested by users before 
implementation. Furthermore, it is often reported in studies 
that patients experience an overload of websites containing 
information 
and 
support 
possibilities. 
Yet 
internet 
applications are often not initiated from the demand side of 
the patient, so they do not meet patients’ needs. In sum, often 
it is not known whether the services offered on the internet 
are services that patients actually desire. Furthermore, 
acceptance problems are often explainable by patients’ 
existing (negative) attitudes towards innovations [22]. Many 
people experience doubts on reliability when it comes to 
health related technology, for the large amount of supply 
causes confusion on what sources are trustworthy. 
Furthermore, privacy issues are of large concern to patients 
when it comes to private health information that is 
communicated via The Web. Overall, it is important to 
carefully match the applications on an IHCA to the needs of 
the patients, so that the offer is patient-centered and actually 
valuable for them [1]. 
  
C. Interview study 
In summary, while studies on the needs of patients 
regarding online applications have been conducted for other 
chronic diseases [8], within rheumatism there remains a gap 
in this kind of knowledge. The aim of this study was to 
perform a needs assessment among patients with rheumatic 
diseases regarding an IHCA. Our study focused on four 
questions: (1) Which (information, communication and 
participation) support applications do rheumatism patients 
already use on the internet? (2) What are their attitudes about 
available online support applications? (3) What are their 
preferences and demands for a rheumatology IHCA? And 
most importantly, (4) What are their reasons for preferring or 
not preferring certain applications? This paper will give an 
expansion on earlier presented work [1] and describes an 
overview of the methods used in our study, the results that 
were found in the three main categories of applications and a 
discussion on each category, including study limitations and 
a conclusion. 
II. 
METHODS 
A descriptive qualitative design was used, since this 
study was explorative. We preferred the use of individual 
semi-structured interviews to get the best understanding of 
patients’ experiences, needs, motives and preferences for a 
selection of widely used internet applications.  
 
A. Selection of participants 
Participants were selected from an existing patient panel, 
which was initiated in cooperation between the University of 
Twente and Twente’s largest clinical hospital. Patients 
registered on this panel are willing to volunteer in 
rheumatology research. The criteria for patient participation 
for the present study were: willing to participate in 
interviews, contactable by e-mail and not older than 60 
years. The interviews took place at the university or at 
people’s homes, at each participant’s choice. In total, 18 
interviews were conducted, after which data saturation was 
reached; meaning that no more new information of value was 
obtained [23, 24]. 
 
B. Interview structure 
Each interview started off broadly, by asking participants 
about their internet use. Both general internet use and health 
and rheumatism related internet use was asked about. 
Subsequently, participants were asked to reflect freely about 
their ideas and preferences for a rheumatology IHCA. The 
interview continued by discussing 7 types of widely-used 
applications within the three main categories of online health 
support: information, communication and participation. For 
each type, a prototype card was made which showed 
representative examples of existing internet applications and 
websites. The participants were asked about their current use, 
their needs and their attitudes regarding these applications. 
Also important were their motives for use or nonuse and 
their preferences for the applications. The 7 illustrated cards 
showed: (1) information about disease and treatment; (2) 
information about care and support; (3) peer support groups; 
(4) e-consultations via e-mail or online chat; (5) symptom 
monitoring (scoring of variables such as pain, swollen joints, 
mood and activity through which is visualized in graphs);  
(6) exercise programs; and (7) access to medical health 
records (the ability to give patients access to their own 
medical files, with information about their diagnosis, 
144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

treatment plan and latest lab results). The interviews took 
one to two hours, depending on the patient. The interviews 
were audiotaped, provided patients had given permission 
beforehand.  
 
C. Data-analysis 
The audiotapes of the interviews were transcribed 
verbatim. Current use and needs were extracted, and citations 
about attitudes and motives for use, nonuse and preferences 
or pre-conditions were selected and coded into categories by 
two independent researchers (RvdV, CHCD). The final 
categories were defined by consensus between the two 
researchers. Next, the first researcher examined the raw data 
again to ensure the robustness of the analytical process and 
to confirm that all the data were indeed reflected in the 
coding [24]. During this process, only the participant 
numbers were used to protect the anonymity of the 
participants. 
III. 
RESULTS 
This section gives an overview of participants’ current 
(health related) internet use and their attitudes towards 
future use of applications on a rheumatology IHCA. 
 
A. Characteristics and internet use 
Eighteen participants were interviewed: five male and 
thirteen female, with a mean age of 50.7 years (SD = 9.27). 
Participants interviewed had been diagnosed with eight 
different forms of rheumatic diseases: more than half of the 
participants were diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis (n = 
10), two with osteoarthritis. The remaining participants were 
all diagnosed with a less common rheumatic disease. All 
participants owned a computer and had home access to the 
internet. They used the internet on a regular basis, generally 
for several hours a day. The internet was mainly used for e-
mail, obtaining information, purchasing goods and banking. 
All the participants reported that they had used the internet 
for health-related purposes, usually to search for information. 
  
B. Utilization of and attitudes toward health related 
internet applications 
Overall participants saw great value in an IHCA provided 
by their own hospital. They reported it would lower barriers 
such as unreliability of information, and would give them the 
confidence to use the IHCA. When asked an open-ended 
question about which applications participants would like to 
find and use on a rheumatology IHCA, participants 
mentioned various topics. Most frequently mentioned were: 
information on the latest developments in treatment and 
medication, insight into hospital procedures, and tips to cope 
with troubles in daily life (e.g., at work, when shopping or 
doing household chores). All these topics were covered in 
the themes that were discussed using the prototype cards. 
Table 1 shows an outline of participants’ current use and 
needs, and their motives for use or nonuse on the 7 themes. 
Table 2 shows an outline of the preferences that patients 
reported for each support tool. Both of these tables are being 
extensively clarified in this section, using participants’ 
quotes.  
The applications most preferred by participants were 
information provision on both medical and support topics, 
online communication with the doctor and insight in their 
medical health record. Patient support groups were less 
preferred, as were participation tools such as symptom 
monitoring and online exercise programs. What stands out is 
the discrepancy between current use and future preferences 
on 
information 
about 
care 
and 
support, 
online 
communication with the doctor and access to medical health 
records. 
 
TABLE I.  
CURRENT USE, NEEDS AND MOTIVES OF PARTICIPANTS TOWARDS ONLINE APPLICATIONS (N = 18) 
Application 
Usea 
Needsa 
Motives pro 
Motives con 
 
Information about disease 
and treatment 
 
high 
 
high 
 
 
 
- easy and fast 
- can read what one wants 
- can read it when one wants 
 
 
- 
information overflow 
- 
can be unreliable 
- 
confrontational/can cause worry 
- 
already has all the necessary 
information 
- 
gets information otherwise 
 
 
Information about care and 
support 
 
moderate 
 
high 
 
 
 
- structured and complete 
- overview 
- helpful in decision-making  
- good reference tool 
 
 
- 
no additional care necessary 
- 
current health professionals recommend   
or refer to supplementary care  
 
Patient support groups 
 
moderate 
 
moderate 
 
 
 
- recognition 
- support in coping 
- giving and receiving advice 
- anonymous 
 
- 
unreliable information/advice 
- 
complaining people 
- 
confronting 
- 
impersonal 
- 
not wanting to spend much time on the 
145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

disease 
 
 
Ask your doctor 
 
low 
 
high 
 
- accessible and easy 
- reliable 
- enables time to write down questions 
and (re)read answers 
- could save visit to doctor 
 
 
- 
non synchronous communication 
- 
waiting time for a response 
 
Symptom monitoring 
 
low 
 
moderate 
 
 
 
- better disease insight for one self and 
the doctor 
- new and fun to try 
- shows patterns over time 
 
 
- 
confronting 
- 
time consuming 
- 
gets one too focused on pain and signs 
 
Exercise programs 
 
moderate 
 
moderate 
 
 
 
- help maintain self-respect 
- comfortable to exercise and get support 
at home 
 
- 
no self-discipline 
- 
already exercises by themselves/at a      
therapist 
- 
doubtful accuracy and safety  
 
 
Access to medical health 
record 
 
low 
 
high 
 
 
- more involvement in treatment 
- overview of appointments 
- overview of previous and current 
(lab)results 
 
 
- 
too difficult to understand 
a. Low: < 6 participants reacted positively; Moderate: 6 - 12 participants reacted positively; High: > 12 participants reacted positively 
TABLE II.  
PREFERENCES AND PRE-CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPANTS FOR ONLINE APPLICATIONS (N = 18) 
Applications 
Preferences and Pre-conditions 
 
Information about disease and treatment 
 
Information on three topics: 
- disease (diagnosis, symptoms, heredity) 
- treatment (medication, therapies, protocols) 
- coping (psychological, social, tips and tricks) 
 
 
Information about care and support 
 
Information on two topics: 
- medical care (job description, specializations, hospital procedures) 
- practical support (tools, insurances, facilities for e.g. work, housekeeping) 
 
 
Patient support groups 
 
- positive topics; tips & tricks 
- divers target groups 
- good control and protection on posts and privacy 
 
 
Ask your doctor 
 
- valuable extension to current care but no replacement 
- contact with own health professional 
- use for minor/non-urgent questions 
- quick handling of e-mails 
 
 
Symptom monitoring 
 
- tele-monitoring by doctor 
- use in consult and treatment 
- overview in graphs 
 
 
Exercise programs 
 
- solution to self-discipline barrier 
- safe exercises  
- online coach 
 
 
Access to medical health record 
 
- clear information and instructions 
- good protection 
 
 
 
146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1) Information about disease and treatment 
Every 
participant 
reported 
having 
searched 
for 
information on rheumatism on the internet. Most of the 
topics patients had searched for were related to medication, 
such as user instructions, side-effects and the development of 
new medications. Participants also went online when they 
felt pain, when they had doubts about their symptoms or 
when they had noticed new symptoms. Furthermore, the 
internet was used to gather information after participants had 
been given their diagnosis and when they heard or read 
something interesting. A final reason to search the internet 
was when a person had forgotten to ask the doctor 
something. The greatest reported benefits of online 
information were that it is easy, fast and one can decide for 
oneself what to read and when to read it. Whereas most 
participants had used the internet to obtain information, some 
participants did not have (or did no longer have) the urge to 
use the internet for health information because they believed 
it was too confrontational or led to unnecessary worry about 
their disease.  
 
“It’s fine by me, I can think of so many other things to 
search for and giving myself a hard time about. I live my life 
now and I don’t want to think about it daily [Female, 40 
years, RA].” 
 
Also, many participants already felt that they knew 
everything they wanted to know. Some participants reported 
that they felt there is an overflow of information on the 
internet, which can make it hard to find relevant information, 
judge the reliability of information and interpret the 
information correctly. Other participants reported obtaining 
their information in alternative ways, such as through their 
doctor or from patient organization magazines. Information 
provision via a rheumatology IHCA from their own hospital 
provoked enthusiasm, since it could overcome the problem 
of information unreliability.  
 
The information participants preferred the most could be 
classified into three categories. The first category is disease 
information, which contains topics such as the symptoms of 
the disease, the diagnosis, heredity and related symptoms, 
such as fatigue. Some patients mentioned that they want to 
be kept up to date on rheumatology research, to know about 
the latest results and developments. 
 
 “That is just keeping up with the newest developments 
within the field, as a patient. [Male, 55 years, Arthritis 
Psoriatica].” 
  
Second, information about treatment was preferred, such 
as medication, therapies and protocols. The final category 
concerns information about how to cope with rheumatism, 
which involves topics such as dealing with the psychological 
and social consequences relating to family, friends and work, 
how to keep exercising, and tips and tricks to overcome the 
difficulties in daily life that rheumatism can cause. 
 
2) Information about care and support 
Participants were asked to what extend they used or were 
interested in a ‘care guide’: an overview of all the 
rheumatism care and support available in the region. Half of 
the participants reported knowing of, and using existing care 
guides. Participants thought that these tools gave structured 
and complete overviews of health care and support services, 
and that they were helpful in making informed choices 
concerning health professionals. The most important reason 
participants mentioned not to use a care guide was that they 
did not need any additional care, and if necessary current 
health 
professionals 
usually 
made 
recommendations. 
However, a care guide from a rheumatology IHCA from 
their own hospital would be appreciated by most 
participants; it was seen as a potentially good reference tool 
in healthcare and support. 
 
“I used one (care guide, ed.) to find a physiotherapist in 
[small town] who was specialized in rheumatic diseases. 
Through this website I got the therapist I have now [Female, 
53 years, RA].” 
 
An effective care guide includes two kinds of 
information, according to the participants. The first type is 
aimed at medical care; the second type at support services 
and local resources. Regarding the medical care information, 
participants expect job descriptions and specializations of all 
health care facilities, including psychological and familial 
help. Each facility should show a complete overview of all 
its health care professionals. Also, information about 
accessibility, waiting periods, and hyperlinks to the web 
pages of each health professional is valued. A few 
participants 
would 
additionally 
like to read about 
experiences and opinions of other patients about particular 
professionals. Regarding the hospital participants wanted 
information about procedures, reciprocal expectations 
between the hospital and the patients, any changes in the 
rheumatism department and announcements of activities and 
meetings involving rheumatism. The preferred information 
on support services and local resources varied from 
household services to work reintegration authorities and 
health resorts for vacations. Participants also expressed a 
need for clear information about the options and financial 
help for home adjustments, support tools, health insurances 
and tips for disabled-friendly shopping, dining and 
entertainment in the region. 
 
“It is not just the medical part that counts, but also the 
coping in daily life. Where can you find information? Which 
regulations are important for you? How are things covered 
financially? [Female, 57 years, Forestier’s Disease].” 
 
3) Communication with peers 
One-third of the participants reported using online peer 
support groups or looking at support message boards 
occasionally. Participants identified advantages in online 
support groups since they can supply recognition, advice and 
support in coping with the disease. Furthermore, such groups 
147
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

are anonymous, which reduces the reluctance to discuss 
personal topics. 
 
“Larger issues you discuss with your doctor, but for me it 
is very nice to read about the little things and think ‘oh, all 
those other people experience that too’ [Female, 57 years, 
RA].” 
 
Reasons for not using online support groups were that the 
information can be unreliable and some participants felt that 
people who are active in online support groups tend to 
complain a great deal or will only talk about their own 
problems. Also, some messages about the scope of the 
disease could be confrontational. Furthermore, some 
participants reported that they did not fit into the target group 
represented by the online support group. 
 
“I searched a lot in the beginning, when I was just 
diagnosed with rheumatism, and then I stumbled upon a 
rheumatism peer support forum. That’s when I thought that 
if this is where I’ll end up, then I’m never looking again. I 
was really shocked by it [Female, 40 years, RA].” 
 
“I know these (peer support groups, ed.), but they didn’t 
appeal to me because there  were mainly younger people 
posting on them,  struggling with kids, getting married and  
jobs, but I already had all of that covered, so that  wasn’t an 
issue for me anymore [Female, 43 years, Ankvlosing 
Spondylitis].” 
 
Some participants added that they perceived online 
communication as impersonal, that they didn’t want to hear 
strangers’ stories or advice, and that they didn’t want to 
spend too much time reflecting on their disease; because they 
did not want to feel like being a patient all the time. 
However, because of the large amount and large diversity of 
pros and cons for peer support groups, most people found it 
difficult to give a clear opinion or preference about the 
desirability of such an application within a rheumatology 
IHCA.  
 
“Personally, I don’t want to be occupied with my disease 
too much. But on the other hand, I don’t want to miss 
valuable advice [Female, 57 years, Forestier’s Disease].” 
 
Participants reported that there should be clear value for 
them in the online support groups: messages should be 
positive, and the exchange of tips and tricks should be the 
main function of the group. Other important pre-conditions 
were that there should be accurate control of posts as well as 
on privacy, and participants thought it was important to have 
a variety of topics and target groups on a forum.  
 
To the question if a peer support group should be 
national or regional opinions split two ways. Half of the 
patients thought such a forum should be national, because 
they felt it could provide more information about how 
treatment and coping differs around the country. One 
participant even mentioned a world wide forum to learn 
more about current research and treatment development 
globally. Furthermore, patients saw more value in a national 
forum to be able to speak to new people; instead of to people 
they can also visit face-to-face.  
 
“Yes, than I would use it more. See, I already have my 
contacts with rheumatic patients in the neighborhood [Male, 
59 years, RA].” 
 
Regional cultural differences were also mentioned; 
people in the region of Twente are known to be more 
introvert and down to earth than patients in southern or 
western regions of the Netherlands. A national forum could 
enrich the information flow, because more (different types 
of) patients can contribute. However, the other half of the 
patients reported to be more in favor of a regional forum. 
This might provide more recognition between patients from 
the same hospital, with the same doctors. Also, it would keep 
things small and orderly when not too many patients have 
access to the forum and can post messages. Furthermore, it 
would be easier to meet each other in person when desired. 
Strikingly, the regional characteristics were mentioned in this 
context as well; patients mentioned it would be nicer to talk 
to other patients who think and communicate alike. 
 
4) Communication with the health professional 
The majority of participants had never used e-mail to 
contact a doctor, either online available doctors or their own 
doctors. Almost all participants would never consider 
consulting an online doctor which they did not know, for it 
might be unreliable and it would feel as a betrayal to their 
own rheumatologist. However, there was a significant 
discrepancy between actual and preferred use of online 
contact with their own care provider in the hospital. Nearly 
all participants felt that this facility would be a valuable 
addition to the current care, since it is accessible, reliable and 
easy. Moreover, participants mentioned that e-mail allows 
them to take time to formulate a question and to carefully 
read or reread a doctor’s answer. Participants would use e-
mail mainly for minor, non-urgent questions, mostly instead 
of using the telephone to ask a question. Yet some patients 
mentioned it could stretch the time between two visits or it 
could possibly even save a visit to the hospital.  
 
“Sometimes I just have a short question and it’s not 
necessary to make an appointment. Something I just want to 
check. I don’t have to make a telephone call for it either, 
there’s no rush. Sending an e-mail would suffice [Male, 58 
years, SLE].” 
 
Despite their positive views, disadvantages were also 
mentioned: one disadvantage is the lack of immediacy in the 
communication, which inhibits both doctors and patients 
from directly asking a follow-up question for clarification. 
Also, patients would have to wait a while for a reply e-mail, 
while face-to-face or telephone contact is both direct and in 
real time.  
148
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Overall, participants thought that e-consultations could 
be a valuable extension of their current healthcare. The most 
important criteria for this tool are that the e-mail contact 
occurs with the rheumatology department of their own 
hospital and that it should not replace their regular contacts 
with their doctor. Moreover, participants expect a quick 
response of e-mails in a protected environment.  
 
Some patients also mentioned to bundle abound 
questions to form a ‘frequently asked questions’-tool (FAQ), 
or to create such a tool in advance, to avoid a lot of the same 
questions. Most patients reported they would use such a tool 
because the threshold would be very low. Furthermore, they 
reported that these tools often provide a lot of useful 
information. It could also contribute to the recognition that 
patients feel, because they are not the only one with those 
kind of questions.  
 
“Those are things (FAQ’s, ed.) I read a lot, and then I 
feel like ‘oh, I am not the only one with these questions and 
they 
are 
already 
answered’ 
[Female, 
28 
years, 
Fibromyalgia].” 
 
Yet an important precondition is that the list of frequently 
asked questions does not become too large, which causes 
overkill and disrupts the orderly presentation of information. 
 
Using a chat function to communicate with their care 
provider causes enthusiasm for almost half of the 
respondents. It would save patients the stress of visiting the 
hospital, including finding a parking space, sitting in the 
waiting room and absorb all the information of the doctor in 
one time. Still, it would be one step to far for a lot of 
patients. They are afraid the conversation would get too 
chaotic or they would not know how to use the tool properly. 
An important precondition would also be that the amount of 
offered chat sessions by the care providers could cover the 
demand by patients. 
 
5) Participation by symptom monitoring 
Half of the participants did not have experience with 
symptom monitoring. The other half had some experience in 
various ways, for example using a diary or during a 
treatment. Reasons mentioned for using a symptom 
monitoring tool were that it could give both the participant 
and the doctor a better insight into the disease, which could 
benefit communication and treatment. Also, it was 
considered to be good to be open-minded about new 
approaches and methods, and it can be fun to use the tool and 
see patterns emerge over time. 
 
“You get a much better idea of what your bottlenecks 
are, and then you can explain it a lot better to the 
rheumatologist [Female, 40 years, Osteoarthritis].” 
 
Some participants were not able to grasp the use and the 
extra value of regular monitoring. Often because they felt 
they did not have complaints that were severe enough to be 
worth monitoring or because their complaints had been 
stable for a longer period of time. Other reasons for not using 
symptom monitoring were that it could be confrontational, 
participants didn’t want to spend too much time thinking 
about their disease and some patients feared it could be 
counterproductive if one becomes too focused on pain and 
symptoms.  
 
“I just don’t want to know. Ignorance is bliss; if I’m 
feeling good on a day, then I live it to the fullest. If I feel 
miserable the next day, then that’s the way it is. I don’t think 
about it too much [Female, 57 years, RA].” 
 
Participants particularly appreciated the value of 
symptom monitoring when the data would not just be for 
their own knowledge, but when their doctor also receives the 
data and uses it to improve treatment. For example, a doctor 
could adjust treatment or medication according to reported 
complaints by patients, or a doctor could go deeper into 
conversation about monitored problems during consultation. 
An advanced way of getting the monitored information from 
the patient to the care provider would be via tele-monitoring. 
The IHCA could offer an application with which it is 
possible to get the patients’ data directly to their own care 
providers. This way it could be a valuable addition to regular 
care. 
 
“For me personally it would only work when it would 
benefit me, when I could improve something with it 
(symptom monitoring, ed.). But if I would only be scoring all 
my pains en symptoms, that would not do any good for me 
personally [Female, 56 years, Sjögren’s Syndrome].” 
 
Symptoms that participants would like to monitor were 
primarily inflamed and swollen joints. Furthermore, the 
monitoring of pain, overall health, and exercise is important 
to patients. Stress, fatigue, medication and nutrition were 
also mentioned. Furthermore, the participants thought it was 
important to see possible correlations between these various 
factors in graphs. For example the effect of exercising on 
perceived pain, or the effect of sleep on the amount of 
stiffness. Symptom monitoring would mainly be used semi-
regularly in times of high disease activity, and before a 
consult. Participants also mentioned that it could be a very 
valuable tool for patients who were recently diagnosed, for 
exactly than it can give good insight in the variability and 
fluctuation of symptoms and pain.  
 
6) Participation by exercise programs 
Most participants did not have any experience with 
online exercise programs. They mentioned not having 
enough self-discipline to persist and they mostly preferred 
visiting the physiotherapist. Some participants regularly 
exercised by themselves, through daily activities such as 
walking or cycling, visiting the gym or using exercises from 
a self-help book or on a game computer. Still, these people 
149
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

also mentioned having self-discipline problems in regulating 
their behavior.  
 
“One time I got a booklet with exercises from the Dutch 
Arthritis Association. I started it, but on some point in time 
the motivation slipped away and I thought ‘well, never mind 
then’ [Female, 50 years, Osteoarthritis].” 
 
Some participants reported that using an online exercise 
program might, in comparison to physiotherapy, help to 
maintain a sense of self-respect: doing things on your own. 
Furthermore, being able to exercise at home and get tips and 
support via the internet would be comfortable. Still, almost 
half of the participants did not see any value in an exercise 
program on a rheumatology IHCA. They did not think the 
tool could address the need for self-discipline. They were 
afraid of the accuracy and the safety of the exercises, and of 
doing them without a supervisor.  
 
“It all depends on proper supervision. I can and I want to 
exercise, but if I do things the wrong way I get injured easily. 
When a healthy person does something incorrectly, he gets 
muscle aches, but if I do something incorrectly I can’t walk 
for a week. To prevent this, I want a physiotherapist next to 
me. I want to keep on exercising, but in a healthy way 
[Female, 43 years, Ankvlosing Spondylitis].” 
 
These barriers might be overcome by an online coach, 
someone who can watch the patient via a webcam, so that 
the coach can look along and give tips and advice. For some 
participants, this seemed like a good idea. Furthermore, 
patients would appreciate information and tips and tricks 
considering exercising. They would like to know which 
exercises are good, and which are not, or which could even 
be bad. They would also like advice on which exercises are 
good for what specific problems or for what specific parts of 
the body. Participants reported that this information would 
lower thresholds for them to start exercising in their own 
pace and convenience.   
 
“I would indeed look up which exercises they 
recommended, and I can imagine that I would also actually 
use them [Female, 56 years, RA].” 
 
7) Participation by access to medical health record 
The most enthusiastically identified example of an online 
application by participants was access to their personal 
health record. Fifteen out of eighteen participants were 
positive about this; they would like to have access to their 
complete personal health record, including previous and 
current test and lab results, their treatment plans and an 
overview of all the upcoming appointments. The most 
important reason why they wanted this was to feel more 
involved with, and in control of, their disease and treatment. 
 
“It would mean more involvement in myself. It concerns 
information about me, so I would like that very much (insight 
in personal health record, ed.) [Male, 59 years, RA].” 
 
Also, it would give a good overview of the entire 
treatment, both back in time and in the future. Patients could 
see how their lab values and their disease activity have been 
changing over time, and they could see how their treatment 
is going to proceed and what they can expect from the 
hospital in the upcoming months. 
 
“According to my treatment plan I have to give blood 
every 4 weeks and I have to get a consultation every 6 
months. If I could see that in a schedule, I would never have 
to ask myself anymore ‘How did this work again?’ [Male, 59 
years, Osteoarthritis].” 
 
One reason for not desiring access to their personal 
health record would be that participants feel it is too difficult 
to understand all the information. Participants argue that it is 
the doctor’s information and they would not know how to 
interpret it. Therefore, an important pre-condition is that the 
personal record should contain enough clear information and 
instructions to allow the patient to correctly interpret all the 
results and information. 
 
“How is that score calculated and what is good or bad? I 
would not know, the nurse always scores everything and 
than says ‘Well, you are doing fine’ [Female, 39 years, 
RA].” 
 
Furthermore, it is important that the records are safely 
secured. Patients want the information to be only accessible 
for themselves and for their care providers.  
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to 
identify a broad overview of use, needs, motives and 
preferences of rheumatism patients on a full spectrum of 
online support applications. Results reveal that the provision 
of an IHCA by ones’ own hospital causes enthusiasm. With a 
hospital based IHCA barriers of online applications, such as 
information overflow or doubts about the reliability, could be 
overcome. Overall, participants were most interested in 
receiving information on both medical and support topics, 
online contact with their doctor and access to their personal 
health record. Patient support groups were less preferred as 
well as participation tools such as online symptom 
monitoring and online exercise programs. Furthermore, a 
significant discrepancy between current use and future 
preferences was seen in information about care and support, 
online communication with the doctor and access to a 
personal health record.  
 
A. Information 
Presently, participants used the internet predominantly to 
search for information. Previous research among rheumatism 
patients, as well as among those suffering from other 
diseases, has shown similar findings [25][26][27]. In this 
study the emphasis was on the kind of information and the 
150
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reasons for which patients searched the internet. We found 
that the participants were predominantly interested in disease 
information, treatment information and information on care, 
which was also reported by Gordon [28] and Hay [29]. Still, 
many participants reported searching for other information 
than the aforementioned subjects, which is not reflected in 
earlier 
studies. 
First, many 
participants 
emphasized 
information about coping: how to deal with psychological 
and social consequences relating to stress, family, friends 
and work, how to keep engaged in exercising, and tips and 
tricks to overcome the small difficulties in daily life that 
rheumatism can cause. Second, information on support 
services and local resources was valued, such as on 
household services and financial support for home 
adjustments. Overall, participants seem to want rheumatism 
information in a broader spectrum, while on the other hand 
many participants mentioned that they often experience an 
information overload. This is widely described in the 
literature, moreover, the available health information is often 
unreliable or biased [21][30]. Information provision by way 
of a hospital IHCA, could meet the preferences of patients by 
overcoming the problem of a doubtful information overload, 
while still offering a wide amount of information. 
 
B. Communication 
Participants were asked about online communication 
possibilities with both their doctors and their peer patients. 
The reported overall current use of communication tools by 
participants is limited. Much is written about the possible 
positive results peer support groups can give [31][32]. Still, 
actual usage of online support groups seems to be moderate 
[24][33][34][35][36]. The current study shows that most 
participants do not immediately reject the concept of online 
peer support groups, but they only want to participate under 
certain conditions. Participants would like to read positive 
messages 
and 
practical 
tips 
from 
other 
patients. 
Communication with health professionals shows a large 
discrepancy between current use and needs for the future. 
This is also shown by Van Lankveld in a study on current 
and expected use of online health applications by the 
chronically ill [27]. This discrepancy is largely due to lack of 
opportunity. Most participants have never communicated 
with their doctor online [33], because such applications were 
not available. Still, when offered, e-mail contact appears to 
be a popular facility [13][18][34][35][37]. Our study reveals 
that rheumatism patients thought it would be an accessible, 
reliable and easy way to improve their current care. 
However, patients do not want e-mail communication to 
replace 
consultations 
or 
other 
face-to-face 
contact. 
Moreover, practical implementation might be difficult as e-
mail communication might be impeded by legal, budgetary 
and motivational barriers [38].  
 
C. Participation 
The current use of self-management or exercise programs 
is reported as moderate by patients. Many of our participants 
did not see the purpose of these applications, or they 
believed it would demand too great a time investment 
without clear benefits. Previous trial studies concerning self 
management and physical activity in rheumatism showed 
good 
results 
using 
computer-based 
technologies 
[15][31][39]. However, despite of promising results, the 
predicted use of suchlike tools on an IHCA is still moderate. 
Reported explanations for this are barriers in both self-
discipline and accuracy, and safety of the exercises.  
On symptom monitoring patients stated that their 
motivation to use the application would definitely increase if 
their doctor would use the information for treatment 
purposes. Therefore, the greatest promise of these tools is 
when linkage to the treatment can be realized. The perceived 
usefulness for themselves and for their treatment is a large 
motivator for use: this raises interesting questions about the 
possible future use of these applications. For example, tele-
monitoring, in which the doctor applies a patient’s self-
reported data on monitoring and management during the 
consultation. 
Finally, a participation tool with great potential is online 
access to medical health records. Previous studies have 
shown that this application is well received by patients 
[18][37][38][40] and the participants in this study also report 
enthusiasm. This application would give patients the sense of 
being involved in, and in charge of, their own disease and 
treatment. Motivations such as this are very important 
because they demonstrate the value an IHCA can have in 
involving patients in their care process.  
 
D. Preferences 
Results show that patients mentioned a lot of pre-
conditions which should be fulfilled in order for them to use 
the various support tools, especially for the communication 
and participation tools (Table 2). Often, the reported motives 
for not using the support tools could be overcome when the 
patients’ demands on possibilities, quality and care provider 
involvement for each online support tool are met. Therefore, 
it is very important to meet these pre-conditions when 
developing a rheumatology IHCA; this is what makes the 
application patient-centered. If we wish to overcome the 
current acceptance problems that many online applications 
face when it comes to actual use, patients’ wishes should be 
complied with as much as possible and feasible. Still, it 
should be noticed that many patients have not yet had the 
opportunity to use most of the participation applications, so 
their preferences and pre-conditions are not based on 
experience, but on expected usefulness [41]. 
 
E. Study limitations 
There are limitations to this study. This qualitative study 
may not be representative for all patients. The participants 
were volunteers who, being more actively involved in 
research than usual patients, may not represent typical 
patients. Furthermore, the participants had mostly suffered 
rheumatism for a longer time. This can influence their needs 
and preferences; they are in a later stage of their illness 
151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

journey than recently diagnosed patients. In a quantitative 
follow-up study these limitations will have to be averted. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Patients see great value in an IHCA provided by their 
own hospital, since it could increase reliability of the 
provided information , and would give them the confidence 
to use the application. The current study shows a significant 
discrepancy between current use and future preferences 
rheumatism patients have regarding online communication 
with their doctor, online symptom monitoring and access to 
their medical health record. Furthermore, our results provide 
an overview of important preferences and pre-conditions that 
patients have for each support tool in order to improve 
intention to use the application. Overall, patients prefer a 
rheumatology IHCA that contains both communication and 
participation tools, which are linked to the hospital, and 
information about disease, care and practical support. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would kindly like to thank all the patients that 
participated in this study for their time and effort. This work 
was supported by an unrestricted educational grant from 
Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, part of Pfizer. This funding source 
had no involvement in data collection, analysis, or the 
preparation of this manuscript. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Van der Vaart, R., Drossaert, C.H.C., Taal, E., Van de Laar, M.A.F.J. 
(2010). Experiences and preferences of patients with rheumatic 
diseases regarding an interactive health communication application. 
eTELEMED'10 Second International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, 
and 
Social 
Medicine, 
64-71 
doi: 
10.1109/eTELEMED.2010.16. 
[2] 
Demiris, G., Afrin, L.B., Speedie, S., Courtney, K.L., Sondhi, M., 
Vimarlund, V., Lovis, C., Goossen, W. and Lynch, C. (2008). Patient-
centered applications: use of information technology to promote 
disease management and wellness. A white paper by the AMIA 
knowledge in motion working group. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, 15, 8-13. 
[3] 
Keselman, A., Logan, R., Smith, C.A., Leroy, G. and Zeng-Treitler, 
Q. (2008). Developing informatics tools and strategies for consumer-
centered health communication. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 15, 473-483. 
[4] 
Powell, J.A., Darvell, M., Gray, J.A.M. (2003). The doctor, the 
patient and the world-wide web: how the internet is changing 
healthcare. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 96. 
[5] 
Ball, M.J. and Lillis, J. (2001). E-health: transforming the 
physician/patient relationship. International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, 61, 1-10. 
[6] 
Gustafson, D.H., Hawkins, R., Boberg, E., Pingree, S., Serlin, R.E., 
Graziano, F. and Chan, C.L. (1999). Impact of a patient-centered, 
computer-based health information/support system background: 
Consumer health information systems potentially improve a patient’s 
quality of life and activate patient self-care. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 16(1), 1-9. 
[7] 
Lapsley, P. and Groves, T. (2004). The patient's journey: travelling 
through life with a chronic illness, authors. British Medical Journal, 
329, 582–583. 
[8] 
Kerr, C., Murray, E., Stevenson, F., Gore, C. and Nazareth, I. (2006). 
Internet interventions for long-term conditions: patient and caregiver 
quality criteria. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 8(3). 
[9] 
Winkelman, W.J. and Choo, C.W. (2003). Provider-sponsored virtual 
communities for chronic patients: improving health outcomes through 
organizational patient-centered knowledge management. Health 
Expectations, 6, 352-358. 
[10] Nguyen, H.Q., Carrieri-Kohlman, V., Rankin, S.H., Slaughter, R. and 
Stulbarg, M.S. (2004). Internet-based patient education and support 
interventions: a review of evaluation studies and directions for future 
research. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 34, 95–112. 
[11] Murray, E., Burns, J., See Tai, S., Lai, R. and Nazareth, I. (2009). 
Interactive health communication applications for people with 
chronic disease (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
1. 
[12] Garcia-Lizana, F., Sarria-Santamera, A. (2007). New technologies for 
chronic disease management and control: a systematic review. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 13, 62–68. 
[13] Solomon, M.R. (2008). Information technology to support self-
management in chronic care: a systematic review. Disease 
Management Health Outcomes, 16(6), 391-401. 
[14] Ansani, N.T., Fedutes-Henderson, B.A., Weber, R.J., Smith, R., 
Dean, J., Vogt, M., Gold, K., Kwoh, C.K., Osial, T. and Starz, T.W. 
(2006). The Drug information center arthritis project: providing 
patients with interactive and reliable arthritis internet education. Drug 
Information Journal, 40(1), 39-49. 
[15] Stinson, J.N., Stevens, B.J., Feldman, B.M., Streiner, D., McGrath, 
P.J., Dupuis, A., Gill, N. and Pertroz, G.C. (2008). Construct validity 
of a multidimensional electronic pain diary for adolescents with 
arthritis. Pain, 136, 281-292. 
[16] Van den Berg, M.H., Ronday, H.K., Peeters, A.J., Le Cessie, S., Van 
der Giesen, F.J., Breedveld, F.C. and Vliet Vlieland, T.P.M. (2006). 
Using internet technology to deliver a home-based physical activity 
intervention for patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized 
controlled trial. Arthritis & Rheumatism, 55, 935-945. 
[17] Lorig, K.R., Ritter, P.L., Laurent, D.D. and Pland, K. (2008). The 
internet-based arthritis self-management program: a one-year 
randomized trial for patients with arthritis or fibromyalgia. Arthritis 
& Rheumatism, 59, 1009-1017. 
[18] Eysenbach, G., Fartasch, D. and Diepgen, T.L. (1999). Evidence-
based patient education on the web: methods and studies for 
determining consumers’ needs. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
Supplement 1. 
[19] Silvestre, A., Sue, V.M. and Allen, J.Y. (2009). If you build it, will 
they come? The Kaiser permanente model of online health care. 
Health Affairs, 28(2), 334-344. 
[20] Or, C.K.L., Karsh, B. (2009) A systematic review of patients 
acceptance of consumer health information technology. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 16, 550–60. 
[21] Wilson, E.V. and Lankton, N.K. (2004). Modeling patients’ 
acceptance of provider-delivered e-health. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, 11(4), 241-248. 
[22] Klein, R. (2007) An empirical examination of patient-physician portal 
acceptance. European Jouranl of Information Systems, 16, 751–60. 
[23] Guest, G., Bunce, A. and Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews 
are enough?: an experiment with data saturation and variability. Field 
Methods,18(1), 59-82. 
[24] Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods 
(2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA:Sage. 
[25] Eysenbach, G. and Köhler, C. (2003). What is the prevalence of 
health-related searches on the World Wide Web? Qualitative and 
quantitative analyses of search engine queries on the internet. AMIA 
2003 Symposium Proceedings, page 225. 
[26] Richter, J.G., Becker, A., Specker, C., Monser, R. and Schneider, M. 
(2003). 
Disease-oriented 
internet 
use 
in 
outpatients 
with 
inflammatory rheumatic diseases. Zeitung fur Rheumatologie, 63, 
216-222. 
152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[27] Van Lankveld, W.G.J.M., Derks, A.M. and van den Hoogen, F.H.J. 
(2005). Disease related use of the internet in chronically ill adults: 
current and expected use. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 65, 121-
123. 
[28] Gordon, M.M. and Capell, H.A. (2002). The use of the internet as a 
resource for health information among patients attending a 
rheumatology clinic. Rheumatology, 41, 1402–1405. 
[29] Hay, C.M., Cadigan, R.J., Khanna, D., Strathmann, C., Lieber, E., 
Altman, R., McMahon, M., Kokhab, M. and Furst, D.E. (2008). 
Prepared patients: internet information seeking by new rheumatology 
patients. Arthritis Care & Research, 59(4), 575-582.  
 
[30] Glenton, C., Paulsen, E.J. and Oxman, A.D. (2005). Portals to 
wonderland: health portals lead to confusing information about the 
effects of health care. Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 
5(7). 
[31] Shigaki, C.L., Smarr, K.L., Gong, Y., Donovan-Hanson, K. and Siva, 
C. (2008). Social interactions in an online self-management program 
for rheumatoid arthritis. Chronic Illness, 4, 239–246. 
[32] Eysenbach, G., Powell, J., Englesakis, M., Rizo, C. and Stern, A. 
(2004). Health related virtual communities and electronic support 
groups: systematic review of the effects of online peer to peer 
interactions. British Medical Journal, 328. 
[33] Anderson, J.G. (2004) Consumers of e-health: patterns of use and 
barriers. Social Science Computer Review, 22, 242. 
[34] Siva, C., Smarr, K.L., Donovan Hanson, K., Parikh, M., Lawlor, K. 
and Ge, B. (2008). Internet use and e-mail communications between 
patients and providers: a survey of rheumatology outpatients. Journal 
of Clinical Rheumatology, 14, 318-323. 
[35] Atkinson, N.L., Saperstein, S.L. and Pleis, J. (2009). Using the 
internet for health-related activities: findings from a national 
probability sample. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11(1). 
[36] Van Uden-Kraan, C.F., Drossaert, C.H.C., Taal, E., Lebrun, C.E.I., 
Drossaers-Bakker, K.W., Smit, W.M., Seydel, E.R. and Van de Laar, 
M.A.F.J. (2008). Coping with somatic illnesses in online support 
groups: do the feared disadvantages actually occur? Computers in 
human behavior, 24, 309-324. 
[37] Weingart, S.N., Rind, D., Tofias, Z. and Sands, D.Z. (2006). Who 
uses the patient internet portal? The PatientSite experience. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 13(1), 91-95. 
[38] Hassol, A., Walker, J.M., Kidder, D., Rokita, K., Young, D., Pierdon, 
S., Deitz, D., Kuck, S. and Ortiz, E. (2004). Patient experiences and 
attitudes about access to a patient electronic health care record and 
linked web messaging. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 11 (6). 
 
[39] Lorig, K.R., Ritter, P.L., Laurent, D.D. and Plant, K. (2006). Internet-
based chronic disease self-management: a randomized trial. Medical 
Care, 44, 964–971. 
[40] Dorr, D., Bonner, L.M., Cohen, A.N., Shoai, R.S., Perrin, R., Chaney, 
E. and Young, A.S. (2007). Informatics systems to promote improved 
care for chronic illness: a literature review. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, 14, 156-163. 
[41] Flynn, D., Gregory, P., Makki, H., Gabbay, M. (2009). Expectations 
and experiences of eHealth in primary care: a qualitative practice-
based investigation. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 78, 
588–60.
 
153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

