 
Assessing an Electronic Health Record (EHR): How Do Basic Assumptions in 
Traditional Health Technology Assessment (HTA), and Empirical Features Fit? 
 
Anne Granstrøm Ekeland 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: anne.granstrom.ekeland@ehealthresearch.no 
 
Gunnar Ellingsen 
Telemedicine and e-health Research Group 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: gunnar.ellingsen@uit.no 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The use of health technology assessment (HTA) in 
the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) 
is receiving increasing attention. However, assessments this far 
are limited. In HTA, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are 
the gold standard approach, building on a coherent set of basic 
philosophical assumptions. Scholars have raised questions 
concerning the assumptions and their fit with e-health, and 
thus questioned the ability of HTAs to produce useful 
assessments. The failure of assumptions to reflect empirical 
features of e-health is one explanation. This paper discusses 
this tension. Based upon the conference paper “Assessing 
Electronic Health Records: Are Basic Assumptions in Health 
Technology Assessment Useful?,” presented at The Eight 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine eTELEMED 2016, April 24–28, 2016, in Venice, 
Italy, we have elaborated the empirical substantiation and 
present 
an 
extended 
version. 
Using 
a 
sociotechnical 
perspective, we studied a large-scale electronic health record 
program in northern Norway. Drawing on data over a 5-year 
period, we discuss how the program’s plans, organization, and 
activities correspond to RCT assumptions. We found that the 
RCT assumptions of a stable world, fixed interventions, and 
controlled implementation processes differ substantially from 
the real-life processes. Thus, RCT approaches that build on 
such assumptions fail to address important features of the 
program 
and 
fail 
to 
produce 
knowledge 
that 
fully 
demonstrates (the causes of) empirical benefits or pitfalls. As a 
result, we suggest embedding a world in flux in the 
assumptions of HTA where social, technical, and clinical 
entities continuously shape each other in dynamic processes. 
This 
may 
increase 
the 
relevance 
of 
HTA 
in 
ICT 
implementation projects.  
Keywords-health technology assessment (HTA); approaches 
and methods in randomized controlled trials (RCT); empirical 
features of electronic health records; assumptions in constructive 
assessments.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Background  
This paper is an extended version of a paper presented at 
the 
Eighth 
International 
Conference 
on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, eTELEMED 2016, 
April 24–28, 2016, in Venice, Italy [1]. The six-page 
conference paper allowed limited space for empirical 
documentation 
and 
data 
from 
participation 
in 
an 
implementation process of the electronic health record 
program (FIKS). In this extended paper, the empirical 
documentation is presented to substantiate the argument in 
the conference paper, for novel and more relevant 
assumptions to guide assessment approaches within the 
health technology assessment (HTA) tradition. In addition, 
the account in the conference paper of the steps within the 
HTA communities was very broad. Therefore, in this 
extended paper, we also describe and discuss in detail the 
policy and scientific steps within segments of this 
community. The paper provides an account of processes 
initiated by the International Health Technology Assessment 
network (HTAi) to meet challenges concerning assessment. 
By expanding the authorship and time period of the data 
material to include the year of 2011, the extended paper also 
incorporates novel detailed empirical content to strengthen 
the argument of the conference paper. This paper also refers 
to 
previously 
published 
results 
that 
provide 
new 
perspectives on the empirical development of information 
and communication technology (ICT) in health care.  
The new material is in line with the original topic but 
substantiates and expands the argument. The conclusion is 
1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

updated to capture the new content by suggesting steps for 
updating 
the 
theoretical 
assumptions 
behind 
HTA 
approaches.  
This paper is, similarly to the original, positioned within 
a sociotechnical perspective and seeks to produce insights 
into the compatibility between the assumptions behind HTA 
approaches to assessments and the practices that are 
assessed. The main idea is that there has to be coherence to 
produce relevant knowledge.  
The need for assessments of ICT programs has been 
strongly expressed. For instance, the Parliament in the 
United Kingdom (UK) stated in a summary of the National 
Health Service (NHS) information technology (IT) program: 
“The original objective was to ensure every NHS patient 
had an individual electronic care record which could be 
rapidly transmitted between different parts of the NHS, in 
order to make accurate patient records available to NHS 
staff at all times. This intention has proved beyond the 
capacity of the department to deliver and the department is 
no longer delivering a universal system. Implementation of 
alternative up-to-date IT systems has fallen significantly 
behind schedule and costs have escalated” [2]. 
Health technology assessments are designed for, and 
expected to, produce knowledge to help decide about and 
procure technology and services that are accurate and cost-
effective and have the expected value and quality [3]. The 
Norwegian health authorities and international scientific 
networks for conducting HTAs have called for steps to 
strengthen its use in ICT. In 2016, the Regional Health 
Authority, North Norway (NNHA) funded a three-year 
project for developing and adapting HTA approaches and 
tools: HTA for ICT [4]. The project builds on the “One 
Patient–One Record” white paper presented to the 
Norwegian Parliament [5]. This extended paper is part of 
the HTA for the ICT project.  
The need to adapt and develop assessments for e-health 
has also been expressed in several scientific publications; 
some are referred to in Section C. A common concern is that 
established assessments have weaknesses in that they 
produce less relevant and timely knowledge. In this paper, 
weaknesses connected to basic theoretical and philosophical 
assumptions in HTA are addressed, more specifically, those 
expressed in the gold standard approach of randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) and related to the development of 
electronic health records (EHRs) in northern Norway.  
The research question is how assumptions of RCT are 
amenable 
to 
empirical 
features 
of 
the 
Common 
Implementation of Clinical Systems (the Norwegian 
acronym is FIKS), a large-scale program for developing and 
implementing a new EHR [6][7]. The paper also briefly 
comments on RCT approaches and methods, because they 
rely on the same set of basic assumptions. FIKS started in 
2012 and was scheduled to last through 2016. It lies within 
the jurisdiction of the NNHA in North Norway. The goal is 
to establish a common electronic patient record for all 
hospitals in the northern region of Norway. No pre-
implementation or baseline evaluation was carried out. 
The first objective of the investigation is to contribute to 
a knowledge base for dealing with challenges experienced 
when conducting traditional HTAs for ICT. The second 
objective is to briefly present and substantiate alternative 
assumptions and assessment designs. The alternative 
assumptions are presented as logical consequences of the 
study’s empirical findings. They are discussed as capable of 
strengthening HTA use in ICT for the benefit of patients, 
health professionals, policy makers, leaders, and industry.  
In Sections B and C, HTAs, represented by RCT 
assumptions and weaknesses, are presented. In Section II, an 
account of FIKS is given, followed by the methods and 
materials. The results and discussion in Section III are 
divided into three sub-sections; each addresses different 
assumptions in RCT: a singular reality (context), a clear 
definition 
of 
the 
intervention, 
and 
a 
controlled 
implementation process. Approaches and methods that 
accommodate different assumptions (a reality in flux and 
interventions and implementation as ongoing socio-, 
technical, and medical achievements) are discussed in 
Section IV. In conclusion, the paper argues that exploring 
such assumptions could be a path for developing more 
relevant HTA approaches for assessing e-health.  
B. Health Technology Assessment and RCT 
HTA is a research field defined and explained as follows: 
“the systematic evaluation of the properties and effects of a 
health technology, addressing the direct and intended effects 
of this technology, as well as its indirect and unintended 
consequences, and aimed mainly at informing decision 
making regarding health technologies. HTA is conducted by 
interdisciplinary 
groups 
that 
use 
explicit 
analytical 
frameworks drawing on a variety of methods” [8].  
The purpose of HTA is to establish a decision basis for 
procuring the right health technologies [9]. The European 
network for HTA, EUnetHTA, justifies the research field as 
follows: “Health care decision making requires the right 
evidence at the right time. Every day there are new health 
technologies available that can improve patient outcomes 
and refine health system efficiency. HTA is a tool to review 
technologies and provide evidence of the value these 
technologies can deliver to patients and their families, health 
system stakeholders, and to society more broadly” [8]. 
Health technologies comprise “Diagnostic and treatment 
methods, 
medical 
equipment, 
pharmaceuticals, 
rehabilitation 
and 
prevention 
methods, 
but 
also 
organisational and support systems used to deliver 
healthcare” [10]. The inclusion of the EHR as a health 
technology refers to the description above. The EHR 
comprises technology but also involves organizational 
structures, routines, and coordination components. In 
addition, the EHR includes vulnerable information, ethical 
considerations, 
social 
interactions, 
relationships, 
and 
competencies among users (e.g., doctors, nurses, and 
2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

patients) which are necessary to deliver health care. In that 
respect, the EHR can be subsumed under the concept of a 
health technology, albeit a complex one. 
In HTA, different products have been developed to 
support knowledge-based decisions in health care, such as 
systematic reviews, meta-analyses, economic modeling, and 
case or experimental assessments of new medical methods. 
These tools draw on basic philosophical assumptions and 
form a coherent approach. The gold standard tool for 
assessments is RCTs. An RCT is a type of scientific (often 
medical) experiment, where the people studied are randomly 
allocated to a treatment or intervention under study. RCTs 
are often used to test the efficacy or effectiveness of various 
types of medical interventions, such as drugs, or devices, 
such as pacemakers. The clinical quality of medications, for 
example, is also tested via RCTs. The interventions tested 
for different outcomes are assumed to be clearly defined and 
demarcated and capable of providing evidence for adverse 
effects, such as drug reactions.  
C. Assumptions and Weaknesses 
Accurate assumptions to guide approaches are imperative 
to produce useful knowledge for different stakeholder 
groups. The assumption underlying an RCT is that there is a 
singular 
reality 
amenable 
to 
objective 
scientific 
measurement to provide universal evidence for the outcome 
of the specified interventions. Human bodies, for instance, 
are assumed to mainly react similarly to a drug, so that 
general conclusions can be drawn about its effects. A stable 
situation is assumed and set up for the experiment, so that 
causal variables and links can be identified to generalize and 
repeat the outcome. One challenge for applying RCTs for 
ICT and e-health programs is that the empirical situation, 
reality, in general is more messy and in flux [11].  
An example is the assessment of electronic health records 
in the NHS IT program in the United Kingdom. Greenhalgh 
and colleagues addressed this challenge, and they asserted 
that e-health initiatives occur in complex and fast-moving 
socio-political arenas. Evidence is produced by and fed back 
into a political process of deciding priorities and allocating 
the resources to pursue them [12]. The authors suggested 
that interpreting practice in context, therefore, could be an 
alternative to producing evidence for universal truths in 
controlled experiments as recommended in RCTs.  
A second assumption underlying RCTs is a clear 
demarcation and definition of the intervention, including a 
fixed start and endpoint. In ICT programs, this can be 
difficult to achieve given the fast-paced technological 
development 
and 
the 
seemingly 
endless 
range 
of 
possibilities for novel service delivery platforms. It 
normally takes years to conduct an RCT, and this is 
described as the most formidable challenge threatening to 
upset the very promise of potential solutions: The rate of 
emerging technologies and services far outpaces the field’s 
capacity to demonstrate the conceptual or empirical benefits 
[13].  
A different challenge is the pressure to roll out new ICT 
services before pilots are fully evaluated. Implementation, 
thus, is assumed to be a linear operation where readymade 
technological applications are rolled out to an organization 
and can be objectively assessed. Human interaction might 
be considered an obstacle in such processes. The alternative 
is proposals to address closer person-to-person interaction 
between users and designers to understand how collegiate 
and interpersonal elements of care delivery can be better 
embodied in assessments and therefore brought to 
consciousness to influence development [14]. In design, the 
emerging openEHR standard represents a step in this 
direction as clinical personnel can define for themselves 
how the content of an EHR should look, that is, the type and 
degree of various structured elements in order to lay the 
foundation for interoperability, decision support, and 
clinical research [6]. OpenEHR is promoted through the 
international 
openEHR 
foundation 
(a 
not-for-profit 
company), and the openEHR standard represents the 
specification of an EHR system: the management, storage, 
and retrieval of health data [15].  
The three challenges described, and the assumptions 
behind them of a singular and stable reality, a fixed 
intervention, and a linear process of implementation, are 
interconnected. 
These 
assumptions 
and 
subsequent 
approaches could fail as guiding principles for addressing 
all the important aspects that affect knowledge about the 
value of ICT. Evidence of positive or negative effects based 
on erroneous assumptions might support overly optimistic 
and overly pessimistic expectations for future development. 
In HTA assessments, different models are, however, 
defined for the assessment of innovations and form part of 
the initiatives taken for novel approaches. The Core model 
distinguishes two models: the diffusion model and the 
translation model which are relevant to the discussion in the 
paper. These will be described and discussed in Section III 
D. 
In the remainder of the paper, steps to address these 
challenges connected to the FIKS program are discussed. 
The research question is specified and discussed in three 
parts: How are assumptions about the reality or context, the 
intervention, the process of implementation, and subsequent 
approaches and methods of RCT amenable to empirical 
features of FIKS? Based upon scientific literature, 
complementary assumptions that can improve HTA for ICT 
are presented. 
II. 
THE FIKS PROGRAM, METHODS, AND MATERIALS 
A. FIKS 
FIKS is a large-scale program for developing and 
implementing a new electronic health record system, 
running from 2012 through 2016. The costs are estimated at 
EUR 90 million, and the vendor (DIPS) is the largest EHR 
vendor in Norway [7]. The aim is to introduce a single 
electronic patient record at the 11 northern Norwegian 
3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

hospitals, including radiology, lab, pathology, and electronic 
requisition of laboratory services for general practices in the 
region [16]. 
An important goal for the Regional Health Authority, 
North Norway was to acquire a process- and decision-
supportive EHR. Thus, the bid for tender asked for an EHR 
with high interoperability and configurability that would 
enable users to tailor the software to their needs. DIPS was 
commissioned to develop the new EHR infrastructure based 
on the openEHR architecture [16]. Due to the high 
configurability associated with an openEHR-based EHR, it 
was expected that openEHR would have the potential to 
support collaboration and workflow of flexible patient 
pathway processes across department and institutional 
boundaries. 
B. Methods and Materials 
The paper is based upon mixed data material consisting 
of documents, web sites, information from advisors, and 
presentations of the FIKS program to different actors in the 
hospitals in North Norway over a period of 5 years, from 
2011 to February 2016. Data were collected via 
observations, interviews, participation in meetings and 
conversations, and access to documents and presentations. 
The authors collected data, as did PhD students who 
conducted participatory projects of aspects of the 
development process. References [6][21][23] and [25] are 
papers for which PhD students are the first author. The 
authors and the students are members of the research group 
of Telemedicine and e-health at UIT - The Arctic University 
of Norway. Different aspects of the processes have been 
extensively discussed in the research group, as well as at the 
Norwegian Centre for e-health Research (NSE). Numerous 
professionals were involved in these discussions, whom we 
thank.  
In addition, papers and reports from two large-scale 
evaluation and assessment projects in the UK connected to 
the NHS ICT program were studied: “The UK Summary 
Care Record Programme” [12] and “Healthcare Electronic 
Records in Organisations” [18]. Many scientific papers were 
recommended in publications from the two programs that 
focus on assessment traditions. The papers are discussed in 
the background and discussion sections. 
The different data sources are combined through a 
triangulation process. Triangulation is a social science 
technique that facilitates validation of data through cross-
verification from two or more sources [19]. In particular, 
triangulation refers to the application and combination of 
several research methods in the study of the same 
phenomenon. Such techniques were applied to combine 
information from multiple sources refined into useable 
assemblages. These culminated to form recognizable 
examples for the discussion of assumptions and approaches. 
The discussion sections also draw on arguments developed 
with the support of the MethoTelemed team, whose 
contribution is acknowledged [20].   
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Assumption One: A Singular Reality Amenable to 
Scientific Measurement and Control  
In this section, the context of FIKS is substantiated, and 
the program itself can be understood in terms of complexity, 
multiplicity, and dynamism. Making a clear distinction 
between the context and the program is not straightforward. 
Stable variables depicting the reality, or context, are, 
however, also distinguished and discussed. These are the 
terms in RCTs for distinguishing external and internal 
causal variables and links in order to be able to repeat 
outcomes in controlled ways. 
The context of FIKS is many mutually dependent actors, 
representing numerous interests trying to accomplish a 
unified vision. This was apparent in the formative stages of 
the project where several development tracks were 
established, and more than 150 users were invited to 
associated regional workshops to identify what needed to be 
developed. The workshops became an arena for the users 
from the different hospitals to understand how the practices 
differed. Accordingly, the users had to negotiate and 
compromise in order to agree upon standards and 
trajectories across organizational boundaries. To illustrate, 
in the first workshops, much time was spent discussing the 
different needs of small and large hospitals related to the 
role of coordinator in the operating rooms. In the smaller 
local hospitals with two rooms, this role had a very different 
meaning for users than it had for users from a university 
hospital with 16 operating rooms. This difference had clear 
implications for designing the new surgical planning 
module where clinicians from the smaller hospitals 
generally preferred simplicity in use instead of the more 
complex functionality that typically was needed at a 
university hospital. 
Another illustration is how differently the vendor’s 
developers and users understood surgery planning. While 
the vendor planned to develop a functionality in a business-
like manner where activities could close at different steps of 
the surgical planning process to exploit the surgical 
resources better (personnel and operating rooms), the users 
argued that planning surgery was a continuous process that 
did not stop until just a few days before the surgery. Thus, 
the regional workshops had to take into account different 
contexts of patient care and treatments in the hospitals.   
In this project, the vendor and the hospitals were 
committed to developing an EHR with highly structured 
content. Unfortunately, they had different understandings of 
how this should be achieved. Many users believed that they 
would get a structured record as part of the delivery of the 
new EHR. However, DIPS had in accordance with the 
openEHR architecture made it technically possible for the 
users to easily do this themselves. Accordingly, in the first 
pilots, the users missed the structured content. As a result, a 
national organization had to be established to standardize 
the EHR.  
4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In 
addition, 
the 
different 
hospitals 
where 
the 
implementation occurred represent different socio-political 
and institutional contexts. The context, therefore, is 
complex, interconnected, and politicized, as health political 
decisions affect resources necessary to add affordances of, 
and accommodation of the record. For example, in one 
aspect it was quite easy to agree to centralize the IT 
portfolio in a regional version from the previous 11 
hospitals. However, an emerging crucial question was who 
should run and control the daily operation (the regional ICT 
governance) and who should decide the functionality and 
use patterns. The university hospital took for granted that it 
should have this responsibility, but some of the smaller 
hospitals found this unacceptable. As a solution, in 2014 the 
University Hospital of North Norway (UNN) suggested a 
fragmented governance model in which each health trust, 
meaning each of the eleven hospitals in the region, should 
be responsible for regulating areas of the ICT portfolio on 
behalf of the others, meaning that one health trust would 
govern the EHR: One would regulate the laboratories, 
another radiology, and so on [21].  
In addition, the historical process accounts for the 
dynamic and interwoven characteristic of the context and 
intervention. In 2011, contracts for the program had been 
signed, showing the different industrial actors involved. The 
web page presented some of the milestones: In 2011, Helse 
Nord Regional Trust signed a contract with Sectra, Tieto, 
and DIPS. In 2013, Helse Nord Trust signed a contract with 
CompuGroup Medical Norge (CGM), and Infodoc. In 
addition, the pathology systems in two major hospitals 
merged. In 2015, Helse Nord Trust signed a contract with 
Hove Medical Systems [7]. The assumptions for the conduct 
of an RCT, a controlled, measurable, and relatively stable 
reality, are not reflected in the empirical features of the 
context/intervention. Instead, the multiple and mutually 
dependent actors and interests depict a reality under 
development and flux, depending on negotiations, shifting 
political conditions, and resources.  
B. Assumption Two: A Clear Demarcation and Definition 
of the Intervention 
On the FIKS web page and Facebook page, the goal is 
described as the ambition that the people of the north will 
have their clinical history assembled in one patient record 
and that the practice of sending records between hospitals 
will end. An ambition refers to a work process, not to a 
defined and fixed intervention as assumed in RCTs. The 
notion rather refers to assumptions of a creative process as 
in “Design Thinking”. One of the first features of the 
intervention was described in 2013: “Moving the databases 
of the hospitals in health region to one central common 
database, is an important condition for the implementation 
of common patient administration and treatment systems 
and one common electronic record for the individual 
hospitals in North Norway” [7]. 
New components were added to the service. Events were 
planned as an ongoing deployment process, and the program 
was described in terms of technical and operational events: 
the connection of the Narvik medical center to the Health 
Nords regional solution for electronic requisitioning of 
laboratory services (11/25/2015), the connection of the 
Leirfjord medical office to the Health Nord regional 
solution for electronic requisitioning of laboratory services 
(11/25/2015), the connection of the Nordreisa medical 
office to the Health Nords regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of laboratory services (11/24/2015), the 
connection of Træna medical office to the Health Nords 
regional solution for electronic requisitioning of laboratory 
services 11/24/2015), and the connection of the Skjervøy 
medical office to the Health Nords regional solution for 
electronic requisitioning of laboratory services [22].  
     By distinguishing events this way, the foundation is laid 
for RCTs of each part of the process, but the resources 
needed for this endeavor would be vast. There are also 
connections between the parts, and therefore, it is difficult to 
single out clearly demarcated interventions. For example, 
the different hospitals had older versions of DIPS (DIPS 
classic) in play, as well as existing systems for other areas, 
such as the laboratory and radiology. The implementation of 
the new portfolio cannot be achieved without taking into 
account 
foreseen 
and 
unforeseen 
constraints 
(and 
opportunities) in the existing systems. 
    Based on this, the senior management found it was 
enormously risky to replace the existing portfolio in one 
stroke and decided to pursue a stepwise strategy in which 
different modules of the existing portfolio were replaced at a 
time [23]. This made it essential that the new system had to 
be compatible (data integration) with the old system since 
they were supposed to work together over several years. 
Since this also was a development project, it was easy for 
the users to give feedback to the vendor on what worked and 
what did not and how newer versions of the software should 
be tailored to the users’ need. In this way, the 
implementation was far from clear-cut but had to be adapted 
based on existing practice, functionality in existing 
technology, and users’ feedback. 
    Moreover, to make the software flexible to allow future 
configurations, the EHR was developed in accordance with 
the openEHR approach, which encourages users to make 
changes to the software themselves. In this way, the EHR 
will never be a finished product but will continue to grow 
and transform after it has been put into daily operation. 
    Another process that affected the implementation of the 
new EHR was another large-scale project that started in 
2014. The goal of the project is to implement an electronic 
medication management (EMMS) system in the health 
region [24]. The EMMS and the new EHR are supposed to 
be closely integrated, meaning that many adaptions have to 
be made in both systems on what to integrate, when to 
integrate, and how to integrate them. Since the EHR and the 
EMMS are crucial systems for clinicians, and have much 
5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

overlapping functionality, it is not obvious in both projects 
how to establish the integration.  
    Currently, there is an ongoing discussion about which one 
of the two systems that should archive the master data (true 
version) of overlapping and integrated data. One example is 
information that a patient is allergic to certain medications 
or food, which is crucial information for the EMMS and the 
EHR. 
    When it comes to the affordances of FIKS, the web page 
states that the next-generation patient record is under 
development and is being tested in the region. Some 
milestones on the path to one common medical record were 
listed in 2016: There is one common medical record at the 
hospitals in Hammerfest and Kirkenes, the UNN employs 
regional radiology solutions, including a common radiology 
archive, and the hospitals in Helgeland, Mo I Rana, 
Mosjøen, and Sandnessjøen employ one common medical 
record (DIPS) [7]. 
    This information tells us that the contexts and the 
intervention consist of multiple, developing, and mutually 
dependent components and processes. 
 
C. 
Assumption Three: Implementation as a Linear and 
Controlled Operation  
 The notion “roll out new ICT services before pilots are 
fully 
evaluated” 
involves 
the 
assumption 
that 
implementation is a linear, top-down, and controlled process 
of a ready-made intervention. In addition, it involves an 
assumption that implementation can be distinguished from 
context and socio-political or human processes. The 
description of the implementation of FIKS, however, clearly 
points to an ongoing and changing process where different 
components should be aligned. This is how it is expressed 
on Facebook: The FIKS program in Helse Nord consists of 
six projects intended to develop and implement joint 
electronic record systems at the hospitals in Northern 
Norway: one joint electronic record (DIPS), new features of 
the electronic record (DIPS Arena), a laboratory information 
system, radiology systems (Sectra, RIS, and PACS), joint 
pathology system in Tromsø and Bodø, and electronic 
requisition of laboratory services [22]. 
In 2011, DIPS decided to use the openEHR framework to 
develop its next-generation EHR for the hospital market [5]. 
This involves negotiations on development directions. The 
role of interaction between different participants in the 
process is a collegial and interpersonal process, enacted as 
different 
meetings 
for 
dialogue 
and 
negotiations: 
11.26.2015, Workshop (EHR Development), Theater nurse 
meeting, Planning and booking DIPS Arena; 11.26.2015, 
Workshop (EHR Development), Theater nurse meeting, 
meeting with clinicians; 11/26/2015, Workshop (EHR 
Development), Decisions in psychiatry, new module in 
DIPS Arena; and 11/12/2015: Operation Planning (EHR 
Development) and meeting with clinicians at University 
Hospital of North Norway [7]. This process adds to the 
previously documented process of negotiating contracts 
with producers and vendors. 
FIKS also designates and educates super-users and states 
that 
employees’ 
competencies 
are 
crucial 
for 
the 
development of good record systems: “Close to 190 super 
users at Nordlandssykehuset are ready to be educated on use 
and routines of the new electronic record and become 
leading DIPS experts” [7].   
The description of the implementation shows a multitude 
of inter-related operational, interactional, and relational 
processes. Thus far, the roll-out process has been far from 
linear, pre-defined, and controlled. It has, instead, been 
characterized by continuous interaction, discussions, and 
tensions between different users and between users and 
developers. In turn, this has transformed how the vendor 
collects 
requirements 
for 
functionality, 
how 
new 
functionality should be tested, and how and whom to 
include in the various steps 
of the design and 
implementation process.  
For example, at the beginning of the project, the vendor 
invited users to define their requirements through user 
stories that were small descriptions (three to four lines) of 
work situations. The developers then used these stories as a 
basis when developing the new functionality. However, this 
appeared to be very problematic because due to the 
heterogeneous user group, it was difficult for the vendor to 
find coherence in the many (and diverging) user stories [25]. 
As an alternative, the vendor had to change the method for 
communicating with users.  
The users now had to define steps of, for instance, 
surgery planning in a several-page document, and the 
process revealed that the steps were performed by different 
professionals: sub-specialized physicians, nurses, and 
secretaries. This diversity implied that the developers had to 
broaden their perspective to look beyond the physician’s 
role. Even so, it became increasingly clear that the 
developers needed more contextual data, and therefore, they 
decided to spend more time in the hospital departments in 
order to identify what was needed of the new EHR in 
specific work situations [25].  
    The first pilot of a smaller segment of the new EHR 
conducted in a smaller hospital in southern Norway also 
revealed that there was a clear gap between the functionality 
offered in the system and what was needed in clinical 
practice. This gap underscored that users had to be even 
more involved in experimentation and testing of new 
functionality before it was put into action. 
    A crucial project management issue was that after four 
years of development, the UNN stated that it had spent too 
much user resources on the project and therefore wanted 
more in return from the vendor. It was difficult to come to 
an agreement on this, and a hospital in western Norway 
replaced the university hospital as the key collaborating 
partner in the development of the new EHR.  
    A linear, pre-defined, and controlled roll-out process is 
not present, as assumed in order for an ICT to be performed 
6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and produce generalizable knowledge about the effects of an 
implemented intervention.   
 
D. Summary and Discussion 
Among the challenges in applying a HTA framework for 
the study of effects of an electronic patient record is that 
HTA tools form a coherent approach and draw on common 
basic assumptions. As shown in the accounts of FIKS, the 
assumptions differ from the empirical features. The basic 
assumptions of a stable reality where generalizable effects 
of a pre-defined intervention can be transferred to other 
settings via an operational and linear implementation 
process, fail to address the empirical features described. 
This issue has been discussed in different HTA bodies, 
related to innovation research. As mentioned in the 
introduction, two different models or approaches are 
described in the core model. The first of these is the linear 
diffusion model, which perceives new technology as an 
external stable entity that is brought to a (health care) 
system and induces change [26].  
A competing paradigm, the translation model is also 
embedded in the core model. Within this model, technology 
is perceived to undergo changes as it interacts with the 
environment in which it is used. Hence, the final impact will 
not depend on the original technology only [26]. In the case 
of FIKS, both the technology, the health-care setting or 
environment, and the implementation process seem to be in 
a state of mutual translation. The findings, therefore, 
encourage openness to even more complexity than the two 
different 
models 
denote, 
in 
assumptions 
governing 
assessments. The empirical features of the applications and 
services connected to the record, are highly diverse and 
constantly in flux within the shifting social and 
organizational contexts. 
Challenges were connected to the discrepancies between 
the RCT assumptions and the features of the context or 
reality within which the electronic record is embedded, the 
intervention itself, and the implementation process. In the 
next section, approaches that build on other assumptions are 
briefly addressed. 
IV. 
COMPLEMENTARY ASSUMPTIONS: THE 
CONSTRUCTIVIST UMBRELLA 
Challenges concerning the validity of evidence in the face 
of the involvement of different stakeholders have been 
articulated within the HTA tradition, which is looking to 
overcome such challenges. One HTA tool is consensus 
conferences 
with 
different 
stakeholders 
[26]. 
Such 
conferences have been investigated, and the following 
assertion strengthens the argument of a shifting social 
reality and the need to consider social relations as drivers 
for intended and unintended outcome:  
“Consensus development programs are not immune to the 
economic, political, and social forces that often serve as 
barriers 
or 
threats 
to 
evidence-based 
processes. 
Organizations 
that 
sponsor 
consensus 
development 
conferences may do so because they have certain 
expectations for the findings of these processes, and may 
find themselves at odds with evidence-based findings. Other 
stakeholders, including from industry, biomedical research 
institutions, 
health professions, patient groups, and 
politicians seeking to align themselves with certain groups, 
may seek to pressure consensus development panelists or 
even denounce a panel’s findings in order to render desired 
results, the evidence notwithstanding” [27]. This is a long 
quotation, which we have chosen to cite because it 
illustrates the fact that HTA institutions are highly up to 
date on the complexity of evidence production. The 
importance of addressing social and political interests and 
processes are clearly recommended in order to understand 
the way evidence can be produced and affect the results of 
ICT use in health services.   
In contrast to assumptions in RCTs about a stable and 
objective reality, a fixed intervention, and a linear and 
controlled implementation process, constructivist traditions 
assume that flux occurs. This comprise that reality is under 
development, the interventions are subject to change, and 
implementation is partly unpredictable and depends on, for 
instance, resource allocation. Implementation is considered 
an ongoing process where certain types of support or lack of 
support strongly influence the outcome. Therefore, it is not 
considered possible to generalize evidence-based outcomes 
to repeat good results in new or future settings. Within such 
traditions, a formative idea exists. It implies to feed 
assessment results, which are produced along with the 
development processes, back into a pragmatic and political 
process of deciding priorities and allocating resources to 
pursue them.  
In this perspective, validation is obtained through 
negotiations between the context, the researchers, the 
intervention, and other stakeholders. Context is considered 
by involving different stakeholders’ interests, and validity is 
addressed by asking what the study is valid for [28].  
Such assumptions and resulting approaches may have 
particular strengths when the goal is to develop good e-
health services, to the confidence of users, professionals, 
policy makers, and payers, and as a leading market in 
Europe. Thus, obtaining a balance between different validity 
claims is a huge challenge. 
In a paper building on discussions in the annual meeting 
in 2016 within HTAi, the topic of changing HTA paradigms 
was addressed [29]. The new HTA paradigm is 
characterized by a more agile and adaptive HTA process 
across the life cycle of technologies, reacting quickly to new 
and real life data when they become available or when 
changes in the technology life cycle emerge; assessment 
methods and language that go beyond incremental cost-
effectiveness ratios, incorporating meaningful results for 
clinicians and patients; where information on what the 
health system and patients need from innovation, and what 
the health system may need to do to get value from it, is 
7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

discussed through the lens of health services delivery and 
product lifecycle; through multi-lateral stakeholder dialog 
and collaboration that addresses health needs and product 
conceptualization; 
through 
development, 
evaluation, 
introduction, and appropriate use in a changing landscape as 
other developments come on stream. 
     As the last point in this discussion, we focus on research 
networks 
and 
institutions 
where 
assessments 
and 
evaluations 
have 
been 
carried 
out, 
explored, 
and 
substantiated over more than three decades. We briefly 
introduce several papers and highlight basic assumptions. 
The point is to highlight shared basic assumptions to 
comment on a discussion of the need to unite networks to 
develop more operational approaches to assessments of e-
health, as well as to unite forces.  
What seems to characterize some of the research 
networks, is that papers have been produced periodically. 
Constructive technology assessment (CTA) was introduced 
in the 1990s [30]. It shifts the focus away from assessing 
impacts of new technologies to broadening design. This 
approach in general, assumes that design and assessments 
are co-producers of innovations, a dynamic and processual 
view of the context, intervention, and implementation 
processes [31]. Numerous papers were published around the 
start of the 1990s. Around 2005, a new wave of papers were 
published on the subject; see, for instance, Genus, who 
discusses assumptions of stakeholders and democratic 
processes as foci important for assessing added value [32]. 
Since 2013, papers and books have addressed pragmatic 
evaluations, and different institutions seem to share basic 
assumptions of dynamics and the use of real life data. 
Monitoring data is, for instance, a fast-growing option for 
knowledge production that invites collaboration between 
different assessment networks and units [33]. This point has 
been promoted by the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD). Scholars have also 
recently argued for the need to unify the efforts of different 
evaluation and assessment networks; see, for instance, [34].  
What is suggested for a new paradigm in HTA seems to 
reflect a combination of two broad traditions, the positivist 
as in RCTs and the constructivist as briefly outlined. To 
bridge the gaps between the assumptions of the two 
traditions, the positivist and the constructivist, should be 
important to produce valuable e-health assessments. This 
point was also noted by Ammenwerth et al. [35]. One goal 
should be to open the borders between traditions and 
identify how evaluators may draw on the benefits the 
different ones have to offer. 
The different networks and institutions briefly introduced 
in this section are the Science and Technology Studies 
network (STS) and the Medical Informatics network. 
Another research environment to consider is various social 
science networks, which have a long tradition for 
theoretically advanced assessment approaches. In this short 
introduction, we mention the book by Guba and Lincoln 
called “Fourth Generation Evaluation” [36]. The book was 
followed by a number of discussions on “naturalistic 
inquiry”. Fourth Generation Evaluation moves beyond 
science to include the myriad human, political, social, 
cultural, and contextual elements that are involved in 
processes of change. Based upon relativism, a unity between 
knower and known, and a subjective epistemology, the 
authors show how the concept fourth generation evaluation 
unites the evaluator and the stakeholders in interaction to 
co-create the product of the evaluation.  
All these networks are highly present communities in 
assessments of e-health and telemedicine. Their work 
should be considered, as well as initiatives within the OECD 
domain. We also introduced the MethoTelemed Team [20]. 
As a follow-up of the work in [20], this team is currently 
embarking on a review to assess telemedicine and e-health 
assessments, the methodologies used, as well as the review 
author’s conclusions. This work should provide additional 
clues about how different traditions have developed 
concerning assumptions and approaches. This work could 
strengthen the knowledge base for discussing joint forces. 
Answers to the question “Does it work?” to produce 
evidence for universal truths need to be supplemented by a 
whole range of answers to questions that reflect the 
complexity of most e-health interventions: How does it 
work? Who does it work for? What components are vital to 
success, and which are redundant? Why does it work in this 
context (and equally important not work)? Is this an 
appropriate and acceptable way of tackling the problem? 
How is quality produced and defined within certain 
innovation processes? Who owns the definition of success? 
This paper focused on the fluctuating character of 
reality, interventions and implementation processes alon 
with the development of FIKS. Nevertheless, the three 
elements have some stable features. In process approaches, 
investigations are directed toward the conditions included in 
the development processes, to feed the results back into the 
process for dialogue and improvements. The intervention is 
shaped and adjusted in and through practices of 
professional–social 
interaction 
between 
participants 
(doctors, nurses, and patients) and the organizational, 
economic, political, and ideological settings in which these 
practices are embedded. This approach is formative. The 
intervention also contributes to shaping these settings as the 
approach pre-supposes that all entities are in a process of 
mutual shaping. Influence and success are empirical 
questions, in turn, potentially enacting different answers in 
each situation assessed. Obtaining the power to control 
conditions will be the crucial task for the future results of 
innovations. Power may be based on participatory or top-
down 
models. 
Process 
investigations 
may 
produce 
knowledge to understand how successes are defined, 
produced and maintained.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The paper has substantiated empirical features of a reality 
in 
flux, 
an 
intervention 
under 
development, 
and 
8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implementation processes as ongoing negotiations for the 
FIKS program. HTA assumptions of a stable reality, a fixed 
intervention and a controlled implementation process were 
not present. Steps to strengthen HTA use for ICT are timely 
even if the HTA communities have not been extensively 
attentive to e-health. E-health communities have also not 
been attentive or interested in HTA. Steps to unite different 
research networks and institutions that make profound 
efforts to address the vast task of assessing ICTs in health 
care are also timely. Approaches that take into consideration 
dynamics and complexities in contexts, interventions, and 
processes 
of 
implementation 
are 
discussed 
in 
all 
communities. Knowledge about the conditions for large 
processes with escalating costs is important, as conditions 
built into the programs vastly influence the effects that 
emerge and manifest.  
Embedding assumptions of a world in flux where social, 
technical, and clinical entities influence each other in 
dynamic processes should increase the relevance of HTA of 
ICT and affect real-time developments. We suggest further 
exploration of assumptions that encourage participatory and 
process assessment approaches. Such assumptions will 
strengthen the knowledge base for future procurements, as 
human interactions play important roles in the development. 
We also recommend controlled studies of stable components 
of e-health. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are grateful to the North Norwegian Health 
Authorities that funded the project and to communication 
advisor Elin Vinje Jenssen, who rapidly translated the FIKS 
fact sheet into English. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  A. G. Ekeland, “Assessing electronic health records: Are 
basic assumptions in ‘Health Technology Assessment’ 
useful?” eTELEMED 2016, IARIA, pp. 36–41, April 2016.  
[2]  The Parliament, U.K., The National Programme for IT in the 
NHS: An Update on the Delivery of Detailed Care Records 
Systems, 
HC 
(2010-12). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect
/cmpubacc/1070/107003.htm 2016.03.14 
[3] International Network of Agencies for Health Technology 
Assessment (INAHTA), Health Technology Assessment 
international (HTAi) and Other Partner Organizations, HTA 
Glossary. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://htaglossary.net/HomePage 2016.03.14 
[4]   A. G. Ekeland, Health Technology Assessment (HTA) for 
ICT: Development and Adaptation. [Online]. Available from 
https://ehealthresearch.no/en/projects/health-technology-
assessment 2017.04.12    
[5] The Norwegian Government, One Inhabitant - One Record, 
Meld. St. 9 (2012–2013). [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/meld-st-9-
20122013/id708609/?q=Meld 2016.03.14  
[6] B. Christensen and G. Ellingsen, “Evaluating model-driven 
development for large-scale EHRs through the openEHR 
approach,” Inter. J. Med. Inform., vol. 89, pp. 43–54, May 
2016. 
[7] Helse Nord, Implementation of common clinical ICT systems 
(FIKS). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.helse-
nord.no/about-fiks-in-english/implementation-of-common-
clinical-ict-systems-fiks-article135571-42080.html 
2016.03.14 
[8] Eunethta, Mission, Vision & Values. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.eunethta.eu/about-us/mission-vision-values 
[9] B. Jennett, “Health technology assessment,” BMJ: Brit. Med. 
J., vol. 305, pp. 67–68, 1992.07.11. 
[10] Eunethta, HTA Common Questions. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.eunethta.eu/about-us/faq#t287n73 2016.03.14 
[11] T. Scott, T. G. Rundall, T. M. Vogt, and J. Hsu, 
“Implementing an Electronic Medical Record System: 
Successes, Failures, Lessons,” Oxford: Radcliffe, 2007. 
[12] T. Greenhalgh and J. Russell, “Why do evaluations of eHealth 
programs fail? An alternative set of guiding principles,” PLoS 
Med, 
vol. 
7, 
pp. 
e1000360, 
2010, 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000360 
[13] D. J. Jones, “Future directions in the design, development, 
and investigation of technology as a service delivery vehicle,” 
J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol., vol. 43, pp. 128–142, 
January 2014. 
[14] D. Avison and T. Young, “Time to rethink health care and 
ICT?” ACM, vol. 50, pp. 69–74, June 2007, 
doi:10.1145/1247001.1247008 
[15] OpenEHR, What is openEHR? [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.openehr.org/what_is_openehr 2016.03.14 
[16] S. Kallbekken, The first step on the road to one patient record 
in Helse Nord (Første steg på veien mot en pasientjournal i 
Helse 
Nord.) 
 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.unn.no/aktuelt/forste-steg-pa-veien-mot-en-
pasientjournal-i-helse-nord-article108606-10106.html 
2016.03.15 
[17] T. Beale and S. Heard, “An ontology-based model of clinical 
information,” in Medinfo 2007: Proceedings of the 12th 
World Congress on Health (Medical) Informatics; Building 
Sustainable Health Systems. Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp.760-
765, 2007. 
[18] Healthcare Electronic Records in Organisations, Research 
Perspectives Facts and Figures. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.researchperspectives.org/ 2016.03.15 
[19] A. K. Bekhet and J. A. Zauszniewski, “Methodological 
triangulation: an approach to understanding data,” Nurse Res., 
vol. 20, pp. 40–43, 2013.01.16 doi 
10.7748/nr2012.11.20.2.40.c9442. 
[20] A. G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews,” Int. 
J. Med. Inform., vol. 81, pp. 1–11, November 2011. 
[21] G.-H. Ulriksen, R. Pedersen, and G. Ellingsen, “Establishing 
ICT governance for regional information infrastructures in 
healthcare,” 49th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS), pp. 5137–5146, 2016. 
[22]  FIKS. Helse Nord: FIKS. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.facebook.com/HelseNordFIKS/info/?tab=page_i
nfo 2017.05.24 
9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[23] L. Silsand and G. Ellingsen, “Generification by translation: 
Designing generic systems in context of the local,” J. Assoc. 
Inf. Syst., vol. 15, pp. 177–196, April 2014. 
[24] J. I. Westbrook, L. Li, A. Georgiou, R. Paoloni, and J. Cullen, 
“Impact of an electronic medication management system on 
hospital doctors’ and nurses’ work: a controlled pre-post, time 
and motion study,” JAMIA, vol. 20, pp. 1150–1158, 
November 2013. 
[25] B. Christensen, L. Silsand, R. Wynn, and G. Ellingsen, “The 
biography 
of 
participation,” 
in 
Participatory 
Design 
Conference (PDC) ’14. Windhoek, Namibia: Proceedings of 
the 13th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, 
Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium 
papers, and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2, pp. 1–4, 2014. 
[26] Eunethta, HTA Core Model for Medical and Surgical 
Interventions. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://meka.thl.fi/htacore/model/HTA%20Core%20Model%2
0for%20Medical%20and%20Surgical%20Interventions%201.
0r.pdf 2016.03.15 
[27] C. Goodman, Introduction to Health Technology Assessment.  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://aaz.hr/resources/pages/57/2.%20HTA101-
%20Introduction%20to%20health%20technology%20assessm
ent.pdf 2016.03.15 
[28] J. Aguinaldo, “Rethinking validity in qualitative research 
from a social constructionist perspective: From ‘Is this valid 
research?’ to ‘What is this research valid for?’” Qual. Rep., 
vol. 9, pp. 127–136, March 2004. 
[29] D. Husereau, C. Henshall, L. Sampietro-Colom, and S. 
Thomas, 
“Changing 
health 
technology 
assessment 
paradigms?” Int. J. Technol. Assess. Health Care, pp. 1–9, 
January 2016. 
[30] J. Schot, “Constructive technology assessment and technology 
dynamics: The case of clean technologies,” Sci. Technol. 
Hum. Values, vol. 17, p. 36, January 1992. 
[31] A. Rip and H. Van den Belt, Constructive Technology 
Assessment: Toward a Theory. Enschede: University of 
Twente, 1988. 
[32] A. Genus, “Rethinking constructive technology assessment as 
democratic, reflective, discourse,” Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change, vol. 73, pp. 13–26, 2006  
[33] H. Hyppönen, A. Faxvaag, H. Gilstad, G. A. Hardardottir, L. 
Jerlvall, M. Kangas, S. Koch, C. Nøhr, T. Pehrsson, J. 
Reponen, Å . Walldius, and V. Vimarlund, “Nordic eHealth 
Indicators: Organisation of research, first results and plan for 
the future,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol. 192, pp. 273–
277, 2013. 
 [34] P. Doupi, “Evolving health IT systems evaluation: the 
convergence of health informatics and HTA,” in E. 
Ammenwerth and M. Rigby, Eds. Evidence Based Health 
Informatics. Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp. 220 - 236, 2016. 
[35] E. Ammenwerth, J. Brender, P. Nykänen, H. U. Prokosch, M. 
Rigby, J. Talmon, and HIS-EVAL Workshop Participants, 
“Visions and strategies to improve evaluation of health 
information systems. Reflections and lessons based on the   
HIS-EVAL workshop in Innsbruck,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 
73, pp. 479–491, June 2004. 
[36] E. G. Guba and Y. Lincoln, “Fourth Generation Evaluation,” 
SAGE 1989 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

