163
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Energy-Aware Systems for Improving the Well-Being of Older People by Reducing 
Their Energy Consumption  
 
 
Jon Robinson, Kevin Lee, and Raheem Yousaf 
 
Department of Computing & Technology 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nottingham, UK 
email:jon.robinson@ntu.ac.uk 
email:kevin.lee@ntu.ac.uk 
email:raheem.yousaf022012@my.ntu.ac.uk 
 
Kofi Appiah 
 
Department of Computing 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, UK 
email:k.e.appiah@shu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract—Fuel poverty is becoming a problem amongst the 
older community in the UK. To help reduce the anxiety that 
fuel poverty places on older members of the community, this 
paper will first address why such systems are necessary before 
introducing a system and various interfaces for engaging and 
promoting better energy usage.  Key areas of the proposed 
prototype will be discussed which focuses on a recommender 
and behavioural change system which enables older people to 
improve their energy footprint through energy-aware systems. 
Using systems to help reduce fuel poverty will invariably 
improve their general well-being.  Results show how this 
technology can be accepted and act as an enabler in improving 
the overall well-being of older people as well as other system 
considerations. In addition, a number of subsequent phases of 
the project will be detailed which will discuss a longer test 
duration, an analysis of the data harvested and future 
directions.   
Keywords- energy-efficiency; energy-awareness; intelligent 
sensor 
systems; 
recommender 
systems; 
well-being; 
internet of things; big data. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
   This paper is based on [1] and provides more detail 
regarding the prototype system and results as first presented 
at the 
2017 International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. 
   At present, older people within the community face a host 
of technological and perceptual problems, which can inhibit 
their interaction and well-being while using information and 
communications technology (ICT) solutions to improve 
their lives.  This is especially relevant when considering 
Internet of Things (IoT) based systems to improve their 
well-being within their home environment [17], dealing 
with heating and reducing costs.  Fuel poverty is a key 
societal problem that impacts on large numbers of the older 
community within the UK [2] as older people tend to fall 
into the low-income range due to low pensions and rising 
energy costs.  The worry and anxiety concerning their 
limited financial resources results in 20,000 – 25,000 deaths 
in the UK [4].  This is due to reducing their dependency on 
heating their homes as they are not financially secure 
enough to afford or pay for their monthly household heating 
or cooling bills [5].  The use of technology to help older 
people reduce costs is constrained by their fear and distrust 
of technology.  To enable older people to accept ICT 
solutions, the UK government has a number of initiatives in 
place to help reduce this fear (e.g., digital by default [3]), 
which aims to provide them with skills to use modern 
technology.  However, figures show that high numbers of 
individuals are still susceptible to fuel poverty which is not 
only reducing their well-being but also putting their lives at 
risk [4]. 
   Compounding the issue of fuel poverty, older members of 
the community also fear the use of technology which can 
impact on the successful deployment and adoption of 
technology to address the issue of fuel poverty.  Other 
issues relating to the acceptance of technology and the 
security of personal information also factor into the distrust 
of ICT, which is there to help improve their well-being.  
   In this work a prototype system is introduced to show how 
unobtrusive and intelligent technology can help reduce the 
energy consumption of older people and how this can 
impact on their behaviour by adopting more energy 
conscious 
patterns 
through 
a 
real-time 
responsive 
recommender system.  Therefore, this work will examine 
whether an intelligent recommender system can reduce the 
energy consumption of older people by predicting and 
modifying their daily patterns and behaviours so that they 
minimise their energy needs.  The first phase of this work is 
to address the aforementioned requirement and expand on 
this by considering large scale data collection for more in-
depth analysis and system considerations that need to be 
taken into account.   
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
provides an insight into existing systems; Section III 
discusses the design considerations that need to be taken 
into account when considering energy-awareness as a 
whole; Section IV introduces our proposed system and its 
key components; Section V discusses user interaction issues 
and factors that can deter engagement; Section VI provides 
initial results;  Section VII provides results gathered from 
the second phase of system development; Section VIII 
discusses what will be considered in the next phases; 

164
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Section IX provides a short discussion and finally, the 
conclusion is presented in Section X. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
   Reducing the energy consumption of individuals has been 
widely tackled by a variety of commercial and academic 
systems.  An approach taken by some commercial systems 
is to view each room as a separate entity and give contextual 
information regarding the state of the room.  Some systems 
require user intervention in the control of the ambient 
energy consumption.  For example, with the Hive system 
[11], to adjust or improve the heating within a room, a 
separate mobile based application is required which can lead 
to problems when considering older people.  Although 
additional sensors and smart plugs are available to provide 
the ability to turn on and off devices [22], these still need to 
have some form of user intervention.  Voice control or a 
mobile phone application is required to govern their 
operation.  However, this forces the user to actively 
monitor, respond and modify temperatures rather than allow 
the system to proactively shape the energy use of the home.  
IFTTT (IF This, Then That) [12] is another system which 
allows IoT integration within the home by providing users 
with a simple rule-based approach for governing the 
operation of smart devices.  Devices are linked to a web 
based system which can then control the devices within the 
home.  Systems like this would fail to address the needs and 
anxiety encountered when older people interact with 
technology [6] due to mobile technology and applications 
not being accessible to all older people which also increases 
their fear of technology.  Another similar system is the 
Honeywell evoHome system [13] which provides users with 
contextual information about the room temperature and 
provides them with a digital thermostat to control ambient 
temperatures.  The Heat Genius system [14] is another 
commercial product which uses motion control to determine 
whether heating is required in a particular room.  This 
system also provides the ability to learn and adjust room 
temperatures based on the life-style of the users.  However, 
these commercial systems do not address the issue of 
reducing energy consumption as a whole but instead focus 
on one specific problem i.e., heating.  
   Smart energy meters have been used extensively in the 
home and in some cases have targeted low-income and older 
users. In [16], a number of smart energy systems and the 
interactions with users are discussed.  Here, users used the 
Duet and Trio devices in a bid to monitor their real-time 
energy consumption over a one year period.  Smart home 
and assistive technology can also play an important part in 
monitoring and adapting the environment to best suit an 
older person.  Kim et al. [15] discuss the U-Health system 
for monitoring and supporting the older person within their 
home.  Wireless sensor technologies embedded within 
appliances in the home allow for the collection and mining 
of information regarding the habits of the older user, as well 
as providing decision-making capabilities to allow the 
system to adapt to the users’ needs. 
   In [23] Granados et al. proposed an IoT architecture for 
healthcare applications based on an energy-efficient and 
resilient gateway design taking advantage of some 
characteristics of many home and hospital environments. 
Their architecture focuses on enabling wide-spread data 
collection from medical and structural sensors. Similarly, 
Rahmani et al. [24] presented a fog computing-based 
solution to enhance different characteristics of IoT 
architectures used for healthcare applications in terms of 
energy-efficiency, 
performance, 
reliability, 
and 
interoperability. Their fog assisted system was targeted at 
monitoring patients with acute illnesses. 
   Leandro et al. [26] proposed a smart architecture for In-
Home Healthcare, based on the use of IoT for smart and 
individualised monitoring of elderly patients in their homes. 
The system has two units, a sensory unit for capturing 
images and a decision unit for inferring the user’s health 
from the images.  
   Zhou et al. [25] presented an architecture and a set of 
functional modules for a smart home energy management 
system, with the aim of implementing an optimal demand 
dispatch system. The system relies on the smart grid 
paradigm to collect real-time electricity consumption data 
from in-home appliances, including schedulable and non-
schedulable appliances. The main focus of the work in [25] 
was on the utilisation of building renewable energy in 
support of energy savings rather than fuel poverty.  
   The issue of fuel poverty is a multi-dimensional one 
which covers more than just the heating of homes.  To 
provide a representative picture of how energy-awareness 
impacts older people, all aspects of energy consumption 
need to be considered.  When looking at the problem of fuel 
poverty, any savings of an older person’s energy 
expenditure must result in financial benefits.    In turn, for a 
technological solution to fully address the issue of fuel 
poverty it must holistically look at energy-awareness as a 
whole, and provide ways in which behaviours and usage 
patterns can be altered to improve energy expenditure 
through an unobtrusive and proactive system which does not 
require constant user interaction to govern the control of the 
environment. 
III. 
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
   Older people face a number of challenges in today’s 
society which can impact their lives and well-being.  Fuel 
poverty is a major societal challenge which affects 
significant proportions of the society.  With limited financial 
resources available to older people who are reliant on state 
pensions, paying for fuel (i.e., electricity and gas) becomes a 
major concern for their well-being [4].  Within the UK 
alone, a high number of unnecessary deaths are caused each 
year due to weather concerns [2].  This can be due to 
excessively hot weather during the summer months or 
excessively low temperatures during the winter.  In 

165
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
circumstances like this, which require a higher expenditure, 
it is common for the older person to go without basic 
heating or cooling due to limited financial resources, which 
enables them to focus on other costs (e.g., food and rent) 
[5].  However, this has a detrimental impact on their well-
being due to the suffering involved, and possible death, 
during low or high temperature times during the year.  Not 
only does it impact older people, but the costs to healthcare 
for dealing with emergencies relating to the admission and 
care of older patients at these times, places stress on services 
which are already over-stretched.  
   Communities and community care offer care services 
where carers or social workers visit the older person to 
ensure that they are coping and not suffering.  However, 
with finite resources, only so much is able to be done.  To 
help in the care of older people, smart technology has been 
employed quite extensively.  For example, in [16], smart 
devices help monitor the older resident.  However, relying 
on technology can introduce other challenges.  More 
specifically, older people distrust and fear the use of 
technology [6].   This often leads to technology being 
ineffective due to the lack of engagement from the older 
person, especially if they are required to interact and engage 
with the technology in some way.  Davis [6] introduces the 
Technology Acceptance Model which impacts on the 
perceived usefulness of technology by the older person 
which can introduce barriers for adoption. However, older 
users also encounter problems with a general lack of 
understanding of ICT which introduces barriers to the user 
as it impedes them from making strategic decisions when 
managing fuel costs [10]. This lack of understanding needs 
to be addressed for the system to be effective and allow 
seamless interaction with the user.  For instance in [15][16] 
mobile technology is used but can introduce problems with 
engagement due to the fear of technology whereby the older 
person has to interact not only with an unknown and 
unfamiliar device but also some form of application and 
visual interface.  If the interaction between the system and 
older person is perceived to be too difficult then a lack of 
engagement usually results [6][9].  Therefore, intelligent 
devices need to be unobtrusive as well as the system 
offering a less technological way of interacting with the 
older person to minimise the impact of the fear of 
technology.   
   Behavioural change is another key consideration for such 
systems as the technology would also have to monitor and 
determine if there are better behaviour patterns when 
interacting with energy-reliant devices within the home.  For 
example, making a cup of tea or cooking dinner relies on 
some form of energy consumption (either electricity or gas) 
to complete the task.  However, energy tariffs can change 
through the day and can impact on the total expenditure 
over a month.  By modifying the behaviour of the older 
person to a more cost-conscious time can have benefits over 
the long term. 
   Therefore, when designing effective systems for reducing 
the energy consumption of older people, a number of design 
considerations have to be taken into account.  Namely, the 
use of unobtrusive technology which is embedded within 
the environment; simple interaction devices which promote 
trust; behaviour modification and prediction to reduce or 
better manage the use of energy reliant devices within the 
home; and, systems to recommend changes to patterns.  
   This work proposes to address the question of whether an 
intelligent recommender system can reduce the energy 
consumption of older people by predicting and modifying 
their daily patterns and behaviours so that they minimise 
their energy needs to ensure an improvement in their general 
well-being by reducing anxiety associated with fuel poverty. 
Anxiety has a clear detrimental effect on the well-being of 
an older person [9], which will hinder their interactions and 
acceptance of technology.  Improving the quality of life of 
older users is difficult to gauge as different people assign 
different values to things [8].  For that reason, the proposed 
system aims to reduce the fear of poverty and improve the 
quality of life for older users by providing them with 
guidance and options on how to change their behaviour so 
that they are more energy-conscious and aware of what they 
are doing through a simple house model interface.  More 
detailed feedback can be given to those users who feel 
comfortable with technology or to carers, or family 
members who are actively helping the older user.  By 
providing them with a more holistic and wide-ranging 
understanding of the energy-consumption which takes into 
account not only their heating but also their activities during 
the day can help them improve their overall energy 
consumption.  By looking at the whole, more substantial 
savings can be made which in turn reduces their chances of 
falling into the fuel poverty trap. 
   An addition technical design consideration is due to the 
heterogeneous nature of the devices necessary to perform all 
the tasks necessary to monitor people in their home.  No 
single commercial company yet provides lighting, power 
sockets, motion sensors and the other devices necessary for 
such a task. As such, it is necessary to create a technical 
solution that integrates the data from a range of available 
devices.  This can be achieved in different ways, including 
runtime transcoding [20], brokers [21], architectures [18], 
cloud based solutions [19] and proxies.  However, because 
of the relatively small scale of the required deployment, the 
data integration will be done in phase two which looks at 
data collection (see Section VII). 
   Therefore, in summary, this paper is intended to address 
the issue of the acceptance of technology as well as factors 
relating to the trust of intelligent systems and improving 
well-being by reducing fuel poverty.  This will be through 
simple, 
trusted 
and 
unambiguous 
human-computer 
interfaces, 
behaviour 
and 
activity 
analysis; 
and, 
recommender systems to help promote more informed 
energy-aware decisions.  This will allow older people to 
consider all aspects of their energy consumption, rather than 

166
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
focusing on one single aspect (e.g., heating) as their overall 
energy-footprint 
will 
be 
made 
of 
many 
different 
components.  For example, heating, cooking, recreation, 
etc., which complements their potentially sedentary life-
style. In addition, other system considerations when 
collecting telemetry from within the home on a more 
permanent basis will be looked at. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
   The development of the system has been split into three 
distinctive phases.  The first phase of development focused 
on the initial system development and interactions with the 
end user (see Section V).  The second phase focused on 
providing more energy-aware devices for monitoring the 
usage patterns of older people (or test candidates) and 
system related issues.  The final phase will be to deploy 
multiple sensors and interfaces into the houses of test 
candidates. 
   From a conceptual perspective, the system (see Fig. 1) 
will process sensor telemetry from devices located within 
the environment, determine if the behaviour of the person 
can be changed based on the task activity they are 
performing, which includes using tariff information 
gathered from energy suppliers through IoT devices and 
then facilitate in providing feedback to the older person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   The guiding principle in the design of the prototype is to 
determine if the energy consumption of the user can be 
reduced by determining the behaviour and patterns they are 
exhibiting.   This builds on our existing energy-aware work 
which is looking into energy-aware programming languages 
and middlewares. The system relies upon a number of key 
components that deal with the interactions with energy 
suppliers to provide information, which informs the 
recommender system; activity/task detection and interfacing 
with the user through an unobtrusive interface.  A system 
prototype has been developed which allows the seamless 
interaction with an older person, which could reduce their 
energy consumption.  For this prototype iteration the full 
system was implemented but deployed within an idealised 
test environment to capture telemetry.  The system was also 
able to save and playback telemetry for user evaluation.  In 
the second iteration, data has been collected from a variety 
of energy-aware plugs, wireless enabled light bulbs and 
motion sensors.  Information was collected over a seven-day 
period to give a richer data set of an occupant’s activity, and 
how best behaviour and activity levels can be analysed for 
energy-aware decisions. 
A. Sensors 
   A variety of off-the-shelf sensors have been used to 
provide contextual information regarding the state of the 
environment, the location of the older person, and what they 
are interacting with in the home environment.  Sensors that 
provide telemetry on light, motion, pressure, electricity use, 
sound, as well as other sensors providing contextual state 
information of the environment, have been used. Sensors 
were typically subsumed within the appliances which 
consumed energy.  This was mostly electrical appliances but 
scope for gas based appliances will be incorporated in a 
later phase.  Sensors can be added seamlessly to the system 
by simply plugging them in and informing the software that 
a particular type of sensor has been added.  Different 
sensors can be dynamically added, along with information 
which provides contextual information regarding how 
telemetry can be analysed and interpreted during the 
behavioural analysis phase.  During the first phase, 
environmental and power usage sensors were based on 
Phidgets technology and were used to record and forward 
telemetry using an event system that had been developed 
(details in Section IV. B).  
System 
Syste
m 
Interf
ace 
Sen
sors 
Energy Suppliers 
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed system. 
Figure 2. Deployment of wireless sensors. 
Kitchen
Sitting Room
Computer
Toaster
Microwave 
oven
Fridge
Visitor’s Toilet
Bathroom
Bedroom 1
Bedroom 2
Bedroom 3
Television
Dishwasher
Kettle
Television
Ground Floor
First Floor
 

167
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
   Building on the first phase, a combination of smart Wi-Fi 
enabled energy plugs and other Wi-Fi enabled technology 
(motion sensors and wireless enabled light bulbs) were 
used.  These are currently outfitted within a test house 
which is also being used for other work that is being 
currently investigating on energy-aware programming 
languages.  Each room of the test house has a combination 
of motion, energy aware plugs and Wi-Fi enabled light 
bulbs.  The present deployment consists of 8 energy aware 
plugs, 8 wireless light bulbs and three-in-one motion 
sensors for recording ambient temperature, light levels and 
motion environmental state information. 
   The test house has 7 rooms (including two toilets / 
bathroom) and a hall way spread over two floors.  For the 
toilets / bathroom, only lighting levels were monitored.  
Sensors have been placed so that minimal occlusion occurs. 
Fig. 2 provides an outline of the deployment of wireless 
enabled sensors within the environment.  There are a 
number of issues that will not be considering in this phase. 
This is principally dealing with privacy, occlusion and 
identify resolution issues.   
B. Behavioural Analysis 
   To aid in the process of determining how much energy is 
being consumed within the house and whether a better 
alternative is available, telemetry from sensors are 
aggregated and processed within the behavioural analysis 
component of the system.  An overview of the activity, 
behaviour and recommender stages is outlined in Fig. 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Activities are used to identify what task the user is 
performing within the home.  For example, making a meal 
would involve using a variety of sensor equipped devices 
within the kitchen, each of which will be generating 
telemetry.  In a typical use case, the oven, along with the 
cooker and supplementary devices (e.g., kettle) could be 
used.  Combined with environmental state information 
originating 
from 
embedded 
sensors 
in 
the 
home, 
additionally telemetry regarding light, sound and motion 
information would be generated and be contextualised 
within the kitchen environment. 
   Activities are generated by end-users and allow the 
association between different telemetry and devices and a 
given activity.  The approach that has been taken is to offer 
a simple means for users to define an activity and then to 
associate device combinations to that activity.  These 
activities will then form the basis of the behavioural analysis 
and pattern-matching functionality whereby the system will 
be able to determine what type of activity is being 
performed by the user. 
   Raw sensor telemetry is tagged with additional meta-
information regarding the device type, timestamp and 
location and is consumed by the system within an event 
message.  For the first development phase, as the types of 
sensors were limited, events contained all contextual 
information which was needed to be consumed and 
processed correctly.  During testing, this did not provide 
sufficient granularity for the types of devices used within 
the second phase of the system.  Here, events became 
aggregates of the principle device types (e.g., plugs, lights 
and motion detectors, as outlined in the data structure 
behind the system in Fig. 4). Events are captured and 
processed within the behavioural component during the 
activity identification process.  To aid in providing an 
environmental snapshot of what is happening within the 
environment, a window of applicability is used which 
allows events to be received over a short period of time.  
This populates activity states which are triggered when all 
associated sensor telemetry has been received during a set 
period.  When this has been satisfied, activities trigger 
notifications, which in turn are processed by the analysis 
component.  At this point, a decision can be made on what 
to do next.  The first option is to process an associated 
action which causes the system to perform some form of 
real-world 
action 
which 
impacts 
the 
end-user.  
Alternatively, notifications can be used to build up 
composite 
events 
which 
provide 
more 
complex 
combinations of activities to be associated with each other.  
This allows the system to provide a richer and more 
complex activity detection process. 
   The system was enhanced in the second phase to capture 
more detailed information from each of the devices.  This 
then interfaces with the rest of the system developed 
previously.  The notable extensions in this phase are to 
allow for richer devices to be used.  Namely, Hue and TP-
Link based light bulbs which can provide contextual 
information regarding their intensity/brightness and, in the 
case of the Hue bulbs, different colours/shades.  The latter 
can also be used to indicate mood information and will be 
incorporated in to the third phase of development and 
testing.  Motion sensors have been used which expands on 
the coarse motion information which was available in the 
first phase of the system.  Wireless based sensors which can 
record temperature, lighting and motion information are 
now used and provide contextual information which was 
spread over a variety of other sensors in the previous 
iteration.  The system stores information (as outlined in Fig. 
4) and links to the rest of the system developed in stage one. 
   Historical information regarding past activities is used to 
provide the ability to determine if activities have occurred 
during similar times in the past.  For example, cooking food 
Sensors 
Activity 
Manager 
Behaviour 
Analysis 
Historical 
Pattern 
Matching 
Recommender 
System 
User 
Notification 
System 
Figure 3. Activity, behavioural and recommender stages. 

168
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
at specific times; use of kettle to make drinks; and activities 
that relate to their life-styles.  This information is used by 
the recommender system to determine if user activity 
patterns can be modified to help improve the energy use 
within the home based on their occurrences.  For instance, 
when coupled with tariff information, the recommender 
would be able to inform the user that by changing their 
pattern to do a particular activity by a few minutes could 
result in a tangible energy cost saving over a period of time.  
In the first phase of development, only small data sets were 
collected over a two day period, and then based on 
information generated on several devices.  With the 
introduction of the second development cycle, devices were 
polled each second and data was stored.  The number of 
devices was increased to incorporate the energy-aware plugs 
and light bulbs which were not used in the previous 
iteration.  Because of this, it was found that the processing 
of historical information introduced additional issues (as 
discussed in Section VII).  This was mainly due to the large 
size of data sets collected over the test period (now one 
week) where the method in which historical behaviours 
were identified and analysed would require more efficient 
storage and processing algorithms for them to work 
effectively in real-time. 
C. Recommender System 
   The purpose of the recommender system is to provide 
end-users with feedback on their energy consumption 
performance or provide alternative actions.  To best inform 
end-users of any energy cost savings, tariff information is 
used from the electricity supplier that they are signed up 
with.  By analysing their past behavioural patterns, the 
recommender system will determine if any energy savings 
can be made by suggesting to the end-user how best to alter 
their habits.  For instance, as a profile of the user is 
generated, any patterns or behaviours they exhibit will be 
identified and any improvements will be suggested. This 
information can be conveyed in a number of ways to the 
end-user.  Notification messages detailing the current cost 
and potential savings can be shown to the user, whilst real-
time feedback is given through a physical prototype system, 
which allows users to instantly see how much energy they 
are consuming within different rooms in the house.  
   An administrative component is provided which allows 
carers or family members to configure the system and 
provide guidance on what levels of energy expenditure the 
older user should use on average.  This information is used 
to inform the older user that targets are not being met and to 
keep the carer or family member informed and involved in 
the care of the user.  Additionally, these set targets also 
allow carers/family members to closely monitor that the 
older user is using a minimum threshold amount of energy, 
thereby ensuring that they are not suffering from the lack of 
heating or cooling.  
Figure 4. System data structure and relationships. 
Plugs 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   Location: Integer 
   Name: Text 
   IP: Text 
   MAC: Text 
   LastSeen: Timestamp 
PlugStatus 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   PlugID: Integer 
   Total: Integer 
   Power: Integer 
   Voltage: Integer 
   Current: Integer 
   LastSeen: Timestamp 
Location 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   Name: Text 
Bulbs 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   Type: Integer 
   Location: Integer 
   Name: Text 
   IP: Text 
   MAC: Text 
   LastSeen: Timestamp 
BulbStatus 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   BulbID: Integer 
   Alive: Integer 
   Timestamp: Timestamp 
   Brightness: Integer 
Motion 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   Location: Integer 
   Name: Text 
   IP: Text 
   MAC: Text 
   LastSeen: Timestamp 
MotionStatus 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   MotionID: Integer 
   Motion: Integer 
   Light: Integer 
   Sound: Integer 
   Timestamp: Timestamp 
Event 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   DeviceID: Integer 
   DeviceType: Integer 
   Value: Integer 
   EventTime: Timestamp 
Activity 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   ActivityType: Integer 
   ActivityName: Text 
   LocationID: Integer 
   Threshold: Integer 
LinkedDevices 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   ActivityID: Integer 
   DeviceID: Integer 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Tariff 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   Amount: Integer 
   TariffType: Integer 
   StartTime: Integer 
   EndTime: Integer 
TarriffTypes 
   ID: Integer (Key) 
   TarriffDescription: Text 
   Supplier: Text 

169
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
USER INTERACTION 
   Compounding the problem of fuel poverty, older users 
also suffer from technology acceptance.  This adds 
additional constraints in which electronic systems subsumed 
within the home impact the experience and engagement of 
the older user.  If the technology with which the older user 
has to interact is complicated or non-intuitive, this can lead 
to users disengaging with the system put there to improve 
their well-being and causes an opposite effect so that the 
user is even more isolated and stuck within the fuel poverty 
trap. The issue of reducing a lack of understanding and 
purpose of the system [10] needs to be considered to allow 
the prototype to be effective with users.  In turn, Leonardi 
[7] highlights that the interactive medium needs to consider 
the “motor and cognitive capabilities” [7] of the older user.  
When considering the perceived usefulness of the system 
[6] to promote older users to engage and trust the system 
and recommendations, a clear simple interface is required.  
These issues are important when considering how the older 
person interacts with the prototype system.  However, it 
does pose challenges when considering the acceptance of 
the interface as it must not rely on something that might 
cause confusion or anxiety when interacting with the 
system.  Therefore, some form of mobile device or interface 
would pose significant challenges to older people. 
   Different interfaces were constructed and evaluated to 
determine which one offered the older user with the best 
way to interpret energy usage information. One method of 
conveying information was through a clock metaphor where 
LED’s indicated the general energy usage within the home.  
However, this did not prove to be too useful or popular with 
older-users. 
   The approach, which ended up being taken, was to 
provide the older user with a simple, non-technical interface 
which does not rely on any interactive technology (e.g., 
mobile phones or smart televisions) but instead uses a 
simple traffic light metaphor.  A mock-up miniature house 
was provided which uses a traffic light system located in 
each of the rooms within the model.  Instant visual feedback 
is provided to the older end-user by indicating their power 
consumption in each room.  Red indicates that they are 
excessively using energy within that room, amber indicates 
they are using more than they should but there is room for 
improvement with a few recommendations, while green 
indicates that they are using energy within the guidelines, or 
what the carer/family member might have specified.  
   Fig. 5 shows the model house prototype interface.  Each 
room of the house contains a set of LED’s which indicates 
the real-time use of energy within that room.  This was 
found to be the most successful of the prototypes for 
conveying straight forward energy usage information to 
older users. 
 
 
Figure 5. Model house prototype. 
A. Administrative interfaces 
   The administrative interface provides carers or family 
members with cost saving’s information either on a day-by-
day basis or over a projected month.  If older users felt 
comfortable with the technology they were also provided 
access to this information, rather than simply relying on the 
model house.  For example, Fig. 6 shows the costs incurred 
for a number of monitored appliances within the home 
environment during the first phase of testing.  Information is 
outlined, based on the activities that have been detected 
during the day and shows a comparison of their energy use.  
Both carers/family members and the more technically 
confident older user can utilise this information to determine 
how many times a day they perform specific activities with 
a view to reducing the frequency over time or to more 
suitable times which reduces their energy costs. 
 
Figure 6. Savings graph (phase 1 of system). 

170
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
   Another way in which financial information can be 
conveyed to the user is through a monthly chart outlining 
the costs that have been incurred for each of the activities 
during that particular period.  Fig. 7 shows how information 
can be presented to end-users regarding the total costs 
incurred and by activity during the first phase of testing.   
 
Figure 7. Monthly energy costs (phase 1 of system). 
   Recommendation notifications were also provided to end-
users and carers/family members to allow them to determine 
where savings could be made by changing habits.  For 
example, recommendations could be made to change the 
time of morning snacks and eating times to make best use of 
energy costs by moving these occurrences by a few minutes.  
For phase two, users were presented with different graph 
information representing their energy expenditure (examples 
of these are included in Section VII). 
VI. 
PHASE ONE RESULTS 
   There are three principle phases to our testing of the 
system.  The first phase was to collect basic data over a 
short period and test the effectiveness of the user interface 
(phase one).  Phase two required spending a week within a 
test house monitoring energy, activity patterns and 
identifying 
system 
considerations 
e.g., 
storage 
and 
processing (phase two) while phase three will look at 
deploying within a number of homes for a longer period and 
expose users to the full monitoring system. 
   To combat fuel poverty, older users have to overcome 
issues with anxiety caused from the distress of lack of 
finance to pay for energy bills and also the fear of 
technology, which impedes the adoption of technology to 
help them become more energy efficient.  Data was 
collected from an idealised test environment and played 
back through the system for evaluation purposes.  The 
prototype was evaluated by 10 older users, whose ages 
ranged between 50 and 70 and were used to measure their 
technological fear and acceptance of using this technology.  
This was to determine whether monitoring energy use and 
recommending more efficient use of energy through 
modifying activity patterns, would improve their well-being 
by reducing their overall energy costs.   
   Preliminary testing was conducted using 10 users to 
determine the effectiveness of the model house prototype.  
Older users were asked to answer a questionnaire after 
evaluating the usefulness of the interface.  The data collected 
represented activities spread over several days from the test 
environment and was played in compressed form for them to 
evaluate the prototype.  Activities were highlighted and 
explained during the playback of telemetry to help identify 
what was being done.  100% of the respondents identified 
with what the model house prototype was attempting to do 
by making them more aware of their energy consumption 
patterns. It was found that 80% of users were able to 
interpret the real-time information with ease while 20% of 
the respondents had difficulty when the system detected an 
increase or decrease in the energy use and notified them 
through flashing LED’s.  When addressing the question of 
technology acceptance and the fear of using new technology 
which can beset an older user, 100% of respondents said that 
they did not feel anxiety or fear regarding accepting 
information generated through the model house prototype.  
When asked if the prototype provided them with a way to 
monitor and adjust their habits during the day to make better 
use of energy, all respondents replied favourably (100%).  In 
fact, it was discovered at this point that a number of users 
would like even more information presented to them on 
improving their energy expenditure.  This proved to be 
encouraging and a validation that the model house improved 
their energy awareness and reduced their anxiety from 
worrying about fuel costs.  Another group of 10 users (aged 
between 20 and 50) were used to evaluate the usability and 
functionality of the backend functionality of the system.  
This type of functionality would be used by carers or family 
members to help advise the older end-user on how to 
improve their energy-use by exposing them to fine-grained 
data regarding which activities were done and how potential 
savings could be made.  The types of questions asked to 
these participants were predominantly focused on activity 
management, savings information, monthly projections and 
recommendations.  The results from this evaluation showed 
that 100% of participants understood what the activities were 
and how they related to the system and data while 70% of 
participants were able to deal with, and manage, activity 
related features.  The remaining 30% required extra guidance 
before they felt fully comfortable with the back-end system.  
When addressing the usefulness of the recommendations and 
potential financial savings, all participants agreed that the 
system was easy to use and offered important and helpful 
information on how to improve energy usage. 

171
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII. PHASE TWO RESULTS 
   Our second phase of development and testing was spread 
over a seven-day period and collected data from a test house 
(see Fig. 2).  This phase primarily focused on the integration 
of 
heterogeneous 
IoT 
devices, 
collection, 
storage, 
processing and administrative analysis graphs.  An 
expansion on the number the monitoring capabilities of the 
initial system was undertaken by incorporating off the shelf 
components that are readily available instead of relying on 
specialist hardware.  More devices would be monitored, as 
well as lighting patterns and other information.  This phase 
also considers the additional system based issues that were 
not encountered in the first stage due to the limited data 
collection and primary focus of interacting with the older 
user. 
   Electrical appliances were plugged into energy monitoring 
wireless plugs, while standard light bulbs were replaced 
within the house environment with equivalent wireless light 
bulbs.  Complementing the environment, each room had a 
wireless motion sensor (which recorded motion, lighting 
and temperature telemetry) in the main living areas 
(front/living room, kitchen and bedroom).  Telemetry was 
captured over a 24-hour, 7-day period.  Each wireless device 
was given unique identifiers so that energy use could be 
tracked for each associated electrical appliance as well as 
the occupancy of the room.  The house is occupied by two 
people (male and female) and ages range from 40’s to 60’s.  
The selection of the appliances to monitor was based on the 
availability of energy-aware plugs.  The rooms with high 
energy use and occupancy were identified as the kitchen, 
front room and bedroom.  Therefore, the appliances that 
were chosen were located within these rooms.  The devices 
monitored in the kitchen were: microwave, kettle, toaster, 
fridge/freezer and dish washer.  Ideally, the cooker and 
washing machine would have been monitored but these 
were found to be wired directly into outlets rather than 
being plug based.  These will be monitored when running 
the third phase in three separate homes.  In the front room, 
the devices which were monitored were the TV and 
computer.  In the bedroom, a TV was monitored. 
   The purpose of this stage was to collect telemetry which 
can then be used to test system and data integration more 
fully before monitoring the usage of a number of older 
people.  As telemetry was collected during the summer 
months, devices which aided in cooling the occupants down 
(i.e., fans) would have been ideal. However, the test home 
did not contain these.  At colder times of the year, other 
devices that provide heat (e.g., electric blankets, central 
heating) would be considered and will be monitored during 
phase three.  Motion sensing was limited to the main areas 
of the home (front room, kitchen, and main bedroom) and 
provided contextual information regarding light and 
temperature levels. 
    The results for each monitored room are shown in Fig. 8 
for the Kitchen, Fig. 9 for the main living room and Fig. 10 
for the bedroom.  It was observed that an issue occurred 
during day 5.  This was down to the Wi-Fi router becoming 
unavailable and was spotted by one of the occupants who 
reset it.  The subsequent figures highlight the loss of 
telemetry during this time. 
     Fig. 8 shows the energy usage of the monitored devices 
located within the kitchen for a 7-day period.  The 
monitored devices consist of a microwave, kettle, a 
fridge/freezer, toaster and dishwasher.  
 
 
    The usage patterns and properties of each device are 
correctly identified for the room.  The freezer has a constant 
load of around 50 Watts, with regular peak loads of around 
600 Watts – as expected when the cooling circuits are in 
operation.  The microwave is generally not used heavily, 
mainly just for preparing evening meals, so only appears at 
its peak load of 1200 Watts.  The kettle is likewise not used 
regularly, appearing when used at a load of around 3000 
Watts for short amounts of time.  The toaster is used 
intermittently during the day and usually at the same time as 
the microwave.  These times are around the time that food is 
prepared in the morning and afternoon/evening.  The peak 
load of the toaster is 1000 Watts.  The dishwasher is used 
once or twice a day and peak load is up to 250 Watts. Based 
on the results, and the frequency of the more commonly 
used items (i.e., kettle, and microwave), the system would 
be able to suggest times at which energy costs are lower and 
thereby, reduce overall costs by time-shifting to more 
affordable time periods.  The same applies to the frequency 
of the dishwasher activity, where changing the times of day 
can result in cost savings.  On the other hand, the fridge 
freezer which is on continuously due to the nature of the 
appliance would not be something that can be time-shifted.  
However, information would be available to provide 
whether the appliance is indeed energy-efficient to help 
identify cost savings if a newer, energy-efficient appliance 
was used instead. 
   Fig. 9 shows the energy use of the monitored devices 
located within the front room for a 7-day period.  The 
 
Figure 8. Kitchen device energy use. 

172
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
monitored devices consist of a TV and a computer. The TV 
tends to be used briefly in the morning and lunch, and more 
extensively in the evening.  It has a relatively high standby 
of around 15 Watts, and an on-power usage of around 150 
Watts. The computer is mainly switched on in the evening.  
It has a very low standby power usage and an on-power 
usage of between 100 and 180 Watts. 
   As only two devices were monitored in the living room, 
the most commonly used electrical appliances in use were 
the TV and computer.  It can be seen from fig. 9 that the TV 
is in use at different times of the day where it is mainly used 
towards the morning and early afternoon.  The associated 
energy costs for this would be higher due to the higher 
energy costs from the supplier, so changing habits could 
result in savings.  In the afternoon and evenings, both the 
computer and TV were in operation, although on some days, 
their usage was spread more evening across the day rather 
than clustering exclusively in the morning / afternoon / 
evening areas.  Changing the habits of the user could result 
in cost savings when considering that both devices are used 
extensively during the day, and at times, concurrently.   
 
 
Figure 9. Living room energy use. 
 
   To enable further analysis of energy usage, the cumulative 
power usage of these two rooms can be plotted based on the 
collected data.  Fig. 10 shows the cumulative energy usage 
in Watt-hours (Wh) of the devices in the kitchen.  It shows 
the cumulative power usage from the devices being 
generally steady.  This information would provide the user 
with an idea of the total energy consumption for the 
duration through the administrative interface.  The 
accumulated energy use of the toaster shows that there was 
an issue with the plug storing the daily energy totals.  It 
does match with the activity patterns in Fig. 8 where the 
toaster was used on day 1 and day 4 with no activity 
between those days.  
 
Figure 10. Cumulative kitchen device energy usage. 
 
   Fig. 11 shows the cumulative energy usage in Watt-hours 
(Wh) of the devices in the living room.  It shows a steady 
increase in power usage. 
 
 
Figure 11. Cumulative living room device energy usage. 
 
Fig. 12 shows the cumulative energy usage in Watt-hours 
(Wh) of the device(s) in the bedroom.  Although only one 
device in the bedroom was monitored, the usage activity of 
the TV indicates rough times at which the occupants are 
occupying the room.  This also can provide loose 
information about the times at which they sleep (before and 
after activity through TV usage).  The peak load of the TV 
is around 80 Watts when in use for short periods of time. 
   Utilising more devices located within the bedroom would 
provide more contextual information regarding the habits of 
the occupants.   
 

173
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 12. Bedroom energy use. 
 
   As well as monitoring the energy usage from electrical 
appliances, the lighting in the house was also monitored.  
The use of lights during the test period is shown in Fig. 13.  
Two types of bulbs were utilised within the home.  Five TP-
Link Wi-Fi enabled light bulbs were used in the main living 
areas.  Three Hue bulbs were used in addition in the 
bathroom, and as supplements to the other rooms.  Fig. 13 
shows only the TP-Link bulb usage during the test phase as 
the information gathered from the Hue bulbs indicated that 
while not in use, energy was actually being expended. 
 
 
Figure 13. Light usage across the house. 
 
   In Fig. 13, it was decided to layer all the TP-Link lights in 
the household on the same figure, as it illustrates an 
important point.  The household lighting is almost always 
switched off.  There is a narrow window of 2-3 hours a day 
when the lights are activated which correlates with the 
longer days during the summer months when the data was 
collected.  This would be greater during the winter months 
due to the shorter daylight hours and would suggest even 
more power usage efficiency. The diagonal lines represent 
data collection issues due to the bulbs dropping the Wi-Fi 
and presenting erroneous results.   It is believed that the 
most efficient approach to reducing lighting waste is to 
install cheap motion sensors that activate, and de-active 
lights based on movement and ambient lighting. It is worth 
noting that the lighting data was also collected over 
summer, hence their minimal usage. 
   During this phase of testing, other issues outside of 
energy-awareness have been shown to be important and 
need to be addressed further.  Issues concerning the size of 
the data set generated from a variety of devices and lights 
resulted in a database exceeding 124MB in size for the one 
week of testing (8 devices & 8 lights).  Based on this, for a 
system running realistically over a year, the amount of data 
generated would be in the range of 6448MB.  With more 
devices being added which are polled for telemetry, this 
would increase the amount of information generated. This 
would mean that efficiency and storage issues would come 
into play which was not considered in the first phase of 
development.  The time to process information to present to 
end users via the administration interfaces would take 
considerable time and as a result, would need to implement 
more efficient ways on processing vast amounts of 
information.  The same can be said when it comes to 
analysing behaviours and activities over a period of time for 
the system to provide useful recommendations.  As the 
second phase was within a closed system (i.e., all devices 
were connected to a Wi-Fi router with limited internet 
access), any information requiring being stored on the cloud 
and its subsequent processing would become an issue.  
Another Wi-Fi related issue observed from the test data is 
the intermittent nature of the router itself.  The one used was 
a fairly cheap off the shelf device but did show that the Wi-
Fi signal dropped at different times.  This would introduce 
the problem of lost telemetry which could potentially have a 
bearing on the recognition and analysis components.  
Making the collection and aggregation of this information 
from devices more resilient and able to cope with periods of 
no connectivity would need to be addressed.  However, it is 
envisaged that the system will store and process information 
locally within the house.  Issues regarding the privacy of 
and security of this information also pose an interesting 
dilemma.  The information collected provides a very fine 
snapshot on the behaviours and activities of the occupants, 
and thus, privacy and the safeguarding of this information is 
paramount.  These issues will be considered in phase three 
of the system development. 
VIII. PHASE THREE RESULTS 
   The final phase of testing will be conducted over the next 
several months with live participants.   A small number of 
candidates will be selected which will allow us to analyse 
the effectiveness of the system.  Both male and female test 
subjects will be selected so that analysis of the differences 
between genders, age, disability (both physical and 
cognitive related) and living status can be considered.  In 
addition, system based issues regarding storage, processing, 

174
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
resiliency and privacy will be explored to best protect the 
end user from potential abuse of information.  The intention 
is to outfit three homes with larger numbers of energy-aware 
plugs, motion detectors and wireless light bulbs over at least 
a two-month period. 
IX. 
DISCUSSION 
   The goal of this work is to look at energy-awareness and 
how this impacts older users.  Our intention was to produce 
a simple ICT system which would attempt to reduce the 
anxiety that older people experience in relation to fuel 
poverty as well as address the issue of accepting technology.  
It was found that the prototype system promoted the 
perceived usefulness of the system to older users.  This is in 
addition to other areas of our research into energy-aware 
programming languages and runtime systems. 
   By focusing on the energy-awareness of everyday use 
from the start, the prototype system was able to successfully 
improve the energy use of a user over the initial trial period.  
The behavioural analysis and recommender systems were 
found to accurately identify activities which in turn aided in 
recognising and highlighting the cost awareness of what 
users were doing in association to their activities.  By 
increasing this cost awareness of their actions, users were 
found to be more aware of how to reduce their energy costs 
by changing times or common activities to more cost-
effective times of the day.  Carers/family members would be 
able to help by raising awareness of what the older user was 
doing on a day-to-day basis by showing them how simple 
changes to their daily patterns could result in tangible cost 
savings as well as improved health. 
   In the second iteration, the primary focus was on 
collecting richer data sets with off the shelf sensor 
technologies that are commonly available.  The devices that 
were used during this process were TP-Link energy aware 
plugs, TP-Link bulbs, Hue bulbs and motion sensors.  A test 
house was outfitted with a number of rooms containing 
these smart devices and data was collected over a 7-day 
period.  The energy use of the test subjects in the principle 
living areas (kitchen, front room and bedroom) was 
monitored.  Although only 8 electrical appliances were 
monitored, usage showed basic patterns and activities 
during the day and night.  Light usage was also monitored 
but as the experiment was performed during the summer 
months, limited lighting patterns were shown.  The amount 
of data collected over one week showed that additional 
investigation is required in the storage and processing of 
large data sets to provide a responsive system, as well as the 
privacy and safe guarding of intrusive information and 
resiliency of transmission / reception of information. 
   The next phase is to introduce more technology into three 
homes and monitor more electrical appliances.  This is 
currently underway, and with the intention to capture 
several months of usage data to validate the system and 
house interface. Experiments on how the system affects the 
overall well-being of the older person will also be conducted 
as well as the impact of gender, disability (both physical and 
cognitive related), living status and age on their acceptance 
and use of the technology. 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
   This paper has argued the case for simpler interaction and 
energy-aware systems for helping older members of the 
community to be aware of, and monitor their energy 
expenditure.  This is a relevant societal problem which is 
addressing the anxieties of fuel poverty facing vulnerable 
groups of individuals as well as their acceptance of 
technology.  An initial prototype system has been 
introduced as well as the lessons learnt from this first phase 
along with a subsequent data collection phase detailing the 
testing and analysis of a bigger data set.  Following this, the 
considerations for the future direction of the work has been 
outlined.  In summary, the benefit of energy-aware systems 
has shown to be a positive influence of the well-being of an 
older person by reducing their anxiety concerning 
interacting with technology and reducing costs associated 
with fuel poverty. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Robinson, K. Appiah, and R. Yousaf, “Improving the well-
being of older people by reducing their energy consumption 
through energy-aware systems,” in Proceedings of the 9th 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2017), Nice, France, March 
2017. ISBN 9781612085401 
[2] Department of Energy & Climate Change, “Fuel Poverty 
Report 2015,” Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/468011/Fuel_Po
verty_Report_2015.pdf [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[3] G. Flood, (2013). “British government's 'Digital By Default' 
plans challenged,” Information Weekly (Online), available at: 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1319367398?accountid=1
4693 [retrieved: November, 2016]  
[4] The Poverty site, “UK: excess winter deaths,” The Poverty 
Site. Available at: http://www.poverty.org.uk /67/index.shtml 
[retrieved: November, 2016]  
[5] Greenseniors.eu,”Green Seniors In The European Union | 
Ageing Is Nothing For Cowards (May West),” Available at: 
http://www.greenseniors.eu [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[6] F. Davis, “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and 
User Acceptance of Information Technology,” MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 319, 1989. 
[7] C. Leonardi, C. Mennecozzi, E. Not, F. Pianesi, and M. 
Zancanaro, “Designing a familiar technology for elderly 
people,” Gerontechnology, vol. 7, no. 2, 2008. 
[8] M. Farquhar, “Elderly people's definitions of quality of life,” 
Social Science & Medicine, vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1439-1446, 
1995. 
[9] E. De Beurs, A. Beekman, A. Van Balkom, D. Deeg, and W. 
Van Tilburg, “Consequences Of Anxiety In Older Persons: Its 
Effect On Disability, Well-Being And Use Of Health 
Services,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 583-
593, 1999. 
[10] R. Ellis and J. Allaire, “Modeling Computer Interest in Older 
Adults: The Role of Age, Education,” Computer Knowledge, 
and Computer Anxiety. Human factors, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 
345-355, 1999. 

175
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[11] Hivehome.com. “Hive,” Available at: https://www.hive home 
.com, [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[12] IFTTT.com, 
IFTTT”, 
Available 
at: 
https://ifttt.com/ 
[retrieved: November, 2016] 
[13] Honeywelluk.com, “evohome - Honeywell UK Heating 
Controls,” 
Available 
at: 
http://www.honeywelluk.com/products 
/Underfloor-
Heating/evohome-Main/ [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[14] Heat Genius, “Heat Genius remote heating control benefits: 
save money, save energy, save time,” Available at: 
https://www.heatgenius.co.uk/benefits/ [retrieved: November, 
2016] 
[15] J. Kim, H. Choi, H. Wang, N. Agoulmine, J. Deerv, and W. 
Hong, “POSTECH's U-Health Smart Home for elderly 
monitoring and support,” IEEE International Symposium on a 
World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks 
(WoWMoM), pp. 1-6, 2010. 
[16] T. Hargreaves, M. Nye, and J. Burgess, “Making energy 
visible: A qualitative field study of how householders interact 
with feedback from smart energy monitors,” Energy Policy, 
Volume 38, Issue 10, pp. 6111-6119, ISSN 0301-4215, 
October 2010. 
[17] A. Dohr, R. Modre-Opsrian, M. Drobics, D. Hayn, and G. 
Schreier, "The Internet of Things for Ambient Assisted 
Living," 
2010 
Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information Technology: New Generations, Las Vegas, NV, 
2010, pp. 804-809. doi: 10.1109/ITNG.2010.104 
[18] W. Wang, K. Lee, and D. Murray. Springer, “A Global 
generic architecture for the future Internet of Things,” Service 
Oriented Computing and Applications, SOCA (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11761-017-0213-1 
[19] K. Lee, D. Murray, D. Hughes, and W. Joosen, "Extending 
sensor networks into the cloud using amazon web 
services," Networked Embedded Systems for Enterprise 
Applications (NESEA), 2010 IEEE International Conference 
on. IEEE, 2010. 
[20] K. Lee and K. Gilleade, “Towards Generic Data Processing of 
Real-time Physiological Data in the Cloud,” International 
Journal of Big Data Intelligence, Special Issue on: ``E-Health 
Systems and Semantic Web'' Vol. 3 No. 4, pp 215-227, 
Inderscience, 
October 
2016, 
DOI: 
10.1504/IJBDI.2016.10000807 
[21] W. Wang, K. Lee, and D. Murray, “Integrating Sensors with 
the Cloud using Dynamic Proxies,” 23rd Annual IEEE 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications (PIMRC 2012), Sydney Australia, 
September 2012, DOI: 10.1109/PIMRC.2012.6362579. 
[22] Y. Thongkhao and W. Pora "A low-cost Wi-Fi smart plug 
with on-off and Energy Metering functions," 2016 13th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Electrical 
Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and 
Information 
Technology, 
2016, 
pp. 
1-5. 
doi: 
10.1109/ECTICon.2016.7561264 
[23] J. Granados, A. M. Rahmani, P. Nikander, P. Liljeberg, and 
H. Tenhunen, "Towards energy-efficient HealthCare: An 
Internet-of-Things architecture using intelligent gateways," 
4th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
Mobile 
Communication and Healthcare - Transforming Healthcare 
Through Innovations in Mobile and Wireless Technologies, 
2014, 
pp. 
279-282. 
doi: 
10.1109/MOBIHEALTH.2014.7015965 
[24] A. M. Rahmani, T. Nguyen Gia, B. Negash, A. Anzanpour, I. 
Azimi, M. Jiang, and P. Liljeberg, “Exploiting smart e-Health 
gateways at the edge of healthcare Internet-of-Things: A fog 
computing approach,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 
2017, 
ISSN 
0167-739X, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.02.014. 
[25] B. Zhou, W. Li, K. Wing Chan, Y. Cao, Y. Kuang, X. Liu, 
and X. Wang, “Smart home energy management systems: 
Concept, 
configurations, 
and 
scheduling 
strategies,” 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Volume 61, 
2016, 
Pages 
30-40, 
ISSN 
1364-0321, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.03.047 
[26] L. Mano, B. Faiçal, L. Nakamura, P. Gomes, G. Libralon, R. 
Meneguete, G. Filho, G. Giancristofaro, G. Pessin, B. 
Krishnamachari, and J. Ueyama, “Exploiting IoT technologies 
for enhancing Health Smart Homes through patient 
identification 
and 
emotion 
recognition,” 
Computer 
Communications, Volume 89, 2016, Pages 178-190, ISSN 
0140-3664, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2016.03.010 
 
 

