124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Prediction of Authors’ Personality Types and Traits in Modern Greek Essays 
Using Stylometric Features  
 
Gagiatsou Sofia 
Department of Linguistics, School of Philosophy 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens  
Athens, Greece  
e-mail: sgagiats@phil.uoa.gr 
Markopoulos Georgios 
Department of Linguistics, School of Philosophy 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens  
Athens, Greece  
e-mail: gmarkop@phil.uoa.gr 
Mikros George 
College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Hamad Bin Khalifa University 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail: gmikros@hbku.edu.qa
 
Abstract—We present a study focused on the prediction of the 
author's personality based on natural language processing 
techniques applied to essays written in Modern Greek by high-
school students. Each writer has been profiled by filling in two 
personality questionnaires, one based on the typology of Carl 
Jung and the other based on the Model of Five Factors. In 
addition, personality prediction is being discussed under the 
general research framework of author profiling by examining 
the effectiveness of several stylometric features to predict 
students’ personality types. The feature set we employed was a 
combination of the word and sentence length, the most frequent 
part-of-speech tags, most frequent character/word bigrams and 
trigrams, most frequent words, as well as hapax/dis legomena. 
Since 
personality 
prediction 
represents 
a 
complex 
multidimensional research problem, we applied various 
machine learning algorithms to optimize our model’s 
performance after extracting the stylometric features. We 
compared nine machine learning algorithms and ranked them 
according to their cross-validated accuracy. The best results in 
predicting the Jung’s Typology types were obtained by the 
Naive Bayes algorithm. In contrast, for the prediction of 
personality features based on the Five Factors Model, the 
Generalized Linear Model (Binomial method) algorithm 
prevailed. According to the personality classification based on 
the Jung Typology Test, the author’s personality prediction 
accuracy reached 80.7% on Extraversion, 79.9% on Intuition, 
68.8% on Feeling, 75.7% on Judging, according to the 
personality classification. In the Big Five personality 
classification, the prediction accuracy reached 85.9% on 
Openness, 71.2% on Conscientiousness, 67.6% on Extraversion, 
70.2% on Agreeableness, and 65.6% on Neuroticism. The 
reported results show a competitive approach to the personality 
prediction problem. Furthermore, our research revealed new 
combinations of stylometric features and corresponding 
computational techniques, giving interesting and satisfying 
solutions to the author’s personality prediction problem for 
Modern Greek.  
Keywords-Author 
profiling; 
stylometry; 
Personality 
prediction; Jung Typology Test; Big Five model; corpus 
processing; computational stylistics; machine learning.  
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Authorship identification represents one of the emerging 
text mining fields at the intersection of Machine Learning, 
Information Retrieval, and Natural Language Processing. 
Under the stylometric framework, the author's identity is a 
multidimensional construct based mainly on writing patterns 
scattered across multiple linguistic levels and expressed 
quantitatively. The specific research domain splits into three 
subdomains: attributing a text to a particular author among a 
finite set of authors (Authorship Attribution), attributing a text 
to an author that does not belong to a closed group 
(Authorship Verification), and specifying the author’s 
metadata such as demographic and psychological traits of the 
author (Authorship Profiling), including gender, age, 
personality [1], etc. 
Language as a communication mechanism denotes the 
diversity of every individual. Therefore, the quantitative study 
of linguistic features can lead to predictions regarding the 
individual's character. The subject of Computational 
Personality Prediction (CPP) through natural language 
processing techniques constitutes a relatively new research 
field with many applications.  
One critical application domain of this field is Forensic 
Linguistics. Criminals can be identified by the way they write. 
Moreover, conclusions can be drawn regarding their 
personalities and the way they think. The example of 
identifying students' personality that carry guns and 
participate in school shootings is typical [2]. CPP can 
highlight their psychological traits, which can be exploited in 
successfully identifying potential perpetrators.  

125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Apart from the apparent contribution provided in 
Behavioural Psychology by connecting personality traits to 
human behaviour, CPP can also function in many other fields. 
For instance, companies utilize personality analysis of 
users/consumers in the marketing domain to adopt effective 
recruitment techniques and customer service techniques. Even 
in human resources management, predicting the personality 
can affect or facilitate the selection and determine the 
eligibility of candidates for a particular job. Moreover, based 
on the user’s personality, dialogic systems can be customized 
and brought closer to users’ temperament making interaction 
more effective and satisfying. 
Another 
vital 
analysis 
domain 
where 
automatic 
personality prediction is used is education. For example, by 
analyzing students’ writings, talented students or students 
with difficulties could be recognized and thus receive adaptive 
teaching, addressing the appropriate cognitive level for each 
group.  
One of the most crucial issues in CPP research is 
developing appropriate linguistic resources enriched with the 
author’s personality metadata. Unfortunately, these resources 
are challenging to create due to the increased level of manual 
interaction with the authors and the various privacy and 
ethical considerations linked with administering psychometric 
questionnaires to many individuals. 
 Another issue is that most Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) tools specialized in psychometric text profiling support 
only English. Therefore, research in other languages should 
be done by developing specialized dictionaries and other 
supporting linguistics resources from scratch (see, for 
example, the case of Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count-
LIWC [3]).  
To cover the above-mentioned research gaps, we 
performed the first CPP study in Modern Greek focused on 
high-school students. For this reason, we developed a model 
for predicting students' personality based on Jung’s taxonomy 
and the model of Big-Five factor markers by analyzing their 
term-essays and applying various machine learning methods 
to rich document representation based on several stylometric 
features.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II 
we provide an overview of previous work on personality 
prediction. Section III describes our researching methods. In 
Section IV we present the research results. We summarize our 
findings and discuss future work in Section V. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW  
This section presents the two personality questionnaires 
used to profile the writers (Carl Jung’s and Isabel Briggs 
Myers’ Personality Type Questionnaire and Big-Five 
Personality Test). Then, we review the findings of studies in 
the field of CPP from the text.  
A. 
Carl Jung’s and Isabel Briggs Myers’ Personality 
Type Questionnaire 
Research in the field of personality prediction uses Carl 
Jung’s and Isabel Briggs Myers’ personality type theory 
[4][5] or the Five-factor Model of Personality [6], which are 
the two most utilized personality models, to profile the 
participating authors. Therefore, the literature review 
presented in this section is referred to associated research, 
which 
involves 
the 
above-mentioned 
personality 
questionnaires since our students have been profiled with 
these tests.    
According to Jung's theory of psychological types [4], 
people can be characterized by 
• 
their preference of general attitude as Extraverted (E) 
or Introverted (I), which signifies the source and direction of 
a person’s energy expression. 
• 
their preference of one of the two functions of 
perception as Sensing (S) or Intuitive (N) represents how 
someone perceives information.  
• 
their preference of one of the two functions of 
judging as Thinking (T) or Feeling (F), which describes how 
a person processes information. 
• 
their orientation to the outer world as Judging (J) or 
Perceiving (P), which reflects how a person implements the 
information he/she has processed.  
The Jung Typology Test classifies psychological 
personality differences in four dichotomies that yield 16 
different combinations or personality types. Each personality 
type can be assigned a 4-letter acronym of the corresponding 
combination of preferences: ESTJ, ISTJ, ENTJ, INTJ, ESTP, 
ISTP, ENTP, INTP, ESFJ, ISFJ, ENFJ, INFJ, ESFP, ISFP, 
ENFP, INFP.   
B. 
Big-Five Personality Test 
One of the most widely accepted personality theories in 
psychology is the Five-Factor model. According to the Five-
Factor Model of Personality, most human personality traits 
can be boiled down to five broad dimensions of personality, 
regardless of language or culture. There has been much 
research on how people describe others, and five major 
dimensions of human personality emerged. They are often 
referred to as the OCEAN model of personality because of 
the acronym from the names of the five dimensions. 
Openness to Experiences, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, 
Agreeableness, and Neuroticism are the five most essential 
personality traits [7]. More specifically: 
• 
Openness to Experience 
High scorers tend to be original, creative, curious, complex; 
Low scorers tend to be conventional, down to earth, have 
narrow interests, be uncreative.  
• 
Conscientiousness 
High scorers tend to be reliable, well-organized, self-
disciplined, careful; Low scorers tend to be disorganized, 
undependable, negligent. 
• 
Extraversion 

126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
High scorers tend to be sociable, friendly, fun-loving, 
talkative; Low scorers tend to be introverted, reserved, 
inhibited, quiet. 
• 
Agreeableness 
High scorers tend to be good-natured, sympathetic, forgiving, 
courteous; Low scorers tend to be critical, rude, harsh, 
callous. 
• 
Neuroticism 
High scorers tend to be nervous, high-strung, insecure, 
worrying; Low scorers tend to be calm, relaxed, secure, 
hardy.   
C. 
Personality and Language 
The way a person uses language as a communication code 
reveals much information for his/her personality. The 
selection of specific morphological, syntactic structures and 
lexical choices can indicate his/her age, gender, social class, 
and feelings. Moreover, we can understand whether the 
speaker or author of a text is extraverted, emotional, or 
distant. So, a critical element that needs to be examined is the 
relationship between personality and language.   
In general, the dominant opinion is that personality affects 
and directs our behavior, thoughts, feelings, interpersonal 
relationships, and of course, language production. People 
speak and write in different ways, even if they want to 
express the same content. The language user chooses the 
appropriate level of speech depending on the specific 
instance of linguistic communication, thus shaping a 
personalized way of speaking or writing. Researchers in this 
field support that every human has a characteristic way of 
using the language, i.e., a kind of authorial fingerprint [8]. 
Since the idiolect is constructed through the selective use of 
specific linguistic elements and their differentiated usage 
frequency, we can infer that also a correlation between 
personality traits and language features, such as lexical 
categories, n-grams is evident.  
The above is confirmed by current research; [9] supported 
that language reveals each person's temperament and 
investigates how it is linked with his/her linguistic 
individuality. [10] emphasizes that all linguistic levels 
(phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics) 
affect the message recipient. Research shows that personality 
traits impact each person’s language production [11]. [12] 
points out that personality is projected through language, but 
that personality may also become perceivable to the recipient 
through language. Moreover, he mentions that different 
personality traits affect different levels of language 
production. [13] talks about the psychological aspect of 
language and focus on the choice of words by the language 
user as an indicative element of its character. Social 
psychologists have pointed out that the use of words, 
intonation, accent, and other language elements reveal their 
social, financial, and psychological position [14].   
Although we perceive the importance of the connection 
between language and personality traits of the speaker or the 
author, the field has not been studied sufficiently, as most 
research focuses on verbal speech and the trait of 
Extraversion. According to [15], this is due to paralinguistic 
elements of the verbal speech, such as accent and intonation, 
as well as the fact that speech between family members and 
friends from a sociolinguistic point of view offers more 
useful linguistic data, since it is more spontaneous. Finally, 
Extraversion as a trait is more easily recognizable in 
somebody’s speech, and therefore in combination with the 
above, research has focused on identifying the language 
features denoting this speaker’s personality trait; as a result, 
it has been studied more than the other traits, both in the Five-
Factor model as well as in Jung’s typology. Finally, the 
dominant language in written data is English; this makes the 
comparative study of findings in other languages more 
difficult.   
Our research attempts to cover the void in this field by 
creating specialized corpora and utilizing natural language 
processing techniques in order to research all types and all 
traits of both personality theories, and thus showing that the 
relation between language and personality can be determined 
computationally.  
D. 
Personality Research from Text 
We briefly present previous research that involves either 
Jung Typology Test or Big-Five Personality Test in the 
author’s personality prediction task from the text.  
1) 
Jung Typology Test 
One of the first studies related to the author's personality 
prediction problem [16] defined the research problem as a 
text categorization task. They developed a corpus consisted 
of essays written in Dutch by 145 students (BA level). By 
selecting syntactic features and training machine learning 
algorithms, the experiments in personality prediction 
suggested that the personality dimensions Introverted-
Extraverted and Intuitive-Sensing) can be predicted 
accurately.   
CPP studies have also expanded to social media texts with 
an emphasis on Twitter. A study for predicting Twitter users’ 
personality type [17] showed that the classifier's performance 
on training data was quite good. Still, the classifier failed to 
achieve satisfying results for the test data. Another study [18] 
describes a logistic regression classifier's training process to 
predict each of the four dimensions of Jung Typology. Their 
results showed that linguistic features are the most predictive 
features. Although they successfully distinguished between 
the personality dimensions Introverted-Extraverted and 
Feeling-Thinking, the other two dimensions were hard to 
predict.  
In a study of a multilingual corpus of tweets [19], based on 
six languages (Dutch, German, French, Italian, Portuguese, 
and Spanish), the researchers extracted the most frequent 
word and character n-grams. Their results confirmed the 
findings of the previous work in that particular personality 
distinctions could be predicted from social media data with 
success. In another study focused on tweets [20], the 
researchers used a Naive Bayes classifier achieving 80% 

127
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
accuracy for Introverted-Extraverted and 60% for the other 
dimensions.  
CPP has also being applied to languages with a different 
graphemic organization compared to Western languages. For 
example, in [21], researchers investigate the personality 
prediction of Twitter users in Japanese and conclude that the 
textual information of user behaviors is more valuable than 
the users’ cooccurrence behavior information such as the 
likes. In this study, the problem of author personality 
prediction was treated as a set of binary classification tasks 
using Support Vector Machines.  
2) 
Big-Five Personality Test 
Another study [22], which also treated personality 
prediction as a classification problem, has been conducted 
using student essays data. The corpus consisted of essays 
written by 198 psychology undergraduates over twenty 
minutes expressing thoughts and feelings. Each writer has 
been profiled by filling in a questionnaire testing the “Big 
Five” personality dimensions. The researchers focused on 
two of the Big Five traits, Extraversion and Neuroticism. 
Style and content features were extracted, and they concluded 
that style features provide a significant amount of 
information about personality.  
 In [23], authors developed classification, regression, and 
ranking models to recognize Big Five personality traits. They 
extracted a set of linguistic and psycholinguistic features 
from essays written by 2,479 psychology students, who were 
told to write whatever came through their minds for 20 
minutes. The LIWC lexicon provided 88 word categories 
with syntactic and semantic information, while the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) Psycholinguistic Database [24] 
was used to extract 14 features. These features were used to 
train machine learning algorithms. The LIWC features 
outperformed the MRC features for every trait, and the LIWC 
features on their own always perform slightly better than the 
full feature set. 
Using a publicly available dataset [11] consisting of 
essays, the authors of [25] developed a personality prediction 
model. They used psycholinguistic indices and language 
embeddings as features. Their results showed that language 
embeddings 
consistently 
outperform 
conventional 
psycholinguistic features. 
In recent years, CPP studies have focused on corpora of 
social network data written in English and other languages. 
One of the most successful research initiatives in this area is 
the Author Profiling Task organised at PAN 2015. The 
specific task aimed to identify Twitter users' personality traits 
considering multilingual data (English, Spanish, Italian, and 
Dutch) [26].  
III. CORPUS 
To test our research hypothesis, that is, whether it is 
possible to detect personality traits of the authors of written 
Modern Greek texts, it is necessary to have a corpus of 
Modern Greek texts and at the same time to connect each 
author of these texts to a psychological profile. Due to the 
lack of such material, the first step was to collect primary 
textual data from native speakers of Modern Greek. In 
particular, the corpus that we developed consists of essays of 
198 high school students and comprises 250.000 words in 
total. It is balanced in size (number of words per student) and 
students’ demographics (gender and age).   
The participating students of three different high schools 
were asked to write three essays to achieve our goal of 
collecting at least 1,000 words from each student. The task 
was voluntary, lasted three school years, and the writing was 
held in the classroom. The experiment was repeated three 
times at different periods. The authors had to write 
spontaneously and continuously for 60 minutes an essay. The 
volunteers were many more than 198, but their data have been 
ignored because they did not provide in their linguistic 
production the required text size. The mean length of the 
essays was 1,255 words. The topics, which were not given in 
advance, were related to the benefits of art, the role of school 
in raising environmental awareness, and fighting against 
child labor. Finally, since the provided texts were 
handwritten, we had to digitize them by manually typing all 
of them.  
IV. METHODOLOGY  
The following section describes the approach used to 
predict the personality types of students.  
A. 
Approach 
In the literature, two approaches stand out for an automatic 
author's personality prediction. In a bottom-up approach, 
personality labels are predicted from linguistic features that 
are being extracted from the corpora used using standard NLP 
document representations (e.g., Bag-of-Words - BoW models, 
etc.) [27]-[29]. In a top-down approach, instead, specialized 
dictionaries with custom entries are used to check the potential 
correlation with personality traits [30]-[32]. Both approaches 
have advantages, as well as restrictions. Therefore, modern 
techniques are oriented towards hybrid methods that combine 
the 
use 
of 
a 
dictionary with 
extended document 
representations trained on machine learning algorithms to 
exploit the best from both approaches, i.e., speed and 
precision, respectively. In this study, we followed the bottom-
up approach, which among other benefits explained above, is 
also language-independent. 
B. 
Feature extraction 
The features used in our research can be considered part 
of a broader feature set characterized as stylometric, i.e., 
models quantitatively the text’s style. The linguistic features 
that have been used previously as stylometric indices are 
numerous. They increase continuously and belong to the 
whole range of linguistic levels. Stylometric features are 
compact, information-rich signaling linguistic devices. They 
are correlated with many different textual functions and carry 
multilevel information related to both the author’s identity and 
his/her metadata.  In CPP, stylometric features can unchain the 

128
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
hidden link between linguistic production and its correlation 
with specific personality types. This is because our personality 
traits are defining and be defined by our socio-cognitive and 
psychological conditions. In that sense, aspects of our 
linguistic behavior reflect these personality traits indirectly 
and amplify them using identity perceptions. 
We processed the corpus with natural language processing 
tools during the pre-processing phase, i.e., tokenizer, 
lemmatizer, and POS tagger. The output (Figure 1) of the 
preprocessing phase (matrix of stylometric features) was 
submitted to the data mining platform Rapidminer [33]. The 
text preprocessing pipeline was initially applied to the original 
texts of the students. However, we observed that various 
language errors were scattered across all linguistic levels and 
inserted significant bias in the modeling process negatively 
affecting the prediction results. Therefore, the essays were 
corrected manually without loss of information on the 
morphosyntactic level.  
Figure 1.        Output of the preprocessing phase.  
 
We designed and ran multiple experiments in order to 
extract and quantify many different subsets of stylometric 
features from the corpus. We extracted the most frequent 
character bigrams and trigrams, words bigrams, and trigrams, 
mean word and sentence length, the occurrence frequency of 
content and functional words, the most and less frequent 
words, the occurrence frequency of parts of speech, as well as 
hapax and dis legomena. These features have been proven 
effective in the field of authorship attribution [34] and gender 
identification [35], and we tested them for author personality 
prediction as well. A list of the stylometric features extracted 
from the textual data is reported in Table I.  
C. 
Classification Algorithms  
In this project, the problem of predicting the personality 
type and personality traits was treated as a binary 
classification task among the four dimensions of personality, 
Extraversion-Introversion, 
Sensing-iNtuition, 
Thinking-
Feeling, and Judging-Perceiving and on the other hand, the 
Five Factors of personality, Openness to Experience, 
Conscientiousness, 
Extraversion, 
Agreeableness, 
and 
Neuroticism. The extracted stylometric features matched the 
texts whose authors clearly belonged to a positive or negative 
category to have a valid prediction. 
TABLE I.  
STYLOMETRIC FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM CORPUS 
1. Frequency of 
Verbs  
13. Frequency of 
Active Voice Verbs   
25. Functional 
Density 
2. Frequency of 
Nouns   
14. Frequency of 
Passive Voice Verbs    
26. Average Word 
Length 
3. Frequency of 
Adjectives    
15. Percentage of all 
Stop Words 
27. Average Sentence 
Length 
4. Frequency of 
Articles   
16. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent Tokens 
28. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent Word 
Bigrams 
5. Frequency of 
Pronouns   
17. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent Non 
Stop Words 
29. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent Word 
Trigrams 
6. Frequency of 
Adverbs   
18. Percentage of 
Bottom Least Frequent 
Tokens 
30. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent 
Character Bigrams 
7. Frequency of 
Prepositions   
19. Percentage of 
Bottom Least Frequent 
Non Stop Words  
31. Percentage of Top 
Most Frequent 
Character Trigrams 
8. Frequency of 
Conjunctions   
20. Number of Single 
Non Stop Words per 
all Words Occurrences 
32. Percentage of 100 
Most Frequent Words 
9. Frequency of 
Personal Pronouns    
21. Percentage of 
Tokens Appearing 
Once 
33. Percentage of 100 
Most Frequent Word 
Bigrams 
10. Frequency of 
Coordinative 
Conjunctions   
22. Percentage of 
Tokens Appearing 
Twice  
34. Percentage of 100 
Most Frequent 
Character Bigrams 
11. Frequency of 
Subordinative 
Conjunctions   
23. Ratio of Twice 
over Once Appearing 
Tokens 
35. Percentage of 100 
Most Frequent 
Character Trigrams 
12. Frequency of 
Personal And 
Possessive 
Pronouns  
24. Percentage of all 
Non Stop Words    
 
 
Since 
personality 
detection 
presents 
a 
complex 
classification task, we decided to use several different 
machine learning algorithms to find the best approach in terms 
of model performance. We compared nine machine learning 
methods, i.e., Naive Bayes, Generalized Linear Model 
(Binomial Method), Logistic Regression, Fast Large Margin, 
Deep Learning, Decision Trees, Random Forest, Gradient 
Boosted Trees, Support Vector Machines, and we ranked 
them according to their cross-validated accuracy (10-fold). 
We evaluated the machine learning algorithms in terms of 
their predictive ability using the students' essays as training 
data. Their personality type and traits had been defined before 
using the appropriate psychometric questionnaires.  
V. RESULTS  
This section presents the results of the procedure that we 
followed to automatically classify the students’ essays based 
on the personality type and personality traits defined by the 
personality questionnaires they filled in. From the nine 
algorithms trained in the textual data, we present the 
evaluation metrics of the most effective algorithm (Table II 
and Table III) along with the corresponding weights that 
 

129
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
positively affected the prediction of the personality type and 
traits depending on the psychological theory used.  
A. 
Jung Typology Test 
Regarding the prediction of all personality types of Jung’s 
typology, the algorithm with the best results was Naive 
Bayes. The accuracy rate revealed a range from 68.8% to 
80.7%, with an average of 76.5%. Extraversion type was 
predicted with 80.7%, the Intuition type with 79.9%, the 
Feeling with 68.8%, and the Judging type with 75.7% [36]. 
A more detailed list of evaluation metrics (accuracy, 
precision, and recall) is reported in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
NAIVE BAYES MODEL PERFORMANCE 
 
The remaining algorithms that were trained in the corpus 
produced the following results in terms of classification 
accuracy: Regarding the Extraversion type, the Generalized 
Linear Model (Binomial Method), Logistic Regression, Fast 
Large Margin, Deep Learning, Decision Trees, Random 
Forest and Gradient Boosted Trees algorithms have the same 
percentage of accuracy being 80.0%, and the Support Vector 
Machine algorithm has 79.0%. The Intuition type was 
predicted with 75.0% by Gradient Boosted Trees algorithm, 
with 71.9% by Deep Learning and 71.7% by  Generalized 
Linear Model (Binomial Method) and Logistic Regression. 
For the Feeling type, the Decision Tree algorithm exhibits the 
second-best performance with 63.2%. Random Forest is in 
the third position with 63.1%. The next best result was 63% 
using Gradient Boosted Trees. The algorithms with the best 
performance for the Judging type were Support Vector 
Machine, Fast Large Margin, and Deep Learning with 
calculated accuracies of 71.1%, 71.0%, and 70.3%, 
respectively.  
The study aimed to classify the essays of the students in 
personality types by using stylometric indices. Therefore, we 
had to check whether and which of these features are the most 
useful and contribute to the prediction accuracy of the 
algorithm. For this reason, we extracted the weights from the 
Naive Bayes model that measure the importance of each 
stylometric feature to the classification decisions of the 
algorithm for each personality type separately.  
For Extraversion (Figure 2), verb types in active voice had 
a significant impact. In addition, the mean length of the 
sentence in words of all sentences, the words that occur only 
twice in one text, the most frequent content words, and finally, 
the personal pronouns complete the list with the five most 
important stylometric features. 
Figure 2.        Weights for Extraversion. 
 
 Figure 3 depicts the prediction ability of the stylometric 
features for Intuition used by the algorithm. The word's mean 
length in characters had the most significant impact. The 
features that follow are the most frequent trigrams of 
characters, the hapax legomena, the personal pronouns, the 
content words, the most frequent word bigrams, the rarest 
words, the most frequent word trigrams, and all content words. 
 
               Figure 3.        Weights for Intuition. 
 
The stylometric features that affected the result of the 
classification of the essays in terms of Feeling are the verbs, 
the adjectives, the most frequent content words, the personal 
and the possessive pronouns, the nouns, and the adverbs 
(Figure 4).  
 Figure 4.        Weights for Feeling.  
 
Finally, in Figure 5, the eight stylometric features that 
contributed to the prediction of the Judging type were in 
descending order: The most common word trigrams, the most 
common word bigrams, the mean length of the sentence in 
words, the most common character bigrams and the most 
common character trigrams with the same percentage, the 
Personality 
Type 
Naive Bayes Classifier 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
Extraversion 
80.7% 
80.5% 
100% 
Intuition 
79.9% 
81.3% 
92.6% 
Feeling 
68.8% 
67.7% 
96.7% 
Judging 
75.7% 
76.2% 
95.2% 
 
 
 

130
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
personal and possessive pronouns, the articles, and the mean 
length of the word in characters. 
 
B. 
Big-Five Personality Test 
Regarding the prediction of all Big Five personality traits, 
the algorithm with the best results was the Generalized Linear 
Model (Binomial Method). The accuracy rate revealed a 
range from 65.6%% to 85.9%, with an average of 72.1%. 
Openness to Experience was predicted with 85.9%, 
Conscientiousness with 71.2%, Extraversion with 67.6%, 
Agreeableness with 70.2%, and the trait of Neuroticism with 
65.6% [36]. It clearly emerges that Openness to Experience 
is the easiest trait that can be predicted from the textual data, 
followed by Conscientiousness and Agreeableness. Table III 
reports a more detailed list of evaluation metrics (accuracy, 
precision, and recall).  
TABLE III.  
GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL PERFORMANCE (BINOMIAL 
METHOD) 
 
In terms of classification accuracy, the next best 
algorithms trained in the corpus produced the following 
results: Regarding Openness to Experience, Logistic 
Regression achieved 85.2%, Fast Large Margin, Decision 
Tree, Random Forest and Support Vector Machine 81.4% 
and Deep Learning 80.4%. The algorithms with the best 
performance for the trait of Conscientiousness were Naive 
Bayes, Gradient Boosted Trees, and Random Forest with 
calculated accuracies of 61.8%, 57.2%, and 56.0%, 
respectively. Extraversion was predicted with 65.1% by Fast 
Large Margin algorithm, 60.0% by Decision Tree and 
Random Forest, and 57.5% Deep Learning and Support 
Vector Machine. For Agreeableness, Random Forest 
algorithm exhibits the second-best performance with 69.1%, 
Deep Learning, Decision Tree, Gradient Boosted Trees, and 
Support Vector Machine being in the third position with 
62.1%. The algorithms with the best performance for the trait 
of Neuroticism were Deep Learning, Naive Bayes, and 
Logistic Regression with calculated accuracies of 59.2%, 
58.0%, and 57.6%, respectively.        
In the following paragraphs, we present the weights we 
extracted from the Generalized Linear Model (Binomial 
Method) that measure the importance of each stylometric 
feature to the classification decisions of the algorithm for 
each personality trait separately with the aim to classify the 
essays of the students in personality traits by using 
stylometric indices. Therefore, we had to check whether and 
which of these features are the most useful and contribute to 
the prediction accuracy of the algorithm.   
For Openness to Experience (Figure 6), the use of 
personal pronouns had a significant impact. In addition, the 
use of verbs, dis legomena, adjectives, prepositions, pronouns, 
articles, subordinative conjunctions, nouns, conjunctions, 
adverbs, and coordinative conjunctions complete the list with 
the twelve most important stylometric features.  
 
    Figure 6.        Weights for Openness to Experience 
 
The stylometric features that contributed to the prediction 
of Conscientiousness were in descending order: functional 
density, non stop words, stop words, dis legomena, ratio of 
twice over once appearing tokens, the top most frequent 
tokens, the average word length, the top most frequent word 
bigrams, the hapax legomena, subordinative conjunctions, the 
bottom least frequent tokens, and the bottom least frequent 
non stop words  (Figure 7).  
Figure 8 depicts the prediction ability of the stylometric 
features for Extraversion used by the algorithm. The average 
sentence length had the most significant impact. The features 
that follow are ratio of twice over once appearing tokens, 
personal and possessive pronouns, the top most frequent word 
bigrams, adverbs, the bottom least frequent non stop words, 
conjunctions, prepositions, and dis legomena.  
The stylometric features that affected the result of the 
classification of the essays in terms of Agreeableness are the 
verbs, ratio of twice over once appearing tokens, dis 
legomena, the use of verb types in active voice, personal and 
possessive pronouns, the top most frequent word bigrams, the 
average word length in characters, the average sentence length 
Personality Trait 
Generalized Linear Model (Binomial 
Method) 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
Openness 
85.9% 
85.4% 
100% 
Conscientiousness 
71.2% 
68.6% 
80.0% 
Extraversion 
67.6% 
66.7% 
86.7% 
Agreeableness 
70.2% 
67.9% 
98.7% 
Neuroticism 
65.6% 
64.8% 
71.9% 
Figure 5.        Weights for Judging.  
 
 

131
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in words, prepositions, the top most frequent tokens, and the 
top most frequent character trigrams (Figure 9).  
     
Figure 7.        Weights for Conscientiousness 
 
   Figure 8.        Weights for Extraversion  
 
  Figure 9.        Weights for Agreeableness 
 
Finally, in Figure 10, the stylometric features that 
contributed to the prediction of Neuroticism are many of the 
100 most frequent character trigrams, which were extracted 
from the whole corpus in contrast to the other features 
extracted from the subcorpora depending on the personality 
trait. Additionally, personality prediction was affected by 
subordinative conjunctions, adverbs, nouns, and the top most 
frequent word trigrams. 
Figure 10.        Weights for Neuroticism 
 
It is evident that the most important features extracted 
from the model vary considerably for each personality type 
and trait. Therefore, we can infer that each type and trait is 
based on a different combination of linguistic features and 
these subsets are different between the different personality 
types and traits.  
It also becomes clear that the predictive accuracy of the 
proposed classification model is high compared to the existing 
literature on the field of personality prediction. Regarding 
Jung’s Typology Test, we got an average accuracy of 76.5%, 
 
 
 
 
 

132
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
compared to the 68.62% reported for Dutch [8]. On the other 
hand, research on textual data from essays using the Big Five 
model achieved an average accuracy of 60.6% [25], while we 
got 72.2%. The other studies mentioned [9]-[13][26] 
implemented machine learning techniques in textual data that 
were retrieved from social media. Therefore, their results can’t 
be directly compared since they involve research with textual 
data from adults written under different circumstances and in 
a different language. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To summarize, in this paper, we presented the results of 
our research in the field of personality prediction. We applied 
CPP for the first time in texts written by high-school students, 
making our dataset unique. Our results confirmed our initial 
research hypothesis that stylometric features could be used as 
reliable prediction indices for the author’s psychological 
profile.  
It is essential, of course, to emphasize that in the research 
field in which this research belongs, there are no reference 
data measuring and comparing the performance of different 
personality traits prediction methods objectively. None of the 
existing research uses comparable methods that have been 
applied to identical or comparable sets of textual data in the 
same language. Therefore, the percentages of accuracy from 
literature involve research with textual data, but not those of 
students but those of adults, written under other 
circumstances and in a different language; and, of course, 
with other features, not always stylometric.   
Our findings further support the latent link of personality 
traits with a wide array of linguistic behaviour aspects. 
Different 
personality 
types 
correlate 
with 
different 
stylometric features that belong to different linguistic levels. 
Therefore, the personality prediction through text demands a 
highly dynamic feature set to capture the widest possible 
spectrum of linguistic structures.  
A basic target for continuing the research work in CPP is 
the investigation of new traits but also testing more 
stylometric features. In this study, we utilized only linguistic 
stylometric features. In this direction, future research will 
employ experimentation with new linguistic features or 
features already examined in the literature, such as content 
features, psycholinguistic, and syntactic features. We plan to 
localize well-known psychometric lexicons in Modern Greek 
(e.g., LIWC) and use them to complement our feature sets. In 
addition, we need to select features depending on the corpus, 
as, for instance, a person writes differently in a school essay 
and differently on social media.    
We have ascertained the need to develop high-volume 
representative data since this constitutes a prerequisite for 
any relevant research. We need to create specialized corpora 
of Greek education texts by means of the used algorithmic 
methods, as well as the respective reference corpora to review 
the performance of the methods. Moreover, we plan to 
increase the size of the used corpus with additional students’ 
essays. To draw more reliable conclusions, the growth of the 
corpus needs to ensure a balance between textual genres and 
different personality profiles. To achieve this, the corpus 
could be enriched with essays of different topics and textual 
genres and sufficient data for every psychological type.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gagiatsou, G. Markopoulos, and G. Mikros, “Using 
Stylometric Features to Predict Author Personality Type in 
Modern Greek Essays” The Fifteenth International Conference 
on Digital Society (ICDS 2021), Jul. 2021, pp. 34-39, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-869-3 
[2] Y. Neuman, D. Assaf, Y. Cohen, and L. J. Knoll, “Profiling 
school shooters: Automatic text-based analysis,” Front. 
Psychiatry, vol. 6, p. 86, 2015.                 
[3]  J.W. Pennebaker, R.L. Boyd, K. Jordan, and K. Blackburn, 
“The 
Development 
and 
Psychometric 
Properties 
of 
LIWC2015”. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. 
(www.LIWC.net), 2015. [retrieved: November, 2021] 
[4] C. G. Jung, “Psychological Types,” Princeton, New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1971. 
[5] I. Briggs Myers and P. B. Myers, “Gifts Differing: 
Understanding Personality Type,” Mountain View, CA: 
Davies-Black Publishing, 1980.  
[6] Jr. P. T. Costa and R. R. McCrae, “NEO-PI-R: Professional 
Manual,” Odessa, Fla.: Psychological Assessment Resources, 
1993.  
[7] The 
Big 
Five 
Project 
Personality 
Test 
https://www.outofservice.com/bigfive. [retrieved: November, 
2021]. 
[8] P. Juola, “Authorship Attribution,” Foundations and Trends in 
Information Retrieval, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 233-334, 2008.   
[9] F. H. Sanford, “Speech and Personality: A Comparative Case 
Study,” Journal of Personality, vol. 10, pp. 169-198, 1942. 
[10] J. J. Bradac, “Language Attitudes and Impression Formation”, 
In H. Giles and W.P. Robinson (eds.), Handbook of Language 
and Social Psychology, pp. 387-412, 1990.  
[11] J. W. Pennebaker and L. A. King, “Linguistic Styles: Language 
Use as an Individual Difference,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, vol. 77, pp. 1296-1312, 1999.  
[12] A. J. Gill, “Personality and Language: The Projection and 
Perception 
of 
Personality 
in 
Computer-mediated 
Communication”, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Edinburgh: 
Scotland, 2003.  
[13] J. W. Pennebaker, M. R. Mehl, and K. G. Niederhoffer, 
“Psychological Aspects of Natural Language Use: Our Words, 
our Selves,” Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 54, pp. 547-
577, 2003.  
[14] J. W. Pennebaker and L. D. Stone, “Words of Wisdom: 
Language Use over the Life Span,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 291-301, 2003. 
[15] J. Oberlander and A. J. Gill, “Language with Character: A 
Stratified Corpus Comparison of Individual Differences in e-
mail Communication,” Discourse Processes, vol. 42, pp. 239-
270, 2006.  
[16] K. Luyckx and W. Daelemans, “Personae: A corpus for Author 
and Personality Prediction from Text” The Sixth International 
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 
2008), 28-30 May 2008, pp. 2981-2987. 
[17] D. Brinks and H. White, “Detection of Myers - Briggs Type 
Indicator 
via 
Text 
based 
Computer-mediated 
Communication,” CS 229 Machine Learning Projects, 
Stanford, 2012. 
[18] B. Plank and D. Hovy, “Personality Traits on Twitter-or-how 
to get 1,500 Personality Tests in a Week” The Sixth Workshop 
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and 

133
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Social Media Analysis, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2015, pp. 92-98.  
[19] B.Verhoeven, W. Daelemans, and B. Plank, “Creating TwiSty: 
Corpus 
Development 
and 
Statistics,” 
Computational 
Linguistics and Psycholinguistics Research Center CLiPS 
Technical Report Series, University of Antwerp, Belgium, 
CTRS-006, 2016.  
[20] L. C. Lukito, A. Erwin, J. Purnama, and W. Danoekoesoemo, 
“Social 
Media 
User 
Personality 
Classification 
using 
Computational 
Linguistic” 
The 
Eighth 
International 
Conference on Information Technology and Electrical 
Engineering, Oct. 2016, pp. 1-6. 
[21] K. Yamada, R. Sasano, and K. Takeda, “Incorporating Textual 
Information on User Behavior for Personality Prediction” The 
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, Jul.-Aug. 2019, pp. 
177-182. 
[22] S. Argamon, M. Koppel, J. W. Pennebaker, and J.Schler, 
“Automatically Profiling the Author of an Anonymous Text,” 
Communications 
of 
the 
Association 
for 
Computing  
Machinery, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 119-123, 2009.  
[23] F. Mairesse and M. A. Walker, “Words Mark the Nerds: 
Computational Models of Personality Recognition through 
Language” The 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, Jul. 2006, pp. 543-548. 
[24] M. Wilson, “MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machine Usable 
Dictionary, Version 2.00,” Behavioural Research Methods, 
Instruments and Computers, vol. 20, pp. 6-11, 1988.  
[25] Y. Mehta et al., “Bottom-up and top-down: Predicting 
Personality with Psycholinguistic and Language Model 
Features” 20th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining 
(ICDM), Nov. 2020, pp. 1184-1189. 
[26] F. Rangel et al., “Overview of the 3rd Author Profiling Pask at 
PAN 2015” In L. Cappellato, N. Ferro, J.Gareth, and E. San 
Juan (Eds), CLEF 2015 Evaluation Labs and Workshop - 
Working Notes Papers, Sep. 2015. 
[27] J. Oberlander and S. Nowson, “Whose Thumb is it anyway? 
Classifying Author Personality from Weblog Text” The 44th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics ACL, Jul. 2006, pp. 627-634. 
[28] F. Iacobelli, A. J. Gill, S. Nowson, and J. Oberlander, “Large 
Scale Personality Classification of Bloggers” The Fourth 
International Conference on Affective Computing and 
Intelligent Interaction, 2011, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 
568-577. 
[29] Y. Bachrach, M. Kosinski, T. Graepel, P. Kohli, and D. 
Stillwell, “Personality and Patterns of Facebook Usage” The 
Fourth Annual ACM Web Science Conference, 2012, pp. 36-
45. 
[30] S. Argamon, S. Dhawle, M. Koppel, and J. W. Pennebaker, 
“Lexical Predictors of Personality Type” The Joint Annual 
Meeting of the Interface and the Classification Society of North 
America, 2005, pp. 1-16.  
[31] F. Mairesse, M. A. Walker, M. R. Mehl, and R. K. Moore, 
“Using Linguistic Cues for the Automatic Recognition of 
Personality in Conversation and Text,” Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research, vol. 30, pp. 457-500, 2007. 
[32] J. Golbeck, C. Robles, and K. Turner, “Predicting Personality 
with Social Media” The 2011 Annual Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 253-
262.  
[33] I. Mierswa and R. Klinkenberg. Rapidminer Studio (9.1) [Data 
science, 
machine 
learning, 
predictive 
analytics]. 
(https://rapidminer.com). [retrieved: November, 2021].  
[34] G. K. Mikros and G. Markopoulos, “Using Multiword 
Sequences as Features in Authorship Attribution: Experiments 
based on Greek Blog Texts,” In A. Christofidou (Ed.), Aspects 
of Corpus Linguistics: Principles, applications and challenges 
Vol. 14, pp. 56-67, 2017. Athens: Academy of Athens: 
Research Center for Scientific Terms and Neologisms. 
[35] G. K.  Mikros, “Authorship Attribution and Gender 
Identification in Greek Blogs,” In I. Obradović, E. Kelih & R. 
Köhler (Eds.), Selected papers of the VIIIth International 
Conference on Quantitative Linguistics (QUALICO), Apr. 
2013, Belgrade: Academic Mind, pp. 21-32.  
[36] S. Gagiatsou, “Automatic author profiling based on natural 
language processing techniques”, Ph.D. Thesis, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens: Greece, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

