297
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Web Accessibility Recommendations for the Design of Tourism Websites
for People with Autism Spectrum Disorders
Antonina Dattolo
SASWEB Lab, DIMA
Universit`a di Udine,
via Santa Chiara, 1
34170 Gorizia, Italy
email: antonina.dattolo@uniud.it
Flaminia L. Luccio
DAIS
Universit`a Ca’ Foscari Venezia,
via Torino 155,
30170 Venezia, Italy
email: luccio@unive.it
Elisa Pirone
Universit`a Ca’ Foscari Venezia,
Venezia, Italy
email: elisapirone06@gmail.com
Abstract—The universal Web design represents an ambitious and
open challenge for the current research on the Web. Key aspects
are Web accessibility and Web usability by people with the widest
possible range of abilities, operating within the widest possible
range of situations. Universal design is adaptive for the users, and
provides personalised answers to different users. A recent study
shows an estimation of the global burden of people with Autism
Spectrum Disorders. In the last 24 years, the incidence of autism
has a stable prevalence of 7.6 per 1000 or one in 132 persons. They
represent a signiﬁcant number of people. People with Autism
Spectrum Disorders are usually solitary and visual thinkers and
they could take advantage by the use of the Web. This paper
discusses of tourism, website and people with Autism Spectrum
Disorders. The aim is to deﬁne a set of recommendations for
the design of tourist websites for people with Autism Spectrum
Disorders, and to present a case study articulated in two tourist,
autistic-friendly, websites. The ﬁrst website considers the area
of Rieti, central Italy; it has been validated through expert
reviews, and several trials with many autistic, verbal users of a
specialised centre for neurological and physical disabilities. The
second website contains as a tourist destination the area around
Mestre, close to Venice, Italy. In this case, the website has been
validated on a single, non-verbal autistic user.
Keywords–Autistic-friendly
website;
Accessibility;
Usability;
Tourism; Autism Spectrum Disorders.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we consider the problem of developing
accessible and usable tourism websites dedicated to people
with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), and we extend some
preliminary results presented in [1].
Web accessibility and usability represent an open challenge
for the current research on the Web. They aim to make Web
content more accessible and usable to a wider range of people
with disabilities, including blindness and low vision, deafness
and hearing loss, learning disabilities, cognitive limitations,
limited movement, speech disabilities, photo sensitivity and
combinations of these [2].
Usually, Web developers apply general standards, following
the guidelines provided by the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C) [3][4], without considering the importance of a univer-
sal Web access. However, every country supports the applica-
tion of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0
[2], although adopts a different Web accessibility legislation.
WCAG 2.0 are recommended, but become mandatory only
in speciﬁc cases, such as, for example, in Italy, for the Web
sites of public Institutions (see the so-called “Legge Stanca”,
literally Stanca Act [5]).
In this paper, we are interested in the development of
tourism, accessible and usable, websites dedicated to people
with ASD. We thus ﬁrst consider the relation between autism
and tourism, and show the existing solutions for tour proposals
to these speciﬁc users; then, we present the state of art of
existing guidelines for the development of websites for people
with cognitive disabilities, and extend them with new features
specialised for people with ASD. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no existing websites that are usable and accessible for
people with ASD, and let them freely navigate inside them and
take independent decisions (as, e.g., the choice of a tour). We
thus propose an interesting case study of two touristic websites
for autistic users and we show some experimental results on a
set of 9 verbal users, and 1 non-verbal user.
The paper is organised as follows: Section II presents ta
brief description of the ASD; it is followed by Section III,
dedicated to the state of art in autism and tourism. Section IV
introduces the themes of usability and accessibility, which are
deepen in Section V, where the discussion is specialised for
users with cognitive disabilities; guidelines and related work
are presented. Section VI revisits the recommendations for
people with ASD. Section VII proposes our case study, focused
on accessible and usable tourism, autistic-friendly websites.
Finally, Section VIII describes the experimentation made with
a group of autistic verbal and non-verbal users and the related
results. Section IX ends the paper with a look to future work.
II.
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
The American Psychiatric Association deﬁnes the ASD as
neuro-developmental disorders with persistent impairments in
social communication and social interaction, and restricted,
repetitive patterns of behaviour, interests, or activities [6].
This general deﬁnition puts together people with a wide and
different set of features and behaviours; so, it is difﬁcult create
multi-purpose environments, but some general guidelines may
be followed. We have focused our attention on ASD user
proﬁles with the following features.
Typically, the impairments in social communication are
related to language delays, however, people with ASD often
present good visual abilities. Thus, modern speech therapies

298
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
are usually combined with Augmentative and Alternative
Communication (AAC) techniques, i.e., powerful methods
that combine different visual components in order to create
syntactically and semantically correct sentences [7][8]. Among
these AAC techniques a standard approach is to use the Picture
Exchange Communication System (PECS), which promotes in-
teractions among users with the exchanging of images [9]. Peo-
ple with ASD are usually visual thinkers, i.e., think in pictures
and express their concepts by visualising sequences of pictures
of the same object [10]. They have often limited attention, i.e.,
limited time in which they might be able to concentrate on a
particular task, thus deﬁning limited, self-contained tasks is
very important. They might also suffer of Sensory Processing
Disorders (SPD), and may thus feel distressed and confused
in particular situations. SPD are neurological disorders that
cause difﬁculties with processing information from the ﬁve
senses (vision, auditory, touch, olfaction, and taste), as well
as from the sense of movement (vestibular system), and/or the
positional sense (proprioception) [11].
III.
AUTISM AND TOURISM: RELATED WORK
The UNTWO (World Tourism Organization) [12] rec-
ommends in several publications cited in [13], among the
priorities for a global tourism, the accessibility of tourism
websites. The numbers are not negligible. In a recent report
in [14], ENAT (European Network for Accessible Tourism)
indicates, only in Europe, a request for accessible tourism
of 350 millions of people with different disabilities; more
speciﬁcally, the global incidence of people with ASD is of
7.6 per 1000 (one in 132 persons) [15].
For people with ASD, some issues that have to be con-
sidered are: social inclusion, e.g., in community activities,
emotional well being, e.g., happiness, interpersonal relations,
e.g., friendship, and physical well-being, e.g., leisure [16].
All this, may be achieved with a well planned tourism trip,
being it an experience that stimulates all the above domains.
However, this is not trivial since all the different activities
related to a trip, i.e., transportation, accommodation, etc. have
to be adjusted to meet special needs.
The ﬁrst issue that has to be considered is the preparation
phase since it is well known that autistic people get stressed
in unknown, unexpected situations, thus everything has to be
previously planned, and the user has to be prepared to tackle
each of the trip steps.
In [16][17] the authors identify some of the issues that a
travel agency or whoever organises the trip should consider
while planning it for an autistic user:
•
Survey phase: A questionnaire should be provided
in order to identify, which are the main physical,
sensory, or language problems the user has, and which
are his/her main interests. According to this, the
agency can suggest suitable tourism destinations or
trips. E.g., a person that gets stressed in very crowded,
loud or noisy places should avoid amusement parks,
crowded exhibitions, etc.
•
Trip planning: At this point a trip may be planned by
taking into consideration all the provided information.
The ﬁrst thing is transportation, so how to move
from a home place to the destination. This can be
achieved in different ways, what is important is that
all the steps are previously explained to the user. If
the transportation is by air the airline company has to
be contacted. Some airports offer some pre-planned
visits of the airport [17], the airport of Dublin also
offers some very interesting on-line material, which
visually describes the different parts of the airport,
following a logical sequence of actions, which a
traveller is supposed to do. It also provides interesting
tips on how to face all the different situations while
being at the airport and also some general rules to
follow during a trip [18].
•
Accommodation: What seems to be more suitable for
autistic users, are small size accommodations, such
as small hotels and motels, or preferably the renting
of a condo where the user can ”feel at home”. In
the USA, there are some hotels that already provide
”autism-friendly
accommodations”
with
special
rooms, staff, and meals [16].
•
Tours: What concerns the tourism activities, is ob-
viously based on the preference of the user. Thus,
following the guidelines of the survey is a good
starting point. Here, we have to distinguish between
one day trips, which obviously have to be planned
in the surrounding area, avoiding too much stress for
the trip, and longer trips of two or more days. There
are obviously different options, depending on the pref-
erences and also considering the sensory problems,
which autistic users might have. Possible options are
sightseeing in scenic areas since autistic users often
like silent places and love taking pictures, visiting
historical and cultural sites, museums, aquariums etc.
Some museums are “Autism-Friendly Museums”, and
are prepared to host these special tourists. An example
is the Royal air force museum in London, which offers
an autism friendly trail that can be downloaded from
the site, and has won an Autism Access Award [19], or
the Metropolitan museum of art in New York, which
offers e.g., a social narrative (PDF) about visiting the
Museum with tips, and a Sensory Friendly Map of the
museum with the list of quiet and less crowded areas
[20].
Obviously, general considerations are that ﬁrst one should
prepare the autistic user to very simple day trips, then these
trips might be planned for a longer time. Daily activities should
not be too intense, locations should be visited in times of the
day during which places are not too crowded, i.e., stressful
situations should be avoided as much as possible. A good
idea is also to prepare the user for the changes of routine
by illustrating the trip using brochures, photos, videos, etc..
A last consideration is that, often, things might not go as
expected, thus the trip should be planned with ﬂexibility in
order to include last minute changes of planes, i.e., alternative
destination, activities and so on.
The site Autistic Globetrotting is an example of a site
developed for people with ASD (see [21]). It has the aim of
encouraging families with people with ASD to travel around
the world; it provides interesting hints for travelling, e.g., how
to let a person with ASD pack his/her luggage, interesting
destinations and hotels, and so on. It also states that the

299
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
beneﬁts of travelling outweigh the problems one will face. For
instance, travelling provides a hand on experience on some
topics, which are studied in books at school (also people
people without ASD would beneﬁt from it). Mathematics for
calculating money exchange or tips, art by visiting museum
and galleries, geography by physically moving from a city to
another, literature by visiting homes of famous authors, and
so on. It increases ﬂexibility not only in the daily routine but
also in the dietary restrictions by encouraging the experience
of tasting different food, in the interaction with other people
by enhancing social and language skills, in raising family
bondings, etc.
IV.
WEBSITE USABILITY AND ACCESSIBILITY
Access to information and communication technologies is a
basic human right as recognised in the United Nations Conven-
tion on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) [22].
Disabilities might be either physical (visual, auditory, etc.), or
cognitive and neurological, and they might be temporary or
boundless.
The W3C [2][3] has proposed different guidelines to pro-
duce accessible websites; in 2012, a W3C group, named Web
Accessibility Initiative (WAI), publishes a draft containing
some principles of Web accessibility for people with cognitive
or neuronal disabilities [23]; it marks the birth of a task force
group, named Cognitive and Learning Disabilities Accessibil-
ity Task Force (COGA). Recently, in August 2016, COGA,
together the Protocols and Formats Working Group, and the
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Working Group, have
published a list of general guidelines useful for most people
with Cognitive and Learning Disabilities [4].
However, speciﬁc features have to be considered while
dealing with people with speciﬁc disabilities, such as ASD.
As we have previously mentioned, typical problems that people
with ASD face are limited attention, sensory hypersensitive-
ness, different way of learning and reacting to things, problems
related to limited text comprehension (e.g., not understanding
ﬁgurative language, etc.). For such a reason standard usable
and accessible websites might not be suitable for such users.
Web usability and accessibility are closely related and their
goals, approaches, and guidelines overlap signiﬁcantly [24].
Usability is all about designing an easy to use website that
appeals to as many people as possible. websites should be
intuitively usable. Usability is a quality attribute that assesses
how easy user interfaces are to use; it is is deﬁned in [25] by
ﬁve quality components:
•
Learnability: How easy is it for users to accomplish
basic tasks the ﬁrst time they encounter the design?
•
Efﬁciency: Once users have learned the design, how
quickly can they perform tasks?
•
Memorability: When users return to the design after a
period of not using it, how easily can they reestablish
proﬁciency?
•
Errors: How many errors do users make, how severe
are these errors, and how easily can they recover from
the errors?
•
Satisfaction: How pleasant is it to use the design?
For Web developers, a key aspect of usability is following
a User-Centred Design (UCD) process to create positive and
emotional user experiences [26].
Accessibility is about ensuring an equivalent user experi-
ence for people with disabilities. For the Web, accessibility
means that people with disabilities can perceive, understand,
navigate, and interact with websites and tools, and that they
can contribute equally without barriers.
Usable accessibility combines usability and accessibility to
develop positive user experiences for people with disabilities.
User-centred design processes include both techniques for
including users throughout design and evaluation, and using
guidelines for design and evaluation. UCD helps making
informed decisions about accessible design. Thus UCD is
necessary to improve accessibility in websites and Web tools.
The goal of Web accessibility is to make the Web work
well for people, speciﬁcally people with disabilities. While
technical standards are an essential tool for meeting that goal,
marking off a checklist is not the end goal. People with
disabilities effectively interacting with and contributing to the
Web is the end goal [24].
We note that accessibility ̸= usability. A website may com-
ply with standards, may pass all the automated accessibility
checks, may appear to be accessible, however, it is not neces-
sarily usable. Web pages can be veriﬁed accessible by focus
groups, and still be inaccessible to a third party. Individual
users may have cognitive, technical, or other barriers.
V.
USABILITY AND ACCESSIBILITY FOR PEOPLE WITH
COGNITIVE DISABILITIES: GENERAL GUIDELINES AND
RELATED WORK
The improvement of the quality of life for autistic people
is a big and open challenge. Several studies recognise that
the computer technologies are assuming a signiﬁcant role for
supporting the people with ASD [27][28][29]:
•
They arouse the interest of these typology of users,
that take major advantage from the interaction through
devices with touch screens, such as tablets.
•
They help them to develop their abilities and simplify
some aspects of their lives.
•
They represent a signiﬁcant help for their families and
therapists.
•
The same research supports their effectiveness for
people with ASD.
The computer technologies offer a large set of possibilities,
such as websites, Web apps, affective computing, virtual
reality, robotics, multitouch interfaces. In this paper, we mainly
focus our attention on websites, and more in general, Web-
based applications, since they play a major role in content
display both for online and ofﬂine use, becoming more ac-
cessible with time, and giving the possibility to develop tools
that easily meet users needs. Web sites, Web applications, and
multitouch interfaces to the Web technologies assume a strong
role on the basis of the following considerations [1][30]:
•
They are within the reach of all.
•
They do not need of speciﬁc pre-expertise in their use.
•
They do not have elevated costs.
•
They play a major role in content display both for
online and ofﬂine use.
•
They are becoming more accessible with time, can-
celling the gaps among people, without discrimina-
tions.

300
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
They may offer easy and fast customisation.
•
They evolve in the time with the new Web standards,
tackling problems that are typically linked to more
traditional monolithic applications.
An interesting reading [31] is provided by Jamie Knight,
autistic developer and senior accessibility specialist: he dis-
cusses on cognitive accessibility and provide some practical
guidelines.
However,
in
the
last
ten
years,
some
works [1][4][27][29][32][33] have been dedicated to deﬁne a
formal set of guidelines for designing usable and accessible
user interface for people with cognitive disabilities:
•
In [32], the authors propose a review of the previous
literacy and extract a list of 64 recommendations
for people with cognitive disabilities, including ASD;
only four of them have a frequency of citation, in the
revised works, at least 50%. They are:
1)
Use pictures, icons and symbols along with
text (75%).
2)
Use clear and simple text (70%).
3)
Consistent navigation and design on every
page (60%).
4)
Use headings, titles and prompts (50%).
The four recommendations can be regrouped in three
macro-areas: language (items 1, 2), structure and nav-
igation (item 3), and graphical layout (item 4).
•
The recent report [4], cited in Section IV, identify
detailed techniques that should enable content to be
usable by people with cognitive and learning disabil-
ities. They may be grouped in the following main
macro-areas:
1)
Provide a clear structure.
2)
Be predictable.
3)
Use a clear writing style.
4)
Provide rapid and direct feedback.
5)
Include help meaning.
6)
Use a clear design.
The six recommendations can be regrouped in same
three macro-areas: language (items 3, 4), structure and
navigation (items 1, 2, 5), and graphical layout (item
6). The macro-area no. 5 suggests the importance to
include short tooltips on all icons, jargon; to introduce
charts and graphs; to use symbols and images to show
meaning [4].
•
In
[29], the authors analyse the previous literacy
between 2005 and 2015 and identify 28 guidelines,
speciﬁc for people with ASD; then they distribute
them in the ten categories (deeply discussed in the
cited paper [29]): four of them represent critical in-
terface design aspects, according to the number of
extracted recommendations and number of works from
which the authors extracted the recommendations:
1)
Visual and textual vocabulary.
2)
Customisation.
3)
Engagement.
4)
Redundant representation.
The 4 recommendations can be regrouped in the same
three macro-areas: language (item 1), structure and
navigation (items 3, 4), and graphical layout (item 2).
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, WCAG 1.0 and
WCAG 2.0 [2] represent the international standard reference
model in this research domain. However, different practical
and operative guidelines have also been proposed [31][34],
together to some systematic studies [27][29][32][33].
Given that most of them consider similar aspects, we have
analysed and summarised all of them in the following three
macro-areas:
a) Graphical layout: Users with ASD may easily be
distracted by secondary contents, thus webpages should be
very simple and should not contain information, images,
frames that create distractions. The page layout should be
consistent throughout the website. Images and white space
should be copiously used in order to focus the user attention
and to simplify the concepts absorption. Background sounds,
moving text, blinking images and horizontal scrolling should
be avoided. Attention must be payed to fonts and colours:
words should be easily readable, thus should usually be written
in plain Sans-serif fonts (e.g., Verdana) of at least 12 points.
To emphasise words, bold should be used. The choice of the
right color is very important, people with ASD may avoid the
navigation in sites with particular predominant colours, e.g.,
red. Foreground and background colours should have sufﬁcient
contrast but not too much, some ASD users ﬁnd e.g., that black
on white, is too visually stimulating.
b) Structure and Navigation: The website should have
a simple and logical navigation structure, links should be easy-
to-access and to ﬁnd, and few options should be given in order
to avoid the user confusion. The navigation inside the site
should be limited by three clicks. Each page should contain
the navigation information and navigation buttons at the top
and the bottom of the page.
c) Language:
The language should be simple and
precise so that it does not create ambiguity, secondary and
irrelevant information should be avoided. The text should be
short and self-contained. The words should refer to things that
“can be seen”, acronyms and abbreviations, together with non-
literal text, and jargon should not be used since people with
ASD literally interpret the text content.
VI.
SPECIALISING THE GUIDELINES FOR AUTISM
The three macro-areas proposed in previous Section V
deﬁne a set of general recommendations; in this section we
specialise them, integrating new features, speciﬁc for the ASD
characteristics:
Graphical layout: Limit the text to very few, simple sen-
tences, and add many images in a PECS-like style in order to
describe concepts and actions through sequences of images.
This is the most important feature, i.e., the copious use of
images throughout the site, in order to transmit all messages.
Repeat concepts, and in the homepage write a sentence that
let the user feel it navigates in its “own” site. Write sentences
in bold, of big size and uppercase.
Structure and Navigation: Use simple and sketchy sym-
bolic pictures. If the site is directed to a group of young users,
add, when possible, some simple games to involve the user,
and also to check his/her level of attention.
Language: Use simple and minimal sentences, and illus-
trate concepts through images, and not though the written text.
To summarise, the main feature that we think should be
added is the use of many ﬁgures to explain situations, illustrate

301
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
actions, etc. This choice is based on an Augmentative and Al-
ternative Communication (AAC) approach that is widely used
to improve standard communication. Moreover, we enforce
the involvement of the user on the site navigation by adding
sentences that personalise the site, and by adding games that
increase his/her curiosity. As we will describe in Section VIII,
this choice has been proved to be winning in our testing phase.
VII.
OUR CASE STUDY: ScopriRieti AND ScopriMestre
There are sites that provide tourism destinations for people
with ASD, or that give some tips on how to develop an autistic-
friendly website, however, we could not ﬁnd sites whose aim
was the independent (or almost-independent) planning of a trip
by a user with ASD.
In this section we propose two tourism websites developed
for a target group of young people/adolescents. The ﬁrst site,
called ScopriRieti (literally, “Discover Rieti”) [35], has ﬁrst
been proposed in [36]. It is an autistic-friendly site, that the
user may use to simply search information, or, what is more
interesting, to independently choose one among different possi-
ble destinations of a one-day tourism trip in the neighbourhood
of Rieti, an Italian town in the north of Rome. This site
has been developed for verbal young/adolescents people with
ASD. The second site, called ScopriMestre (literally, “Discover
Mestre”) [37], has recently been developed for a tourism tour
around Mestre (a city close to Venice), and it is a simpler
version developed for non-verbal young users with ASD.
While developing both sites, we made sure that they
met all the accessibility and usability standards we have
presented in Section V and Section VI. We ﬁrst developed
the ScopriRieti website in collaboration with therapists and
operators of the centre Nemo in Rieti, which hosts different
users with neurological and physical disabilities. Following
the same guidelines we then developed a similar, simpliﬁed
version, the ScopriMestre website.
A. The website structure of ScopriRieti
We will ﬁrst introduce in detail the ScopriRieti website,
the ScopriMestre website will have a similar structure, in the
next section we will point out the main differences.
Graphical layout. The page layout is essential and simple
in order to be enjoyable and comprehensible. The background
is white and it has just some simple bars in a ﬂexible colour
(blue and orange), in order to avoid too much contrast on the
colour, and thus prevent visual discomfort. The header of the
website contains typical standards such as the logo, the primary
navigation menu and the search bar, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. The header bar of our website. The menu contains four main
items: nature, sport, history, and religion.
We have inserted many pictures and photos in order to
increase the full comprehension of the site content, which is
simple, repetitive and synthetic. We have also followed the
guidelines and the suggestions proposed by the therapists, and
we have included travel itineraries that well suited the users.
In the homepage we have written a sentence “Sei un ragazzo
del Centro Nemo? Questo sito `e stato realizzato proprio per
te” (Translation: “Are you a girl/guy of the Nemo center? This
site has been developed for you”) that would let the user feel
happy to navigate inside his “own” site.
We have used simple fonts, big size and uppercase for let-
ters in order to facilitate the reading (see Figure 2. Translation:
Discover several new places of Rieti and organise a tour with
your friends or your family. What do you like?).
Figure 2. The fonts.
Language. The language used is simple, sentences are
minimal and do not contain acronyms or abbreviations (see,
e.g., Figure 2). Note that, the site is in Italian since it had
to be accessible by Italian disabled users. We have preferred
to illustrate all the tourism experience with a sequence of
pictures, rather than with some text (see the entire home page
in Figure 3). This prepares the user with ASD to a sequence
of practical experiences and actions, which he/she has already
visualized and pre-processed, and thus reassures him/her.
Figure 3. The homepage.
Structure and navigation. The site is organised in at most
four levels. From the logo, the user can go back to the
homepage. In some pages, there is a back command. We
have not included pop-ups in Javascript, background sounds,
moving images in order to avoid sensory annoyance.

302
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The user may navigate from the homepage to the secondary
pages by clicking (a) on the images or (b) on the green smiles
below, or from the main menu in the header (see Figure 3).
We have discussed with the psychologists, and opted for
the use of simple and sketchy symbolic pictures. The idea is
that if a user with ASD sees a picture with a bike inside a
bike trail (see Figure 4) s/he will conclude s/he can practice
this sport.
Figure 4. A bike trail tour.
In the homepage, the user faces a decision “Cosa ti piace?”
(“What do you like?”), and has to choose one of the four
itineraries, each of one has the same structure and contains: a
simple question, an image that represents the general content
of the page, links to pictures, videos, four images that link to
subsections, which include information on where it is located,
how we can go there, what can we do there, and what to bring
(see Figure 4). All these links can be used to prepare the user
to the trip by visualising in advance a map of the location, the
way the trip will be done (by car, by bus, with relatives, etc),
how to behave, and what to see. The last link, a backpack,
contains instructions on how pack it and what to bring on that
speciﬁc itinerary (see Figure 5).
Figure 5. What to bring in the backpack.
Some sections contain some games, in which we can check
the level of attention of the user. There are questions as: “Have
you seen this image during the itinerary?” and so on (see
Figure 6).
Finally, at the end of most of the pages we can ﬁnd a print
command (“stampa la pagina”) and a back command (“torna
indietro”), see Figure 7.
Itineraries. We have chosen four possible itineraries, for
a one day tourism trip in the neighbourhood of Rieti and the
options are: nature, sport, history, and religion. These topics,
well ﬁt these users since people with ASD like to explore
quiet and relaxing places (nature and religion), love to move
around (sport), are very good at memorising dates and images,
and often like to take pictures (history). As we will mention
in Section VIII, all these itineraries have all been very much
appreciated by the users of the experimentation.
All these itineraries can be done in one day, having as a
starting position the centre Nemo, and given that some are
urban tours we have pointed out known places inside town to
facilitate the comprehension of the destination location.

303
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. A partial screenshot of the game, S`ı, No (literally Yes, No).
Figure 7. A print and a back command.
B. The website structure of ScopriMestre
The structure of this new website is very similar. We have
chosen the same graphical layout, fonts and colors, structure
and navigation. However, given that our experiments had to be
run on non-verbal users, we added as a general requirement
additional simplicity in the site presentation. In particular, the
main differences between the two sites are:
•
Language. Given that the users are non-verbal we have
decided to use very few short sentences and many
pictures, i.e., a simpliﬁed language compared to the
one of the ScopriRieti website.
•
Itineraries. We have chosen four possible itineraries,
for a one day tourism trip in the neighbourhood of
Mestre and the options are: nature, sport, parks, and
culture (see Figure 8).
Given the strongest disability of the new users (they
are non-verbal) we have decided to replace more
complicated itineraries such as religion and history
with parks and culture. In particular, for the itinerary
in the nature we have chosen a one day trip along the
Sile river, close to Treviso, for sport a trip along the
Figure 8. The homepage of the ScopriMestre website.
cycling path of Forte Gazzera in Mestre, for parks, a
one day spent in the San Giuliano park of Mestre, the
biggest of Europe, ﬁnally, for culture we have planned
a trip to Venice.
•
Page content and navigation. We have simpliﬁed
the explanation of the itineraries and page content,
see e.g., Figure 9 where we have used two simple
sentences and a single image.
Figure 9. A simple page of the ScopriMestre website.
We have also omitted the part on games, since the games
require at least some basic verbal language and some non
trivial-level of content comprehension. Finally, we have chosen
videos animated by the cry or movment of animals or by
activities on water, which are usually liked by people with
ASD.

304
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VIII.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section we describe the methodology we have used
and we then illustrate our experimental results ﬁrst on the
ScopriRieti site [35], and then on the ScopriMestre site [37].
A. Methodology.
The development of the both websites has followed
different steps:
1) Collection of medical material: The ﬁrst phase was
the search for the medical material on the speciﬁc disability,
and the study of the characteristics that deﬁne these speciﬁc
users. This is important both to well meet the accessibility
requirements, and for the choice of the appropriate content
for the site.
2)
Literature survey:
In the second phase, we have
collected all the information about usable and accessible
websites for users with ASD, and we have proposed some
new interesting features that the site should include (e.g.,
pictures, games, etc.).
3)
Interviews: In the third phase, for the ScopriRieti
site, one of our group members (Elisa) has interviewed a
group of specialised therapists and professionals of the centre
Nemo of Rieti, Italy. This centre hosts people with different
neurological and physical disabilities. Elisa has collected
information about the different disabilities and about the
limits and expectations one could meet while developing the
site. She has also participated to different meetings in order
to analyse the methodology used by the professionals for
approaching these users. What we have realised in this phase
is that the site had to be developed for users, which were
not “too much serious”, given that it is not easy to include
users with big behavioural problems in tourism activities
outdoor. Thus, we have developed our site for users with
non-serious or mild disabilities, that had some elementary
ability with the use of a computer and with reading. In the
case of the ScopriMestre site, we have discussed with a
specialised operator what to change to the previous structure,
so that the site could be enjoyable by non-verbal users with
ASD and with non-serious disabilities. We have thus decided
to mostly simplify the language shortening many sentences,
and we have proposed very simple itineraries, which are
very well known by all the people living in Mestre (and
probably by all the autistic users that will navigate on the site).
4)
Website development:
The
forth phase
was
the
development of the website applying the four categories of
guidelines (discussed in Subsection V and in Section VI), and
the hints and suggestions collected in the two previous phases.
5)
Preliminary test on a single user: The ﬁfth phase
was a preliminary test on a single user. We wanted to ensure
that the site had been appropriately developed and was
comprehensible. We have collected the impressions both of
the user and the therapist that was following the meeting. We
have thus accordingly adjusted and improved the site.
6) Test on a group of users: In the sixth phase, for the
ScopriRieti site, we have then presented this new version to
a wider set of users, which were ﬁrst instructed, and were
then left free to navigate and explore the site. We have then
collected their impressions. In that case of the ScopriMestre
site, for lack of time, we have tested the ﬁnal site only on
the same single user. However, although this site has still
to be tested on more users (this is left as future work),
as we will see in Section VIII-B, the results on a single
user were still very interesting. In this case, given that the
user was non-verbal, we have collected the impressions of
two distinct operators that separately, and during different
sessions, followed the test on the user.
7)
Assessment questionnaire: In order to evaluate the
perceived accessibility of the Web site, in the last phase we
collected the impressions from the relatives of the users by an
assessment questionnaire.
B. Outcomes of the tests and of the assessment questionnaire
for the ScopriRieti site.
We ﬁrst present the results for the ScopriRieti and then for
the ScopriMestre site.
We have tested the ScopriRieti site with a set of 9 users
(1 female and 8 males) with non-serious or mild disabilities,
with different backgrounds and general expertise, with some
computer skills, and with some interest on this touring activity.
1)
Disabilities: Our 9 users (whose names have been
omitted for privacy reasons) had the following disabilities:
•
U1 (19 years old), U2 (18 years old), and U3 (18 years
old)
ASD and medium mental retardation;
•
U4 (19 years old)
ASD and mild mental retardation;
•
U5 (14 years old), and U6 (15 years old)
Asperger syndrome;
•
U7 (22 years old) ASD and psychosis;
•
U8 (15 years old)
medium mental retardation
•
U9 (17 years old)
mild mental retardation.
We have excluded from this group users with serious
mental disabilities.
2) Computer skills: All the users had some basics skills
on how to use the computer. Depending on the skills, we
have left the users to either autonomously navigate, or we
have partially helped them. Some have been able to type
the name of the site, others have found it already opened.
We made sure that could navigate without external distractions.
3) Test results: We have tested the Web site with one user
at a time with the goals of completing three simply tasks:
•
Task 1: Autonomously navigate in the Web site.
•
Task 2: Autonomously choose a typology of itinerary.
•
Task 3: Complete the test.
In the following, we describe the test results for each user:

305
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
User U1 has shown very good computer skills; she
was able to autonomously navigate inside the site; she
has chosen the historical itinerary, and has navigated
inside it in a non sequential way, being intensely
involved. She has spent a lot of time looking at
pictures and videos.
•
User U2 was able to autonomously navigate; he has
shown interest for the religious itinerary, and, in
general, for the preparation of the backpack in all the
different itineraries.
•
User U3 was almost independent in the navigation
phase. He chose the historical itinerary, and got so
involved by looking and photos and videos and com-
pleted the test saying “I want to go there!”. He really
liked the proposed games.
•
User U4 has navigated inside the sport section; he
has intensely observed pictures and videos, and has
autonomously discussed, which places he had already
explored, and which were new.
•
User U5 has shown very good computer abilities. He
has chosen the historical itinerary, and has explored
it following the sequential sequence, observing all
the pictures, and enthusiastically playing the proposed
games.
•
User U6 had more difﬁculties on the use of the
computer; thus he had found the homepage open. He
has chosen the naturalistic itinerary, which he had
already visited with the school. He has intensively
observed all the pictures, and declared that he wants
to go back there with his family.
•
User U7 has chosen the religious itinerary; he was
very curious about all the churches and saints (he did
not know about), thus asking many questions during
the navigation and observation of the photos.
•
User U8 has chosen the naturalistic itinerary. He was
not very skilled in the use of the computer, thus
followed some verbal suggestions. He was enthusiastic
about the pictures of lakes, plant and animals. We
are not sure wether he has really understood all the
information, as, e.g., the location of the lakes.
•
User U9 has chosen the historical itinerary; he was
enthusiastic about the pictures of the underground trail
and has declared he wanted to do it soon. Even in
this case he needed some verbal help, and we are not
sure he has completely understood all the information
collected during navigation.
Table I synthesises the number of tasks realised by each
user.
To summarise and provide a quantitative metric, we consid-
ered the task completion rate - cr, that represents one of main
metrics used to evaluate the effectiveness of a Web site, that
is, the accuracy and completeness with which users achieve
speciﬁed goals.
cr = Number of tasks completed successfully
T otal number of tasks undertaken
∗ 100%
This metric is recommended by the ISO/IEC 9126-4 Metrics
[38]. In our test, each user had to complete three main tasks.
TABLE I. Only user U6 was not completely able to complete one of the
three tasks.
User
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
U1
Yes
Yes
Yes
U2
Yes
Yes
Yes
U3
Yes
Yes
Yes
U4
Yes
Yes
Yes
U5
Yes
Yes
Yes
U6
No
Yes
Yes
U7
Yes
Yes
Yes
U8
Yes
Yes
Yes
U9
Yes
Yes
Yes
Applying the results showed in Table I, the task completion
rate is strongly positive.
cr = 26
27 ∗ 100% = 96.3%
All the users, except a couple of them, had previous
navigational experience on the Web, and were able to follow
the itineraries and to use the mouse.
Figure 10 shows the percentages related to the chosen
itineraries.
Figure 10. The typologies of chosen itineraries.
All the users were enthusiastic, and have really liked the
site and all the itineraries. In particular, the elements they
have preferred are: the pictures, an explanation on how to
prepare the backpack, the proposed games. All of them have
also asked questions about speciﬁc pictures, have discussed
the site contents, and some of them really wanted to try the
real itinerary right away. The use of the mouse facilitated the
navigation. We also tried to run the tests using touch screens,
but this seemed to complicate it.
As a limit, we have found that some users have shown
some small difﬁculties on ﬁnding the location of some speciﬁc
pictures, and on the sequences of some itineraries.
4) Assessment questionnaire: We have ﬁnally proposed
an assessment questionnaire to the families. We have ﬁrst
met them and we have illustrated and shown the Web site.
Some of them had already seen it previously and had given
suggestions on its development. The families were asked to
fulﬁl a questionnaire of 7 items, focused on four constructs,
extracted and adapted from [39]: graphical layout (GL), struc-
ture and navigation (SN), language (LA), satisfaction (SA).

306
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The levels of agreement were expressed by a 5-point Likert
scale (“completely disagree”, 5: “strongly agree”).
Table II shows the 7 items.
TABLE II. The 7 items of the questionnaire
Construct
Item
01-GL
Accessible and easy graphical layout
02-LA
Accessible and easy language
03-SN
Accessibile and easy structure and navigation
04-SA
Easy to use
05-SA
Autonomous choices
06-SA
Satisfactory content
07-GS
Future use of the Web site
Figure 11 shows the results of the questionnaire, and for
each statement, relatives’ ratings as well as their mean (µ) and
standard deviation (σ).
Figure 11. Relatives’ assessment questionnaire results.
This project and the Web site have been really appreciated
and the parents have claimed they will surely use it for future
trips (µ=4.78, σ=0.19), since relatives were happy to have a
site where their kids could “autonomously navigate”. What
emerged is that some of the itineraries were known, others
were new. Parents really liked the section on the preparation
of the backpack, and the indications on how the trip evolves
in order to stimulate their kids orientation capabilities. The
site has been appreciated in all the three main components:
graphical layout (µ=4.78, σ=0.19); language (µ=4.67, σ=0.25);
structure and navigation (µ=4.78, σ=0.44). It has been con-
sidered easy to use (µ=4.89, σ=0.11); in the opinion of
the parents, the objective to sollecitate autonomous choices
has been completely reached (µ=5), and content has been
considered satisfactory (µ=4.78, σ=0.19).
C. Outcomes of the tests and of the assessment questionnaire
for the ScopriMestre site
We have tested the site on a single user U, and we now
illustrate the results.
1) User: We have tested the site with one non-verbal
male user of 10 years old, with autism and a limited level of
comprehension.
2) Computer skills: The user U had some basics skills
on how to use computers/smartphones/tablets. In particular he
had very good abilities on how to navigate on YouTube, but
needed help to open speciﬁc pages (e.g., the main page of the
ScopriMestre site).
3) Interests: The user U had some general interest on this
touring activity.
In the development phase we have tested the site on the
user, and noticed that only few changes were necessary in
order to improve the presentation of the photo galleries. The
rest of the site well suited the user.
4) Test results: We have started a formal test of the
ScopriMestre site with the user U ﬁrst with operator A and
then with operator B.
a) Results with operator A: Operator A tested the site
both on a computer and on a smartphone. User U needed
some help during navigation, in particular he had to found the
homepage open. He chose the sport itinerary all the times, by
pointing it with his ﬁnger on the computer, or by independently
choosing it with a smartphone. He intensively observed all the
pictures, and videos, and tried to navigate also on the other
itineraries.
b) Results with operator B: Operator B tested the site
with U both on a computer and on a iPad. Even in this case
user U needed some help to start the navigation from the main
page, and he was then able to autonomously navigate inside
the site using the iPad (with the computer needed some help).
He again chose the sport itinerary and decided to ﬁrst navigate
on pictures and then to view the video. U also showed interest
in the pictures related to the preparation of the backpack. He
did not show much interest on the maps, because this requires
some kind of concept abstraction level. The only exception
was the map of Venice, since it is a real photo taken from an
airplane. He also liked the pages on ”what you can do” on the
itinerary or ”how you should behave”. As a second itinerary
U chose nature, then culture, then parks. Finally, operator B
noticed that U preferred the video related to culture, which is
an accelerated video, compared to the normal speed one.
To summarise the result, from the opinion of both operators
A and B (since U is non-verbal and is not able to write), the
user was able to complete the test up to the end. What also
surprised both operators is that he was able to understand the
symbolic pictures of the itineraries, at least the one used for
nature and sport. User U was enthusiastic, and really liked the
site and all the itineraries (in a scale of 5, 5 out of 5). With
user U touch screens worked better than the computer with
mouse.
As a limit, we have found that user U has shown some
small difﬁculties on the use of the back command, and needed

307
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
some initial help before understanding how it worked.
5) Assessment questionnaire: We have ﬁnally proposed the
assessment questionnaire to the family of user U, after we have
met the parents to illustrate the site. As for the case of the
ScopriRieti site, this project and the ScopriMestre site have
been really appreciated. What emerged is that all itineraries
were known. Parents really liked the idea of letting the user
choose a preferred itinerary. They also found useful being able
to show the site to prepare their kid before starting the trip,
given that users with ASD decrease the stress when they know
in advance what they will be doing. Globally, the site has been
really appreciated both for the contents and for its graphical
design (in a scale of 5, 5 out of 5). What the parents suggested
is to eventually add some sub-itineraries inside a single one,
in order to have multiple options.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we analysed how an accessible and usable
website should be developed in order to be enjoyable by a
user with ASD. We have also considered, how such a user
can beneﬁt of travelling around the world, and which tips it
should follow in order to be able to face in serenity the trip.
We have ﬁnally presented two interesting accessible and usable
websites we have developed for users with ASD, the ﬁrst for
verbal, the second also for non-verbal users. With these sites,
the users were able to plan and almost independently decide
the trip they wanted to do. We have also shown the appreciation
results it has received while experimented on a group of users
with ASD. This work represented a pilot, prototypal project
and the encouraging feedbacks allow us to plan future work:
•
Extend the test on the ScopriMestre site to a wider
set of users (results on a single users were very
encouraging).
•
Validate the usability and the accessibility of the
websites on a systematic analysis of data collected on
a statistically signiﬁcant sample of users. This will
require: (a) the creation of new websites that will
use our conceptual model; they will contain as case
study other cities; (b) the deﬁnition of the features
of potential user proﬁles, in order to generating a
taxonomic analysis of the experimentation results.
•
Implement a mobile app, that will contain all the
case studies and will become a concrete tool for the
tourism; it should be an adaptive and ubiquitous app
able to follow the users on their trips. We will collect
all the information generated by the use of the app,
like navigation paths, user proﬁles, user preferences,
geo-localisations, etc.; the aim will be to analyse these
data and deﬁne a reference model for an adaptive, and
semantic app for the tourism of speciﬁc class of users.
•
Implement the social aspects, in such a way users
could vote their preferred pages, insert a personal
comment or share their trips and their experience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We want to thank centro Nemo, all its therapists and
operators, the families, the users, and all the people that
collaborated to this project. Moreover, we are grateful to dr
Marco Lestuzzi, which made responsive the ScopriMestre and
ScopriRieti websites.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Dattolo, F. Luccio, and E. Pirone, “Webpage accessibility and
usability for autistic users: a case study on a tourism website,” in ACHI
2016: The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions.
Venice, Italy, 24-28 April 2016.
[2]
“Web content accessibility guidelines (wcag) 2.0,” 2008, https://www.
w3.org/TR/WCAG20 [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[3]
“W3 consortium,” 2016, http://www.w3.org [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[4]
M. C. Lisa Seeman, “Techniques for the the cognitive and learning
disabilities accessibility task force (coga),” 2016, w3C, https://w3c.
github.io/coga/techniques/ [accessed: 2016-09-15].
[5]
“Act n. 4 of 9.01.2004,” 2004, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?
urn:nir:stato:legge:2004-01-09;4!vig= [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[6]
American Psychiatric Association, Ed., The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM 5.
BookpointUS, 2013.
[7]
K. Still, R. Rehfeldt, R. Whelan, R. May, and S. Dymond, “Facilitating
requesting skills using high-tech augmentative and alternative commu-
nication devices with individuals with autism spectrum disorders: A
systematic review,” Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, vol. 8,
2014, pp. 1184–1199.
[8]
A. Dattolo and F. Luccio, “Modelling volo, an augmentative and
alternative communication application,” in ACHI 2015: The Eighth In-
ternational Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions.
Lisbon, Portugal, 22-27 February 2015.
[9]
A. Bondy and L. Frost, “Mands across the water: A report on the
application of the picture-exchange communication system in Peru,”
The Behavior Analyst, vol. 16, 1993, pp. 123–128.
[10]
T. Grandin, “How does visual thinking work in the mind of a person
with autism? A personal account,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society, vol. 364, no. 1522, May 2009, pp. 1437–1442.
[11]
C.
Sicile-Kira,
“What
is
sensory
processing
disorder
and
how
is
it
related
to
autism?”
2010,
https://www.
psychologytoday.com/blog/the-autism-advocate/201003/
what-is-sensory-processing-disorder-and-how-is-it-related-autism
[accessed: 2016-11-19].
[12]
“World tourism organization,” 2016, uNTWO, http://www2.unwto.org/
[accessed: 2016-11-25].
[13]
“World tourism organization - publications and documentation,” 2016,
uNTWO, http://publications.unwto.org/ [accessed: 2016-11-15].
[14]
“Accessibility is gaining ground,” Smart Guide 2015 Travelling in
Europe, 2015, p. 25, eNAT, http://www2.unwto.org/ [accessed: 2016-
11-16].
[15]
A. J. Baxter, T. Brugha, H. E. Erskine, R. W. Sheurer, T. Vos, and S. J.
G., “The epidemiology and global burden of autism spectrum disorders,”
Psychological Medicine, vol. 45, no. 3, 2014, pp. 1601–613.
[16]
H. Hamed, “Tourism and autism: An initiative study for how travel
companies can plan tourism trips for autistic people,” American Journal
of Tourism Management, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 1–14.
[17]
A. Goehner, “Six tips for traveling with an autistic child. time spe-
cial.2012.” 2012, http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/
0,28804,1893554 1893556,00.html [accessed: 2016-11-11].
[18]
“Autism asd, travelling through the airport,” http://www.dublinairport.
com/gns/at-the-airport/autism-asd.aspx [accessed: 2016-11-20].
[19]
“Royal air force museum, london, autism friendly trail,” 2016, http:
//www.rafmuseum.org.uk/london/things-to-see-and-do/autism.aspx [ac-
cessed: 2016-11-29].
[20]
“Metropolitan museum of art in new york, resources for visitors on the
autism spectrum,” 2016, http://www.metmuseum.org/events/programs/
met-access/visitors-with-developmental-and-learning-disabilities/
for-visitors-with-autism-spectrum-disorders [accessed: 2016-11-29].
[21]
“Autistic globetrotting, autism travel made easy,” 2016, http://www.
autisticglobetrotting.com/ [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[22]
“Convention
on
the
rights
of
persons
with
disabilities,”
2006,
http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/conventionfull.shtml
[accessed: 2016-11-11].
[23]
S. Abou-Zahra, “How people with disabilities use the web: Overview,”
2012, https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/people-use-web/ [accessed: 2016-
11-15].

308
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24]
“Web accessibility and usability working together,” 2010, w3C, http:
//https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/usable [accessed: 2016-11-25].
[25]
J. Nielsen, “Usability 101: Introduction to usability,” 2012, https://
www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-101-introduction-to-usability/ [ac-
cessed: 2016-11-26].
[26]
J. Nielsen and R. Budiu, Mobile Usability.
New Riders, 2013.
[27]
C. Putman and L. Chong, “Software and technologies for people with
autism: what the users want?” in ASSETS 2008: 10th International
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility.
Hal-
ifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, 13-15 October 2008, pp. 3–10.
[28]
W. Chen, “Multitouch tabletop technology for people with autism
spectrum disorder: A review of the literature,” in DSAI 2012: 4th
International Conference on Software Development for Enhancing
Accessibility and Fighting Info-exclusion.
Douro Region, Portugal,
19-22 July 2012.
[29]
T. Britto and E. Pizzolato, “Towards web accessibility guidelines of
interaction and interface design for people with autism spectrum disor-
der,” in ACHI 2016: The Ninth International Conference on Advances
in Computer-Human Interactions.
Venice, Italy, 24-28 April 2016.
[30]
M. Kamaruzamana, N. Rani, H. Nor, and M. Azaharia, “Developing
user interface design application for children with autism,” Procedia -
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 217, 2016, pp. 887 – 894.
[31]
“An
interview
with
jamie
knight:
autism
and
accessible
web
design,” 2015, http://www.iheni.com/an-interview-with-jamie-knight-
autism-and-accessible-web-design/ [accessed: 2016-11-02].
[32]
M. G. Friedman and D. N. Bryen, “Web accessibility design rec-
ommendations for people with cognitive disabilities,” Technology and
Disability, vol. 19, no. 9, 2007, pp. 205–212.
[33]
A. Darejeh and D. Singh, “A review on user interface design principles
to increase software usability for users with less computer literacy,”
Journal of Computer Science, vol. 9, no. 11, 2013, pp. 1443–1450.
[34]
“Cognitive accessibility user research,” 2016, w3C, http://www.w3.org/
TR/coga-user-research/ [accessed: 2016-11-26].
[35]
E. Pirone, “Scopririeti,” 2015, http://volo.uniud.it/scopririeti/ [accessed:
2016-11-30].
[36]
——, “Turismo e autismo: realizzazione di un sito web turistico per
soggetti autistici,” Master’s thesis, Universit`a Ca’ Foscari, Venezia,
2015.
[37]
A. Dattolo, F. Luccio, and E. Pirone, “Scoprimestre,” 2016, http://volo.
uniud.it/scoprimestre/ [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[38]
N. Bevan, “Iso and industry standards for user centred design,”
2000,
http://usabilitynet.org/trump/documents/Usability standards.ppt.
pdf [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[39]
T. Lavie and N. Tractinsky, “Assessing dimensions of perceived visual
aesthetics of web sites,” Int. Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
vol. 60, no. 30, 2004, pp. 269–298.

