TERAPERS - Intelligent Solution for Personalized Therapy of Speech Disorders
Mirela Danubianu; Stefan-Gheorghe Pentiuc; Ovidiu Andrei Schipor; Marian Nestor ; Ioan Ungureanu; Doina
Maria Schipor
“Stefan cel Mare” University
13 Universitatii Street, Suceava
Romania
mdanub@eed.usv.ro; pentiuc@eed.usv.ro; schipor@eed.usv.ro; mnestor@stud.usv.ro; ioanu32@yahoo.com;
vmdoina@yahoo.com
Abstract - The aim of this paper is to describe an
intelligent system designed for assisting the personalized
therapy of dyslalia for the Romanian pre-scholars children.
This system is developed in the framework of the TERAPERS
project which includes informational technologies in response
to
society
challenges
for
health
early
diagnosis
and
personalized therapy. The Romanian language is a phonetic
one that has its own special linguistic particularities, there is a
real need for the development and use of audio-video systems,
which can be used in the therapy of different speech problems.
The system has a high degree of originality because his
objective is to treat the pronunciation disorders in the
Romanian language. Furthermore, the complexity of the
project results from the high number of different research
areas involved: artificial intelligence (expert system), virtual
reality,
digital
signal
processing,
digital
electronic
and
psychology (assessment procedures and therapeutically guide).
Keywords - intelligent system; expert system; mobile device;
speech disorder; personalized therapy
I.
INTRODUCTION
Individuals
with
disabilities
have
become
more
prominent
and
with
the
advent
of
new
information
technologies that have been applied to the diagnosis and
treatment of these individuals, the implementation of more
efficient systems has been realized.
A speech disorder is a problem with fluency, voice,
and/or how a person says speech sounds.
Classification of speech into normal or disorder is a
complex one. Statistics points out that only 5% to 10% of
the population has a completely normal manner of speaking,
all others suffer from one disorder or another.
The most common speech disorders are: stuttering,
cluttering, voice disorders, dysartria and speech sound
disorders.
Dyslalia
is
articulation
disorder
that
consists
of
difficulties with the way sounds are formed and strung
together. These are usually characterized by omitting,
distorting a sound or substituting one sound for another.
Dyslalia has the greatest frequency among handicaps of
language for psychological normal subjects as well as for
those with deficiencies of intellect and sensory. Thus, the
opinion of Sheridan (1946) is that at the age of eight years
dyslalia are in proportion of 15% for girls and in proportion
of 16% for boys.
Speech disorder therapy should begin as soon as
possible.
Children
enrolled
in
therapy early
in
their
development (younger than 5 years) tend to have better
outcomes than those who begin therapy later.
In the process of therapy, speech therapists use a variety
of strategies including: oral motor or feeding therapy,
articulation therapy and language intervention activities.
In the step of oral motor/feeding therapy the therapist
will use a variety of oral exercises, including facial massage
and various tongue, lip, and jaw exercises, to strengthen the
muscles of the mouth. It is also important to work with
different food textures and temperatures to increase a child's
oral awareness during eating and swallowing.
The
exercises
used
in
order
to
get
the
correct
articulation, or sound production, involve to have a correct
therapist model of sounds and syllables for a child and it is
often used during his play activities. Child’s play level is in
accordance with the child's specific needs. The therapist
will physically show the child how to make certain sounds,
such as the "r" sound, and may demonstrate how to move
the tongue to produce specific sounds.
During the language intervention activities the therapist
will interact with a child by playing and talking. He may use
pictures, books, objects, or ongoing events to stimulate
language development. The therapist may also model
correct pronunciation and use repetition exercises to build
speech and language skills.
In the area of speech disorder, there are some European
projects developed as part of the European Union (EU)
Quality of Life and Management of Living Resources
program.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
The priorities on the international level are represented
by
the
developing
information
systems
that
permits
personalized therapeutically pathways. The following main
directions are considered: development of expert systems
that personalize therapeutic guides to the child’s evolution
26
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

and the evaluation of the motivation and progresses that the
child’s achieves.
The most important objective is the determination of
methods for the evaluation of speech impairments [3] where
the data set is based on children, aged between 2
and 2
years and 11 months old and have English language skills.
To date, there are only a few articles about the results
obtained on this subject, although research in this area is
progressing.
The potential users of the system are children affected
by speech impairments and logopaed professors (speech
therapists).
The OLP (Ortho-Logo-Paedia) project [2] for speech
therapy began in 2002. The EU finances this complex
project. It involves the Institute for Language and Speech
Processing in Athens and
seven other partners from
academia and the medical domains. The scope of this
project
aims
to
establish
a
three
–
module
system
(OPTACIA, GRIFOS and TELEMACHOS) capable of
interactively
instructing
the
children
suffering
from
dysarthria (difficulty in articulating words due to disease of
the central nervous system). The proposed interactive
environment is a visual one and is adapted to the subjects’
age (games, animations). The audio and video interface with
the human subject will be the OPTACIA module, the
GRIFOS module will make pronunciation recognition and
the computer-aided instruction will be integrated in the third
module – TELEMACHOS.
An interesting developing project is Speech Training,
Assessment, and Remediation (STAR) [4], which began in
2002. STAR members -AI. duPont Hospital for Children
and The University of Delaware- aim to build a system that
would initially recognize phonemes and then sentences.
This research group offers a voice generation system
(ModelTalker) and other open source applications for audio
processing.
On the international level, is Speechviewer III developed
by IBM [5] that creates an interactive visual model of
speech while users practice several speech aspects (e.g. the
sound voice or special aspects from current speech).
The ICATIANI device developed by TLATOA Speech
Processing Group, CENTIA Universidad de las Américas,
Puebla Cholula, Pue, México uses sounds and graphics in
order
to
ensure
the
practice
of
Spanish
Mexican
pronunciation [6].
A recent project Articulation Tutor (ARTUR) [11] goal
was to obtain an integrated speech therapy system with an
intuitive graphical interface named Wizard-of-Oz and a
virtual speech tutor named ARTUR. Based on audio (user’s
utterance) and video (facial data) information, the system
recognizes
and
reproduces
mispronunciations.
Then,
ARTUR suggests the correct pronunciation (audio data) and
the correct speech elements’ position (virtual articulator
model).
At the national level, little research has been conducted
on the therapy of speech impairments. What has been
funded has been focused on traditional areas such as voice
recognition, voice synthesis and voice authentication. These
studies were conducted in the Psychology and Education
Science Department from “Al. I. Cuza” University of Iasi.
These studies have lead to development of software for
aided instruction that provides feedback regarding oral
fluency. Although there are a lot of children with speech
disorder, the methods used today in logopaedia are mostly
based on individual work with each child. The few existing
computer-assisted programs in Romania don’t provide any
feedback.
There
are
expensive
($500-$1,500
USD)
software
applications but are not appropriate for the phonetic
specifics of the Romanian language, which has its own
special linguistic particularities. Therefore, we considered
the real need for the development and use of audio-video
systems, which can be used in the therapy of different
pronunciation problems.
III.
SYSTEM OBJECTIVES
The information systems with real-time feedback that
address pathological speech impairments are relatively the
new due to the increasing amount of processing power they
require [7]. The progress in computer science allows at the
moment for the development of such a system with low risk
factors. A child’s pronunciation is also used to enrich the
existing audio database and to improve the current diagnosis
system’s performances.
Our system has reached some specific objectives [1]:

initial and during therapy evaluation of children and
identification of a modality of standardizing their
progresses
and
regresses
(at
the
level
of
the
physiological and behavioral parameters);

rigorous formalization of an assessing methodology and
development of a pertinent database in this area;

development of an expert system for the personalized
therapy of speech impairments that allows designing a
training
path
for
pronunciation,
individualized
according to the speech disorder category, previous
experience and the child’s therapy previous evolution;

development of a therapeutic guide that allows mixing
classical methods with the adjuvant procedures of the
audio-visual system ; and

design and the achievement of a database that contains
the child’s dates, the set of exercises and the results
obtained by the child.
The high degree of complexity of the project is due to
the high number of different research areas involved:
artificial intelligence (learning expert systems, pattern
recognition), virtual reality, digital signal processing, digital
electronic (VLSI), computer architecture (System on Chip,
embedded device) and psychology (evaluation procedures,
therapeutic guide, experimental design for validation).
IV.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Assisted therapy is based on the interactions between six
functional blocks: child, speech therapist, lab monitor
program, expert system, 3D model and the child monitor
program. The system’s
information
flow is presented in
Fig 1.
27
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 1.
The system information flow
1.
There is a close interpersonal relationship between the
speech therapist and the child. All the other modules
assist the teacher in his therapeutic action.
2.
The monitor program allows the introduction of a
complex examination’s information and offers the
possibility of making periodically records with the
child’s speech. The child receives an instant audio
feedback and he can see the history of his audio
recordings.
3.
The role of home monitor program is to create a
virtual interface between teacher and child (home
speech therapy). This component is implemented both
for personal computer (PC) and personal digital
assistant (PDA). It can run exercises in a game
manner, can offer feedback and can perform statistics
base on current subject scores [18]
4.
The 3D model provides viewing of the correct
positioning of language, lips and teeth for each sound.
The child may change the transparency of these items.
5.
The
monitor
program
performs
homework
transmission to the child PC or PDA. Later, when the
child comes back, he can receive the activity report.
6.
The professor will analyze the images offered by the
3D model and can correct some of the mistakes.
7.
Expert system, if it is activated make suggestions
regarding
some training parameters like session
frequency, length and content (exercises) according
with some input variables. If the teacher observes
erroneous conclusions, he can view the inferential
route and can change the knowledge base.
8.
The expert takes the data input from the monitor
program
and
generates,
upon
request,
sets
of
personalized exercises.
9.
Monitor program is an interface between the speech
therapist and other components like data base, expert
system and child monitor program. At this level,
speech therapist can collect both textual and audio
information regarding each child, can administrate
exercises
and
can
manage
all
therapy
aspects:
selection of children, scheduling for therapy, offer all
statistical reports that are required.
Fig.
2
presents
therapeutic
steps
and
necessary
knowledge bases:

dyslalia therapeutically guides

speech therapy centers experience
Figure 2.
Therapeutically steps and knowledge bases

dyslalia exercises sets

historical data of therapy
According to Levitt [13], speech therapy software can
help speech problem diagnostic, can offer real-time, audio-
visual feedback, can improve analysis of a child’s progress
and can extend speech therapy at the child’s home.
The architecture of TERAPERS - the personalized
therapy system of dyslalia - is presented in Fig. 3. The
system contains two main components: an intelligent system
installed on each speech therapist’s office computer and a
mobile system used as a friend of child therapy. The two
systems are connected. The intelligent system is the fix
component of the system and it is installed on each speech
therapist’s office computer. This system includes the
following parts:

a child information management module,

an expert system that will produce inferences based on
the data presented by the evaluation module,

a virtual module of the mouth, that allows the
presentation of every hidden movement that occurs
during speaking and

an exercises management module that allows for the
creation or modification of the exercises corresponding
to various stages of therapy and grouping them in
28
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

complex issues.
Figure 3.
The architecture of TERAPERS
The mobile device of personalized therapy has two main
objectives. It is used by the child in order to resolve all
homework prescribed by the speech therapist and delivers to
the intelligent system a personalized activity report of the
child.
V.
INTELLIGENT SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
In order to manage a child’s logopaedic activity we have
designed and implemented a complex software system
named LOGOMON. The speech therapy teachers use this
system for [10]:

introduction and analysis of child’s specific information
(automatic obtain special reports);

production of audio recordings with phonemes and
scoring them (for each altered sounds);

obtaining decision support from an integrated expert
system;

creation and evaluation of a large set of exercises for
children; and

performing homework transmission to the child’s PC
or PDA and receiving the activity report.

Figure 4.
The LOGOMON Interface
To assess the way in which therapy evolves including
the child’s attendance at therapy sessions and the activity
report downloaded from the mobile device. This activity
report gives information regarding the exercises that have
been done, how many times each exercise has been
repeated, the time needed for each exercise and the results.
Fig. 4 presents the interface of LOGOMON. This is a
graphical user interface that allows the therapist to perform
all these activities.
A.
Children Information Management
LOGOMON is an intelligent system which assists the
individually therapy of the speech disorders. It consists of
software that performs the specific tasks of a monitor
system. The aim of this system is: the initial evaluation for
determining
those
children
with
speech
disorders,
registration of them in a database, suggestion of the
diagnosis with the possibility for the expert to confirm or to
modify this diagnosis, the selection of children for the
therapy, the management of the therapy process and the
supervision of the children’s progress.
Moreover by using LOGOMON we collect and process
the data such as we can remove any manual action of
collecting or processing of data. Also we can eliminate the
data storage on the paper.
The previous objectives are achieved using the following
distinct activities:

detection and recording data regarding children affected
by dyslalia. Detection is made through an initial
evaluation, based on tests applied to children. These
tests
are
conducted
in
educational
establishments
(schools or kindergartens) by the speech therapists. It
has
five
standardized
tests
for
examination
of
pronunciation of sounds s, ş, ţ, ci, and r, each of them
containing nine samples. Each sample consists of three
trials, in sequence, the score obtained may vary
between 0 points - when all the trials are wrong, and 3
points if all attempts are successful

establish a presumptive diagnosis based on the sum of
scores obtained as a result of the tests. A less than a
minimum threshold, set by the specialist, show the
existence of a deficiency.
Expert System
C
O
M
M
U
N
I
C
A
T
I
O
N
Mobile
Device
Mobile
Device
Mobile
Device
Virtual Model
Children’s
Information
Management
Exercises
Management
Module
Intelligent System
29
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/


selecting the children that follow the speech therapy
according to legal criteria. These criteria, specified in
the order of priority, are: the type and the severity of the
deficiency, the age of the child and the family
implication. Each child is associated with a particular
type of therapy (for groups of diagnosis G, or for
individual activity A).

design the personalized therapy according to the
identified diagnosis. This involves specifying the stages
of therapy and the choice of the right exercises for each
stage of therapy.

programming the therapy sessions and looking after the
therapy progress.

evaluation of the progress made by children and, if it is
necessary, redesign of the intervention. This evaluation
is based on the same tests that have enabled the
detection of deficiencies, applied at the end of each
phase of therapy or at fixed intervals. A comparison of
test scores from the current to those achieved in
previous tests can provide information regarding the
evolution of a child. The result of this comparison may
lead to one of the following conclusions about the
current state of the child: corrected, ameliorated or
stationary.

collecting
and
recording
all
the
data
that
allow
preparation the logopaedic summary of each child.
These data refer to anamnesis, complex logopaedic
examination, diagnosis and various recommendations,
the evolution during therapy or other final comments.
All the collected and processed data are stored in a
relational
database
implemented
in
Oracle
database
management system.
B.
Recording and Evaluation of Children Phonemes
An important part of our research refers to the automatic
parsing of audio recordings. These recordings are obtained
from children with dyslalia and are necessary for an
accurate
identification
of
speech
problems.
We
have
developed a software application that helps parse audio and
real time recordings [10].
The main objective of this task is to record the children,
using different audio environments during recording (some
phonemes will be used for training a real-time recognition
system). The speech therapist’s voice must be ignored and
after recording is necessary to split the stream into
phonemes. The cost of recording devices and the children’s
impact must be minimized.
We utilize a digital voice recorder in high quality mode
and
with
Variable
Control
Voice
Actuator
(VCVA)
activated. The record format is IMA-ADPCM, 16 KHz and
4 bits (16 bits PCM). A microphone was placed at 10 cm
from mouth in order to minimize environment noise.
A software set of classes (C#) was created for handling
audio stream (read, conversion between different format,
and write). We also have proposed an original solution for
placing markers in audio stream. These markers are needed
for correct parsing of full record.
C.
Expert system
The expert system is based on a therapy guide, written in
a natural language. This guide formalized in knowledge
base consists of [19]:

the muscular of phonon-articulator system development
methods (e.g. setting up exercises for cheeks, lips and
tong);

the rhythm of respiration controlling methods (e.g.
supervised inspiration and expiration from the temporal
and intensity standpoint);

the phonomatic hear development methods (e.g. the
onomatopoeic pronunciation, rhythmic pronunciation
exercises, distinguish along the paronyms);

the method for the sound consolidation (e.g. the
pronunciation sound of direct, inverse and complex
syllable, of words, of paronyms, etc); and

the
sound’s
utilization
in
complex
contexts
(e.g.
sentence, short stories, poems, riddles).
In this project we have used a fuzzy expert system for
therapy of dyslalic children. With fuzzy approach we can
create a better model for speech therapist decisions. A
software interface was developed for validation of the
system.
The main objectives of this task are:

personalized therapy (the therapy must be appropriate
for
the
child’s
problems
level,
context
and
possibilities);

speech therapist assistant (the expert system offer some
suggestion regarding what exercises are better for a
specific moment and from a specific child);

(self)teaching (when system’s conclusion is different
that speech therapist’s conclusion the last one must
have the knowledge base change possibility).
We use a rule-based expert system which has two major
advantages: usually that kind of systems do not requires a
large training set, and since the expert thinking is explicitly
spelled out, we know how he thinks about the problem.
Regarding that, it has the disadvantage that the knowledge
acquisition phase may be difficult. A great advantage of
fuzzy expert systems is that most rules can be written in
language that the expert can directly understand, rather than
in computer jargon; communication between domain expert
and knowledge engineer is greatly eased. Another advantage
of rule-based expert systems is the potential ability to learn
by creation of new rules and addition of new data to the
expert knowledge data base.
Fuzzy logic has ability to create accurate models of
reality. It’s not an “imprecise logic”. It’s a logic that can
manipulate imprecise aspects of reality. Recently, many
fuzzy expert systems were developed. [14][15]
In the next set of figures, we present an example of
fuzzy inference. There are three input linguistic variables
(speech problems level – Fig. 5, family implication – Fig. 6
and children age – Fig. 7) and one output linguistic variable
(weekly session number – Fig. 8). We consider five fuzzy
rules and, base on these rules, we illustrate specific fuzzy
result (Fig. 9). If the system user wants a crisp value,
defuzification is a good solution (Fig. 10).
30
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

To express a number in words, we need a way to
translate input numbers into confidences in a fuzzy set of
word descriptors, the process of fuzzification. In fuzzy math,
that is done by membership functions [7].
Defuzzification is the reverse process of fuzzification.
We have confidences in a fuzzy set of word descriptors, and
we wish to convert these into a real number.
Figure 5.
Speech_problems_level language variable
Figure 6.
Family_implication language variable
Figure 7.
Children_age language variable
Figure 8.
Weekly_session_number language variable
Figure 9.
Obtain a fuzzy result
Figure 10. Obtain a crisp value
The
first
three
variables
have
the
following
representation:
speech_problems_level (1.62)
= {“low”/0.37,”normal”/0.62,”high”/0.0}
family_implication (2.00)
= {“reduce”/0.0,”moderate”/1.0,”high”/0.0}
children_age (4.50)
= {“small”/0.25,”medium”/0.5,”big”/0.0}
31
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

We consider five rules for illustrate the inference steps:

IF (speech_problems_level is high) and (child_age is
medium) and (family_implication is reduce) THEN
weekly_session_number is high;
min (0.00, 0.50, 0.00) = 0.00 for linguistic term high

IF (speech_problems_level is low) and (child_age is
small) and (family_implication is moderate) THEN
weekly_session_number is low;
min (0.37, 0.25, 1.00) = 0.25 for linguistic term low

IF (speech_problems_level is low) and (child_age is
medium) and (family_implication is moderate) THEN
weekly_session_number is low;
min (0.37, 0.50, 1.00) = 0.37 for linguistic term low

IF (speech_problems_level is normal) and (child_age is
small)
and
(family_implication
is
moderate)THEN
weekly_session_number is normal
min (0.62, 0.25, 1.00) = 0.25 for linguistic term normal

IF (speech_problems_level is normal) and (child_age is
medium) and (family_implication is moderate)THEN
weekly_session_number is normal
min (0.62, 0.5, 1.00) = 0.50 for linguistic term normal
Final confidence coefficients levels are obtained using
max function:

high = max (0.00) = 0.00

low = max (0.25, 0.37) = 0.37

normal = max (0.25, 0.50) = 0.50
Each linguistic term of output variable has another
representation and in this manner is obtained as the final
graphical
representation
of
weekly_session_number
variable. If the system user wants to get a single output
value, then the area center of gravity is calculated. In our
case (value 1.62), the child must participate in one to two
session (but two is preferred).
We implement over 150 fuzzy rules for control various
aspects of personalized therapy (19 variables presented in
Fig. 11). These rules are currently validated by speech
therapists and can be modified in a distributed manner.
Figure 11. Fuzzy variables used for expert system
D.
Exercises generator
All kind of exercises, part of different phases of speech
therapy, are grouped in two main categories:

general
therapy
(mobility
development,
air
flow
control, hear development);

specific therapy (sound obtaining, consolidation and
regular utilization).
Each therapy session contains a formative assessment
and will be followed by home training. After three months,
the speech therapist can finalize the treatment or can
consider continuing it.
In order to help children with dyslalia we have created a
consistent set of software exercises. This set has a unitary
software
block
(data
base,
programming
language,
programming philosophy) and a big number of multimedia
items for each Romanian language sound (over 5000 audio
recordings and over 1000 image).
The speech therapist has the possibility to create and
save exercises. They can also transmit these exercises to
mobile device of children.
For example, the aim of phonematic hearing phase of
therapy is
to
educate
the
ability to
distinguish
and
differentiate sounds and words. As a result, appropriates
exercises should allow including a) to identify words that
contain certain phoneme, b) to identify the word that does
not contain certain phoneme from a set of word, and c) to
distinguish certain phoneme from pairs of paronyms (a word
from pair contain certain phoneme and the other word
contain a similar phoneme). This type of exercise can run in
two ways: a words is represented by significant images, or
the words are represented by flags, because there are many
words in paronymic pairs which can not be associated with
images (such as verbs, adjectives, adverbs, etc…).
Fig. 12 presents an example of an exercise which request
to identify the words that contain the r sound.[16][17]
Figure 12. Example of an exercise interface
We observe that the interface is very simple. The child
must only click on the image if the sound is present in the
corresponding word. The feedback offered by the system is
appropriate to the child’s age. Every successful attempt is
recompensed with a flower in the matrix from the right
corner.
32
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

At the end of exercise some statistics are presented.
These statistics refers: total number of words from the
exercise, the number of correct answers and the number of
wrong answers, the percentage of success (one to must be
achieved) and the percentage obtained by the child.
Fig. 13 presents such a statistic.
Figure 13. Final statistics of an exercise
VI.
THE MOBILE DEVICE
The mobile device of personalized therapy system has
two main objectives. It is used by the child in order to
resolve the homework prescribed by the speech therapist
and delivers to the intelligent system a personalized activity
report of the child. The functions of the mobile device for
assisted training are: presenting the exercises that the child
should solve by himself, a personalized interaction with the
human subject during therapy, the possibility of evaluating
and encouraging the progresses obtained by the human
subject through out an appropriate feedback, the capacity of
collecting of the audio samples for learning and of the
exercises solved by the child and the ability to communicate
with the speech therapist’s computer.
The device has two kinds of facilities: multimedia (to be
able to record, to process and to play audio samples) and
graphics (a friendly and accessible interface). Fig. 14
ilustrates the main page of the application implemented on
the mobile device (a) and two types of exercises: (b) the
child must detect if a sound is present inside a word
(indicated by an image) and (c) where the child must select
a word from a group of paronyms.
a
b
c
Figure 14. Three interfaces on the mobile device
VII.
DISTRIBUTED FRAMEWORK
TERAPERS system was conceived as an assistant for
the personalized therapy of speech disorders. In addition it
provides a solid basis for improving the speech therapy at
the national level through sharing experience of successful
therapies
from various
speech therapists’ offices and
through collecting data that will lead to synthetic accurate
information.
In Romania, the logopaedic assistance and therapy
system has a hierarchical structure. Each speech therapist’s
office represents a node of a County Logopaedic Center
network. At one superior level there is a National Center. In
this context it is necessary to have access to data of each
office in order to achieve a summary of the national
condition. This situation refers to the number of children
detected with speech impairments, grouped by age and
diagnosis, the number of children included in the therapy
program at the national level or synthetic results obtained
through the application of different schemes of personalized
therapy.
The fix part of the system is installed on each speech
therapist’s office computer. Because on each of these points
create and maintain a database, it can be said that each of
these local databases is a fragment of a distributed database
and each speech therapist’s office is a node in a distributed
system. Communication between nodes can be done through
an internal network, dedicated to this purpose, or using
Internet technology.
The main advantage of this kind of system is that data
are located near the place where the greatest demand is and
that conduct faster data access, faster data processing and
reduced operation costs.
Our project consists of a homogeneous distributed
system, because all the nodes have the same operating
system and the same application LOGOMON, so there is a
unique
database
management
system.
Since
all
local
schemes
are
identical
we
have
used
a
horizontal
fragmentation, in which each site has complete data
regarding the children treated in the office and the exercises
created by the therapist.
Regarding
data
replication
there
are
two
aspects.
Personal data of children are not replicated. They are found
only on the node where are managed. Instead, all the tables
containing data regarding the exercises and themes are
replicated in all nodes. This type of replication is necessary
not only for security but also because it is necessary to share
the experience and results, in particular the success ones,
with all in the system. Thus each specialist can easily see
the full set of exercises.
VIII.
SYSTEM VALIDATION
The therapeutic system including the expert system has
have been validated from three distinct perspectives:

Theoretical validation of the knowledge base.
From
theories and models offered by psychology and speech
therapies on tried to build a coherent set of rules
33
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/


Practical validation of the therapeutic system. The
TERAPERS system was tested by the Interschool
Regional Logopaedic Center of Suceava.

Experimental validation of therapeutic and expert
system. We have implemented two experiments in order
to validate the system.
The subjects were 40 children, boys and girls selected by
the speech therapists from Interschool Regional Logopaedic
Center of Suceava, age range 5 and 6 years, with difficulties
in pronunciation of R and S sounds.
They were divided into equal groups a control group and
a program group. Each child attended two meetings weekly
and was rated weekly. The two groups were constructed so
as to be equivalent in terms of characteristics and in terms of
initial tests assessment scores. Session length and course
was designed to be the same for both groups. All
preparatory actions, including the exercises selection, were
developed before the session began.
The first group used the classical method of therapy,
where the speech therapist select the exercises, while for the
second group used the TERAPERS system, particularly the
exercises were selected by the expert system.
Because the small number of subjects in each group
(under the limit of 30), scores’ distribution was not in
generally normal. That is why, statistic data were processed
using nonparametric tests: ManWitney test for difference
between groups and Wilcoxon for difference between
pretest and posttest scores [20]. The experiment conducts to
the following results: a) groups were parametrically and
statistically equivalent (ManWitney, session 0); b) both
groups have progressed (Wilcoxon); c) both groups have
arrived at the same performance (ManWitney, session 24).
We have not achieved significant differences between
the two groups at the end of the 24 meetings, so we may
consider that the exercises’ choice can be performed either
by speech therapist or expert system. This may be explained
by the fact that the expert system has been tested during a
six month period. All this time speech therapist have
compared its decision with those suggested by the expert
system and has adjusted knowledge base.
During the experiment were observed certain advantages
of expert system utilization: speech therapist has possibility
to be more concentrate on therapy because he don’t spent
time creating exercises (average time is 7 minutes per
session) and rigor and predictability.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In order to improve speech therapy activity, we have
developed an integrated system that can be used for
assisting the personalized therapy of dyslalia for the
Romanian pre-scholars children. This system is actually
tested by Interschool Regional Logopaedic Center of
Suceava.
We estimate that this research will stimulate the
preoccupation for the classical therapy efficiency compared
with the therapy assisted by computer, at national and also
European level. The after results will be compared with the
similar smart systems from other countries, which use a
similar phonetic language to the Romanian language.
The use of informatics applications in order to assist and
to track the speech therapy has provided huge volumes of
data. This has been possible due to the development of
database technologies and
the development of media
storage, which have the capacity to keep an impressive
amount of data.
However increased volume of available data does not
lead immediately to a similar volume of information to
support the decisions regarding therapy because classical
methods of data processing are not applicable. For this
reason we think that data mining, as techniques for automate
detecting of relevant patterns in databases may helps
therapists
to
build
personalized
therapy programs
by
identifying and anticipating the needs and the evolution of
different types of patients. Consequently we intend to
extend the capabilities of TERAPERS system by using
some adequate data mining techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The financial support was granted by the National
Agency for Scientific Research, contract ref. no. 56-CEEX-
II03/27.07.2006.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Danubianu, St.Gh. Pentiuc, O. Schipor, I. Ungureanu, M. Nestor,
Distributed Intelligent System for
Personalized Therapy of Speech
Disorders, in Proc. of The Third International Multi-Conference on
Computing in the Global Information Technology, ICCGI 2008, July
27- August 01, Athens, Greece.
[2]
OLP
(Ortho-Logo-Paedia)
–
Project
for
Speech
Therapy
(http://www.xanthi.ilsp.gr/olp);
[3]
Diagnostic
evaluation
of
Articulation
and
Phonology
(http://www.harcourtuk.com);
[4]
STAR
Speech
Training,
Assessment,
and
Remediation
(http://www.asel.udel.edu/speech);
[5]
Speechviewer III –
(http://www.synapseadaptive.com/edmark/prod/sv3)
[6]
R. Laboissière, D. J. Ostry, and A. G. Feldman, The control of multi-
muscle systems: Human jaw and hyoid movements. Biological
Cybernetics, 74, pp. 373-384, 1996.
[7]
C. Chivu,
Applications of Speech Recognition for Romanian
Language,
Advances
in Electrical and Computer
Engineering,
Suceava, Romania, ISSN 1582-7445, No 1/2007, volume 7 (14), pp.
29.
[8]
L. Mititiuc, Psychotherapeutic problems of children with speech
impairments, Ankarom, Iasi, Romania, 1999.
[9]
E. Vrasmas, Speech problems therapy, Bucuresti, Romania.
[10] M. Danubianu, S. G. Pentiuc, O. Schipor, C. Belciug, I. Ungureanu,
M. Nestor, Distributed system for therapy of dyslalia, Distributed
Systems, “Stefan cel Mare” University of Suceava Press, Romania,
Sept. 2007.
[11]
O. Schipor, M. Nestor, Automat parsing of audio recordings. Testing
children with dyslalia. Theoretical background., Distributed Systems,
“Stefan cel Mare” University of Suceava Press, Romania, Sept. 2007.
[12] http://www.speech.kth.se/multimodal/ARTUR/index.html
[13] H.Levitt. The impact of technology on speech rehabilitation. In:
Proceedings of an ESCA Workshop on Speech and Language
Technology for Disabled Persons, Stockholm, Sweden, 1993.
34
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

[14]
V. Mukhin, E. Pavlenko, Adaptative Networks Safety Control,
Advances
in
Electrical
and
Computer
Engineering,
Suceava,
Romania, ISSN 1582-7445, No 1/2007, volume 7 (14), pp. 54-58.
[15] R. Fuller, Carlsson, Fuzzy Reasoning in Decision Making and
Optimization. Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany , 2002.
[16]
C. E. Belciug, O. A Schipor, M. Danubianu, Exercises For Cildren
With Dyslalia - Software Infrastructure, In Proceedings of The
Distributed Systems Seminar, Suceava, Romania, 2007.
[17]
S. G. Pentiuc, F. Giza Blciug, D. M. Schipor, Phonematic Exercises
For Cildren With Dyslalia. -Software Application, In Proceedings of
The Distributed Systems Seminar, Suceava, Romania, 2007.
[18]
M. Cerlinca, A. Graur, S. G. Pentiuc,T. I. Cerlinca, Developing a
Logopaedic Mobile Device Using a FPGA. In: Proceedings of SACI
’07 - 4th International Symposium on Applied Computational
Intelligence and Informatics, Romania, 2007, pp. 89-92.
[19] S. G. Pentiuc, O. A. Schipor, M. Danubianu, M. D. Schipor, Therapy
of
Dyslalia
Affecting Pre-Scholars.
In:
Proceedings
of
Third
European Conference on the Use of Modern Communication
Technologies - ECUMICT, Gent, Belgium, 2008
[20] O. A. Schipor, S. G. Pentiuc, M. D. Schipor Improving computer
based speech therapy using a fuzzy expert system, Computing and
Informatics, Vol. 22, 2003, pp.1001–1016
35
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

