63
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Understanding Barriers to Wider Telehealth Adoption in the Home Environment of 
Older People: An Exploratory Study in the Irish Context  
Brenda Moreira Becker Reginatto 
Institute of Gerontology 
King’s College London 
London, UK 
brenda.m.b.reginatto@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—Emerging evidence has demonstrated the potential 
for Telehealth systems to reduce unnecessary hospital 
admission and lower costs of care by assisting patients and 
healthcare professionals to manage chronic conditions more 
efficiently. Nonetheless, due to a complex interplay of different 
barriers, Telehealth has not yet been widely adopted in any 
country. Understanding barriers to wider Telehealth adoption 
is vital to enable its embracement by many older people who 
could greatly benefit from the technology. The aim of this 
exploratory study was to identify barriers to wider Telehealth 
adoption in the homes of older people, in the Republic of 
Ireland. Objectives included identifying barriers from the 
perspective of five groups of stakeholders, determining the 
most pressing barriers and suggesting possible approaches to 
addressing such issues. Fifteen semi-structured interviews were 
conducted. Findings were analysed against existing literature, 
current technology adoption trends and successful initiatives 
implemented in different countries. This study suggests that 
the lack of incentive to healthcare professionals to embrace 
Telehealth, technology usability issues, implementation costs 
and lack of organisational willingness to change are the most 
pressing barriers to wider Telehealth adoption. Possible 
approaches to address healthcare professional incentive 
barriers have been suggested and include government 
mandates, the establishment of reimbursement schemes and 
the use of government financial incentives. The provision of 
Telehealth through devices that people are familiar with such 
as mobile phones, laptops and computer tablets, and the 
involvement of end-users during Telehealth technology 
development stages are also supported by this study as 
strategies to overcome Telehealth usability challenges.  
Keywords–older people; chronic disease management; 
telehealth; barriers to adoption; acceptability;  incentive 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The original version of this paper has been presented at 
the eTELEMED 2012 Conference, in Valencia, Spain [1]. 
This extended version includes more detailed data across all 
sections of the paper. 
In line with European demographic trends, the proportion 
of older people in the Republic of Ireland is expected to 
double in the coming decades [2], [3]. As a consequence of 
population ageing, Ireland is expected to experience a 
significant increase in the prevalence of chronic conditions. 
By 2020 the number of people experiencing cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) events is expected to rise by 50%, while the 
number of those diagnosed with diabetes and hypertension is 
likely to increase by 62% and 40%, respectively [4].  
The impact of such trends on the demand and financing 
of healthcare services has become central in international 
agendas [5]. At present, chronic conditions account for three 
quarters of the total healthcare expenditure in Ireland. 
Approximately 
80% 
of 
general 
practitioner 
(GP) 
consultations and two thirds of all emergency medical 
admissions to hospitals are related to chronic diseases [6]. 
Projections indicate that the demand for such healthcare 
services will continue to grow as a consequence of 
population ageing, representing a significant burden to the 
Irish public finances. The development of cost-effective and 
sustainable services, capable of meeting the needs of this 
growing population, has become essential [7]. 
The importance of shifting the focus of healthcare 
services from curative to preventative strategies, where 
patients are empowered to take active control over their 
health, is being recognised as the key to control costs and 
increase efficiency in healthcare [6]. It is amid this context 
that Telehealth technologies emerge as a relevant alternative 
to address these issues. Telehealth is here defined as the use 
of information and communication technology (ICT) based 
systems to assist the diagnosis, monitoring, management and 
empowerment of patients with chronic conditions [8]. 
Remote vital signs monitoring systems are a common 
example described in the literature [6]. In this context, 
Telehealth solutions allow patients to collect health measures 
on a regular basis, from their own homes. This information 
feeds into an Electronic Health Record (EHR) and is shared 
with a designated healthcare professional (e.g., doctor, 
community nurse, Telehealth triage centre) using an Internet 
connection. Significant changes detected in the patients’ 
health status are brought to the attention of the healthcare 
provider, who may then contact the patient and intervene as 
necessary [9]. Telehealth features often include the use of 
video consultations to support remote contact between 
patients and healthcare professionals (ibid.). Moreover, 
Telehealth platforms may be also used to deliver educational 
content to support patient self-care [10].  
Emerging evidence has demonstrated the potential for 
Telehealth systems to reduce unnecessary hospital admission 
[11], [12], decrease mortality rates [8], [13], lower costs of 
care per patient and increase satisfaction among users [14]. 
Examples of chronic conditions that may be positively 
supported by Telehealth include chronic heart failure – CHF  
[15]-[18], diabetes [19], [20] and chronic obstructive 

64
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pulmonary disease – COPD [21]-[23]. A well known 
example of successful Telehealth implementation is the 
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Care Coordination / 
Home Telehealth (CCHT) scheme, in the United States. The 
main purpose of this programme was to coordinate the care 
of over 30,000 veteran patients suffering from chronic 
conditions (diabetes, hypertension, heart failure, COPD and 
depression) through the use of at-home monitoring devices, 
self-care tools and video consultations. Four years after its 
introduction, positive results have been identified including 
25% reduction in number of hospital bed days used, 19% 
reduction in the number of hospital admissions, significantly 
lower costs of care per patient and a high satisfaction among 
users [14]. 
Despite all such positive factors, Telehealth has not yet 
been widely adopted in any country, in the sense that all 
relevant healthcare providers include such services within 
their repertoire [12], [24]. No significant trials have taken 
place in the Republic of Ireland and there is currently no 
national policy focusing on Telehealth, indicating that such 
systems are still far from reaching the homes of Irish older 
people [12]. A complex interplay of barriers has been 
identified in the literature and some of those have so far 
proven difficult to overcome [12], [24]. Poor ICT skills [12], 
[24], confidentiality concerns [11], [12], [25] and lack of 
awareness of the available technology and its potential 
benefits [8], [12], [24], [26], [27] were associated with lower 
Telehealth acceptability among both older people and 
healthcare professionals. Technology issues involving 
usability problems [8], [27], poor system stability and 
reliability [12], [24] have been associated with low 
Telehealth up-take post pilot programmes. Moreover, limited 
access to broadband connections [11], [12] and lack of 
interoperability between various Telehealth solutions have 
been highlighted as significant barriers to effective 
information sharing amongst patients and healthcare 
professionals [8], [10], [12], [25], [27].  
The fragmentation within the healthcare sector [8], [12], 
[28], absence of service ‘champions’ capable of  promoting 
the recognition of Telehealth as part of core healthcare 
services [11], [24] and overall lack of willingness to innovate 
[8], [11], [12], [24] have been pointed as organisational 
obstacles to the embracement of Telehealth in the healthcare 
sector. The absence of clear guidelines defining roles and 
responsibilities of the different stakeholders involved [11], 
[12], [24], [29], lack of technical quality standards [11], [24] 
and unclear data protection legislation are also believed to 
hamper Telehealth adoption amid healthcare professionals. 
Additionally, the lack of robust evidence supporting the role 
of Telehealth in chronic condition management and unclear 
evidence for return on investment are perceived as 
significant barriers to its wider adoption among the medical 
community [11], [12], [27]. 
The 
absence 
of 
reimbursement 
arrangements 
to 
incentivise healthcare providers to embrace Telehealth is 
perceived as a fundamental barrier to its mainstream 
adoption [8], [24], [26]-[28]. Additionally, it has been 
pointed that existent payment systems in fact discourage 
healthcare providers to embrace Telehealth [12], [26], [27], 
[30]-[32]. This is because most systems remunerate 
professionals per in-person contact with patients and remote 
contact supported by Telehealth (e.g., remote vital signs 
monitoring, e-mails, video-consultation) is not currently 
covered under most reimbursement systems.  
Although much has been debated about the barriers to 
Telehealth adoption, little research has been done to 
investigate the extent to which such obstacles apply to the 
Irish context [12]. Moreover, few studies have attempted to 
explore barriers to Telehealth adoption from the perspectives 
of different stakeholders [29]. Therefore, the aim of the 
present exploratory study was to answer the following 
question: “what are the main barriers to the wider adoption 
of Telehealth in the homes of older people, in the Irish 
context?” Research objectives included: 1) to identify 
barriers to wider Telehealth adoption from the perspective of 
five groups of stakeholders: Potential Consumers, Healthcare 
Professionals, Service Providers, Technology Providers and 
Irish Context Experts; 2) to determine the most pressing 
barriers; and 3) to suggest possible approaches to address 
such issues.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II explores the study methods, while Section III 
presents a summary of the main barriers to Telehealth 
adoption indentified by interviewees. Potential solutions 
suggested by participants are also described in this section. 
In Section IV findings are critically analysed against the 
literature, the most pressing barriers are identified and 
potential solutions are discussed. Study conclusion is 
presented in Section V, while Section VI offers a reflection 
upon study limitations and opportunities for further research. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This study was approved by the King’s College London 
Ethics Committee (ref KCL/10-11_379) and conducted 
between February and May 2011 as part of an MSc 
dissertation project. A maximum of fifteen semi-structured 
interviewees was considered feasible given the scope of the 
study. Potential participants were approached through 
convenience sampling strategy and interviewees were 
selected based on the assumption that they had the necessary 
experience to help investigating the research question.  
A. Sampling and Recruitment 
Based on an initial literature review, five groups of 
stakeholders have been defined as the subjects of this study: 
Consumers, Healthcare Professionals, Service Providers, 
Technology Providers and the Government. Since there was 
no provision of Telehealth services to older people in the 
Republic of Ireland when this study was conducted, it was 
not possible to verify barriers from existing consumers’ point 
of view. For this reason, this group was replaced Potential 
Consumers. Additionally, despite multiple attempts, it was 
not possible to conduct any interviews with Irish 
Government representatives. In order to strengthen the 
analysis of barriers to wider Telehealth adoption in the Irish 
context, a new group was included, named Irish Context 
Experts. Table 1 summarizes the number of individuals 
invited and interviews conducted per stakeholder group. 

65
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS INVITED AND NUMBER OF 
INTERVIEWS CONDUCTED PER STAKEHOLDER GROUP 
Stakeholder 
Number of 
individuals invited 
Number of 
interviews 
conducted 
Potential Consumers 
(PCs) 
60* 
5 
Healthcare 
Professionals (HCPs) 
4 
4 
Service 
Providers 
(SPs) 
2 
1 
Technology 
Providers (TPs) 
5 
3 
Irish Context Experts 
(ICEs) 
2 
2 
Total 
 
15 
* Number of invitation letters made available to potential participants 
To verify barriers to Telehealth adoption from the 
Potential Consumer (PC) point of view, relatives (sons, 
daughters, nephews or nieces) of older people currently 
receiving long-term care were approached. The rationale for 
selecting this group was that 1) their generations are more 
likely to benefit from the use of Telehealth by the time they 
reach old age, in comparison with their older relatives and 2) 
they were expected to have reasonable understanding of 
older peoples’ needs due to their experience with relatives 
who require long-term care. It was assumed that this group 
could shed light on the research topic both from a potential 
user point of view and a family member / caregiver 
perspective. To access this group, two nursing homes in 
Dublin, Ireland were approached. In order to allow 
involvement of participants from different socio-economical 
backgrounds, the nursing homes chosen were located in 
areas that are historically known for their contrasting socio-
economical differences (Nursing Home 1 was located in a 
less privileged area, while Nursing Home 2 situated in a 
more affluent region of Dublin). Invitation letters were made 
available at the reception desk. In order to maximise 
response rate, invitation was extended to visitors and staff 
members, who met the main inclusion criteria (sons, 
daughters, nephews or nieces of older people who require 
long-term care or suffer from chronic conditions). In total, 
five (n=5) PCs were recruited. Face-to-face interviews were 
conducted in a suitable area in the nursing homes (e.g., 
visitors’ room). 
To explore the views of Healthcare Professionals 
(HCPs), GPs who regularly visit residents in the same 
nursing homes above mentioned were approached. The 
reason for choosing GPs was the assumption that they 1) 
have relevant experience working with older patients who 
require chronic condition management and 2) could 
potentially benefit from having access to Telehealth data. An 
invitation letter was made available to potential participants 
in one of their visits to the nursing homes. In total four (n=4) 
HCPs 
were 
recruited. 
Face-to-face 
interviews 
were 
conducted in a suitable area in the nursing home or, 
alternatively, in the participant’s private practice facility. 
Service Providers (SPs) were defined in this study, as 
organisations concerned with the supply of Telecare / 
Telehealth products and services. Two SPs have been 
identified in Ireland. An invitation email introducing the 
study was sent to both companies. One of them (n=1) agreed 
to take part and a telephone interview was arranged. 
Technology Providers (TPs) were defined as companies 
that develop Telehealth systems and have headquarters in 
Ireland. Five organisations have been identified and 
contacted through the same approach used with SPs. Three 
subjects (n=3) agreed to participate. Although in the case of 
two companies the appointed interviewee was not based in 
Ireland, this was considered acceptable since both 
individuals had the desired experience to contribute to the 
study. Depending on interviewees’ location a face-to-face or 
telephone interview was arranged. Face-to-face interviews 
took place in a suitable area of the respondents’ workplace. 
Finally, Irish Context Experts (ICEs) were defined in this 
study as individuals who have significant knowledge of the 
Irish health and social care systems and are familiar with 
Telehealth systems. Two potential interviewees with this 
profile were identified through snowballing strategy (i.e., 
through the indication of other interviewees) and were 
approached via email, as described above. Both agreed to 
take part (n=2) and face-to-face interviews took place in a 
suitable area of their workplaces. 
B. Data Collection and Analysis 
All participants received a study information sheet and 
gave informed consent prior to interview. Topic guides have 
been used to support the semi-structured interviews and 
different questions have been included to suit the different 
stakeholders’ backgrounds (available upon request from the 
author). A diagram created by the author illustrating possible 
Telehealth configurations has been used to frame discussions 
about barriers to Telehealth adoption (Fig. 1). The diagram 
displayed technologies commonly described in the literature 
including remote vital signs monitors, video-consultation and 
EHR systems. Considering the likelihood that most PCs and 
HCPs would not be familiar with Telehealth technologies, 
two videos were shown to further support the interviews. 
Video 1 described the use of a Telehealth remote monitoring 
system to support patients with chronic pulmonary disease 
(http://www.intel.com/corporate/healthcare/emea/eng/health
guide/LothianCaseStudy.htm). 
Video 2 
explained 
the 
functions of a personal EHR that allows patients to organize, 
store, 
and 
share 
health 
information 
online 
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9hLT2bMfbY). 
Both 
videos were freely accessible on the Internet at the time the 
interviews were conducted and have been used for 
illustration purposes only. This method was considered 
beneficial, 
since 
interviewees 
expressed 
greater 
understanding of the Telehealth concept after watching the 
videos. Moreover, an Apple iPad device was used to display 
the videos. This was considered useful should interviewees 
be unfamiliar with touch screen interfaces, a common feature 
in Telehealth devices.  
Interviews with SPs, TPs, and ICEs followed a similar 
structure. Participants were initially asked to briefly describe 
their background and experience in the field of Telehealth. 
Afterwards, the same  diagram  was  presented  to  frame  the 

66
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Diagram representing possible Telehealth configurations (larger 
version available upon request from the author) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion about the current state of Telehealth industry and 
existing barriers to wider implementation. Interviewees were 
asked to comment on whether they agreed or not with the 
barriers identified through the literature review. Any new 
barriers suggested were documented and used to frame the 
discussion with subsequent interviewees. At the end 
participants were asked to suggest solutions to overcome the 
barriers raised. 
Interviews with PCs and HCPs were largely similar. 
Participants were initially asked about their familiarity with 
ICT solutions, as well as experience dealing with older 
people and chronic conditions. Figure 1 was used to illustrate 
possible Telehealth configurations and Videos 1 and 2 were 
played. Interviewees were then asked to comment on 
perceived advantages offered by Telehealth technologies and 
then potential barriers to its wider adoption in the homes of 
older people. Finally, participants were asked to suggest 
potential solutions to the barriers discussed. 
Interviews 
were 
audio 
recorded 
and 
manually 
transcribed. Based on interview transcripts, a thematic 
content analysis was carried out. The use of the qualitative 
analysis software NVivo 9 (www.qsrinternational.com/ 
products_nvivo.aspx) greatly facilitated this process.  
Barriers raised by interviewees have been classified 
according to the categorization model described on Table 2. 
Categorizing the barriers for wider Telehealth adoption is 
important to allow for critical analysis of common aspects. 
Categories are also essential to identify relative criticality 
and therefore determine specific areas for focus and action. 
The classification of barriers used in this study derives from 
the theoretical model suggested by Broens, Veldw et al. [24]. 
In that model, authors classified determinants for successful 
Telehealth implementation under five main domains: 1) 
Acceptance; 2) Technology; 3) Organization; 4) Policy and 
Legislation and 5) Financial. In the present study, some of 
these categories have been subsequently broken down in 
order to better explore issues of greater complexity. Category 
1) Acceptance in Broens, Veldw et al. model [24] has been 
broken down into categories A) Acceptance Barriers and E) 
Evidence Base Barriers. This has been done in line with 
other   studies    that   identify   evidence    base   issues   not  
TABLE II.  
BARRIER CATEGORIZATION 
 
Broens, 
Veldw et al. 
(2007)  
 
Present study  
1 
Acceptance  
A 
Acceptance Barriers  
2 
Technology  
B 
Technology Barriers  
3 
Organisation  
C 
Organisational Barriers  
4 
Policy 
and 
Legislation  
D 
Policy and Legislation Barriers  
 
 
E 
Evidence Base Barriers 
5 
Financial  
F 
Financial Barriers  
 
 
G 
Healthcare 
Professional 
Incentive 
Barriers 
 
necessarily related to acceptance [12]. Moreover, one 
additional category has been added to the model: G) 
Healthcare Professional Incentive Barriers. This has been 
added because different studies point to a significant number 
of issues that have lack of incentive to healthcare 
professionals as its root cause [27], [31], [32], [33]. 
In order to determine the most pressing barriers to 
Telehealth adoption in the Irish context, findings were 
critically analysed and compared to the literature. Current 
technology adoption trends and successful initiatives 
implemented in different countries have been also considered 
in this analysis.  
III. 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
The most significant barriers identified by interviewees 
are explored below. Participants also suggested possible 
strategies to promote Telehealth adoption, and these can be 
found at the end of this section.  
A. Acceptance Barriers 
1) Poor ICT skills: PCs, SP1, TPs and ICEs suggested 
that at present the lack of technology skills is a barrier to 
Telehealth adoption among older people. Nevertheless, 
these participants acknowledged that this should not be a 
barrier to Telehealth adoption in the near future. PCs 
believed that their generations will be more familiar with 
electronic devices by the time they reach old age and will 
have greater understanding of the advantages the technology 
can offer. 
“My aunt had a panic button but she never wore it. I think 
she was afraid of the technology. I don’t think older 
people adapt well to change. (…) I would think now we 
are more open, I’m only 70, I would be more open than 
she was. She was probably 90 when she got it. I think as 
the time goes on people will be more receptive to these 
things.” (PC5) 
HCPs were less optimistic than the other groups. The 
group pointed out that older patients often demonstrate 
decreased ability to learn new skills, posing an important 
barrier to wider Telehealth adoption. Two HCPs also 
believed that this will continue to be an issue for future 
generations of older people. 
2) Lack of face-to-face contact: HCPs suggested that the 
lack of face-to-face contact with patients may represent an 

67
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
important barrier to Telehealth adoption among medical 
professionals. It was pointed out that remote contact could 
negatively impact doctors’ decision making capacity, since 
relying on hard data, without clinical observation, could 
potentially increase the risk of medical errors.  
“I think baseline details like blood pressure, fine, but 
when you go into more details like breathlessness, wheeze, 
chest tightness, you can’t actually see “are they 
cyanosed?”, “what is their chest actually like?”. You 
know, would you be able to rely on the data that 
much?”(HCP2) 
TPs agreed that the lack of face-to-face contact may 
increase liability concerns among medical professionals. SP1 
added that remote contact with patients may also raise fears 
of decreased business among physicians. 
“[Doctors’] biggest drive for business is the repeated 
visits they receive from this demographic. So I find they 
are absolutely reluctant to engage with anything that may 
possibly reduce the amount of visits, which will happen, in 
their practice. That is a huge obstacle to overcome.” 
(SP1)  
On the other hand, lack of face-to-face contact has not 
been seen as an issue to any PCs interviewed in this study. 
PC1 expressed that she would rather have a video 
consultation with her doctor, if that would mean not having 
to spend time in waiting rooms before medical appointments.  
3) Confidentiality concerns: PCs were interested in who 
would have access to their EHR. They acknowledged that 
different people would have different perceptions of privacy 
issues. While all participants would like to share their EHR 
with a GP and most would trust the data to a public health 
nurse (PHN) or competent Telehealth triage centre, there 
were mixed opinions about sharing Telehealth data with 
family members and insurance companies. 
“I would be happy that my GP, my family or the nurse 
would be aware if I suddenly became unwell. (…) 
Although some people are afraid, I mean, my husband is 
afraid of the world and his wife knowing about his 
illnesses. He would feel that confidentiality might be an 
issue. But I think this is all to the advantage of the patient 
rather than the disadvantage. The advantages would 
certainly outweigh the disadvantages.” (PC3) 
Two PCs demonstrated apprehension about their health 
information travelling online. This was not a concern for the 
remainder PCs who acknowledged that, at some extent, most 
people 
already 
securely 
share 
sensitive 
information 
electronically (e.g., bank transactions).  
Confidentiality concerns were perceived as a barrier to 
Telehealth implementation among HCPs. Interviewees were 
suspicious about how to ensure that only authorized 
professionals have access to EHRs and who would be 
ultimately liable for maintaining patient data protection. 
“There are huge safety issues with having all that 
information accessible, and who will have access to it. 
Because it could just get into the wrong hands, and 
suddenly you are in major trouble for not protecting your 
patient’s information. (…) At present GPs own the 
information to a certain extent, so if you share that with 
the community nurse, who owns that? And who is 
ultimately 
responsible 
for 
that 
if 
it 
is 
used 
inappropriately?” (HCP3)  
SP1, TPs and ICEs did not believe confidentiality 
concerns are a significant barrier to Telehealth adoption. 
These groups shared the perception that this issue may be 
easily solved through adequate regulation and awareness 
raising. 
4) Lack of familiarity with Telehealth and its benefits: 
SP1, TP1, TP2 and ICE1 agreed that the overall lack of 
awareness among healthcare professionals and patients 
about Telehealth existence and benefits is an important 
barrier to its wider adoption in Ireland. 
“The big difficulty here in Ireland (…) in terms of the 
healthcare professionals is (…) the ignorance of what is 
the actual equipment that is out there. (…) Predominantly, 
they will go with what they know works, and it can be a 
real challenge to break that down sometimes. Telecare is 
much more readily accepted because the vast majority of 
health professionals (…) have all pretty much seen this 
pendant alarm so they are all pretty much familiar with 
that. But Telehealth is a total new department.” (SP1) 
B. Technology Barriers 
1) Technology usability: All PCs expressed that touch 
screen devices, as displayed in Video 1, looked easy to use. 
They suggested that this may facilitate the interaction of 
older people with the technology, increasing the chances of 
adoption of Telehealth solutions. However, when asked if 
they would like to have a device to cater specifically for 
their health needs most PCs expressed that they would 
prefer if this could be done through the devices they already 
have at home, such as laptops and mobile phones. The 
reasons supporting these views included privacy concerns 
and practical issues such appliance size, mobility, ease to 
use and level of disruption to users’ lifestyle.  
 “I wouldn’t like to have a specific health device at home. 
(…) I think it is the whole thing about privacy, you know, 
you can have as many people on the computer and they’ve 
got their own password so it remains private.” (PC2) 
“I would rather have something small like that (pointing 
to an iPhone). Something like that would be easier to use, 
easier to store and you could have beside the bed, and 
carry around if you go out (…) I wouldn’t like to have 
another device in the house. People don’t have space for 
all these stuff, do they?” (PC5) 
“I would like to have something in my pocket, which could 
do it more or less automatically. Personally I don’t think 
people are prepared to sit down and enter information on 
the computer, well, I wouldn’t do that. People get tired; 
you don’t have the same drive all the time. I think if it was 
automatic, that would be better.” (PC3) 
SP1, TPs and ICEs acknowledged that existent 
Telehealth systems are still in early stages of development 

68
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and many issues around technology usability must be further 
explored. ICEs added that the frequent lack of gerontological 
expertise among Telehealth designers is an issue that must be 
addressed. 
“Design challenges are huge because you are dealing 
with unwell people and older people. So it is much easier 
to get a bunch of young engineers to go crazy over the 
iPhone and do all kinds of this jazzy stuff (…). Somebody 
who is sick with COPD just needs to press the button and 
make it work. That is all they want to know. (…) But yet, 
there are innovative ways of doing that.” (ICE1)  
“What is missing is gerontological expertise and 
awareness in the technology providers. (…) They need 
corporate gerontologists. I think a big issue is that they 
are not gerontologically aware, they kind of imagine what 
older people are going to be.” (ICE2) 
Usability issues have also been identified as a barrier to 
Telehealth embracement by healthcare professionals. TPs 
suggested that the views of healthcare providers may not be 
sufficiently considered by technology designers, resulting in 
systems that are not in tune with providers’ workflow.  
“A lot of the technology providers in this space have 
already developed stuff and are trying to sell it as hard as 
they can (…) but what they misunderstand is that all of 
these things are only useful in providing data once you 
decided what you are trying to measure. (…) It is not 
about making the best possible device, it is about having 
the right design so the whole thing is easy to use. And it 
has to be clinically useful.” (TP2) 
HCPs also demonstrated concerns about how realistic it 
would be to incorporate Telehealth into their usual practice, 
as they may not have time to interpret the additional 
information generated. HCP3 and HCP4 suggested that, in 
order to get doctors involved, the data would have to be 
presented in a very simple manner, as they feel that 
healthcare professionals will not have the time to spend in 
extensive data analysis. 
“I had a patient today who brought me a reading of his 
diabetes in a graph, so it makes it much easier to review. 
(…) But it can be quite time consuming, that consultation 
took over 30mins (…) sometimes it is just too much 
information, you know?”(HCP4) 
“I think it would depend on the quality of the information 
coming through, and how user friendly it is to look at the 
information. (…) If you are going to be presented with 
pages of graphs or diagrams you are just not going to… 
all you want to know is ‘are they getting sick or not’, ‘do I 
need to see them or not’. (HCP3) 
PCs also expressed disbelief that doctors would have the 
time to analyse large amounts of data generated by 
Telehealth and suggested that many doctors may choose not 
to consider it when making patient-related decisions. 
2) Limited access to broadband: SP1, TPs and ICEs 
agreed that lack of access to broadband is an important 
obstacle to reach older people in Ireland. 
“Lack of broadband to me is probably one of the number 
one issues in Ireland (…). Free public broadband for 
older people would fix a lot of problems (…) social 
connectivity would increase dramatically and we could get 
healthcare into the homes.” (TP1) 
3) Device Incompatibility: TPs pointed that, at present, 
Telehealth devices are often not compatible with each other, 
what may also hamper widespread adoption. Nevertheless, it 
has been acknowledged that there is a significant movement 
pushing towards equipment compatibility, through the 
Continua Health Alliance (www.continuaalliance.com). 
4) Lack of interoperability amongst EHR systems:TP3 
stressed that even where the end user has the required 
infrastructure to run a Telehealth system at home, this is of 
little use if the data cannot be shared with healthcare 
professionals. He explained that, at present, electronic 
systems used by hospitals and medical practices are not 
technically configured to allow such data flow. Even if users 
were able to start collecting and recording their vital signs, 
unless their healthcare professional used a compatible 
system in their practice, they would not be able to easily 
share the information collected, hindering potential 
Telehealth capabilities. TPs and ICEs acknowledged that the 
industry is still very elementary, and therefore far from 
relying on interoperable information sharing platforms. 
C. Organisational Barriers 
1) Lack of integration within the healthcare sector: 
ICEs suggested that the actual configuration of the Irish 
healthcare system and lack of professionals specialised in 
care management could hinder Telehealth implementation 
in Ireland. ICE1 explained that system configurations that 
include care managers may allow smoother incorporation of 
Telehealth, thus increasing the chances of success. 
“A care manager is somebody that works on behalf of the 
patient, and liaises with the nursing system, GP system, 
welfare system and admission and discharge to hospital. 
Most countries who have adopted Telehealth have adopted 
care management (…) Telehealth links different parts of 
the health system together. And in order to do that you 
need someone managing that linkage. This is one of the 
key issues in Ireland, we don’t have that system in place.” 
(ICE1) 
2) Low levels of trust among stakeholders: PC4, SP1 
and TPs suggested that low levels of trust from medical 
professionals in their patient’s ability to measure their 
readings appropriately, as well as in the accuracy of devices 
and security of connections used may pose obstacles to 
wider Telehealth implementation. TP3 challenged this 
argument since data collected by patients should be 
considered as trustworthy as subjective information reported 
by them during medical appointments. 
“What you see a lot is that the professionals can’t really 
trust the data that is coming from the patient. I don’t think 
that sort of barrier holds much weight. Because 
ultimately, when the patient walks into a doctor’s office 
and tells them about their condition, that is no more or 

69
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
less trustworthy than the patient recording it and sending. 
(…) I think [this attitude] is making it harder for this type 
of data emigration to penetrate in the industry, but I think 
it will go away at some point.” (TP3) 
As shown above, HCPs demonstrated concerns about 
older peoples’ capacity to collect trustworthy data at home. 
Nevertheless, HCP3 recognized that the use of electronic 
devices could in fact increase data reliability, when 
compared to manually collected data. 
“No more than the diabetic who would come back to you 
filled in their ‘allegedly’ last month glucometre readings, 
when you know well that they sat last night and filled them 
out (laughs). Whereas if it would have been done 
electronically, whereby there was a computer day, time 
and reading, which can’t be altered, definitely, that would 
help.” (HCP3) 
SP1 argued that he perceives considerable reluctance 
from medical professionals to trust technology and service 
providers. He explained that Telehealth is often perceived as 
an invasion of the medical domain, and medical 
professionals are reluctant to accept that other professionals 
may be suggesting better ways of doing their job. 
3) Increased professional responsibility  and lack of 
organisational willingness to change: SP1, TPs and ICEs 
acknowledged that wider adoption of Telehealth requires 
healthcare professionals to significantly adapt their 
professional practice. Interviewees explained that, for 
example, Telehealth enables professionals to look after a 
much larger number of patients and to provide more 
continuous care than they would through traditional 
methods. It was suggested that an overall lack of willingness 
to embrace such changes may be a significant barrier to 
Telehealth implementation. TP2 explored this issue, 
explaining that the Telemedicine concept, for example, was 
more accepted because it did not fundamentally interfere in 
the medical practice.  
“In Telemedicine (…) you are basically taking account of 
the fact that you have an specialist who cannot be 
everywhere at once, and you are using this separational 
distance in order to provide more use of that very scarce 
resource to patients, wherever they happen to be. So it fits 
in very well with the model of practicing medicine. As 
soon as you go into Telehealth it is a different matter, (…) 
because today’s practice of medicine means that the 
doctor doesn’t have to pay special attention to you until 
you are in a consultation with him. (…) If the patient is at 
home generating health information continuously, (…) this 
is a different way of practicing care, which isn’t what they 
have been trained instinctively to do.” (TP2)  
Among HCPs, one interviewee clearly expressed he 
would not be willing to change his usual practice in order to 
adopt Telehealth.  
“This my own perspective, I’ve studied medicine to deal 
with people, I didn’t study medicine to look at their 
computer printouts, or blood pressure going up and down. 
(…) that might work, but that wouldn’t be for me. I mean, 
it would wreck my head now if I would spend half of my 
day looking at printouts, or people emailing me stuff about 
it, I just don’t do that, you know?” (HCP1) 
Based on their experience dealing with medical 
professionals, SP1 and ICE1 argued that incongruent training 
is often used as a reason for not engaging with Telehealth.  
“My perception is that there is almost a level of 
condescension, that (…) ‘I am trained to be a doctor, not 
to look at computers, look at graphs’. And I am like, wait 
for a second here, this is public money that should be 
spent a hell of a lot smarter.” (SP1) 
4) Lack of ‘champions’ in the healthcare system: SP1, 
TPs and ICEs suggest that the lack of strong ‘champions’ in 
the healthcare system may be one of the reasons for the 
virtually inexistent movement towards Telehealth adoption 
in the Irish context. 
D. Policy and Legislation Barriers 
SP1 and ICEs argued that it is still largely unclear how 
data protection legislation applies to Telehealth. They 
suggested that this issue is an obstacle to different 
stakeholders to become involved with Telehealth.  
Most HCPs suggested that Telehealth would not achieve 
wider adoption in Ireland without a clear Government led 
strategy. They believed that this would be necessary to 
address data protection concerns.  
“I think [data protection legislation] would have to be 
determined by the government, there would have to be 
policies in place in terms of safety, informed consent (…) 
because if it is just done through the private companies I 
think it will be perceived as too ad-hoc or that there is 
something in it for the individual company.” (HCP3)  
E. Evidence Base Barriers 
TPs and ICE1 acknowledged that despite a significant 
number of successful pilots, Telehealth still lacks robust 
studies, such as large randomized controlled trials (RCTs), to 
support its efficacy and cost-efficiency. Participants 
explained that a high proportion of Telehealth trials used 
small sample sizes or carefully selected participants, which 
greatly hinders the generalisation of results.  
Nevertheless, such interviewees also pointed that the lack 
of RCTs may be also used as a reason for non adoption 
among medical professionals. It was suggested that 
Telehealth may instead require different scientific evaluation 
methods to demonstrate its value. 
“(…) you can argue that [careful patient selection] is 
exactly what you have to do with Telehealth, that there is 
no point in randomly selecting people in the same way 
that you won’t randomly give people drugs to treat their 
conditions. (…) I think quite often, evidence is used as an 
excuse for inaction rather than being the real reason why 
they won’t invest. There are lots of other things happening 
in medicine that doesn’t have evidence base.” (TP2) 
F. Financial Barriers 
1) Costs  of  establishing  the  required  infrastructure:   

70
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TPs and ICEs acknowledged that the high costs of 
establishing the necessary infrastructure, staff training, 
processes reconfiguration, etc., may be a major barrier to the 
adoption of Telehealth by healthcare systems that are 
already under financial strain, which is the case of the HSE, 
the national healthcare agency in Ireland. It was pointed, 
however, that this would largely depend on the level of 
government involvement in the implementation process. 
“High costs of establishing infrastructure [is a barrier] 
only if the Government decides to do it. There is already 
lots of infrastructure out there for other reasons, we can 
piggyback on existing mobile networks or smart meters, 
and other things that are happening around us.” (TP2) 
HCPs also pointed out that the costs of system 
implementation could prevent small GP practices to engage 
in Telehealth. Interviewees demonstrated disbelief that wider 
adoption would be achieved without government financial 
incentive. 
2) Telehealth affordability by older people: ICE1, HCPs 
and two PCs expressed that many older people may not 
have the resources to afford Telehealth if this is provided 
through out of pocket purchasing, therefore, hindering wider 
adoption. 
“I just don’t see it becoming a big thing if it is done 
privately (…) it wouldn’t be standardised enough. There 
would be only certain people that would be able to avail of 
that service then.” (HCP2)  
“I’m sure these things are very costly, and after this 
recession I’m sure this is the last thing in peoples’ minds, 
that they want to spend on things like this.” (PC5) 
This view was not shared by the other PCs, who would 
expect Telehealth services to have similar costs to Telecare 
or broadband services, which they judged reasonable 
considering the advantages offered.  
All PCs would expect at least partial out of pocket 
financing of Telehealth. Participants expressed they would 
appreciate government subsidy, however they did not believe 
this would be realistic given the HSE financial situation. 
G. Lack of Incentive to Healthcare Professional 
According to SP1, TPs and ICEs the lack of clear 
incentives to healthcare professionals to embrace Telehealth 
may be one of the most significant barriers to its uptake. 
Interviewees suggested that, even if other obstacles are 
addressed, Telehealth will struggle to be widely adopted if 
healthcare professionals do not perceive clear advantages 
over traditional practice.  
1) Absence of reimbursement arrangements: The fact 
that Telehealth is not currently covered by reimbursement 
arrangements was seen by HCPs, SP1, TPs and ICEs as a 
significant disincentive to the involvement of healthcare 
professionals. They argued that even though Telehealth may 
represent cost-savings to the wider healthcare system, 
healthcare professionals will be reluctant to engage unless 
reimbursement systems are created. 
“You have to look at what incentives does a GP have to 
offer vital signs monitoring to his or her patients? Not 
much, because they are not under reimbursement systems, 
it doesn’t exist in the HSE so it would be up to the GPs to 
do it privately. So they don’t really have a huge incentive 
to do it.”(ICE1) 
Two HCPs also acknowledged that under the current 
reimbursement system in Ireland, GPs would not be 
compensated for monitoring Telehealth data. Both agreed 
that professionals would probably not engage without 
payment. 
“I think there would have to be some sort of payment, 
because, say you have private patients that would be paid 
for the appointment, or with the medical card we would 
get a global fee. But the fee would have to be looked at 
because there is a lot more time [being spent].”(HCP4)  
2) Disincentives caused by existent payment system: 
TPs and ICEs pointed out that, different than other 
technologies that have successfully penetrated in the 
healthcare industry, Telehealth does not fit into the existent 
procedure-driven 
model. 
Interviewees 
argued 
that 
technology diagnostic solutions, for example, clearly 
allowed professionals to increase their income streams, what 
is not the case of Telehealth. There was a common 
perception that unless the focus of reimbursement 
arrangements shifts from procedures to health outcomes, 
Telehealth will hardly penetrate in the healthcare system. 
“The reasons why radiology was adopted so fast are quite 
simple. On the one hand it allowed you to generate more 
income, because you could get more patients through the 
radiology department more quickly. It also didn’t interfere 
with the status quo and the workflow in the hospital in a 
fundamental way (…). So if the doctor gets paid to see 
you, but doesn’t get paid to look after you when you are 
out of the room, why would they invest in it and pay 
attention to it? (…) I guess a lot of doctors will not like 
this because they prefer the system whereby you are paid 
by the appointment, because they can see an obvious way 
to increase their income, by increasing number of 
appointments.” (TP2)  
“The answer to that is really simple. Our healthcare 
system is based on a model that incentivises poor health. 
(…) Nothing will change until we change that model.” 
(TP3) 
H. Suggested Actions for Wider Adoption of Telehealth 
PCs suggested that in order to achieve wider adoption, 
Telehealth technologies must be flexible enough to match 
different user’s lifestyles and preferences. Participants added 
that devices should be small, portable and easy to use, what 
could be more easily addressed if Telehealth systems could 
run in devices people already own, such as mobile phones.  
TPs and ICEs agreed that in the future technology 
developers should focus on the design of Telehealth software 
applications, as oppose to hardware. Overall, they 
highlighted that the input of gerontologists and healthcare 

71
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
professionals is critical to successful Telehealth technology 
design.  
PCs suggested different strategies to promote awareness 
among older people and family members. This included 
mass media advertisement (television, newspapers, Internet), 
availability of information leaflets in medical practices and 
the creation of a government approved website, with 
“neutral” and up-to-date information that could facilitate 
informed consumers' choice. 
Most 
interviewees 
indicated 
that 
government-led 
Telehealth implementation could address several of the 
barriers discussed. Government legislation could, for 
example, address data protection and medical liability issues. 
National policies were seen as necessary to endorse a 
standardised adoption of Telehealth across the country and to 
promote educational support through undergraduate training 
and continuous professional development. Interviewees in all 
groups indicated that State provision would be important to 
ensure that older people with lower incomes have access to 
Telehealth. TPs also pointed that government initiatives 
could 
stimulate 
the 
establishment 
of 
the 
required 
infrastructure to allow Telehealth data sharing. This could 
include the subsidy of broadband for older people and 
financial incentives for the adoption of interoperable EHR 
systems by healthcare providers and organisations.  
Considering 
the 
current 
Irish 
healthcare 
system 
configuration, ICE1 suggested that it may be easier to start 
the implementation of Telehealth through the secondary 
sector. She explained that chronic disease support teams are 
currently based in hospitals and Telehealth could offer cost-
saving advantages for such departments.  
“Actually most of the chronic disease management in 
Ireland is coming from the hospital, not from primary 
care. So that is why the hospital has a load of incentive, 
they are saying ‘we are sending a load of these heart 
failure and COPD teams out to all these people, and that 
is expensive, it is time consuming, and they are still not 
able to catch people before they have an exacerbation. So 
if we have the infrastructure, the building, the team, why 
not put Telehealth into the hospital?’. So there you are, 
that is an incentive.” (ICE1) 
The establishment of reimbursement schemes has been 
the most suggested measure to incentivise Telehealth 
adoption among healthcare professionals. Considering the 
fact that Ireland has a public health system in place, 
reimbursement policies were also expected to be determined 
by government policies. 
Finally, in order to avoid barriers associated with 
healthcare professional reluctance to embrace Telehealth, 
TPs and ICEs suggested that a possible strategy to achieve 
wider adoption of Telehealth in the homes of older people 
would be focusing on the development of Telehealth 
solutions that do not necessarily require healthcare 
professional involvement. Interviewees indicated that the 
platform created by Telehealth devices could be used to 
promote education, motivation and social support to patients 
and caregivers. As well as being a channel for accurate 
information and advice, Telehealth systems could promote 
treatment compliance among users through clear goal setting 
and feedback tools. Moreover, interviewees suggested that 
future developments should explore the capacity of 
Telehealth technologies to connect older people in equivalent 
disease stages and caregivers in similar situations. 
Participants argued that this approach could promote 
knowledge sharing and tackle social isolation, a frequent 
problem among chronic disease patients and caregivers. 
Additionally, this could address some of the business model 
and reimbursement issues previously mentioned, since 
Telehealth would be no longer seen as a medical device that 
is prescribed by a doctor, but a consumer device, which older 
people and family members could be interested in 
purchasing privately.  
“I think this is the tip of the iceberg, because what we see 
in the market is, we have gone from ‘this is a medical 
device and you have to comply with it every day’ to ‘this is 
your health coach, if you are dear to what it is advising 
you to do, your health outcomes will be better’ and 
moving there onto ‘this is actually your gateway into a 
support community’, so it is not you and your device 
anymore, it is you and a community of other people, and 
you are sharing knowledge and experience, about what 
works for you. And these things instead of being isolating 
technologies, they actually reduce social isolation, 
because now you are connected. You can bring in Skype, 
video-conferencing with your doctor, your nurse, your 
family. And this is where it is getting interesting, because 
it is seen as no longer a thing that you have to do, but your 
support system. And something that you might be willing 
to pay for too, which is the other key factor here.” (TP2)  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Study findings were analysed in order to determine the 
most pressing barriers to Telehealth adoption. Table 4 
presents the barriers as identified in the introduction section 
of this paper and its significance assessment by each 
interviewee, representing a summary of interview findings. 
A heat map scheme has been used, where darker shades of 
grey indicate important issues and lighter shades point to 
trivial obstacles or issues that were not perceived as a barrier 
(Table 3). Barriers perceived as more significant are situated 
near the top of the table. 
TABLE III.  
HEAT MAP COLOUR CODING 
 
Very important barrier 
 
Important barrier 
 
Trivial barrier 
 
Not a barrier 
 
Not mentioned 

72
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV.  
BARRIERS TO WIDER TELEHEALTH ADOPTION HEAT MAP – SUMMARY OF INTERVIEW FINDINGS 
Barriers 
PC1 
PC2 
PC3 
PC4 
PC5 
HCP1 
HCP2 
HCP3 
HCP4 
SP1 
TP1 
TP2 
TP3 
ICE1 
ICE2 
Lack of clear incentives to 
healthcare professionals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology usability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Absence of reimbursement 
arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack 
of 
organisational 
willingness to change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costs of establishing the 
required infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poor ICT skills 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change in roles and levels 
of 
trust 
among 
stakeholders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality concerns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disincentives caused by 
existent payment system 
models 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unclear data protection 
regulation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased 
liability 
exposure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased 
professional 
responsibility 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of familiarity with 
Telehealth and its benefits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limited 
access 
to 
broadband 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of champions in the 
healthcare system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telehealth affordability by 
older people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of interoperability 
amongst EHR systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack 
of 
established 
financial structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fear of reduced business  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of integration within 
the healthcare sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduced 
face 
to 
face 
contact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of standards ensuring 
technical 
quality 
and 
interoperability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of robust evidence 
for 
Telehealth 
effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inadequate 
evaluation 
methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Device incompatibility 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of guidelines clearly 
defining 
roles 
and 
responsibilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unclear 
cost 
saving 
evidence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology stability and 
reliability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In line with international literature, interviewees in this 
study suggested that the lack of clear incentives for 
healthcare professionals to engage in Telehealth is one of the 
most pressing barriers to its wider adoption [12], [27], [32], 
[33]. It has been acknowledged that the absence of 
reimbursement 
arrangements 
significantly 
discourages 
healthcare professionals to offer this service [8], [24], [26]-
[28]. Moreover, the fact that Telehealth does not fit into the 
existent procedure-driven healthcare model was seen as 
another barrier to its penetration in the healthcare sector [12], 

73
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[26], [27], [30]-[32]. Past experiences in healthcare show 
that the introduction of new technologies is not an issue 
when its adoption model is aligned with existing incentive 
schemes. The rapid adoption of computed tomography and 
magnetic resonance imaging scanners in the healthcare 
sector in many countries is an example [34]. 
Although these barriers have so far proven more difficult 
to overcome, several countries have been successfully 
employing strategies to stimulate Telehealth adoption 
amongst healthcare professionals. Many countries use 
government mandates to achieve broad ICT adoption in the 
health sector. In Denmark and Norway, for example, high 
rates of electronic prescriptions have been achieved since the 
Governments made this practice mandatory for primary care 
providers [35]. 
The establishment of reimbursement structures is also 
considered vital to incentivise Telehealth adoption among 
healthcare 
professionals. 
Studies 
show 
that 
the 
reimbursement structure adopted will vary depending on the 
country’s healthcare financing model and governments play 
a key role in defining this [12], [35]. In Sweden and the UK 
the existing (small scale) provision of Telehealth has been 
publicly funded. In Germany, regulatory changes have 
enabled Telehealth reimbursement through health insurers. 
In the Netherlands phone and e-mail consultations are 
reimbursed via fixed prices by the health insurance 
companies [12].  
Innovative reimbursement frameworks, such as pay-for-
performance schemes, are also being introduced in different 
countries in an attempt to shift away from procedure-driven 
models. In the UK around 15% of GPs’ salaries is based on 
their performance against a set of quality measures [36]. 
Finally, government financial incentives have been used 
in Australia, Denmark, the Netherlands and the UK as 
effective policy tools to incentivise technology adoption 
among healthcare professionals [12], [35]. In the US the 
Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive Program offers 
financial stimulus of up to $44,000 / $63,750 to physicians 
and hospitals that demonstrate meaningful use of EHR 
systems 
certified 
by 
the 
Government. 
Since 
its 
implementation in January 2011, the scheme has registered 
over 326,000 eligible professionals and hospitals [37]. This 
is particularly significant considering that the fragmentation 
of the US American health sector is usually pointed as a 
barrier to the implementation of any measures in large scale 
[25].  
Technology usability issues have been highlighted by 
virtually all interviewees, in agreement with several studies 
[8], [24], [27], [28]. It has been pointed by interviewees that 
devices specifically designed to cater for healthcare needs 
may not be well accepted by users. Leveraging devices that 
people already have, such as mobile phones or laptops, was 
pointed as a better strategy for Telehealth adoption, since 
people are already familiar with such devices and these fit 
more readily into their lifestyles. Participants added that this 
could make Telehealth more affordable and readily 
accessible to the public. This perception is in large 
agreement with trends towards the use of mobile platforms 
for Telehealth provision (e.g., smartphones, computer 
tablets). Projections indicate that smartphone applications 
will enable the mobile health industry to reach 500 million 
users in 2015 [38].  
In line with interviewees’ suggestions, other studies have 
also pointed that involving end-users during Telehealth 
technology development stages is key to solve usability 
problems [8], [27]. The input of gerontologists and 
healthcare professionals is critical to successful Telehealth 
technology design and will address many concerns related to 
life style and workflow disruption. 
The lack of organisational willingness to conform to 
changes is considered a pressing barrier to wider Telehealth 
implementation [8], [11], [12], [24]. While the role of 
‘champions’ in promoting change in the healthcare system 
has been acknowledged by interviewees and the literature 
[11], [24] achieving wider adoption of Telehealth will 
require more than individual leadership. May et al. [29] 
argue that in order to overcome intra-organisational inertia, 
coherent policies promoting an organisational vision are 
needed. According to Castro [25] strong national-level 
leadership has been essential to countries like Denmark, 
Finland, and Sweden to successfully drive and coordinate 
wider adoption of ICT in the health sector. The idea that 
comprehensive national strategies are required to address this 
and other pressing barriers to wider adoption of Telehealth is 
in line with perceptions from several interviewees. 
The strategies above explored indicate that a high level of 
government involvement may be necessary to transform 
healthcare provision and allow wider adoption of Telehealth. 
Interviewees in this study point, however, that the high initial 
costs of establishing the infrastructure and incentivising 
healthcare professionals is an important barrier to 
government led Telehealth implementation in Ireland. 
Financial challenges have also been acknowledged by 
different studies [10], [24], [25], [27], [35] and partnerships 
between public and private sectors have been suggested as a 
way of overcoming such issues. 
Barriers involving poor ICT literacy among older people 
pointed by previous studies [12], [24] were perceived by 
most interviewees as a trivial barrier. Recent evidence show 
that the interest of older people in technology has grown at a 
fast pace in the last decade [39], [40]. In Ireland, the 
percentage of people aged between 65 and 74 years 
accessing the Internet at least once a week has increased 
more than five times between 2003 and 2010 [41]. The use 
of the Internet for health purposes has also increased among 
the older population [39] indicating that this barrier may 
gradually become insignificant. 
Other acceptance barriers mentioned in the literature such 
as lack of face-to-face contact [11] and confidentiality 
concerns [11], [12], [25] have also been cited by 
interviewees. However, it is possible to suggest that these 
issues are not significant barriers to Telehealth adoption for 
several reasons. According to Darkins et al. [14] patient 
satisfaction was significantly high among older participants 
in the VHA Telehealth programme and lack of face-to-face 
contact with healthcare professionals has not been observed 
as a barrier to Telehealth adoption. This may indicate that the 
benefits offered by the technology may outweigh such 

74
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
concerns. Similarly, Castro [25] suggests that confidentiality 
concerns should not be a barrier to ICT penetration in the 
healthcare industry, considering that technical controls (e.g., 
encryption, electronic identification, audit logs) are available 
to ensure personal health data security. In Denmark, for 
example, health data is securely shared through an official e-
health portal. In this context patients have access to this 
website and can easily control privacy functions, including 
monitoring who has accessed or modified their personal 
medical records. In Ireland the recently implemented 
National HealthLink Project (http://www.healthlink.ie/) is 
another example of how patient data can be securely shared 
over the Internet. At present this service allows hospitals and 
general practitioners to exchange patient information, such as 
laboratory results and discharge summaries. Patients, 
however, do not have access to this service.  
Interviewees in this study challenged several authors 
[11], [12], [27] suggesting that lack of RCTs is not a 
significant barrier to Telehealth adoption. Participants argued 
that careful patient selection is desired to achieve Telehealth 
benefits, thus alternative study designs should be used to 
evaluate Telehealth value. This has been previously observed 
by other authors [24], [26]. The MAST is an example of a 
new model for Telehealth evaluation, which has been 
developed to support decision making in European countries 
[42]. There are indications, therefore, that evidence base 
barriers should not be of major significance. 
Interviews supported the main findings of the literature in 
relation to certain technology barriers including limited 
access to broadband connections by older people [11], [12] 
and lack of integration between various Telehealth 
technological solutions [8], [10], [12], [25], [27]. It is 
important to acknowledge, however, that several initiatives 
are being undertaken and such barriers may not be 
significant in the long-term. The Irish government has 
implemented a national scheme, which aims to achieve 
extensive broadband coverage by the end of 2012 [43]. 
Moreover, 
with 
the 
increasingly 
fast 
adoption 
of 
smartphones, the native broadband Internet connection 
capabilities of those devices may in practice address the 
connectivity infrastructure requirements for Telehealth, as 
opposed to government-led, residence-based broadband 
connection programmes [44]. Similarly, interoperability 
issues are being tackled by both private and public sectors. 
Through the Continua Health Alliance, over 240 healthcare 
and technology companies worldwide are working together 
to set quality and interoperability standards for Telehealth 
solutions [45]. Studies by Anderson [12] and Castro [25] 
indicate that in the UK and Denmark government agencies 
are setting such standards. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
The aim of this exploratory study was to determine the 
main barriers to the wider adoption of Telehealth in the 
homes of older people, in the Irish context. Research 
findings point to a number of direct and indirect obstacles, 
which largely correspond to those discussed in the 
international literature. Issues involving evidence base, 
technology interoperability and broadband access were not 
considered to be of major significance, given that important 
initiatives are already addressing these barriers. Similarly, 
based on interviewees’ perceptions and technology adoption 
trends, older people’s acceptance is not believed to be a 
pressing barrier to wider Telehealth implementation in the 
medium term.  
The findings indicate that technology usability issues 
may significantly hinder Telehealth adoption. The use of 
devices that people are familiar with such as mobile phones, 
laptops and computer tablets, and the involvement of end-
users during Telehealth technology development stages are 
supported by this study as strategies to overcome Telehealth 
usability challenges. Another important barrier is the lack of 
organisational willingness to change, currently perceived in 
the healthcare sector. While implementation costs were seen 
as a challenge to government action in Ireland, strong 
national-level leadership is considered essential. 
Finally, the lack of incentive to healthcare professionals 
to embrace Telehealth is considered a pressing barrier to its 
wider adoption. The absence of arrangements to reimburse 
healthcare providers and the incongruence with the present 
procedure-driven 
healthcare 
model 
are 
believed 
to 
significantly discourage professionals to offer this service. 
Possible approaches to address healthcare professional 
incentive barriers have been suggested and include 
government mandates, the establishment of reimbursement 
schemes and the use of government financial incentives. 
The imminent population ageing and epidemiologic 
trends indicate that new forms of healthcare provision are 
urgently needed. Shifting away from the current disease-
centric healthcare model towards a health-centric system is 
not only an economic necessity but also a moral obligation. 
The adoption of Telehealth technologies is believed to 
contribute towards these issues by allowing more efficient 
service provision in a patient-driven model. However, the 
disruption to traditional healthcare practices caused by the 
introduction of Telehealth represents a major challenge, one 
that requires the support from all stakeholders involved. 
Governments around the world are gradually implementing 
strategies to promote a new vision in the healthcare sector 
and significant changes are envisaged in the long-term. 
Meanwhile, technology adoption and the use of the 
Internet for health purposes are growing among all age 
groups, including the older population. Concomitantly, 
projections suggest a significant growth in the mobile health 
industry in coming years, which may enable Telehealth 
diffusion through a consumer market. Should these trends 
continue and become reflected in people’s expectations 
around healthcare provision it is possible that, in the short-
term, technological disruption in the healthcare sector will be 
a demand raised by patients themselves. 
VI. 
STUDY LIMITATIONS AND AREAS FOR FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
Even though interview findings indicate large agreement 
with the literature, the small scope of this study and its non-
probability sampling strategy do not allow for the 
generalisation of these results. It is possible to suggest, 
however, that the comprehensive literature review and 

75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
adequate methodology employed may provide a useful 
framework for future research projects.  
This study would have greatly benefited from the 
participation of representatives of the Irish Government, as 
initially intended. It is also important to acknowledge the 
possibility of biased results, since the views of those 
participants who volunteered to take part in this study may 
differ from others [46]. Additionally, the fact that Potential 
Consumers and Healthcare Professionals interviewed in this 
study did not have personal experience with Telehealth 
technologies indicate that one has to cautiously consider their 
contributions.  
While identifying barriers to wider Telehealth adoption is 
an important starting point to promote its implementation, 
future research should focus on clear and practical strategies 
to increase Telehealth adoption in the homes of older people. 
Investigating innovative ways of incentivising healthcare 
professionals and organisations to embrace Telehealth in 
their usual practices seems to be one of the most needed 
areas for research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Professor Anthea Tinker 
from the Institute of Gerontology, King’s College London, 
for her support and supervision. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Reginatto, "Addressing Barriers to Wider Adoption of 
Telehealth in the Homes of Older People: An Exploratory 
Study in the Irish Context," Proc. eTELEMED 2012: The 
Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine. IARIA, Jan. 2012, pp. 175-183, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3. 
[2] M.C.K.Gaßner and M. Conrad, "ICT enabled independent 
living for elderly – A status-quo analysis on products and the 
research landscape in the field of Ambient Assisted Living 
(AAL) in EU-27," Berlin: Institute for Innovation and 
Technology as part of VDI/VDE Innovation + Technik 
GmbH, 2010. 
[3] P. McGill, "Illustrating Ageing in Ireland North and South: 
Key Facts and Figures," Belfast: Centre for Ageing Research 
and Development in Ireland, 2010. 
[4] K.P. Balanda, S. Barron, L. Fahy, and A. Mclaughlin, 
"Making chronic conditions count: hypertension, stroke, 
coronary heart disease, diabetes. A systematic approach to 
estimating and forecasting population prevalence on the 
island of Ireland," Dublin: Institute of Public Health in 
Ireland, 2010. 
[5] WHO, "2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the 
Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases," 
World Health Organization: Geneva, 2008. 
[6]  DoHC, "Tackling chronic disease - a policy framework for the 
management of chronic diseases," Dublin: Department of 
Health and Children, 2008. 
[7] R. Layte, "Projecting the Impact of Demographic Change on 
the Demand for and Delivery of Healthcare in Ireland," 
Dublin: ESRI, 2009. 
[8] COCIR, "COCIR Telemedecine toolkit. For a better 
deployment and use of Telehealth," Brussels: European 
Coordination Committee of the Radiological, Electromedical 
and Healthcare IT Industry,  2010. 
 [9] Counsel and Care, "Telecare and telehealth: what it is and 
how to get it," Counsel and Care: London, 2010. 
[10] S. Koch, "Home telehealth--current state and future trends," 
International journal of medical informatics, 2006. 75(8): pp. 
565-576. 
[11] N. Goodwin, "The State of Telehealth and Telecare in the 
UK: Prospects for Integrated Care," Journal of Integrated 
Care, 2010. 18(6): pp. 3-10. 
[12] L. Kubitschke and K. Cullen, "ICT & ageing–European study 
on users, market and technologies. Final report," Brussels: 
Commission of the European Communities, 2010. 
[13] J. Barlow, D. Singh, S. Bayer, and R. Curry, "A systematic 
review of the benefits of home telecare for frail elderly people 
and those with long-term conditions," Journal of telemedicine 
and telecare, 2007. 13(4): pp. 172. 
[14] A. Darkins, P. Ryan, R. Kobb, L. Foster, E. Edmonson, B. 
Wakefield, and A. E. Lancaster, "Care coordination/home 
telehealth: 
the 
systematic 
implementation 
of 
health 
informatics, home telehealth, and disease management to 
support the care of Veteran patients with chronic conditions," 
Telemedicine and e-Health, 2008. 14(10): pp. 1118-1126. 
[15] R. A. Clark, S. C. Inglis, F. A. Mcalister, J. G. F. Cleland, and 
S. Stewart, "Telemonitoring or structured telephone support 
programmes for patients with chronic heart failure: systematic 
review and meta-analysis,". Bmj, 2007. 334 (7600): pp. 942. 
[16] J. G. F. Cleland, A. A. Louis, A. S. Rigby, U. Janssens, and 
A. H. M. M. Balk, "Noninvasive Home Telemonitoring for 
Patients With Heart Failure at High Risk of Recurrent 
Admission and Death: The Trans-European Network-Home-
Care Management System (TEN-HMS) study," Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, 2005. 45(10): pp. 1654-
1664. 
[17] O. Dar, J. Riley, C. Chapman, S. W. Dubrey, S. Morris, S. D. 
Rosen, M. Roughton, and M. R. Cowie, "A randomized trial 
of home telemonitoring in a typical elderly heart failure 
population in North West London: results of the Home-HF 
study," European journal of heart failure, 2009. 11(3): pp. 
319. 
[18] B. Maric, A. Kaan, A. Ignaszewski, and S. A. Lear, "A 
systematic review of telemonitoring technologies in heart 
failure," European journal of heart failure, 2009. 11(5): pp. 
506. 
[19] T. E. Barnett, N. R. Chumbler, W. B. Vogel, R. J. Beyth, H. 
Qin, and R. Kobb, "The effectiveness of a care coordination 
home telehealth program for veterans with diabetes mellitus: a 
2-year follow-up," American Journal of Managed Care, 2006. 
12(8): pp. 467. 
[20] M. Jaana and G. Paré, "Home telemonitoring of patients with 
diabetes: a systematic assessment of observed effects," 
Journal of evaluation in clinical practice, 2007. 13(2): pp. 
242-253. 
[21] M. Vitacca, L. Bianchi, A. Guerra, C. Fracchia, A. 
Spanevello, B. Balbi, and S. Scalvini, "Tele-assistance in 
chronic respiratory failure patients: a randomised clinical 
trial," European Respiratory Journal, 2009. 33(2): pp. 411. 
[22] J. C. A. Trappenburg, A. Niesink, G. H. De Weert-Van Oene, 
H. Van Der Zeijden, R. Van Snippenburg, A. Peters, J. W. J. 
Lammers, and A. J. P. Schrijvers, "Effects of telemonitoring 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease," 
Telemedicine and e-Health, 2008. 14(2): pp. 138-146. 

76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[23] P. Koff, R. H. Jones, J. M. Cashman, N. F. Voelkel, and R. 
Vandivier, "Proactive integrated care improves quality of life 
in patients with COPD," European Respiratory Journal, 2009. 
33(5): pp. 1031. 
[24] T.H.F. Broens, R. M. H. A. H. I. T. Veldw, M. M. R. 
Vollenbroek-Huttenw, A. T. V. Hermenswz, H. J., Halteren, 
and L. J. M. Nieuwenhuis, "Determinants of successful 
telemedicine implementations: a literature study," Journal of 
telemedicine and telecare, 2007. 13(6): pp. 303. 
[25] J.G. Anderson, "Social, ethical and legal barriers to e-health," 
International journal of medical informatics, 2007. 76(5-6): 
pp. 480-483. 
[26] A. Runge and F. Feliciani, "Telemedicine: from technology 
demostrations to sustainable services," in The European Files: 
The Telemedicine challenge in Europe. Brussels: European 
Commission, 2010. 
[27] M. Alwan and J. Nobel, "State of Technology in Aging 
Services According to Field Experts and Thought Leaders," 
Washington: American Association of Homes and Services 
for the Aging (AAHSA), 2008. 
 [28] J.-M. Pique, "Impact on the restructuring of healthcare," in 
The European Files: The Telemedicine challenge in Europe. 
Brussels: European Commission, 2010. 
[29] C. May, T. Finch, J. Cornford, C. Exley, C. Gately, S. Kirk, et 
al., "Integrating telecare for chronic disease management in 
the community: What needs to be done?" BMC Health 
Services Research, 2011. 11(1): pp. 131. 
[30] J. Bonfini and C. Parker, "Telehealth: Making House Calls 
Count," in The European Files: The Telemedicine Challenge 
in Europe. Brussels: European Comission, 2010. 
[31] J. Cruickshank, "Healthcare without Walls: A Framework for 
Delivering Telehealth at Scale," London: 2020health.org, 
2010. 
[32] L.L. Barrett, "Healthy@ Home," Washington: AARP 
Foundation, 2008. 
[33] D.W. Bates, "Physicians and ambulatory electronic health 
records," Health Affairs, 2005. 24(5): pp. 1180. 
[34] E.H. Oh, Y. Imanaka, and E. Evans, "Determinants of the 
diffusion of computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging," International journal of technology assessment in 
health care, 2005. 21(1): pp. 73-80. 
[35] D. 
Castro, 
"Explaining 
International 
IT 
Application 
Leadership: Health IT," Washington: The Information 
Technology and Innovation Foundation, 2009. 
[36] NHS, "GP Payments Calculation Service Memorandum of 
Information 
(MOI)," 
2010 [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/g
psupport/gppcs/gppcsmoi.pdf [Accessed 09 December 2012]. 
[37] CMS, "EHR Incentive Programs" 2012  [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html 
[Accessed 09 December 2012]. 
[38] E. Mikalajunaite, "500m people will be using healthcare 
mobile applications in 2015," 2010 [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.research2guidance.com/500m-people-will-be-
using-healthcare-mobile-applications-in-2015/ [Accessed 09 
December 2012]. 
[39] K. Cullen, C. Dolphin, S. Delaney, and M. Fitzpatrick, 
"Survey of Older People and ICTs in Ireland (2008)," Dublin: 
Work Research Centre (WRC) & Age Action Ireland, 2009. 
[40] H. Seybert and A. Loof "Internet usage in 2010 – Households 
and Individuals," Eurostat, European Commission, 2010. 
[41] Eurostat, "Individuals regularly using the Internet," 2011 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=isoc_
pibi_use&lang=en [Accessed 09 December 2012]. 
[42] K. Kidholm, C.D. Pedersen, J. Rasmussen, L.K. Jensen, A.G. 
Ekeland, A. Bowes, et al., "A new model for assessment of 
telemedicine—MAST," International Journal of Integrated 
Care, 2011. 11(6). 
[43] DCENR, "Rural Broadband Scheme Announced by Minister 
Rabbitte," 
2012 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.dcenr.gov.ie/NR/rdonlyres/732A18F8-2247-4F96-
8334-F63171B1F36D/0/PressReleaseRBS952011.doc 
[Accessed 09 December 2012]. 
[44] Miscrosoft Tag, "The Growth of Mobile Marketing and 
Tagging," 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://tag.microsoft.com/community/blog/t/The_Growth_of_
Mobile_Marketing_and_Tagging.aspx 
[Accessed 
09 
December 2012]. 
[45] Continua Health Alliance, "About the Alliance," 2010  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.continuaalliance.org/about-the-alliance.html 
[Accessed 09 December 2012]. 
 [46] A. Bryman, Social Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008. 
 

