The Inertia of the Status Quo: 
A Change Management Analysis of Technological Innovation  
 
Anthony P. Glascock 
Department of Culture and Communication 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
glascock@drexel.edu
 
 
Abstract—A reanalysis of the lack of acceptance of an ehealth 
data records system utilizing the tenets of change management 
reveals fundamental issues surrounding the challenges facing the 
introduction of new technologies in health care. Even though the 
design of the system was largely driven by the end-users 
themselves, ultimately these same individuals rejected the system 
once a series of pilot studies ended. The findings from these 
studies suggest that the key element for the successful 
introduction of a new technology is the necessity to overcome the 
inertia of people not wanting to change how they do their jobs, 
not the technology itself. 
 
Keywords—acceptance of innovative technologies, change 
management, an ehealth data records system 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
This article is an example of the reason that one presents 
papers at professional meetings: being pushed into expanding 
one’s analysis because of questions being asked that one 
cannot answer. In this case, it was a question posed in 
Barcelona at eTELEMED 2014: “isn’t your work an example 
of the process of change management?” Although unable to 
answer the question at the time, the most cursory research into 
change management allowed the answer to be an emphatic 
yes. However, that simple answer led to a rethinking of the 
process on which the eTELEMED paper, “If they designed it, 
why don’t they want it? The lack of acceptance of an ehealth 
data records system” [1], was based with the result being a 
much expanded analysis and a greater understanding of what 
on the surface was a largely inexplicable failure of adoption of 
a wireless ehealth data records system for use in the delivery 
of care and services in the residences of at-risk elderly 
individuals. 
This particular wireless ehealth data records system was 
developed as a response to the desire on the part of 
governments, in most industrial countries, to introduce 
electronic health care records systems and to the dramatic 
increase in the amount of care and services being delivered in 
residences. Although the use of electronic health records 
systems has been one of the major initiatives in the United 
States as well as in most European countries for much of the 
21st century, the actual adoption of ehealth records systems 
has been much slower than anticipated. This is the case even 
though the United States “government set aside $27 billion for 
an incentive program that encourages hospitals and providers 
to adopt electronic records systems” [2]. Although there is 
some debate over the reliability of ehealth records systems [3], 
there appears to be little doubt that the greater the ease of 
storage, access and cost savings will eventually achieve close 
to universal usage within institutions and among physicians 
[4][5]. If the pace of adoption in hospitals and physician 
practices has been slow, the pace of adoption of ehealth data 
systems for use to chronicle care and services in the home has 
been even slower. There is little debate that the delivery of 
care and services in the home has increased significantly and 
will accelerate at an ever more rapid pace over the coming 
several decades because of two basic factors: demography and 
cost. The demographic trends are well known: dramatic 
increase in the number of elderly, especially the oldest-old; a 
concomitant increase in chronic diseases associated with 
aging; and a decline in the number of family members who 
can provide care. Cost projections are similarly daunting: 
increasing cost for care delivery within the institutional 
setting; insufficient number of institutions and insufficient 
funds to build the large number of additional institutions; and 
prohibitive costs to government to provide care and services 
through current care delivery models.  
It is generally agreed that the only way to meet the 
increasing needs brought about by the demographic trends, 
while at the same time not bankrupting national treasuries, is 
to provide more care and services in the home [6]. As more 
care and services are being delivered in the home, several 
issues have emerged that raise serious concerns. In the first 
place, the care being delivered had steadily become more 
extensive. Whereas a decade ago rehabilitation after a serious 
illness or accident would have been undertaken in a 
specialized facility; presently many of these services are being 
provided in the home on an outpatient basis. But rehabilitation 
is just one of an escalating number of care services being 
provided in the home: nutritional counseling; wound care; 
psychological therapy; and medication adherence, to name 
several of the major ones. Additionally, the range of products 
and non-care services supplied to individuals in their own 
homes has increased significantly: oxygen; specialized beds; 
monitoring; meals; housekeeping; shopping; companion 
services. As the care and services have multiplied, so have the 
number 
of 
people 
providing 
the 
services. 
These 
companies/agencies are, of course, in addition to any services 
provided by informal carers. Thus, the need for a means of 
recording and tracking the care and services provided in the 
home are essentially the same as for institutions: increased 
136
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

reliability; better coordination; appropriate level of care; and 
cost savings.   
As more care and services are delivered by more people 
representing different companies and agencies, just keeping 
track of who is providing what becomes increasingly difficult, 
especially if the individual receiving the care lives alone in her 
home and is experiencing cognitive decline or other 
impairments. Scheduling of visits and deliveries, ensuring the 
correct product or service, avoiding duplication all become 
difficult if records are scattered among various agencies, 
companies and individuals and are rarely, if ever, shared. It is 
also extremely difficult to evaluate if the care and services are 
having the desired impact on the individual if there is no 
systematic way to track the outcomes of the care and services. 
The lack of systematic and comprehensive records also makes 
it difficult for other care providers to make informed care 
decisions, since the reliance on the patient to remember 
specifics about the care and services in the home has proven to 
be suspect at best. In addition, if ehealth records of care and 
services in the home do not exist, it is obvious that they cannot 
be linked with the records that have been created in the 
hospital and the physician practice. Finally, even though 
delivering care and services in the home is more economical 
than in institutions, it still costs money and someone has to 
pay for it. As a result, from the point of view of the client 
receiving the care and services, as well as the insurance 
company and the government, there is a discernible need to 
track the care and services to ensure that what is paid for is 
provided and that everyone was paid appropriately. 
The problem is that there has been a general reluctance on 
the part of many care organizations to adopt such systems. 
Research on various ehealth technologies indicate that there 
are many explanations for this reluctance, among the most 
important being: unwillingness of care providers to change 
how they do their work; fear of a loss of professional 
autonomy on the part of care providers; insufficient training; 
inadequate investment in IT infrastructure; and a lack of a 
supportive culture within the care organizations [7][8][9][10]. 
The remainder of this paper reports on a series of problems 
encountered when implementing a particular ehealth data 
records system and uses ideas from the field of change 
management to offer an explanation for the system’s lack of 
acceptance. 
 
II.   DESIGN PHILOSOPHY 
The eTELEMED paper reported on the development of a 
wireless ehealth data records system: the Home Care 
Informatics System (HCIS) that attempted to fulfill the need 
for a means of recording and sharing details on the ever 
increasing care and services delivered to elderly individuals in 
their own residences. The system was developed and tested 
over an eight year period in a total of seven care organizations 
in three countries. The article’s main focus was on the lack of 
acceptance of the HCIS on the part of the care providers in all 
seven locations, even though these very same carers had 
played a major role in the design of the system. Several 
possible reasons for the lack of acceptance were presented 
and, although they were consistent with the findings overall, 
the reasons were fairly unconvincing [1].  So it was not 
surprising that someone listening to the paper would suggest a 
different explanation for the lack of acceptance of the HCIS, 
specifically one rooted in the theory of change management.    
However, before reinterpreting the lack of acceptance of 
the HCIS based upon the theory of change management, some 
background information is required as to the approach taken to 
its design and implementation. It was decided from the very 
beginning that the design of the HCIS would be driven by the 
end-users—the carers who would actually use the system to 
record and share information, e.g., visiting nurses, geriatric 
social workers, care managers. This decision was based upon 
previous experience gained from the development of another 
innovative ehealth project [11]. Even though seven patents 
were issued, a start-up company invested heavily in its 
commercialization and the company and patents were 
eventually sold to General Electric, acceptance of the product 
in the market-place was less than anticipated. One explanation 
for this lack of success in the market-place was that almost all 
design decisions were made by management, software 
developers and marketing personnel with little, if any, input 
from the people who would be using the system in the delivery 
of care. Thus, there was little “buy-in” on the part of the end-
users and a general reluctance on the part of these care 
providers to make changes in their actions in order to 
incorporate the system into their normal care delivery model. 
This was the case even though the upper administrators at the 
care organizations were, for the most part, enthusiastic 
champions of the technology. The problem was that because 
the decision to use the system was driven by these 
administrators without any input from the people who actually 
delivered the care, this high-level enthusiasm was never 
duplicated among the end-users.     
Based upon this experience, it was decided that in the 
development of the Home Care Informatics System as much 
control as possible over the design of the system would be 
ceded to those individuals who were actually going to be using 
the system to aid in care delivery. Not only did this approach 
appear to make sense because of the previous experience, but 
from the very beginning, and throughout the design process, 
the care providers at all seven care organizations were 
anything but shy in making suggestions about both the design 
of the system and how it should be used. In fact, as will be 
illustrated in the next section, it could be argued that the final 
iteration was so unlike the one originally conceived that it was 
actually a different product. Whether this was the case or not, 
the final design certainly reflected the input of the end-users 
much more than the developers.   
In the next section, the actual design process is described, 
with emphasis placed on the role played by the care providers; 
in section four the reasons presented in the previous paper for 
the lack of acceptance on the part of the carers are briefly 
presented; in section five the reasons for the lack of 
acceptance are analyzed based upon the tenets of change 
management; in section six the two sets of explanations are 
137
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

compared; and in the last section future implications for the 
development and implementation of electronic records 
systems, as well as other innovative ehealth technologies, are 
explored. 
III.  THREE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT 
As stated previously, the development of the HCIS 
spanned an eight year period, involved seven care 
organizations and took place in three countries—the United 
States, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The first 
iteration of the HCIS was actually a research tool designed to 
work in conjunction with a behavioral monitoring system. 
This prototype was designed to systematically record the alerts 
generated by the monitoring system, as well as the care 
delivered based on the alerts and there was no thought at this 
stage of developing an electronic health records system. It was 
the reaction of the end-users, in this case geriatric social 
workers that began to shift the research tool to an ehealth 
application. 
 
A.    Stage 1—2006-2007 
 
This process took place during a pilot study at Selfhelp 
Community Services, Inc. in Queens, New York and involved 
eleven 
geriatric 
social 
workers 
who 
provided 
care 
management services to over 200 residents [12][13][14]. 
Twenty-seven of these clients agreed to have the system 
installed for a six month period and to have the social workers 
use the resultant data in care management decisions. The 
problem was that there was no way to systematically collect 
information on the care actions that they took in response to an 
alert. The instrument created was labeled the TAO: Trigger, 
the system’s alert; Action, the care action taken by the social 
worker in response to the alert; and Outcome, the health or 
care outcome brought about by the care action. A brief 
example illustrates the initial design of the TAO:  
 
Trigger: The system sends an alert to the geriatric 
social worker indicating an increase in overnight 
toileting for a particular client;  
Action: The social worker phones the client to 
inquire about the client’s behavior;   
Outcome: Finding out that the client was frequently 
in the bathroom because of stomach flu, the social 
worker contacts the client’s physician to obtain a 
prescription for medication.  
 
Initially, the social workers filled out a paper form with the 
relevant information, which was then entered into a computer 
data base in order to allow analysis. This worked well for 
about two weeks, but at the first care review meeting several 
social workers complained that filling out the paper version of 
the TAO was time-consuming. They suggested that, since they 
were on their desk-top computers throughout the day, that it 
would be easier for them to enter the information directly into 
the spreadsheet themselves. In response to these suggestions, a 
computerized web-based version of the TAO was created and 
this new version became the first design change driven by its 
users.  
This new Web-TAO form took about five minutes to fill 
out, could be easily shared with others and, most importantly, 
could be updated as more actions and outcomes occurred. In 
the short run, this last feature proved beneficial for the social 
workers as they could quickly and almost effortlessly update 
the Web-TAO records for individual clients. In the long run, 
the need to have an update capability proved essential in the 
development of the HCIS. This is because, although the alert 
is a discrete event, care actions and health outcomes are not 
discrete, but instead roll out over time. The previous example 
of the TAO narrative has all three elements as discrete 
events—one Trigger, one Action, one Outcome—and this 
example corresponds to approximately 40% of the TAOs. 
However, a majority of the TAOs corresponded more to the 
following example: 
 
Trigger: The system sends an alert to the geriatric 
social worker indicating an increase in overnight 
toileting for a particular client;  
Action: The social worker phones the client to inquire 
about the client’s behavior;  
Outcome: Finding out that the client was frequently in 
the bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social 
worker contacts the client’s physician to obtain a 
prescription for medication;  
Second Action: The social worker phones the client’s 
daughter to report that her mother has the flu;  
Third Action: Daughter visits her mother the next day 
finding out that her mother is no better; 
Fourth Action: Daughter phones social worker 
reporting on mother’s condition;  
Fifth Action: Social worker visits client, determines 
that she is dehydrated, phones physician; 
Sixth Action, Second Outcome: Physician decides to 
have client admitted to hospital; 
Seventh Action, Third Outcome: Client is discharged 
after two days in hospital. 
 
All of the above actions and outcomes were the result of the 
single alert and could now be entered into the Web-TAO as 
the events rolled out in real time. As a record of care provided 
and outcomes generated, the Web-TAO proved extremely 
helpful to the geriatric social workers as they could more 
systematically track the progression of care and outcomes. 
However, the realization of how multiple care actions and 
outcomes could be gathered together in a single record proved 
invaluable for the future development of the informatics 
system that eventually became the HCIS.  
Once this alteration was made, the carers had other 
suggestions: add auto-populated fields; use check-boxes 
whenever possible; allow for easier follow-up entries; and 
allow access to individual records by other social workers and 
supervisors. At the first care review meeting, after these 
changes were made, two issues that would drive much of the 
development of the TAO surfaced. Since the objective for 
138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

these meetings was to review what had happened to each of 
the clients over the previous month in order to assess how the 
monitoring system had impacted the delivery of care, it was 
not surprising that the TAOs were the focus of the discussions, 
but it was surprising how the social workers utilized the 
TAOs. They placed the TAOs for each of the clients together 
and then worked their way chronologically through the TAOs. 
By their actions, the social workers were constructing an on-
going record for each of the clients by putting TAOs for the 
particular client together into a single “pile”. This “piling up” 
was the first care record and would drive much of the future 
development of the ehealth system. 
The second issue raised by the geriatric social workers 
concerned the ability of the Web-TAO in the evaluation of 
performance. For the supervisors, the Web-TAO provided an 
objective basis on which to evaluate the work performed by 
the social workers; for the social workers, the Web-TAO 
allowed supervisors to question their actions and professional 
conduct using information that had not been available 
previously. These issues were not resolved before the study 
ended, but, as discussed subsequently, it remained a vexing 
problem for the future development of the ehealth system.  
 
B. Stage 2—2007-2008 
 
As the Selfhelp pilot was ending, a pilot study in London 
was getting underway. Unlike the Selfhelp study in which all 
clients lived independently and had their care managed by a 
single care organization, the London study involved several 
residential types and more than one care organization. All 
residents lived in Southwark, an area of Central London south 
of the Thames, and were provided services from one of three 
care organizations—Southwark Falls, Oasis and Hyde 
Housing—all of which operated under the broad umbrella of 
the Southwark Local Authority. Thus, the work undertaken by 
“carers” in these organizations was much more coordinated 
than would be found in the independent organizations in the 
United States.  However, even though these organizations 
were “independent” and served distinct populations, for this 
discussion it makes sense to view them as a single entity, the 
Southwark Study, and to aggregate their 97 clients.  
Based on the development work undertaken at Selfhelp, 
the Southwark Study began with a fully operational Web-TAO 
that had the ability to easily update a report as care actions and 
outcomes rolled out over time. Within the first six weeks of 
the study, it became apparent from the analysis of the material 
being entered into the Web-TAO that the carers were using the 
system much differently than the social workers at Selfhelp. 
This was primarily due to the fact that the culture at 
Southwark was extremely collaborative and, although 
particular carers had primary responsibility for specific clients, 
all carers engaged with all clients in some fashion, and thus, 
the Web-TAO was conceived as a tool to allow for easier 
sharing of information among all carers rather than just a 
record of responses to triggering alerts. Therefore, the ability 
for all members of the care team to not only view the 
information, but to contribute to the information stream 
became paramount. The cultural imperative to share and 
contribute to the information of clients resulted in a 
modification that allowed for much longer narratives to be 
entered into the system which, as a result, took on the 
appearance of “blogs” in which numerous carers listed their 
actions and the subsequent outcomes for particular clients.  
Fig. 1 is an example of a typical “blog” for a single client. 
 
Figure. 1.     Web-TAO blog narrative 
 
On the surface, this change appeared to be trivial, but in 
actuality it altered much of the design of the structure of the 
Web-TAO going forward. The Web-TAO had already mutated 
from a research tool to a care provision tool that tracked 
responses to the system’s alerts, and now it had transformed 
again from a limited record of what transpired when an alert 
occurred, to a more comprehensive ehealth record of all care 
being delivered to a specific client over time. Fig. 1 not only 
shows the comprehensive nature of the information recorded, 
but also illustrates how many carers became involved in 
contributing care for this client. 
The members of the newly formed Smart Team had other 
suggestions for the Web-TAO. One was to be able to send the 
“blog” to a client’s physician prior to an appointment in order 
for the physician to have all relevant care information. This 
139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

required the creation of a new security function that limited 
who could send and what could be sent to individuals outside 
the Southwark Smart Team. A second suggestion was to allow 
the “blogs” to be sorted by alert, particular carer, type of care 
actions and date of entry. Although technically not a complex 
undertaking, the challenge was to understand the uses to be 
made of such a sorting feature, before creating it. This change 
took time and the requested feature only became fully 
operational near the end of the study. 
 
C.     Stage 3—2007-2012 
 
Work in the Netherlands began in late 2007 as part of a 
demonstration project to evaluate the role of behavioral 
monitoring in the delivery of care in both a residential and 
institutional setting [15]. During the first stage (2007-2008) of 
the project the behavioral monitoring system was installed in 
the residences of 12 individuals living independently and 13 
individuals living within a sheltered housing facility, while in 
the second stage (2008-2012) the system was installed in the 
residences 
of 
an 
additional 
230 
individuals 
living 
independently throughout the largely rural Limburg Region 
served by two care organizations. Similarly to how the three 
London organizations were combined, it makes sense to view 
these two organizations, as well as the demonstration project 
and larger study, as a single entity and to aggregate the 255 
clients into a single Dutch Study.  
Since the demonstration project in the Netherlands began 
as the London Study was winding down, it was possible to 
provide the Dutch with an enhanced Web-TAO which had the 
ability to produce “blogs”, which we renamed the “Client’s 
Journal”. Of course, the content of the Web-TAO, e.g., check-
boxes, auto-populated fields, instructions, had to be translated 
into Dutch. The care delivery model at the two care 
organizations—Proteion and Zorgroep—required that their 
care workers spend a considerable amount of each day 
traveling to and from clients’ residences. Thus, they spent 
little 
time 
at 
the 
two 
organizations’ 
administrative 
headquarters, limiting their ability to both access the Web-
TAO and to enter information on computers. This problem 
was solved by developing the capability for the Web-TAO, 
renamed the Home Care Informatics System (HCIS), to be 
accessed on any smart mobile device. This change in the 
structure of the HCIS to a wireless mobile service raised 
several design challenges. First, everything had to be 
reformatted so that it could fit the small screen of the mobile 
devices. This led to an even greater reliance on check-boxes 
and auto-populated features and to the development of more 
efficient scrolling features. Second, there was the challenge of 
making the HCIS display properly on the different smart 
devices used by the care workers.  
Working directly with the carers during the demonstration 
project allowed for a series of other suggestions to be 
incorporated into the HCIS: 1) the Client’s Journal feature 
allowed entries by any authorized personnel; 2) the Journal 
could be sorted by alert, date, care worker, type of care 
delivered and outcome; 3) there was a new feature that 
allowed additions to a previous entry, but not the elimination 
of the original entry; 4) a series of pop-up prompts helped the 
user navigate through functions and avoid common errors; 5) 
additional security features were developed to ensure that only 
authorized individuals could access and contribute to a client’s 
record; and 6) a read-only feature was added. Even with these 
modifications, two issues remained unresolved. The first issue 
concerned how the HCIS was used during care review 
meetings at which time the care delivered to specific clients 
was discussed and decisions on future care made. These 
meetings included both individuals who had knowledge of and 
access to the HCIS and others who had neither. Since the 
client reviews were more thorough when everyone at the 
meeting had access to the information stored in the HCIS 
record, questions arose as to who should have access, how 
should they obtain access and who was in charge of making 
access happen? Although this issue does not directly concern 
the technical development of the HCIS, it certainly impacts 
the implementation of the HCIS and its long term use. The 
second issue concerned whether the information stored in the 
HCIS could be used by supervisors and administrators in the 
evaluation of work performance. On the surface, the concern 
expressed by the care workers in the Netherlands was similar 
to those raised by the social workers at Selfhelp. It was 
believed that these concerns could be fairly easily resolved by 
discussions of interested parties. This was not the case, and 
this issue remained unresolved at the end of the pilot. 
 
D.    Summary of Changes  
 
Below is a summary of the changes made to the HCIS in 
response to the expressed needs of the people using it. A 
review of these changes brings into focus how much the 
TAO/HCIS changed during the six years studies in response to 
the wishes of the users. 
 
Selfhelp  
1. The TAO was put on the web; 
2. A feature that allowed the sharing of TAOs was 
created; 
3. Check-boxes were added; 
4. Auto-populated fields were added; 
5. A feature that allowed follow-up entries was 
developed. 
 
Southwark 
 
1. Changes made to conform to British English; 
2. Enhanced sharing capabilities were developed to 
allow  multiple team members to enter data; 
3. Security features added to allow sharing of data 
beyond the Smart Team; 
4. A blog structure was created that allowed data to 
be entered by multiple carers; 
5. An added feature that allowed the sorting of the 
blogs by alert, carer, care action taken, health 
outcome and date. 
140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The Netherlands 
 
1. It was translated into Dutch; 
2. The blogs became the Clients’ Journals; 
3. The system was made to be operational on any 
mobile device; 
4. A feature that allowed additional carers to enter 
data was developed; 
5. More auto-populated fields and check-boxes 
were added; 
6. A feature that allowed entries to be corrected 
without erasing the original was developed; 
7. Additional search features were added to the 
system; 
8. A read-only feature was created.   
 
The above summaries support the argument that the final 
HCIS was actually a different product from the one that was 
created as a research tool for the pilot study at Selfhelp. Given 
that the development of the electronic health records system 
spanned eight years and was used by over one hundred care 
providers at seven different care organizations, it should not 
be that surprising that the final product was significantly 
different from the original. However, what is surprising is that 
all the significant changes brought about over this period were 
made at the request of the end-users. Possibly even more 
surprising is that almost all of the suggestions made by the 
developers for the “improvement” of the system were rejected 
by the end-users. Some of these suggestions concerned the 
way material was displayed on the smart phones, i.e., the 
number and order of check-boxes, while others were more 
fundamental, i.e., an automatic notification when a client was 
discharged from the hospital. Following the design policy 
outlined previously, all changes suggested by the developers 
were made operational in order to be tested in the actual 
provision of care. After one month of use, the end-users were 
surveyed in order to assess the usefulness of the changes. If 
the results indicated that over 75% of the care providers 
rejected the change, it was made non-operational. For 
example, every one of the end-users found the automatic 
notification of a client being discharged from the hospital to 
be both unnecessary and inappropriate, thus, it was 
immediately made non-operational. 
IV.   LACK OF ACCEPTANCE  
Even with all of these accommodations to meet the needs 
of the end-users, ultimately they stopped using the HCIS to 
record details of the care that they delivered even before the 
scheduled end date of the pilot studies. Most telling, the 
pattern of a gradual decline in the use of the HCIS leading to 
its abandonment, took place in all seven pilot study locations 
regardless of the care delivery model: care management; 
visiting nurse; coordinated intensive care management and 
residential setting: independent living; sheltered housing; high 
rise NORCS. Although frustrating, and initially perplexing, 
this result led to an analysis, and after the original paper was 
presented in Barcelona, a reanalysis of the reasons for why 
this lack of acceptance occurred. In order to assess the reasons 
for this lack of acceptance, questionnaires were administered 
to all eleven social workers at Selfhelp, while individual carers 
were interviewed in the Southwark and Dutch studies. In 
London, 70% of the carers were interviewed by phone and in 
the Netherlands approximately one-third of the carers were 
interviewed in person, while another third were interviewed by 
phone.  Initial analysis of the findings derived from the 
questionnaires and interviews indicated that there were three 
main reasons for the lack of acceptance: 1) fear on the part of 
the carers that the information would be used to evaluate work 
performance; 2) the nature of the pilot study model and its 
impact on the carers’ commitment; and 3) unwillingness of the 
carers to change their work routine. 
 
A.    Evaluation of Performance 
 
Analysis of the carers’ answers from the seven locations 
showed that the carers in the United States and the 
Netherlands were fearful that the information contained in the 
HCIS would be used by supervisors to evaluate their job 
performance. Two brief examples illustrate this ability of the 
information contained in the HCIS to evaluate the carers’ 
performance. Each alert generated by the monitoring system is 
time stamped, as is every care action taken by a specific carer, 
and as a consequence, there is a concrete record of whether the 
carer responded to the alert and how long it took the carer to 
respond. In addition, the HCIS contains specific information 
on the type of response and the health outcome for each client 
over time, allowing supervisors to compare the work of 
different carers. It is this ability to compare the work of 
different carers which appeared to disturb the carers the most. 
And, it is indisputable that the HCIS allows this type of 
comparison to be made and for performance reviews to be 
based upon the information contained in the system. Not 
surprisingly, supervisors viewed this ability as an advantage 
because it documents performance, whereas, carers viewed it 
as an intrusion into their professional decision making.  
 
B.    Problems with the Pilot Study Model 
 
The deficiencies of the pilot study model employed in the 
testing of the behavioral monitoring system have been detailed 
elsewhere [11], but some of these issues relate directly to the 
lack of acceptance of the HCIS. There appear to be four 
problems with the pilot study model.  First, only a small 
number of carers were involved in the pilots at each of the 
organizations resulting in the studies being marginalized. At 
Selfhelp, only eleven of almost 200 social workers were 
involved in the study; while in London fewer than a dozen 
carers within the entire Southwark Local Authority had any 
role in the study and in the Netherlands, fewer than 5% of 
carers at the two organizations were involved in the study. 
Second, in no case was the HCIS used by the carer for all of 
her clients; instead it was always used for a small fraction of 
clients—on average no more than 20% and in only two cases 
over 50%—meaning that the carer was employing two 
141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

different systems to record care. Third, information derived 
from the questionnaires and interviews showed that, because 
the carers knew when the pilot was to end, many carers put 
little effort into using the HCIS because they knew when it 
would go away. Finally, the HCIS was never part of “normal” 
care, but was always viewed as something that was just being 
“tested”. As a result, the majority of carers responded logically 
by putting less and less effort into its use as the pilot 
progressed. 
 
C.    Unwillingness to Change Routine 
 
Even though information from the questionnaires and 
interviews showed the importance of the previous two factors 
in the lack of acceptance of the HCIS by the carers, an even 
more important reason was their unwillingness to change their 
normal routine that did the most damage. There is no doubt 
that the HCIS required carers, at least initially, to do more 
work and undertake tasks which were unfamiliar. For 
example, in the Netherlands, carers, instead of just writing a 
couple of lines on a piece of paper kept in the client’s 
residence, were expected to type in information on their smart 
phones before driving to their next appointment. They were 
also expected to update this information as additional care was 
delivered and even track and record health outcomes over 
time. These tasks were viewed as especially egregious since 
not all of their clients were in the pilot study and, therefore, 
they had to employ two different recording systems. Finally, it 
was difficult for the carers to see the value in this extra effort, 
because the benefits of better and more coordinated care were 
in the future, whereas the extra work had to be done every 
day.   
 
D.    Limited Generalizability 
 
These three reasons appeared, prior to the Barcelona 
presentation, to explain the lack of acceptance of the HCIS in 
the care organizations, but there was still a serious unresolved 
issue: other than somewhat similar reasons for the lack of 
acceptance of another electronic health care records system in 
Germany [16], there were no other examples in which these 
particular reasons for the lack of acceptance of innovative 
health care technologies. This was disturbing enough, but 
when combined with the fact that the HCIS actually worked as 
envisioned, the records contained in it were readily shared, 
there was documentation that appropriate care based on the 
records was delivered and the system had been largely 
developed based upon input from the carers using the system, 
the three explanations just appeared insufficient to explain the 
consistent pattern of non-acceptance. And the pattern was 
eerily consistent. Within four months at each of the 
organizations the information the carers entered was 
increasingly uninformative and by the end of the pilots a 
majority of the carers at each of the seven locations had 
stopped using the HCIS altogether. There just had to be a 
better explanation for this lack of acceptance than that the 
pilot study model was limiting or that the carers were worried 
about their supervisors using the information contained in the 
HCIS to evaluate their work. As it turned out, there was; it just 
took the question about change management to elicit it.    
V.   CHANGE MANAGEMENT 
An examination of the field of change management 
quickly provided an answer to the apparently simple question 
asked in Barcelona: the findings from the seven pilot studies 
were an example of the process of change management. The 
introduction of the HCIS required fundamental changes in the 
way that the seven organizations structured their business and 
care models. This did not take place with the result being a 
lack of acceptance on the part of the end-users which led to 
the non-adoption of the product. However, to fully understand 
this process, a reanalysis of the findings using the tenets of 
change management was necessary. This reanalysis not only 
brought into focus the inadequacy of the previous 
explanations, but, more importantly, highlighted a series of 
challenges facing the rapid and smooth introduction of new 
innovative technologies into existing health care systems. 
 
A. Key Features of Change Management  
This is not the forum for a detailed discussion of the field 
of change management, but several key elements of the 
approach must be briefly outlined before the reanalysis of the 
findings from the seven pilot studies can proceed. The main 
problem with providing such a summary is that change 
management is not a theory, but instead an approach or a 
process that is used in almost any type of business 
environment to manage almost any form of change, from the 
development of a new product, the introduction of a new 
technology, to the reorganization of a company’s management 
team and everything in-between. There appear to be as many 
definitions as there are practitioners, consultants and gurus, 
selling, 
lecturing 
about 
and 
implementing 
change 
management. Any number of certificate programs are offered 
by any number of entities (companies, associations, 
universities) and an ever increasing number of books and 
journals devoted to specialized types of change management 
within the business community—IT, Human Resources, 
supply chain—which are easily available. Thus, change 
management can be almost anything making a single coherent 
definition difficult. 
However, there are some common features upon which 
almost all practitioners agree. First, the field of change 
management can be traced to the 1962 publication of Diffusion 
of Innovation by Everett Rogers [17] in which he divided 
people into four categories: early adopters; early majority; late 
majority; and laggards to illustrate the way change flows 
through organizations. Rogers’ work proved so influential that 
by the 1980’s and 1990’s the field was expanding 
exponentially as businesses and organizations faced the need 
to incorporate new technologies. It was during this period that 
a series of “principles” of change management were 
developed by different practitioners, usually consulting firms 
which offered to guide organizations through the process of 
142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

change management, for a price. The number of principles, as 
well as the emphasis given different principles, varied, but, 
most of the lists stressed that successful change management 
is about people and thus, success came when the focus is 
placed on the human side of the equation, not the 
technological side. 
Although difficult, given the large number of approaches 
available, it was necessary to select a single approach to guide 
the reanalysis of the lack of acceptance of the HCIS in the 
seven care organizations. The selection of this particular 
approach was based on the combination of the degree of 
recognition within the field and suitability to the reanalysis 
[18]. As in most of the approaches, the authors provide a list 
of principles, but equally important, they emphasize that long-
term 
structural 
transformation 
is 
based 
upon 
four 
characteristics: scale; magnitude; duration; and strategic 
importance, without which change will not be successful. It 
was the insight gained from applying these characteristics, 
along with the ten principles the authors put forward, to the 
findings from the seven care organizations which allowed for 
a much more robust understanding of why the HCIS failed to 
be adopted.  
 
B. The Characteristics 
This and the next sub-section read as a litany of mistakes, 
mistakes that now appear obvious and avoidable, but at the 
time of the studies, were hidden by day-to-day challenges of 
modifying the HCIS, incorporating it into the existing care 
model and handling technological glitches. The first mistake 
concerns scale—the need for the change to impact all or most 
of the organization. As discussed in Section IV, the pilot study 
model was set up deliberately to restrict the HCIS to a small 
portion of the organization’s care providers. This was the case 
in all seven of the pilot studies and was really the fundamental 
mistake made and repeated over and over again, since 
technological innovation that is limited to a small portion of 
the organization cannot be successful [14]. Therefore, it was 
not the pilot study model per se that was one of the reasons for 
the HCIS’s lack of acceptance, but instead its use by only a 
small percentage of the care providers within the organizations 
that doomed it to failure. 
Likewise, from the very first pilot study the issue of 
magnitude—a significant alteration in the status quo—was 
ignored. In many ways, the seven studies were set up to 
maintain, rather than alter the status quo. First, the small 
number of carers who were using the HCIS were isolated from 
their peers within the organization and little, if any, 
information, other than complaints, flowed from the carers in 
the pilots to carers who were not. Second, the pilot studies 
were viewed by top management all the way down to the end-
users as tests of a new technology, not as a restructuring of the 
way people did their jobs. If anything, since the carers 
participating continued to provide care in the “normal” 
manner to clients who were not in the pilot studies, even their 
status quo was not truly altered. 
The negative consequence of maintaining the status quo 
was compounded by the time limits set on the pilot studies 
because changes in long term transformations must last 
months if not years in order for the changes to be sustainable 
[14]. Everyone knew at each of the studies how long they 
would last. On day one, the carers who were employing the 
HCIS knew that on a certain date they would quit using it as 
the pilot study would be over. There were no plans to continue 
the use of the new system beyond the end date and thus, no 
understanding of the importance of duration in the success of 
incorporating a new technology into the organization. 
In retrospect, the management of the seven care 
organizations was telegraphing a lack of strategic importance 
of the HCIS—the fourth characteristic—by the absence of 
commitment to the key characteristics of successful change. 
The scale of implementation was in all cases small; there was 
no plan to change the way that the care providers did their job 
and the duration was short with the endpoint always known. 
The question is why if the management of the care 
organizations was serious in its desire to introduce the 
electronic records system, did it not take steps that ensured its 
successful adoption?    
 
C. The Ten Principles 
The answer to this question is complex, but much insight 
into what went wrong can be gained by comparing the process 
undertaken in the pilot studies to the ten principles of change 
management outlined by Jones [18]. A detailed consideration 
of each of the ten principles in each of the seven pilot studies 
is beyond the scope of this paper. Therefore, in order to make 
the main points without the material being overwhelming and 
redundant, the seven pilot studies have been collapsed into one 
composite study. This collapsing is justified because, even 
though the location and care delivery model varied from one 
location to another, structurally the pilot studies were very 
similar: the same behavioral monitoring system; one of the 
several iterations of the HCIS; elderly at-risk clients; and the 
delivery of care in the clients’ residences.  
Principle 1—“Address the human side” is important 
because the change will involve people doing their jobs 
differently after the introduction of the new technology. This 
principle was completely ignored in the pilot studies because 
they were viewed as a test of a new technology without any 
consideration of how the use of this technology would impact 
people at all levels in the organization. Only when the issue of 
the material contained in the HCIS being used in the job 
evaluation of the carers was there any discussion of the change 
in the way people did their jobs and this was solved by 
deciding, both in the United States and the Netherlands, that 
the material would not be used and nothing would change. 
Principle 2—“Get buy-in at the top” for the adoption of 
the new technology appears to have been followed in the pilot 
studies. Top management and even members of the Board of 
Directors were champions of the introduction of the new 
technology, but the problem came from a lack of follow-
through. How top management viewed the pilots and what 
143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

they wanted to gain professionally from the studies has been 
discussed previously [11] but briefly, the managers were more 
desirous of personal and professional gain than transforming 
the way care records could be used to provide improved care. 
This disconnect between the goals at the top and the work at 
the level of care provision, turned out to be one of the biggest 
hurdles to the effective use of the HCIS. 
Principle 3—“Involve essential personnel” was ignored at 
all levels and there was lack of leadership during the pilots. 
No champions were identified and given leadership roles 
within the implementation. Several champions at the level of 
care provision emerged during the pilots, but they were not 
encouraged to play a leadership role and suggestions to 
compensate these champions were routinely rejected. Perhaps 
most devastating was that supervisors, who were responsible 
for assigning clients to particular carers and supervising the 
performance of the carers, played only marginal, if any, role in 
the roll out of the technology. Even when several supervisors 
tried to become involved in the pilot, their efforts were 
rejected and their suggestions ignored. The result was that 
these supervisors were the most negative of all employees 
toward the introduction of the technology. 
Principle four—No “formal vision statement” was issued 
during any of the pilots. Instead of explaining why there was a 
need to adopt the new technology and spelling out in detail the 
corporate goals associated with its adoption, the managers left 
employees to figure out for themselves why they needed to 
change what they were doing and how the technology fit with 
the vision of the organization’s future. The result was no 
common vision and no real reason for anyone to buy into the 
changes necessitated by the introduction of the technology, 
and certainly no Principle five—“feeling of ownership” over 
the process developed. No one accepted responsibility and, as 
a result, no one stepped in when things went wrong. 
Management blamed the carers for not taking the pilots 
seriously, carers blamed the managers for making them do 
more and different work without any justification of 
compensation, the IT department believed that they had not 
been sufficiently involved in the planning of the pilot and the 
supervisors just blamed everyone for the disruption in 
scheduling.  
Principle six—“Communicate the message” was violated 
primarily because no one took ownership of the process. 
Management’s only message was, “test this technology”. It 
was pretty much left up to the end-users to figure out how to 
use the technology in care provision and it was their 
responsibility to fix any problems that emerged as the pilot 
study proceeded. There were no channels of communication 
created by which information could flow to upper 
management primarily because upper management did not 
want to know about any problems that could interfere with 
their claims of being at the cutting edge in the use of 
technology in care provision. If any message was sent, it was 
that no one was taking the pilot studies seriously. 
Principle seven—“Assess the cultural landscape” was 
neglected because of the lack of seriousness conveyed by 
upper management. In a perverse way, the pilot studies 
actually assessed the culture and peoples’ behavior at each 
level of the organization by documenting the overall lack of 
desire on the part of almost everyone in the organization to 
change how they did their jobs. People were happy doing what 
they were doing because they firmly believed that the existing 
care model worked, so why change. Since there was no clear 
message about the need to change from upper management, 
there was no reason for people to alter their behavior and 
change the culture of contented status quo. As a result, since 
there was no effort to assess the culture, there was no attempt 
during the pilot studies to follow Principle eight—“address 
the culture explicitly” in order to bring about the effective 
integration of the technology into the existing care model. 
Even when it was clear that carers were not using the HCIS, 
no one in management did anything about it. Instead of 
explicitly building a new culture that would have encouraged 
carers to make a greater effort to use the new technology, 
managers and supervisors allowed the existing culture to 
continue with the result that, over time, there was no incentive 
for anyone to change her/his behavior. 
Principle nine—Given that upper management took no 
action when the carers stopped using the HCIS illustrates the 
degree to which individuals at all levels did not “Prepare for 
the unexpected”. There were no contingency plans, no 
committees, no individual administrator or carer who was 
responsible to deal with the unexpected. Everything was ad 
hoc and problems were not addressed until someone—a carer, 
a client, a family member of a client—made a fuss. Then 
someone took an action. The problem was that it was arbitrary 
who that person was and the action taken, even if effective, 
was never institutionalized so that it could be used when a 
similar or different problem arose. As a result, it was the 
problems that became institutionalized and over time these 
problems were used as a justification for discontinuing the use 
of the HCIS. 
Principle ten—“Speak to all individuals involved” was 
perhaps the most neglected of all the principles. Since no one 
wanted to admit that there were problems, no one spoke about 
these problems. The concept of having a well thought out 
system of rewards for carers who used the system was 
rejected, even though such an idea was continually suggested 
by the systems developers. Even when carers just stopped 
using the system, no one spoke to them to either encourage 
resumption or to determine why the individual had stopped 
using the system. The lack of concern reinforces the 
conclusion that there was a complete absence of a strategic 
plan for the incorporation of the HCIS into the care delivery 
model. 
 
VI.  DISCUSSION 
The last of the pilot studies ended December 31, 2012 and 
currently the HCIS is not being used within any care 
organization. Thus, it is fair to conclude that the HCIS is a 
failure, even though it was used for over eight years to create 
and share information on the care of hundreds of at-risk older 
people. In the end there was a lack of acceptance on the part of 
144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the very end-users who designed the system. This is an 
irrefutable fact, but the reasons for the lack of acceptance are 
not so clear cut. Two different explanations have been offered 
for this result: one based on conclusions drawn exclusively 
from the evidence generated by questionnaires and interviews; 
and the second, although based on the same evidence, using 
the tenets of change management. Neither is wrong, per se; 
rather it is the difference in the ability to generalize the 
findings 
beyond 
these 
particular 
pilot 
studies 
that 
differentiates them. The first explanation is idiosyncratic and 
can only be compared with other studies using a pilot study 
model, while the second can be compared with any number of 
examples of how the process of change management can be 
used to understand the introduction of new technologies in a 
variety of industries.  
It is clear that the seven pilot studies, to one degree or 
another violated each of the ten principles outlined in the 
previous section. It now appears to have been completely 
foolhardy to believe that at the end of the pilot study the HCIS 
would be adopted and incorporated into the existing care 
delivery model, simply because the HCIS required a new care 
delivery model to have been created. This new technology, if 
adopted, required a new way of organizing the delivery of 
care, necessitating a dramatic change in the way carers, 
supervisors and upper management did their jobs. In order to 
bring about such dramatic change, the leaders in the care 
organizations needed to develop a coherent strategic plan that 
addressed the challenges that this disruptive process put in 
front of them.  In retrospect, the administrators at the 
organizations either needed to apply the tenets of change 
management themselves to this process or to have hired a 
consulting firm to direct the process. However, these options 
were never seriously considered simply because the pilots 
were viewed as “tests of a new technology”. The belief was 
that if the technology worked, then it would just be seamlessly 
incorporated into the care delivery model. There was no 
recognition that this incorporation either could change the way 
people did their jobs or that people would just stop using the 
technology. 
As it turned out, the fact that the end-users played a major 
role in the design of the HCIS was of little consequence to the 
final outcome. This inclusion of the end-users was just a 
furthering of the belief that the pilots were a test of the 
technology. The belief was that if the carers designed the 
technology, they would be more likely to use the technology 
in their work. Thus, the carers in the various pilot studies were 
encouraged to design the system, but once the technology 
changed how they did their jobs and no inclusive strategic 
plan that explained the long term goal of the introduction was 
produced, they stopped using the system. The original 
idiosyncratic explanations for the lack of acceptance of the 
HCIS were not wrong, but instead they were symptoms of the 
much larger issues captured by applying the tenets of change 
management to the process. The carers’ worry about how the 
information contained in the HCIS could be used to evaluate 
their job performance was a real concern and the lack of 
response to these concerns illustrates that it was impossible for 
the pilot studies to have led to adoption of the HCIS: the 
complexity of the process was just underestimated by 
everyone involved.   
 
VII.   CONCLUSION 
 
Several findings are apparent from the material presented 
above, some of which are specific to the pilot studies, while 
others are of a more general and important nature. Of the 
former, two are the most obvious: 1) it is possible to create an 
ehealth data system for home care and that such a system can 
be used effectively to coordinate care and services and 
contribute to the maintenance of independent living; and 2) the 
success of such a system is dependent on issues that do not 
concern design and functionality, but instead on its acceptance 
by the people employing the system. Even when much of the 
system’s design was driven by these users, there was a lack of 
acceptance on the part of these very same people. Three 
reasons were put forward as the main factors for this lack of 
acceptance: the potential use of information in the system for 
the evaluation of job performance; the pilot study model; and 
the unwillingness of the carers to alter their normal routine. 
However, these reasons were unsatisfactory because of their 
lack of generalizability. In place of these idiosyncratic 
reasons, an analysis based upon the tenets of change 
management was offered which led to a second set of 
outcomes which prove to be much more important to 
understanding, not only the lack of acceptance of the HCIS, 
but of more fundamental  challenges facing the introduction of 
new technologies. 
The most important finding from this analysis was that 
there is no such thing as a test of technology in the real world. 
Tests of technology take place in the laboratory where 
conditions can be controlled, not in the world in which people 
have to provide care on a daily basis to at-risk elderly. In the 
real world what is being tested is the organization’s 
willingness to change the way things are done so that the new 
technology will be used. The fact that the HCIS worked as 
designed and, thanks to the improvements made at the behest 
of the care providers, worked much better at the end of the 
eight years during which it was used, supports the view that 
tests of technology can only occur in the lab. It was not the 
technology that resulted in the lack of acceptance, but the fact 
that the carers did not want to change the way they did their 
jobs and there was no plan to alter the status quo. There is no 
reason to review the mistakes that were made from a change 
management perspective to conclude that there was no chance 
that the HCIS would be adopted while everyone involved 
believed that the only thing being tested was the technology. 
At an even more general level, two additional conclusions 
can be derived from the findings. First, it can be argued that 
new ehealth technologies, such as the HCIS, will only become 
widely adopted when the traditional care models are unable to 
meet the needs of the burgeoning elderly population. Basically 
it comes down to the argument—if it’s not broken why change 
it. The slow pace of the adoption of electronic medical records 
in hospitals and physician practices in the United States, even 
with government mandates and financial inducements from 
145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

insurance companies, supports this simplistic argument. There 
will be a point at which the demographics overwhelm the 
ability of the current care models to provide for the huge 
number of elderly individuals who will need an ever 
increasing amount of services in the home and it will only be 
at that point that the new technologies will be adopted. 
Second, when this time comes, not all organizations will 
be able to make the adjustments necessary to effectively adopt 
the new technologies. The internal inertia at many 
organizations will be so great that changing the basic work 
routines will just not be possible and thus, the only way the 
necessary changes will occur is for new organizations to 
emerge. This has been the history of technological change; 
new companies that embrace new technologies emerge and 
leap frog over the companies that refuse to undergo the 
necessary transformations. To think that this same process will 
not occur in the field of health care, in general, and home 
health care, in particular, is naïve. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Glascock, “If they designed it, why don’t they want it? The 
lack of acceptance of an ehealth data records system,” 
Proceedings of eTELEMED 2014, L. Van Gemert-Pijnen, H. C. 
Ossebaard, Eds, 2014, pp. 116-122. 
[2] B. Shilling, “The federal government has put billions into 
promoting electronic health record use: How is it going?,” 
www.commonwealtfund.org, retrieved October, 2014. 
[3] B. Kaplan and K. Harris-Salamone, “Health IT success and 
failure: recommendations for literature and an AMIA 
workshop,” JAMIA, vol 16, no. 3, pp. 291-299, 2009. 
[4] K. Ashish, C. DesRoches, E. Campbell, K. Doneian, S. Rao, and 
T. Ferris, “Use of electronic health records in U.S. hospitals,” 
NEJM, vol. 360, pp. 1628-1638, 2009. 
[5] D. Ludwick and J. Doucette, “Adopting electronic medical 
records in primary care: Lessons learned from health 
information systems implementation experience in seven 
countries,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78, 
pp. 22-31, 2009. 
[6] National Association for Home Care & Hospice, “Basic 
statistics about home care updated 2010,” http://www.nahc.org, 
retrieved October, 2014. 
[7] P. Esmaeilzadeh, M. Sambasivan and N. Kumar, “The 
challenges and issues regarding e-health and health information 
technology trends in the healthcare sector,” in E-business 
Technology and Strategy, M. Zaman, Y. Liang, S. Siddiqui, T. 
Wang , V. Liu and C. Lu,  Eds, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2010, 
pp. 23-37. 
[8] N. Zakaria, S. Affendi and N. Zakaria, “Managing ICT in 
healthcare organization: culture, challenges, and issues of 
technology adoption and implementation,” in Handbook of 
Research on Advances in Health Informatics and Electronic 
Healthcare Applications: Global Adoption and Impact of 
Information Communication Technologies, Y. Dwivedi, K. 
Khoumbati, B. Lal and A. Srivastava, Eds., Hershey, PA: IGI 
Publishing, 2010, pp. 153-168. 
[9] Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, “Health information 
technology in the United States: Progress and challenges ahead, 
2014,” http://www.rwjf.org/en/research-publications/find-rwjf-
research/2014/08/health-information-technology-in-the-united-
states.html, retrieved November, 2014. 
[10] Altarum Institute, “Overcoming challenges to health IT adoption 
in small rural hospitals,” http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/ 
files/pdf/OvercomingChallenges_in_SmallRuralHospitals.pdf,  
retrieved November, 2014. 
[11] A. Glascock, “A conflicted view of telehomecare after a 20 year 
journey,”  Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2012. 
[12] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “A care informatics approach to 
telehomecare applications,” in The Handbook of Research on IT 
Management and Clinical Data Administration in Healthcare, A. 
Dwivedi, Ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2009, pp. 368-382. 
[13] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “The impact of behavioral 
monitoring technology on the provision of health care in the 
home,” JUCS, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 59-79, 2006. 
[14] D. Kutzik and A. Glascock, “An Evidentiary Report of 
QuietCare®: Selfhelp Community Services,” unpublished. 
[15] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. van der Heide, A. Glascock, 
D. Kutzik, L. de Witte, and J. Rietman, “Activity monitoring to 
support independent living in Dutch homecare support,” in 
Everyday Technology for Independence and Care, G. 
Gelderblom, M. Soede, L. Adriaens, and K. Miesenberger, Eds., 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 145-151. 
[16] M. Schapranow, “Personal communication,” during the Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine, Nice, France, February 2013. 
[17] E. Rogers, “Diffusion of innovations,” New York: Free Press, 
2003. 
[18] J. Jones, D. Aguirre, and M. Calderone, “10 principles of change 
management,” Strategy + Business, Booz Allen Hamilton Inc., 
pp. 1-4, 2004. 
 
146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

