Analysing the Use of a Telestroke Service 
 
 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for Telemedicine, 
University hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
 
Terje Solvoll 
Norwegian Centre for Telemedicine,  
University hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway 
terje.solvoll@telemed.no 
 
Ellen Rygh 
Norwegian Centre for Telemedicine,  
University hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway 
ellen.rygh@telemed.no 
Tove Sørensen 
Norwegian Centre for Telemedicine,  
University hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway 
tove.sorensen@telemed.no 
 
 
Abstract—Telestroke can facilitate remote cerebrovascular 
specialty consults from virtually any location within minutes of 
attempted contact, adding greater expertise to the care 
provided to any individual patient. In 2010, a Telestroke 
service was established between the three hospitals that 
constitute the Nordland Hospital in Northern Norway. The 
Telestroke service connected the neurological department at 
the central hospital with two small, local hospitals. The aim of 
our study was to implement a Telestroke service and explore if 
the benefits reported internationally could be achieved in the 
North Norwegian healthcare context. The study presented 
herein was based on Telestroke log data, field observations, 
semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions with 
the health personnel involved. After more than two years of 
operation, 
Telestroke 
consultations 
were 
described 
as 
successful. However, the frequency of use was much lower than 
the estimate before implementation, and the Telestroke service 
was terminated with the project conclusion. In this article, we 
ask why the service was terminated, and focus on the 
significance of the local context when establishing telemedicine 
services. 
Keywords- Telestroke; video-teleconferencing; consultation; 
cerebral stroke; local hospitals; local context 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The volcano ash incident in Iceland in April 2010, gave a 
reminder of how vulnerable the health services are in 
Norway without air transport. In May 2010, Northern 
Norway Regional Health Authority, decided to establish a 
telemedicine service for diagnosis and treatment of cerebral 
stroke patients in the Nordland Hospital (NLSH). A 
Telestroke service was implemented by connecting the two 
local hospitals, NLSH Vesterålen and NLSH Lofoten, to the 
Neurology department at the central hospital NLSH Bodø 
[1]. A pre-study estimate, based on the average frequency of 
stroke incidents in Norway and the number of inhabitants in 
the actual area, indicated that the two local hospitals receive 
an average of two patients with stroke symptoms every 
week; NLSH Vesterålen (1.25) and NLSH Lofoten (1.6). As 
the numbers are small, a fully specialized stroke unit with 
stroke specialists physically present day and night, seven 
days a week, is expensive and difficult to staff. Therefore, a 
“VAKe” [2, 3] compatible video-teleconferencing system 
(VTC) was installed in June 2010. After reaching an 
agreement on common procedures, revising and on-site 
training of local health personnel, the Telestroke service was 
operational 
from 
September 
2010. 
It 
was 
utilized 
immediately at one of the local hospitals. At the second local 
hospital the usage was postponed until a specialized stroke 
unit was established, including the employment of a 
specialized stroke nurse and the furnishings of dedicated 
stroke rooms at the second local hospital. 
Telestroke implies that the stroke specialist at the central 
hospital examines the patient in cooperation with the 
physicians and nurses at the local hospital, through VTC 
systems. Radiology images are transmitted using the 
RIS/PACS systems [4]. The recommended procedure was to 
make the Telestroke unit ready for transmission and call the 
central stroke specialist when a patient with stroke symptoms 
arrived, or was notify to arrive at the local hospitals. The on 
duty stroke specialist at the central hospital headed to a room 
dedicated to the Telestroke system. 
For more than two years, the Telestroke service was used 
with success for a few patients with stroke symptoms in 
Northern Norway. However, the numbers were much lower 
than the estimate prior to the implementation of the system, 
and the Telestroke service was terminated with the project 
conclusion. In this paper, we discuss why the system is no 
longer in use, and focus on the significance of the local 
context when establishing Telestroke services. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Cerebral stroke is the third most frequent cause of death 
in Norway, and the most common cause of severe disability 
in adults. The annual incidence is about three per thousand 
inhabitants, where 85-90% is due to ischemic stroke. The 
179
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

average treatment cost of one stroke incident is approx. NOK 
600,000, adding up to a total annual cost of NOK 7.8 billion. 
Timely treatment and rehabilitation can reduce disability 
after stroke, improve quality of life and reduce costs [5, 6]. 
Hospitalization in a specialized stroke unit leads to a 10 % 
absolute reduction in mortality in the acute phase [5]. The 
prognosis for patients with ischemic stroke is further 
improved by thrombolytic treatment in the acute phase. The 
main challenge for optimal cerebral stoke treatment is the 
narrow time window. Thrombolytic treatment should be 
given as soon as possible, and not later than 4.5 hours after 
the first symptoms. The national registry of thrombolytic 
treatment [7] indicates that only 10 % of all stroke patients in 
Norway received such treatment, whereas 20 % is the 
recommended frequency by the Norwegian Health Ministry 
[6]. According to the register, the two local hospitals, in 
average, used thrombolytic treatment for one patient each 
during the four month periods reported in 2010 and 2011.  
For stroke patients, it is crucial to decide on the cerebral 
stroke diagnosis and indication for thrombolytic therapy as 
soon as possible, and no later than 4.5 hours after the first 
symptoms. Telestroke networks are successful in Europe and 
the USA [8, 9]. In the Nordic Countries, a Telestroke 
network between the University Hospital in Helsinki and 
five local hospitals demonstrates increased frequency of 
thrombolytic treatment [10].  
For cardiac stroke patient, pre-hospital stroke treatment 
in ambulances is the established procedure in Norway. In 
Germany, pre-hospital treatment in ambulances has also 
been tried for cerebral stroke patients [11]. The German 
study reports that pre-hospital cerebral stroke treatment in 
specialized 
ambulances 
equipped 
with 
a 
Computed 
Tomography 
(CT), 
point-of-care 
laboratory, 
and 
telemedicine connection reduced the median time from alarm 
to therapy decision substantially [11]. Implementation of 
CT-ambulances and pre-hospital treatment of cerebral stroke 
is discussed in Norway, and particular in Northern Norway 
were dispersed settlement and long travel distances to the 
nearest hospital is part of everyday life. An internal 
assessment from the University Hospital of North Norway 
concludes that the implementation of specialized stroke 
ambulances with existing mobile CT-equipment will not 
improve the emergency care for cerebral stroke patient in the 
northern 
region. 
On 
the 
contrary, 
the 
assessment 
recommends strengthening the procedures with in-hospital 
treatment of cerebral stroke patients in this region. 
Telestroke can be used to guide and support the local 
physician remotely [12-16]. According to Audebert, 2006 
and Audebert and Schwamm, 2009 [12, 13], the organization 
of Telestroke networks requires: 
 
Specialized stroke units in all hospital; 
 
Comprehensive and continuous education and 
training of the entire staff in the units; 
 
Stroke specialists available 24/7 on VTC, combined 
with teleradiology; 
 
Centralized organization of patient transfers. 
The establishment and use of Telestroke network is 
consistent with the Norwegian Health Ministry’s national 
guidelines for treatment and rehabilitation of stroke [6]. 
Telestroke consultations may be useful to decide on the best 
treatment for the patient, whether it is a conservative 
treatment, thrombolytic treatment or a more advanced 
neurological 
or 
neurosurgical 
emergency 
treatment. 
Telestroke is also helpful to support quick triaging and 
transfer to the appropriate unit. Although the decision to give 
thrombolytic treatment is seen as the end-point of the 
Telestroke consultation, this is just the beginning of care for 
the patient [8]. Post-thrombolytic care requires intensive 
cardiovascular and neurological monitoring, neurosurgical 
backup, and decision whether to keep the patient or to “drip-
and-ship”. Tele-consultation may also be useful for follow-
up after the acute phase [8]. 
In Norway, there is limited experience with Telestroke. 
Some hospitals use remote CT images in combination with 
phone advice to support acute stroke treatment at small, local 
hospitals. The single documented service in Norway is 
between Haukeland University Hospital and the local 
hospital in Voss, which reports an increase in thrombolytic 
treatment [17]. Internationally, there is substantial scientific 
evidence of the medical impacts of Telestroke [12, 13, 18-
23]. Several studies of Telestroke solutions including video, 
versus solutions without video, show that VTC may [24, 25]: 
 
Reduce the number of wrong diagnoses: 
7.1 % vs. 17.6 %, p< 0.05; 
 
Reduce death rate: 
1.3 % vs. 6.8 %, p <0.05; 
 
Reduce needs for nursing homes: 
2.6 % vs. 5.4 %, p = 0.58. 
Telestroke networks, where the experienced stroke 
specialists performs an evaluation and examination of the 
patient through a VTC system, and considers the indication 
for initiation of thrombolytic treatment, is comparable with 
face-to-face consultations [16]. In our study, the aim was to 
implement and organize a Telestroke service, and then 
explore whether the same benefits reported internationally 
were possible to obtain in a North Norwegian context.  
In spite of limited experience with Telestroke in Norway, 
the nation has long experience with telemedicine, and 
particular in Northern Norway [26-28]. Unfortunately, in 
Norway as well as internationally, there is also a long track 
record of telemedicine services terminating after the pilot 
project is over [29-30]. The failures do not, in the majority of 
cases, represent technological problems, but rather human 
and organizational factors. Numerous studies show that the 
past failures of technological innovations with respect to 
improving health outcomes have not necessarily been due to 
their 
clinical 
ineffectiveness, 
but 
rather 
to 
social, 
technological 
and 
cultural 
issues 
relating 
to 
their 
implementation and adoption [31-34]. 
Hence, the rationale for this paper is to follow the 
Telestroke service, by studying the social and cultural 
context of the Telestroke service. The context of the health 
services has already proven to be important factors to ensure 
a functional and sustainable telemedicine services in this 
region [40-41]. 
180
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Research settings 
The research was conducted at the three hospitals that 
constitute NLSH, in Nordland County, Norway. NLSH 
serves a geographical area with 131,000 inhabitants, and 
consist of hospitals in the city of Bodø and the archipelagos 
of Vesterålen and Lofoten. While Bodø is located on the 
main land, the district of Vesterålen and Lofoten are made up 
of several islands, see Fig. 1. NLSH Bodø is the largest 
hospital in the county, and acts as the central hospital of 
NLSH [3]. The two local hospitals are situated in a 
geographical area known for its wild and beautiful nature, 
long distances, small communities, a culture based on 
earning a living from the sea and extreme rough weather 
conditions. The intense weather conditions, particularly 
during the winter, often make it difficult, or even impossible, 
to use air transport for severely ill patients. Other types of 
transport from the local hospitals to the central hospital take 
between five to ten hours. 
NLSH Lofoten is placed on the island Vestvågøy, 
Gravdal (see Fig. 1), which is located in the middle of the 
Lofoten Islands. The hospital serves approximately 24,000 
inhabitants, has a surgical and medical emergency unit, and a 
maternity ward. NLSH Vesterålen is placed in the 
community of Stokmarknes (see Fig. 1), covers a 
geographical area with approximately 30,000 inhabitants. 
The hospital has a surgical and medical emergency unit and 
a maternity ward. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Nordland County, Norway. 
In our study the Telestroke service was implemented 
simultaneously at all three hospitals, and was operative from 
September 2010. To ensure user confidentiality we will from 
now on use local hospital A and local hospital B.  
At local hospital A, the Telestroke equipment was placed 
at the intensive care unit (ICU), while the mobile patient 
centered unit was placed in a small room connected to the 
emergency room at local hospital B. 
To make sure that the technology was operational and 
worked flawlessly, to maintain the users’ expertise and to 
educate new users, the implementers, Norwegian Centre for 
Telemedicine (NST), who implemented the service, 
recommended that each hospital tested the Telestroke 
solution regularly, and preferably once a week. The local 
staff agreed to use the system in the initial phase in 
accordance with these recommendations. 
When a potential cerebral stroke patient arrived at one of 
the two local hospitals, a junior physician could be the first 
attending. At both hospitals, the procedure was to conduct a 
CT examination and collect the necessary blood samples as 
soon as possible. As already mention, the equipment was set 
up in the intensive care unit at local hospital A. At this 
hospital the Telestroke system was connected and made 
ready for a potential session by a nurse, while the patient had 
the CT examination. At hospital A the Telestroke service 
was only prepared upon request from a senior physician. 
This setting was different from local hospital B. Where the 
system was located next to the emergency unit and part of 
the nursing procedure was to move the system into position, 
connected it, and made it ready for use as soon the hospital 
was notified about an incoming stroke patient. 
B. Materials 
To implement a Telestroke service VTC equipment must 
be installed, at least one on each site. In this project, we 
decided to supply each of the hospitals with the same type of 
equipment, which reduces possible sources of error and eases 
user-support. Only minor local adjustments were made due 
to room configuration. The VTC equipment consisted of a 
Tandberg Quick set C60 and a Sony full HD (1080p) 
television, mounted on a mobile rack (see Fig. 2). The 
Tandberg Quick set C60 has the possibility to connect with 
medical equipment such as electrocardiography (ECG) 
together with two full HD (1080p) cameras. The system was 
also 
made 
ready 
for 
multipart 
conferences 
for 
communication between more than two locations. The total 
cost of each unit ready for use was approximately NOK 
200,000. 
At the central site, the Telestroke system was installed in 
a dedicated Telestroke studio. The studio had a computer 
equipped with two 24 inch displays; one display is devoted 
to the electronic patient record, and one to the CT images. At 
the two local hospitals, the VTC equipment (see Fig. 2) was 
mounted on mobile racks, enabling the equipment to be used 
in different settings such as treatment, education and 
meetings. The three Telestroke units were connected through 
the Norwegian Health Net (NHN) [35], which is a dedicated, 
secured network for health information, see Fig. 3, and were 
set up to use minimum 2Mbit for this communication. 
181
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2.  Telestroke equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  NLSH Telestroke service. 
C. Methods 
A qualitative, multi-method research approach has been 
used. Our interdisciplinary analytical approach is inspired by 
Science Technology Studies (STS) and Actor Network 
Theory (ANT) [36, 37]. We have followed the technology in 
use, with a particular focus on how Telestroke is used or not 
used in the local context. This approach is suitable to avoid 
both technical and social determinism [38]. Quantitative 
methods with control-groups were considered, but found 
non-ethical. It was also considered to include two similar 
hospitals as control-groups. This was however difficult 
within the empirical context of Northern Norway, and the 
framework of our study. The same counts for cost 
evaluation. As we will show, the numbers in the study are 
small, and not sufficient for cost analyses. The methods used 
were: 
 
Analysis of log data 
 
Field visits including observations and 15 semi- 
structured interviews with involved health personnel 
 
Focus group discussions 
Our multi-method approach did not only capture research 
data, it was also helpful to ensure that the Telestroke system 
worked according to the plan. It revealed needs for follow-up 
actions like additional training and revision of procedures. 
1) Analyzing Telestroke log data: Exploring and 
analysing log data is an adequate approach to gather a broad 
and general understanding of the Telestroke service. The log 
data indicates the year, date, time, length and frequency of 
the video and sound communication between the hospitals. 
Therefore, the study of log data is sufficient to explore the 
frequency and the length of the connections between the 
hospitals. It reveals use, as well as lack of activity or 
absence of Telestroke collaboration. In addition, to visualize 
the actual Telestroke activity, the study of log data is also a 
useful approach to map the number and the length of the 
training sessions, if and how often the hospitals are testing 
the equipment, if the system is used for other purposes, and 
the differences in use between the two local hospitals. 
2) Field visit and semi-structured interviews: About a 
year after implementation, autumn 2011, we visited the 
three hospitals. During the field visits we spent time at the 
hospitals and in the different local communities. In addition 
to observations, the data includes informal conversations 
with health personnel and local inhabitants. Field 
observations were particularly useful to get an in depth 
understanding of the stroke treatment at the three hospitals, 
and to contextualize the Telestroke service in three different 
hospitals settings. It was also helpful to get an 
understanding of the visited area and the population.  
Semi-structured interviews with the involved health 
personnel are a constructive approach for gathering the 
users’ satisfaction and experiences with the Telestroke 
system. During the interviews health personnel reported on 
specific cases where Telestroke has been used or not used. 
For instance, why VTC was used or not, the age of the 
patient, time from onset of symptoms to hospitalization, if 
 
  Norwegian        
   Health Net 
NLSH Bodø 
(Tandberg C60) 
NLSH Lofoten 
(Tandberg C60) 
NLSH Vesterålen 
(Tandberg C60) 
182
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the patient receive thrombolytic treatment or not, etc. The 
method is also sufficient for gathering information about 
health personnel experience with the technology and the 
online collaboration. In addition, semi-structured interviews 
can reveal potential differences between users, for instance 
between the remote neurological experts and the onsite local 
hospital staff. It may also detect technological obstacles or 
organization challenges with the Telestroke service.  
We perfomed a total of fifteen interviews, six were done 
at the central hospital and nine at the local hospitals. The 
health personnel have been interviewed at their workplace; in 
their office, a meeting room, the nurses break room, in the 
corner of a hospital lounge, or in an empty patient room. 
Most interviews have been done individually face-to-face, 
two interviews were in groups, with two and four 
participants, and one by phone. The interviews were 
conducted in Norwegian, recorded and transcribed. The 
quotations used in this paper were translated into English. 
Throughout the study, we also had e-mail and phone 
correspondence with selected health personnel. 
3) Focus group discussions: Focus group discussions 
with participants from all three hospitals was an adequate 
approach to get in contact with the everyday practice of 
cerebral stroke treatment. Similarities, differences and the 
dynamic character of the local practices are often revealed 
in group discussions [39]. Focus group discussions between 
health personnel from different institutions were also 
suitable to expose contextual and organizational aspect of 
the Telestroke service. 
4) Ethical considerations: The study has been approved 
by the North Norwegian Regional Medical Ethics 
committee (REK). We have not studied patients. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The Telestroke service in Northern Norway was in 
operation from September 2010 until April 2013. It was only 
used at one of the two local hospitals, and just for a total of 
four patients with acute cerebral stroke symptoms. After 
more than two years of service, the frequency of Telestroke 
conferences 
was 
considerably 
lower 
than 
expected. 
Telestroke was never integrated in daily practice at the 
hospital and the service was terminated by the end of our 
study. 
Despite low frequency and lack of use, it is worth noting 
that the few conferences that were carried out were reported 
as successful, constructive and valuable. The conference 
quality was characterized as excellent. The video quality was 
good enough to detect pupil contraction and eye movements 
like nystagmus (a rapid, involuntary, oscillatory motion of 
the eyeball). 
During the implementation of Telestroke, the project 
team strongly recommended to use Telestroke for all patients 
with acute cerebral stroke symptoms. Neither of the local 
hospitals followed this advice, but developed local, specific 
and confined Telestroke procedures. Even if the hospitals 
procedures varied, both hospitals limited the use of 
Telestroke for thrombolytic treatment. 
The local staff at the hospital that used Telestroke 
(hospital B) was, in general, more committed to adopt the 
new service than the involved staff at local hospital A. 
However, as demonstrated in the four quotes below, 
physicians from all three hospitals mentioned the potential 
for using the VTC for additional clinical consultations. This 
could be other neurological disease, but also entirely 
different acute or none acute conditions with uncertain 
diagnoses and treatment. 
Informant 1, local hospital:  
 
“Yes, especially in neurology where the examination is 
particularly important. You know, it is subjective what you 
see, and how to interpret what you see. If you could get 
assistance from a neurologist under the examination… very 
useful!” 
Informant 2, local hospital: 
“I would like, say a telestudio that can be used for 
multiply purposes, for instance for interdisciplinary 
discussion about a cancer patient. I am thinking about the 
establishment of teams. ….That would have been excellent. I 
would like an examination and conversation room, where 
you can talk with the patient and demonstrated in a 
telestudio.” 
Informant 3, central hospital: 
“I am very skeptical to telemedicine, so I might not be 
the right person to answer… No, what I would like to use it 
for is; if you look at YouTube on neurology, it is a lot of 
involuntary movements and odd symptoms, which is useful to 
visualize. That is what I would like to use it for. You know; 
strange movements by the arms, or eye movements that are 
different. It could be useful, but it is rare conditions.” 
Informant 4, central hospital: 
“No, I think about different neurological conditions, 
which they (physician at local hospitals) are unsure about 
and need assistance to diagnose without putting the patient 
on a plane and fly him over here. I think about the patient. 
That’s who I am concerned about. How to do stuff out there, 
without flying the patient over here to do the examinations? 
It must be useful for the patient, avoiding the strain and 
particularly for older sick people.” 
A. Hospital A 
During the fall of 2011, at the time we did our field 
studies, a specialized stroke unit with a dedicated stroke 
nurse, a few beds reserved and adapted for cerebral stroke 
patients, was opened. Hospital A had one neurologist, five 
senior physicians, and several junior physicians. The 
neurologist was usually available during weekdays from 
08:00-16:00, while the senior physicians also had second on-
call duties, evenings and weekends. 
The VTC equipment was mounted on a mobile rack to 
enable easy movement and use in different settings, though it 
was usually located in the intensive care unit. The new stroke 
unit, as well as the intensive care unit, was located on the 
third floor of the old hospital building. Narrow corridors, 
lifts and staircases made it impractical, if not impossible, to 
move the Telestroke equipment, for instance, to the 
emergency unit at the ground floor, where patients with 
cerebral stroke symptoms arrived. The laboratory and the CT 
183
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

were also located at the ground floor. Due to room 
configuration, the Telestroke equipment could not be placed 
in the emergency unit. In order to use Telestroke, the patients 
had to be moved from the emergency unit or CT room at the 
ground floor, to the third floor and the intensive care unit. 
The placing of the equipment and the room outline in the old 
hospital building were described as impractical and time 
consuming for the use of Telestroke. 
All the senior physicians were middle-aged men, who 
had been working at the hospital for several years. They had 
broad experience with treatment of cerebral stroke, and most 
weekdays’ also access to local neurologist expertise. Patients 
with stroke symptoms were usually met by a junior physician 
in the emergency unit. In the cases where thrombolytic 
treatment was considered, the junior physicians’ routine was 
to always consult a senior physician prior to initiating 
thrombolytic treatment or seeking remote cerebrovascular 
guidance. Remote assistance and using Telestroke were only 
considered in cases where the local team was uncertain about 
the best treatment for the patients. 
When Telestroke was implemented, remote expertise 
from senior neurologists were available on weekdays, 
between 08:00-19:00. The Telestroke service was later 
expanded to include evening, nights and weekends. During 
this period, the Telestroke service could be staffed by a 
junior neurologist, while a senior neurologist was the second 
on call. Limited “opening hours”, or access to a senior 
neurologist only weekdays and daytime, was a recurrent 
issue during the interviews. Due to these limitations most of 
the senior physicians were hesitant and doubtful about the 
benefits of the Telestroke service. In general, they 
emphasized that they had local access to equivalent stroke 
competence that Telestroke could offer from a distance. 
At local hospital A, the use of Telestroke was limited to; 
the intensive care unit; thrombolytic treatment; senior 
physicians; nights and weekends. The Telestroke service was 
never used at the hospital. 
B. Hospital B 
While a specialized stroke unit was newly established at 
hospital A, such a unit had been in operation for several 
years at local hospital B. This hospital had trained stroke 
nurses, two rooms reserved and adjusted for cerebral stroke 
patients, and a rehabilitation unit for patients and relatives. 
The hospital had four senior physicians and several junior 
physicians, but no neurologist. Parts of the hospital buildings 
were modernized recently, although the major parts were old 
and not optimal for the work that was carried out. For 
instance, the emergency unit, which was the first stop for the 
patients, was located on the second floor. This was close to 
the stroke unit, still, on a different floor, and in a different 
part of the hospital than the CT and the laboratory. 
Initially, the mobile Telestroke equipment was placed in 
a small room connected to the emergency unit. Part of the 
local stoke procedure was to connect the Telestroke system, 
and make it ready for all patients reported to arrive at the 
hospital with possible cerebral stroke symptoms. This was 
done by a nurse. The Telestroke equipment was later moved 
from the emergency room to a storage facility. The argument 
was not to occupy space in the emergency unit, as well as to 
enable alternative usage of the VTC equipment. 
The stroke procedure at local hospital B was to use 
Telestroke to consult a neurologist at the central hospital in 
all cases where thrombolytic treatment was considered. 
Telestroke was used four times at the hospital. Prior to 
Telestroke, the hospitals procedure was to call the central 
hospital for thrombolytic assistance. Hence, Telestroke 
replaced the phone as a collaboration tool in cases of 
thrombolytic treatment. Telestroke, as a substitute for 
ordinary phone calls, was used on four out of five patients, 
where the one exception was referred to as a mistake. The 
hospital did not report delays in thrombolytic treatment when 
using Telestroke. On the contrary, and as the next quote 
illustrates, involved health personnel described Telestroke as 
superior to telephones.  
Informant 5, central hospital:  
“I think it (Telestroke) was useful because I could talk 
directly to the patient, which made it easier to assess the 
aphasia, and also to consider other parameters. He had 
some additional symptoms, which actually made us decide 
not to give thrombolytic treatment.” 
Telestroke can be considered a success at local hospital 
B. To illustrate the diverse outcome and the clinical value of 
the service, we have included three cases of use. 
 
A patient arrived at the local hospital with a 
diagnosis of possible cerebral stroke. After using the 
Telestroke service, this diagnose was dismissed and 
changed. No thrombolytic treatment was given, and 
the patient was discharged from the local hospital 
two days later. 
 
A patient with a heart transplant arrived with 
cerebral stroke symptoms. After using the Telestroke 
service, the patient was diagnosed with a possible 
severe rejection of the transplant. The patient was 
transferred by air ambulance directly to a specialized 
hospital in Oslo. No thrombolytic treatment was 
given. 
 
A patient with a possible cerebral stroke diagnosis 
and history of cerebral stroke. The patient had 
successfully received thrombolytic treatment one 
and a half year earlier. After using the Telestroke 
service, the patient received thrombolytic treatment 
successfully. 
However, despite clinical value and positive experience 
at local hospital B, the frequency of use was considerably 
lower than expected. From September 2010 - April 2013, the 
service was only used four times. Throughout the project 
period, health personnel from all three hospitals were 
concerned about how limited use could lead to ambiguity 
and hesitations on how to operate the Telestroke equipment, 
and how this could be a threat to the long term success of the 
Telestroke service. After approximately two and a half years 
of service, this concern became reality. The initial 
enthusiasm and optimism for Telestroke had faded, and the 
central hospital could no longer justify spending resources on 
training and education. Consequential, on one occasion when 
local hospital B tried to use the Telestroke service, a remote 
184
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

stroke specialist was no longer available. The Telestroke 
service in Northern Norway was closed down soon after. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The three cases of remote stroke collaboration illustrate 
how a Telestroke service can be useful for diagnosis and 
treatment of patients with acute cerebral stroke symptoms in 
Northern Norway. At one of the local hospitals, Telestroke 
was used for all patients where thrombolytic treatment was 
considered, except for one. Telestroke became a replacement 
for phone consultations regarding thrombolytic treatment 
and was described as constructive, valuable and superior by 
central stroke specialists and local health personnel. This 
corresponds with international studies published by 
Handschu, R. et al. and Meyer, B.C. et al. [24, 25]. 
The interview data shows that health personnel, in 
general, were positive to the use of telecommunication 
services. Nonetheless, in spite of affirmative attitudes and 
positive feedback, the frequency of use was considerably 
lower than expected, and the Telestroke service in Northern 
Norway was only used at one of the local hospitals.  
Limited or lack of use raises interesting questions. In the 
following, we will focus on the local context of the 
Telestroke service, and start by discussing how we can 
understand the limited use in Northern Norway. Few or none 
studies were found on the significance of the local context 
when implementing Telestroke. This is unfortunate since the 
context is known to be significant to other telemedicine 
services in the region, geographical, contextual and 
organizational environment have proven to be of significance 
when implementing telemedicine services in the Northern 
Norwegian region [40, 41].  
A Telestroke service in Northern Norway might face 
challenges that are not reported internationally. Northern 
Norway, as most parts of Norway, has dispersed settlement, 
small communities, and relative small hospitals. The 
numbers of acute stroke incidences in each hospital are low. 
Long distances and extreme weather conditions, particularly 
during winter time, might add time to the patients hospital 
transportation. Clinicians in the region have high turnover, 
and technical support is not available 24/7. 
Successful, but limited use of Telestroke questions the 
estimated number of potential stroke patients in the region. 
Was this estimate too high? Local hospital B reported 
approximately 40 patients with an acute cerebral stoke 
diagnosis during a 12 month period, from March 2011 to 
March 2012 (also reported in Nilsen and Solvoll, 2012 [42]). 
Since our data identified the number of stroke diagnosis, and 
not the total number of patients that arrived at the local 
hospital with acute cerebral stroke symptoms, it is difficult to 
determine whether the initial estimate was too high. On the 
other hand, interviews with local health personnel confirm a 
weekly average of one patient with stroke symptoms at the 
local hospitals. Given that Telestroke was used for almost all 
patients assessed for thrombolytic treatment at one of the 
hospitals, limited use might consequently address the low 
frequency of thrombolytic treatment at the hospital, rather 
than the actual number of stroke patients in the region. 
The main ambition for initiating a Telestroke service in 
Northern Norway was to improve the stroke treatment and to 
increase the thrombolytic frequency in the region. This was 
probably also a key motivation for the Northern regional 
health authorities funding of this project (HST-1019-11) 
[43]. 
The 
Norwegian 
health 
ministry 
recommends 
thrombolytic treatment for at least 20 % of all stroke patients 
[6]. These guidelines specify that treatment must be given as 
soon as possible, and within 4.5 hours of the debut of the 
stroke symptoms [6]. However, the Norwegian Registry on 
thrombolytic treatment (2012) indicates a national average of 
10 % [7], and even lower in Northern Norway. 
We asked the local physicians if the thrombolytic 
frequency could be increased in line with the health authority 
recommendations. A senior physician, informant 2, at one of 
the local hospitals answered: “It can be increased to a 
certain extent, but it’s not… We can do something with our 
procedures internally, but what’s more important, or as 
important, is to catch the public’s awareness about cerebral 
stroke symptoms’. Similar to what has been done with 
cardiac stroke, where most people know how important it is 
to get there (to the hospital) quickly.” 
Lack of stroke awareness in the population and late 
incoming patients were highlighted as the main reason for 
the low thrombolytic frequency at both local hospitals. A 
rather relaxed attitude towards health and illness might not 
only be common, but even essential to live in an area where 
health care services traditionally have not been easily 
accessible. The two local hospitals are located in a region 
built on a cultural heritage of earning a living from the sea, 
known for its remoteness, its closeness to nature and the 
inhabitants pride in making-do and getting-on. This is a place 
where it is common to “sleep on it”, which means to wait 
until the morning and see if the situation improves. 
Contextual aspects like; cultural heritage, closeness to 
nature, long distances and extreme weather conditions are of 
significance for how fast stroke patient and their next of kin 
seek professional health care.  
Telestroke was only used to verify thrombolytic 
treatment. Only a small amount of the stroke patients in the 
region arrived at the local hospitals within the time frame for 
thrombolytic treatment. Consequently, the local context was 
not only of significance for the thrombolytic frequency in the 
region, it was also crucial for the use of the Telestroke 
service. In fact, it seems like the strong link between 
thrombolytic treatment and Telestroke was fatal to the long 
term success of the Telestroke service in Northern Norway. 
The low frequency of thrombolytic treatment did not only 
affect the usage of Telestroke at the local hospitals, it also 
had consequences for the central hospitals’ attitude towards 
Telestroke. After more than two years of service, the total 
number of Telestroke conferences was still only four. Due to 
low usage, the central hospital could not justify spending 
resources on education and training of new personnel, and 
the Telestroke service in Northern Norway was closed down 
by the end of our study. 
Local hospital A was a bit larger than hospital B. The 
hospital had one neurologist and five senior physicians who 
had been working at the hospital for several years. 
185
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Consequently, these physicians knew the hospital, each 
other, the stroke procedures, the population, and the region 
well. In addition, most of them questioned the added value of 
the Telestroke service. That is why, lack of use at local 
hospital A can be interpreted as an expression for the senior 
physicians’ confidence in their own expertise, and the quality 
of the stroke treatment at the hospital.  
The hospitals’ room configurations and the location of 
the equipment, the newly established stroke unit and clinical 
practice, were additional aspects that reflected the lack of 
use.  
The air ambulance service in Northern Norway might 
also have influenced the use of Telestroke. A well-
functioning air ambulance service was described as essential 
for the safety of the population in small rural communities in 
Northern Norway. Air Ambulances was not exclusive for 
cerebral stroke patient, it included all emergency patients. 
Some of the senior physicians were concerned that remote 
support from medical expertise, like Telestroke, could 
jeopardize rather than expand the ambulance service. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim of our study was to implement and organize a 
Telestroke service to explore if it was possible to obtain the 
same benefits reported internationally in a North Norwegian 
context. The results show that usage has been limited to one 
of the local hospitals, and only for patients where 
thrombolytic treatment was considered. In total, this was just 
four cases. However, for all four cases, involved personnel at 
the local, as well as the central hospital, reported beneficial 
results for the patient, successful online cooperation for 
involved personnel, and excellent video and sound quality. 
Despite positive feedback, the numbers are small, and we 
cannot demonstrate the same clinical benefits as reported 
internationally. Our main finding in Northern Norway is low 
frequency and lack of use. 
Our study shows that a Telestroke service depends on a 
complex interplay of different contextual and local aspects. 
Lack of stroke awareness in the population, cultural heritage, 
local in-house procedures, the local hospitals current staff 
situation, the senior physicians’ confidence, the air 
ambulance situation, and weather conditions, also influences 
the use of Telestroke.  
When implementing and organizing the Telestroke 
service in Northern Norway, the recommendation was to use 
Telestroke for all patients with stroke symptoms. This 
recommendation is in line with international literature, but 
was not followed. The two local hospitals limited the use of 
Telestroke 
for 
patients 
considered 
for 
thrombolytic 
treatment. It needs to be questioned if this practice might 
have terminated the Telestroke service in Northern Norway.  
The next step of our research is to compare the 
Telestroke service in Northern Norway with a similar service 
in Western Norway. In Western Norway, the local hospital 
use Telestroke for all patients arriving with cerebral stroke 
symptoms [17]. It will also be interesting to compare a 
dedicated service like Telestroke with more general 
telemedicine services, using similar equipment, in small 
local hospitals. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Northern Norway Regional 
Health Authority for funding this research project (HST-
1019-11). Special thanks to Professor Rolf Salvesen and the 
staff at Nordland Hospital. We also want to thank Professor 
Lars Thomassen at the Haukeland University Hospital, for 
inspiration and guidance, and Line Lundvoll Warth at the 
Norwegian centre for telemedicine, for cooperation and 
discussions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Dyb, T. Solvoll, E. Rygh, and T. Sørensen, ”Improved 
Treatment of Cerebral Stroke Patients in Small Hospitals? 
Reporting from a Telestroke Service in North Norway,” in 
eTELEMED 2012, The Fourth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, Valencia, Spain, 
2012, pp. 72-77. 
[2] S. Bolle, F. Larsen, O. Hagen, and M. Gilbert, ”Video 
conferencing versus telephone calls for team work across 
hospitals: a qualitative study on simulated emergencies,” 
BMC Emergency Medicine, 2009, vol. 9. 
[3] Nordlanssykehuset. 2011 [cited 2013 Nov]; Available from: 
http://www.nlsh.no/om-oss/category2791.html. 
[4] C. Granja, Z. Kokkinogenis, J. Gabriel, and T. Solvoll, 
”Integration of Healthcare Information Systems: Improving 
Data Quality in a Diagnostic Imaging Department,” in 
eKNOW 2013, The Fifth International Conference on 
Information, Process, and Knowledge Management, ed: 
International Academy, Research and Industry Association 
(IARIA), 2013, pp. 129-134. 
[5] M. Skaset, ”Lokalsykehusenes akuttfunksjoner i en samlet 
behandlingskjede,” Oslo, 2007. 
[6] Helsedirektoratet, ”Nasjonale retningslinjer for behandling og 
rehabilitering 
ved 
hjerneslag. 
Nasjonale 
faglige 
retningslinjer,” Oslo, 2010. 
[7] Helsedirektoratet. N-016: Trombolysebehandlinger. 2013 
[cited 
2013 
Nov], 
Available 
from: 
http://nesstar2.shdir.no/kvalind/. 
[8] J.F. Meschia, “Camera in the Emergency Department: The 
Evolution of Stroke Telemedicine,” Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 
2009, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 3-4. 
[9] P. Muller-Barna, L.H. Schwamm, and R.L. Haberl, 
“Telestroke increases use of acute stroke therapy,” Curr Opin 
Neurol, 2012, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 5-10. 
[10] T. Sairanen, S. Soinila, M. Nikkanen, K. Rantanen, S. 
Mustanoja, M. Farkkila, I. Pieninkeroinen, H. Numminen, P. 
Baumann, J. Valpas, T. Kuha, M. Kaste, T. Tatlisumak, and 
F. Finnish Telestroke Task, ”Two years of Finnish Telestroke: 
thrombolysis at spokes equal to that at the hub,” Neurology, 
2011, vol. 76, pp. 1145-1152. 
[11] S. Walter, P. Kostopoulos, A. Haass, I. Keller, M. Lesmeister, 
T. Schlechtriemen, C. Roth, P. Papanagiotou, I. Grunwald, H. 
Schumacher, S. Helwig, J. Viera, H. Korner, M. Alexandrou, 
U. Yilmaz, K. Ziegler, K. Schmidt, R. Dabew, D. Kubulus, Y. 
Liu, T. Volk, K. Kronfeld, C. Ruckes, T. Bertsch, W. Reith, 
and K. Fassbender, ”Diagnosis and treatment of patients with 
stroke in a mobile stroke unit versus in hospital: a randomised 
controlled trial,” Lancet Neurol, 2012, vol. 11, pp. 397-404. 
[12] H. Audebert, “Telestroke: effective networking,” Lancet 
Neurol, 2006, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 279-282. 
[13] H.J. Audebert and L. Schwamm, “Telestroke: scientific 
results,” Cerebrovasc Dis, 2009, vol. 27 no. 4, pp. 15-20. 
[14] T. Johansson and C. Wild, “Telemedicine in acute stroke 
management: systematic review,” Int J Technol Assess Health 
Care, 2010, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 149-155. 
186
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[15] M. P. LaMonte, M. N. Bahouth, P. Hu, M. Y. Pathan, K. L. 
Yarbrough, R. Gunawardane, P. Crarey, and W. Page, 
”Telemedicine for acute stroke: triumphs and pitfalls,” Stroke, 
2003, vol. 34, pp. 725-728. 
[16] L. H. Schwamm, R. G. Holloway, P. Amarenco, H. J. 
Audebert, T. Bakas, N. R. Chumbler, R. Handschu, E. C. 
Jauch, W. A. Knight, S. R. Levine, M. Mayberg, B. C. Meyer, 
P. M. Meyers, E. Skalabrin, L. R. Wechsler, o. b. o. t. A. H. 
A. S. Council, and t. I. C. o. P. V. Disease, ”A Review of the 
Evidence for the Use of Telemedicine Within Stroke Systems 
of Care,” Stroke, 2009, vol. 40, pp. 2616-2634. 
[17] L. Thommasen, ”Behandling av akutt hjerneinfarkt,” Tidsskr 
Nor Lægeforen, 2007, vol. 127, pp. 1060-1063. 
[18] K. Khan, A. Shuaib, T. Whittaker, M. Saqqur, T. Jeerakathil, 
K. Butcher, and P. Crumley, ”Telestroke in Northern Alberta: 
a two year experience with remote hospitals,” Can J Neurol 
Sci, 2010, vol. 37, pp. 808-813. 
[19] B.M. Demaerschalk, and T.E.J. Kiernan, “Vascular neurology 
nurse practitioner provision of telemedicine consultations,” 
International journal of telemedicine and applications, 2010. 
[20] B.M. Demaerschalk, “Telemedicine or telephone consultation 
in patients with acute stroke,” Current neurology and 
neuroscience reports, 2011, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 42-51. 
[21] G. S. Silva, S. Farrell, E. Shandra, A. Viswanathan, and L. H. 
Schwamm, “The status of Telestroke in the United States: a 
survey of currently active stroke telemedicine programs,” 
Stroke, 2012, vol. 43, pp. 2078-2085. 
[22] S. Wang, S. B. Lee, C. Pardue, D. Ramsingh, J. Waller, H. 
Gross, F. T. Nichols, 3rd, D. C. Hess, and R. J. Adams, 
“Remote evaluation of acute ischemic stroke: reliability of 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale via telestroke,” 
Stroke, 2003, vol. 34, pp. e188-1891. 
[23] S. F. Zaidi, M. A. Jumma, X. N. Urra, M. Hammer, L. 
Massaro, V. Reddy, T. Jovin, R. Lin, and L. R. Wechsler, 
“Telestroke-guided 
intravenous 
tissue-type 
plasminogen 
activator treatment achieves a similar clinical outcome as 
thrombolysis at a comprehensive stroke center,” Stroke, 2011, 
vol. 42, pp. 3291-3293. 
[24] R. Handschu, M. Scibor, B. Willaczek, M. Nuckel, J. G. 
Heckmann, D. Asshoff, D. Belohlavek, F. Erbguth, and S. 
Schwab, ”Telemedicine in acute stroke: remote video-
examination compared to simple telephone consultation,” J 
Neurol, 2008, vol. 255, pp. 1792-1797. 
[25] B. C. Meyer, R. Raman, T. Hemmen, R. Obler, J. A. Zivin, R. 
Rao, R. G. Thomas, and P. D. Lyden, ”Efficacy of site-
independent telemedicine in the STRokE DOC trial: a 
randomised, blinded, prospective study,” Lancet Neurol, 
2008, vol. 7, pp. 787-795. 
[26] D. R. Elford, ”Telemedicine in northern Norway,” J Telemed 
Telecare, 1997, vol. 3, pp. 1-22. 
[27] D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, T. Bergmo, and S. Pedersen, 
”Videoconferencing in psychiatry: a survey of use in northern 
Norway,” 1996, J Telemed Telecare, vol. 2, pp. 192-8. 
[28] E. Johnsen, Breivik, E., Myrvang, R., & Olsen, F. , 
”Gevinster av norsk telemedisin,” NST, Tromsø, 2006.  
[29] B. Andre, G. I. Ringdal, J. H. Loge, T. Rannestad, and S. 
Kaasa, ”The importance of key personnel and active 
management for successful implementation of computer-
based technology in palliative care: results from a qualitative 
study,” Comput Inform Nurs, 2008, vol. 26, pp. 183-9. 
[30] A. Obstfelder, K. H. Engeseth, and R. Wynn, ”Characteristics 
of successfully implemented telemedical applications,” 
Implement Sci, 2007, vol. 2, no. 25. 
[31] J. Car, A. Black, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell, C. Pagliari, B. 
McKinstry, R. Procter, A. Majeed, and A. Sheikh, ”The 
impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of health care: a 
Systematic Overview and Synthesis of the Litterature,” 
Report for the NHS Connecting for Health Evaluation 
Programme, 2008.  
[32] PG. Neumann, “The Risks Digest” [Cited 2013 Nov.]; 
Available from: http://catless.ncl.ac.uk/risks 
[33] G. I. Rochlin, “Trapped in the Net: The Unanticipated 
Consequences of Computerization,” Princeton University 
Press, 1997 
[34] E. Tenner, “Why things bite back: technology and the revenge 
of unintended consequences,” Vintage Books, 1997. 
[35] Norsk Helsenett 2011 [cited 2013 Nov]; Available from: 
http://www.nhn.no/om-oss. 
[36] B. Latour, “Science in action: How to follow scientists and 
engineers through society,” 1987: Harvard university press. 
[37] J. Law and J. Hassard, ”Actor network theory and after,” 
1999. 
[38] M. Akrich, “The de-scription of technical objects,” Shaping 
technology/building society, 1992, pp. 205-224. 
[39] A. Fontana and J. Frey, “The interview: from structured 
questions to negotiated text,” Collecting and Interpreting 
Qualitative Materials, N.K. Denzin and Y.A. Lincoln, Editors, 
Sage, pp. 61-106, 2003. 
[40] H. K. Andreassen and K. Dyb, ”Differences and inequalities 
in health,” Information, Communication & Society, 2010, vol. 
13, pp. 956-975. 
[41] K. Dyb and S. Halford, ”Placing Globalizing Technologies: 
Telemedicine and the Making of Difference,” Sociology, 
2009, vol. 43, pp. 232-249. 
[42] L. L. Nilsen and T. Solvoll, ”Traditional Practice vs. New 
Tools and Routines in Stroke Treatment,” Future Internet, 
2012, vol. 4, pp. 688-699. 
[43] T. Sørensen, T. Solvoll, E. Rygh, R. Salvesen, L. Rye, and K. 
Dyb, ”Utprøving av teleslag ved Nordlandssykehuset,” NST, 
2011. 
 
187
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

