Understanding eHealth use from a Persuasive System Design Perspective 
 An Antibiotic Information Application for Nurses  
 Jobke Wentzel, Nienke de Jong, Julia E.W.C. van 
Gemert-Pijnen 
Dept. of PHT, University of Twente  
Enschede, The Netherlands 
m.j.wentzel@utwente.nl, n.dejong@utwente.nl, 
j.e.w.c.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl 
 
Lars Nijdam, Regine van Drie-Pierik  
Hospital Pharmacy, Medisch Spectrum Twente  
Enschede, The Netherlands 
l.nijdam@MST.nl, r.vandrie-pierik@mst.nl 
 
 
Abstract - To ensure optimal treatment and patient safety, 
nurses need easily accessible information. An application was 
developed to support nurses in their antibiotic-related tasks. 
With log data analysis and user interviews we evaluated the 
application. We aimed to interpret log data by applying the 
Persuasive Systems Design model. The results show steady, 
continuing use that corresponds to nurse tasks regarding 
timing and content of use. Task support seems a top relevant 
motivation for using the system, given positive user comments 
and most popular content of instruction pages. The results 
show that a combination of log data and user interviews help to 
understand use and uptake of an application in practice. 
Keywords-eHealth; antibiotic stewardship; nurse; task-
support; log data; persuasive technology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we provide a more in-depth analysis of 
actual use (log data), elaborating on the effects of an 
antibiotic information application for nurses that was 
presented at eTelemed 2014, the sixth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine and Social Medicine 
[1]. Managing constant information needs is among one of 
the many tasks of Health Care Workers (HCWs). 
Increasingly, integration of information and support via 
online or mobile applications can facilitate HCWs. This is 
especially the case when working in complex medical 
settings, or when dealing with situations that require good 
interpretation of information from multiple sources [2]. For 
good support, applications should be integrated with daily 
work practice. Therefore, besides studies on behavioral or 
clinical outcomes, understanding of application use and use 
context is pivotal to the development and improvement of 
eHealth applications for clinical settings. This paper focuses 
on understanding of use data as a prerequisite for 
interpretation of effectiveness. 
A. Ehealth to support tasks 
Information and communication technology holds the 
promise of facilitating information transfer and offering 
support in a variety of health care settings [3][4]. 
Applications aimed to support health care workers (HCWs) 
are abundant, both in mobile applications (for smartphone or 
tablet), in websites, and web apps [2]. However, sometimes 
applications and websites that are supposed to facilitate and 
support HCW‟s jobs are perceived as distracting, user-
unfriendly and ill-fitted to work practice, thereby possibly 
compromising patient safety [5][6][7]. Taking a more user- 
or practice- based focus throughout the design phases may 
help to overcome these difficulties [6][8]. By taking this 
focus, user needs and implications of use context are 
balanced with stakeholder values and needs, to reach an 
optimal fit between user, organization and technology [8]. 
However, in professional clinical settings, conducting such 
user-driven formative studies can be a challenge, due to 
practical (time, access) and ethical considerations. Therefore, 
requirement elicitation strategies that take into account the 
specific boundaries of medical settings have been proposed 
[9]. 
B. Persuasive system Design 
Another development approach that may facilitate 
implementation, uptake, and effectiveness of eHealth 
applications includes incorporating Persuasive Systems 
Design (PSD) into technology. In this model, the targeted 
behavior is reinforced, shaped or changed by the technology, 
thereby „persuading‟ its users [10]. This persuasion can 
occur via different strategies, which depend on an analysis of 
the context. The system qualities should be adapted to this 
context, using one or more strategies: primary task support, 
dialogue support (facilitating interaction with the system), 
credibility support (credibility of the system and its content), 
and social support (strategies that include others, integrate 
the system in interpersonal interaction or comparison). The 
strategies are supported by design principles that exemplify 
how to operationalize a certain persuasive strategy. For 
example, including tokens of expertise (regarding content) in 
the system contributes to credibility support [10]. 
Designing technology in such way that it is unobtrusive, 
useful, and easy to use helps to blend the technology 
seamless into users‟ work (or life) and to quickly reach their 
goals. The model is applied to the design and evaluation of 
health interventions aimed at (changing health behavior of) 
patients or non-professional [11], but the principles apply to 
professional-aimed eHealth tools as well [12]. 
C. Information support for antibiotic stewardship 
Information support can be especially useful in areas 
where complex medical situations arise [13]. Clinical 
antibiotic use is such a situation. Mis- or over-use of 
antibiotics contributes to the problem of antibiotic resistance. 
Due to their resistance to antibiotics, infections caused by 
210
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

resistant pathogens are difficult to treat. Therefore, prudent 
use of antibiotics is needed to stop resistance forming and 
preserve the effectiveness of these drugs [14]. Antibiotic 
Stewardship Programs (ASPs) aim to optimize antibiotic use 
in clinical settings. Formulary restrictions, antibiotic cycling, 
multidisciplinary bed-side consultation and improved 
diagnostics are some strategies that are used to this end. 
Infectious disease specialists, clinical microbiologists, 
pharmacists and physicians work together in ASP to improve 
antibiotic use. Optimal antibiotic therapy relies on timely 
adjustment of therapy, based on lab results (diagnostics) as 
well as careful monitoring of patient progress and vital signs. 
Correct 
execution 
of 
antibiotic 
therapy 
(including 
preparation and administration of the medications) as 
prescribed by the physician stands at the base of successful 
ASPs. In addition to expert input in ASPs, nurses contribute 
a great deal [15]. Nurses spend a lot of time caring for and 
observing patients; they are the „eyes and ears‟ of the 
physician and notice changes in patient status that call for 
action (e.g., antibiotic therapy adjustment). 
In earlier research, we identified nurses as an important 
stakeholder for ASPs [16]. However, in literature and 
practice, physicians and clinical experts are regarded as the 
main actors in ASP, and nurses‟ roles are not made explicit 
[15][17]. As earlier research indicated that nurses have high 
information needs regarding the antibiotic care process, we 
aimed to optimally support nurses in their antibiotic-related 
tasks. We applied human centered design to develop an 
information application, that takes user needs into account 
and provides bed-side task support. With regard to nurse 
support in antibiotic stewardship, no dedicated applications 
were identified in literature, as nurses are often overlooked 
as stakeholder in ASPs. Nurse tasks in ASPs are demanding 
and ask for good information integration and decision 
making: 
nurses 
gather 
information 
from 
different 
information systems, integrate it, and decide whether further 
action is required. Previous research indicates that especially 
task support and system credibility strategies from the 
Persuasive Systems Design model are influential; formative 
evaluations revealed a lack of task support and easy 
accessible information [16], which can be a barrier for nurse 
empowerment in ASP. Based on this understanding of the 
work context, we developed an application, the Antibiotic 
Information Application (AI Application). 
D. Study aim 
In this study, we aim to assess if and how the AI 
Application fits into nurses‟ workflow and nurses are 
motivated to use it. To this end, we analyze actual use 
patterns (time of use and content viewed) and combine this 
log data with data on user satisfaction as resulted from our 
qualitative evaluations.  
II. 
THE ANTIBIOTIC INFORMATION APPLICATION 
Based 
on 
formative 
evaluations, 
the 
Antibiotic 
Information Application (AI Application) was developed 
[17]. In focus groups, interviews, scenario tests and usability 
tests nurses in our pilot research expressed a need for an 
easily accessible, centralized information application, where 
they can find all information on antibiotics they need during 
their work. This includes instructions on preparation and 
administration, as well as background information and 
information that is needed on specific occasions only (e.g., 
when side effects occur). On the basis of the previous results, 
a prototype was created in WordPress [18], with some 
alterations to fit our specific content management demands 
(e.g., flexibility of button-order and features for import and 
export of content). Based on its evaluations (user tests, user 
interviews), a final release was launched. This application is 
web-based, and can be run from the hospital‟s own server. 
However, for the pilot study the system was made available 
via the internet, and was taken up in the nurses‟ personal 
hospital start page and medication administration system so 
that it can be accessed easily. Besides for use on a PC, the AI 
Application is optimized for mobile (tablet, smartphone) use. 
For the application‟s content, the information sources that 
were already used in this hospital served as input. This 
included general reference works and national guidelines as 
well as the hospital‟s own protocols as created by the 
hospital pharmacy. All sources were „chopped up‟, where 
needed, selecting only the content that is necessary for nurses 
to execute their tasks (the original sources often contain 
much information aimed at physicians or medical experts, 
which can be irrelevant and confusing to nurses). This 
process was done based on formative research outcomes 
regarding information needs, and expert views (clinical 
microbiologist, pharmacists) on what types of information 
should be available to nurses to be able to contribute to 
ASPs. The different types of content are ordered according to 
the mental models of the nurses as they resulted from the 
card-sort study that was conducted during formative research  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A: task instructions, B: 
important information and warnings, C: background information, D: Safety 
checks, E: medical background, F: search field for antibiotic or select from 
list, G: search all pages (per antibiotic).  
 
211
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A:back-button B: print 
and email buttons, C: search field, D: breadcrumb trail, E: instructions for 
administration, F: information source with link, G: information on updates  
phases [17]. Users select an antibiotic from a drop-down 
menu or type the name in a search field to access an 
overview page (see Fig. 1). On these overview pages, 
information is grouped by the following categories: 
information needed to perform the primary tasks, warnings, 
general or background information, extra checks and safety 
information, and information for specialists and medical 
background (see Fig. 1).  Fig. 2 shows an instruction page of 
the 
AI 
Application, 
showing 
information 
on 
drug 
administration, including what to pay extra attention to. A 
demo version (in Dutch) of the AI Application can be 
accessed online via [19]. 
By providing easily accessible information, nurses may 
be better equipped to perform antibiotic related tasks. For 
example, it helps them to recognize and address instances of 
suboptimal 
antibiotic 
use. 
This 
supports 
improved 
knowledge and recognition of instances to optimize 
antibiotic use and nurse empowerment to discuss patient 
therapy and alert physicians in case of suboptimal antibiotic 
use.  
As nurses are generally aware the importance of looking 
up information, it is not a lack of awareness that hinders 
information 
use. 
Rather, 
inaccessibility 
and 
incomprehensibility of information is the problem: nurses 
lack time an knowledge to localize and interpret the various 
information sources to be able to apply them quickly during 
their work. Therefore, in this case, persuasive strategies that 
focus on creating unobtrusive, easy to use information, that 
supports tasks are most likely to contribute to a positive user 
experience and effectiveness. In the AI Application, 
reduction and tunneling (among others) realize these 
strategies: the amount of actions to reach information are 
decreased by integrating all information in one application 
(reduction) and users are guided directly to the desired 
information via the overview grid (tunneling), as can be seen 
in Fig. 1.  
III. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
Two lung wards of a local 1000-bed teaching hospital 
participated in this research. The wards have a total of  57 
beds. During the pilot phase, 62 nurses (45 FTE) worked at 
the two wards. Approximately 15 of them were informed 
about the AI Application and the importance of antibiotic 
stewardship in presentations and were encouraged to share 
this information with their colleagues. In addition, all nurses 
received an email with instructions and fact-sheets on 
antibiotic stewardship and the AI Application were 
distributed repeatedly throughout the wards. 
A convenience sample (based on availability during the 
weeks of interviewing) of thirty-four nurses participated in 
the AI Application evaluation interviews. These nurses have 
an average age of 32 years, and  29 of them are female, 5 
are male. On average, they have 9 years work experience as 
a nurse, and 6 years work experience on their current ward. 
B. Log file analysis 
To get more insight into the working mechanisms of the 
technology that is implemented, actual use of the technology 
can be studied. Log data analysis provide a means to study 
technology use in an ecological setting. The AI Application 
was introduced at the two pilot wards where users could 
access it directly on a pc. Login was performed based on IP 
recognition. To ensure whether the AI Application fulfills 
information needs, at what moment these needs arise and 
what information is viewed, AI Application use is logged 
using Google Analytics [20], as well as a Wordpress plug-in 
because of additional information the two systems provide; 
e.g., the plug in identified users (including admin) whereas 
Google was able to provide overviews of most viewed 
content. Log information of interest includes number of 
visits per day, time of day with most visits, most frequently 
viewed content and visit duration. Also, preferred search 
methods, entry and exit pages are assessed. Only log data 
from the hospital‟s IP address is considered, to filter out 
application use by third parties (e.g., maintenance) not 
included in the pilot.  
C. Intended use 
To make sense of the log data for answering the research 
questions, the intended use of the AI Application must be 
defined. With regard to intended use, some remarks from our 
earlier research can be made. Antibiotics are administered 
several times a day in the wards, but nurses indicated during 
development phases that they especially look for instructions 
when dealing with antibiotics that are unfamiliar to them or 
when a patient reacts to the medication in an unexpected way 
(side effect or allergy). Also, inexperienced nurses may need 
to look up information more often than experienced nurses 
[17]. The frequency of critical moments, when an unknown 
 
212
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

antibiotic is prescribed or when an unexpected event related 
to an antibiotic occurs, is unknown. Because nurses share 
information, not every individual nurse may need to consult 
the AI Application every time he/she cares for a patient who 
receives antibiotics. Therefore, a precise estimation of 
intended use is hard to give but multiple visits per day 
(overall use) are expected. 
D. User interviews 
Semi-structured interviews with nurses (n=34) were held 
to assess their satisfaction with the AI Application, eight 
months after implementation. First, participants were asked 
to perform a few information seeking tasks. Half of them  
was asked to use the AI Application (n=17) for this, while 
the other half of the participants (n=17) was asked to use the 
regular information sources that were already available and 
used prior to this pilot study (pre-implementation 
information sources), such as traditional guidelines. The 
participants were asked to „think aloud‟ [21] to assess 
overall positive or negative user experience of the AI 
Application as compared to the pre-implementation 
information sources. In addition, during these sessions short 
interviews were held to ask participants about their opinion 
of the AI Application, how satisfied they are with it, and if 
they would like to change anything about the application. 
Audio recordings were made during these individual 
sessions. The transcripts of the „think aloud‟ data were 
transcribed and categorized into positive, neutral, or 
negative remarks. The transcripts of the interview part of the 
sessions were coded using the PSD model, as previous work 
on a sub-sample of our dataset showed that this model [22] 
helps to clarify the cause of (dis)satisfaction with the 
application. The data was analyzed using the constructs of 
the Perceived Persuasiveness Questionnaire [23] as a coding 
scheme. 
This 
questionnaire 
measures 
perceived 
persuasiveness; the extent to which persuasive strategies are 
recognized (present) in the system by measuring to what 
extent users experience primary task support, dialogue 
support, 
perceived 
credibility, 
social 
support, 
unobtrusiveness, perceived persuasiveness, perceived effort, 
perceived effectiveness and use continuance. As not all 
persuasive strategies are present in the AI Application, 
because of the strong focus on primary task support, some 
constructs were adapted in our coding scheme: perceived 
effectiveness and primary task support were merged. 
Previous research showed that these constructs overlap in 
measuring the AI Application‟s perceived persuasiveness 
[22]. The data were analyzed by two independent coders 
[JW, NdJ], first to identify relevant transcript excerpts, and 
second to apply a certain code.  
The transcript excerpts coded according to the PSD-based 
coding scheme are not the same excerpts that were used to 
establish satisfaction during use; the latter comments are the 
verbalizations of thoughts made while executing tasks with 
or without the application, while the PSD-coded comments 
constitute interviews transcripts.  
 
Figure 3. Daily AI Application visits throughout the pilot period.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The eight month pilot period provides prolonged insight 
into use and user satisfaction with the AI Application. 
 
A. Log file analysis 
The AI Application was launched at the end of March 
2013, and has been used 5.21 (SD 3.09) times per day on 
average during the pilot period (April 2013 – Nov 2013). 
The bounce percentage is 11%; in these cases users left 
directly after entering. On average, visits lasted 2.5 minutes. 
The log files show a variable, but steady use of the AI 
Application over time (see Fig. 3). This use pattern continues 
after the pilot phase (as the application continues to be 
available). During week days (Monday to Friday) the AI 
Application is used more often (14-16% of visits per week 
day are on one of these days) than during weekends (11% of 
all visits occur on a Sunday, 13% on a Saturday), as can be 
seen in Fig. 4. When data are arranged by visits per hour of 
the day, peaks around 08:00h, 12:00h, 17:00h and 21:00h are 
visible (see Fig. 5).  
To access the antibiotic pages, users prefer the search 
field over the drop-down menu; 74% vs. 26% out of 3,060 
search instances. Pages that are viewed most often, aside 
from the welcome page and antibiotic overview pages (see 
Fig. 1 for an example), are pages of the category task 
instructions (Fig. 1, section A): information on dosage, 189 
page views (8.5%), instructions on preparation, 1,025 page  
 
Figure 4. AI Application use per day of the week. 
213
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5. Hourly AI Application visits throughout the pilot period 
 
Figure 6. Page views in percentage per section. 
views (46%), and instructions on administration, 516 page 
views (23%). The other categories (see Fig. 1, section B-E) 
generate less page views, ranging from 2-84 (0-4%) for 
individual pages and 49-247 (2-11%) per category (see Fig. 
6). 
Information 
on 
the 
antibiotics 
Amoxicillin-
Clavulanicacid, Ceftriaxon, and Ceftazidim was viewed most 
often with page views (including overview pages) of  
respectively 717 (16%), 609 (13%), and 537 (12%). 
B. User interviews 
While using the AI Application during the interview, 
users commented on the ease and support they experienced 
when working with it. Table I show the types of remarks 
participants made while searching for information with the 
application or without it (pre-implementation sources). 
Overall, more negative than positive remarks about the 
pre-implementation information sources were made (see 
Table I). The negative comments regarding the pre- 
implementation information sources (negatively) addressed 
the ease of finding information and clarity of the sources: 
“I want to remark that I do not think this [table of drug- 
TABLE I.  
 
USER COMMENTS DURING SEARCH 
 
Pre-implementation 
sources 
AI Application 
Comments 
% 
Comments 
% 
Positive 
18 
14 
97 
56 
Neutral 
10 
8 
12 
7 
Negative 
104 
79 
63 
37 
 
drug interactions, ed.] is good, because it is very, very 
small. And when you zoom in, you cannot see it precisely 
and that is when you make mistakes”. 
However, positive remarks on the pre-implementation 
sources include that information is nonetheless available and 
there is always a way to find it: 
“Well, there is always the drug leaflet, and you 
can find this type of information in there. And I 
think it is just as fast to search for it in the leaflet 
[…] Takes precisely as much time [as other search 
methods, ed.]”.  
The AI Application generated more positive (56%) than 
negative (37%) comments (see Table I). Positive comments 
included remarks on functionality, looks and usefulness: 
“You see all these nice blocks” and  
“It is instantly clear where you can find the 
information”. 
Negative comments addressed the available content and 
problems finding information: 
“That‟s stupid, I cannot find it right now” and  
“Look, it does not show any results. I would want 
it to do that”. 
To be able to deduct why the AI Application generates 
positive and negative qualifications, interview transcripts 
were analysed using PSD constructs for coding. Table II 
depicts the results of this analysis. Overall, for nearly all 
categories the amount of positive comments outweigh the 
negative comments, except for unobtrusiveness (11 positive 
vs. 12 negative) and credibility (equal amount of 4 
comments). By far, most remarks concerned primary task 
support (42,45%),  indicating that this is a relevant concept 
in the AI Application‟s setup. Participants typically 
commented on how the information and setup of the AI 
Application is specifically useful when performing their 
tasks. This quote illustrates it: 
“[…] that it clearly shows: dose, preparation and 
administration. That is what I want to know. 
That‟s why I use the AI Application”.  
Some negative remarks concerning primary task support 
were given (see Table II) and address information that lacks 
or ways in which the AI Application cannot be used while 
performing tasks when this is wanted:  
“You miss [information, ed.] in the AI Application 
sometimes. One time I had something; one gram 
that should be given per two grams. It doesn‟t say 
if the speed of the drip should be adjusted yes or 
no. That are sort of the puzzles you have to [solve, 
ed.]”. 
214
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Comments concerning perceived persuasiveness were quite 
prevalent as well (see Table II), mostly indicating that using 
the AI Application is easy, nice or convenient. This seems a 
more pleasurable method of searching than former 
information sources. These quotes underline that: 
“[…] And it is very convenient that it is so easy to 
search. That it‟s much like our good old „yellow 
booklet‟ [paper-based antibiotic information, 
ed.]” and “It works quite easily, yes”. 
However, some users encountered difficulties in using the 
AI Application that made them less motivated to use it:  
“That it is difficult to read, so it is less interesting, 
because you‟ll soon feel like you don‟t understand 
and I would then just leave it to the physician”. 
Table II shows that many remarks addressed the concept of 
perceived effort: how easy it is to use the AI Application 
(e.g., time, number of actions required). Especially saving 
nurses the trouble of scanning  large texts and extensive 
searching within the system typify these comments:  
“Clear. Especially these distinct blocks and 
preparation, administration and the like. That it is 
clear where you can find it because especially with 
all the other sites they give you a long list and you 
have to search through the entire page”. 
However, some effort still has to be put into searching for 
information, as the negative comments indicate: 
“Sometimes you have to search a bit further, but 
often you‟ll figure it out”. 
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW OF USER SATISFACTION ANALYSIS  
PSD construct 
Comment load 
Number of 
remarks (*) 
% of total 
remarks per 
construct 
Primary task 
support 
Positive 
63 (27) 
42,45 
Negative 
27 (15) 
Perceived 
persuasiveness 
Positive 
20 (15) 
11,79 
Negative 
5 (4) 
Perceived effort 
Positive 
20 (14) 
13,21 
Negative 
8 (5) 
Use 
Continuance 
Positive 
18 (14) 
12,26 
Negative 
8 (7) 
Unobtrusiveness 
Positive 
11 (6) 
10,85 
Negative 
12 (9) 
Credibility 
Positive 
4 (3) 
3,77 
Negative 
4 (2) 
Social Support 
Positive 
7 (7) 
3,30 
Negative 
0 (0) 
Dialogue 
support 
Positive 
5 (4) 
2,36 
Negative 
0 (0) 
total 
 
212 (34) 
100 
*number of unique participants making remarks in this category 
Use continuance indicated if nurses were inclined to (keep) 
using the AI Application, which was mostly positive for as 
far as nurses made a remark on this theme:  
“I actually always use the  AI Application” and 
“When I search something about antibiotics or 
something I always start with the AI Application, 
[to see, ed.] if it is in there”. 
A few users had little experience with using the AI 
Application, or mentioned they just did not use it as often as 
they could. This quote illustrates how the AI Application is 
not used in standard settings (where information still can be 
of value): 
“Look, the standard stuff, we give a lot of 
Augmentin [an antibiotic, ed], you really don‟t 
look up in the AI Application anymore”. 
Having a system right at hand that is easily accessible while 
performing tasks was mentioned as a positive aspect. 
Especially easy access to the AI Application via the 
medication 
registration 
system 
contributed 
to 
this 
unobtrusiveness: 
“You want your information instantly. And this is 
useful for that. It is just nice that I can access it 
directly from this system [medication registration 
system, ed.]”. 
However, some down-time of the system and the desire for 
even more and faster ways to access the AI Application 
accounted for a few negative remarks on unobtrusiveness:  
“[…] then it would become a bit more striking. 
[…] If you would just see it [the link, ed] on top 
here, that would be clearer for the people that do 
not use it very often”. 
Credibility is not commented on very frequently (see Table 
II). Given the AI Application‟s location and support by the 
hospital, its credibility is valued positively, but some 
concerns were expressed with regard to a warning message 
that appeared when updates were overdue. These quotes 
illustrate it: 
“[…] Information that you find on the internet is 
not specifically written for our hospital. This is”.   
Concerning the updates, users mentioned: 
“So how reliable is the AI Application then? If it 
says […] that it is not fully up to date?!” 
The AI Application may play a role in social interactions, 
via social support; it can offer nurses a reference source 
when discussing or communicating a problem to physicians:  
“Or just for your own information. […] Because 
you want to be as well informed as possible when 
you call the physician”. 
215
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The AI Application does not require a great deal of 
interaction, but some positive comments on the way search 
queries are handled by the system (a form of dialogue) are 
given:  
“As soon as you type in „am‟, that Amoxicillin and 
Augmentin are already suggested to you. I 
personally find that really convenient”. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. AI Application use 
The log file analysis and user satisfaction results show 
that the AI Application does support nurses during their 
work. AI Application use remains steady over time, and the 
bounce percentage is low (11%), indicating that most users 
do not leave after entering the home page but actually 
navigate through the site to content pages. Therefore, we 
conclude that the uptake is good. As the pre-implementation 
information sources remained available to the nurses, they 
had the option of not changing their primary source of 
information, but our data shows continuing use of the 
application, indicating a preference among the nurses of the 
wards to use it over conventional materials, months after its 
release. 
A first possible contributor to the AI Application‟s 
uptake, is its successful introduction. To introduce the AI 
Application, relatively few activities were undertaken; some 
nurses attended an instructional meeting and fact sheets on 
antibiotic stewardship and the AI Application were 
distributed. This minimal introduction may have sufficed 
because the intended users initially proclaimed they liked the 
concept and look and feel of the application, which has 
possibly led to increased willingness to start using it, and 
spread the word. In addition, the AI Application probably fits 
in with nurses‟ work routines as it is available via the system 
that nurses are already using when dealing with antibiotics, 
and it is easier to find than the scattered information sources 
they previously used. A third reason for AI Application 
uptake may lie in the human centered design process, as 
involvement in the development can generate user 
commitment. It can be more difficult to reach this type of 
involvement on a large scale however.  
Log data contributes to eHealth evaluation by giving 
insight into actual use (and uptake) [24]. However, to make 
sense of the log data, in terms of how the AI Application is 
used in daily care practice, having some concept of what 
intended use (how users should use the technology) should 
be present. For eHealth interventions in general, this usually 
relies on the program‟s setup (e.g., weekly modules require 
at least on log-in per week) [25]. However, for information 
applications that meet occasional information needs, it is 
difficult to determine whether users use it as intended. In the 
current study, we found that overall, AI Application use 
peaked on four moments per day; 08.00h, 12.00h, 17.00h, 
and 21.00h. These hours correspond roughly with medication 
rounds; typically nursing activities where information on 
preparation and administration of antibiotics is needed. In 
addition, in the (late) afternoon and evening there is no 
support from the hospital pharmacy available, which might 
motivate nurses to check the application in case of questions. 
AI Application use was slightly higher during week days 
than on Saturdays and Sundays. An explanation may be that 
usually few patients are admitted during weekends, so few 
new medication regimes are started, which causes a lower 
information need on these days. These results suggest that 
the AI Application is integrated in the care process as the 
most popular moments of use correspond to the timing of 
care activities involving antibiotics. 
The most popular pages of the AI Application are 
instructions on preparation and administration of antibiotics 
and the antibiotics that are viewed most often are used 
frequently on these wards. As nurses are required to follow 
the instructions for preparation closely, these findings are not 
surprising: preparation and administration of the commonly 
used antibiotics are tasks that occur often. Based on the log 
data, the AI Application seems to primarily provide support 
via the procedural information [26]: instructions on how to 
perform certain tasks. In contrast, side effects or unexpected 
progress or deterioration in patient status occur less frequent, 
and the information that offers the background knowledge 
and explanations (e.g., working mechanisms, side effects), is 
not used as often as the concrete instructions. However, to 
optimally benefit from nurses‟ monitoring and alerting roles 
in ASP, having sufficient (background) knowledge that 
enables recognition of critical moments in antibiotic care, is 
needed too. The log data suggest that a more interactive 
learning method for information that supports this behavior 
is needed, as background information is used less often. In 
this sense, primary task support is a useful persuasive 
strategy to fine-tune information to support workflow. For 
learning new behaviors or creating awareness, it needs to be 
complemented with interactive learning strategies, as are 
applied in other persuasive behavior change systems, for 
example [11].  
B. User satisfaction 
The user interviews indicated that overall, nurses are 
satisfied with the AI Application. In contrast, the pre-
implementation sources generated more negative comments. 
One of the possible explanations for this finding lies in the 
fact that the AI Application indeed greatly facilitates 
information-finding as compared to the sources that were 
available pre-implementation. This is underpinned by other 
preliminary research findings of our study that are currently 
analyzed 
more 
in-depth: 
a 
pre-post 
implementation 
questionnaire 
reveals 
that 
nurses 
judge 
the 
pre-
implementation information situation worse than post-
implementation situation [1].  
The AI Application‟s clear setup that enables nurses to 
find information fast contributes to the positive evaluations. 
As was to be expected, especially primary task support as a 
persuasive strategy seemed relevant. For nurses, using an 
information system is not so much a matter of wanting to 
change some type of behavior, or reaching a long term goal 
(e.g., lose weight, increase physical activity, become less 
depressed), but concerns solving an instant information need. 
216
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In this context, task support, for example via tunneling, 
contributes most. This finding is supported by the log data, 
that show that the AI Application is used most often when 
concrete tasks of preparing and administrating antibiotics are 
performed. However, good task support possibly does not 
explain application use and positive appreciation entirely: we 
found that perceived persuasiveness, operationalized as 
pleasantness of using the application, was also present in 
users‟ comments on why they use the AI Application. Thus, 
an application can be efficient and clear, but  positive user 
experience contributes to use and implementation as well. In 
addition, possibly related to this finding, unobtrusiveness and 
effort also contributed to, and may overlap with task support. 
Surely, if it costs little effort, and is not very obtrusive to use 
a system, users may use it more frequently thereby feeling 
more supported. The interrelatedness of these Perceived 
Persuasiveness constructs seems logical and is being studied 
[11][12]. The negative remarks that were made stipulate the 
importance of managing information applications properly: 
credibility is hampered when information is not up to date 
and when the application cannot be accessed easily, as was 
the case temporarily during the pilot, users may use it less 
often. Users also commented on information that they 
wished to access via the AI Application, but was not present. 
This included certain types of instructions that would make 
their tasks easier. Also, requests for an expansion of the 
scope of the application to all types of medications instead of 
antibiotics only. This also asks for application management: 
either comply with the users‟ wishes and provide the extra 
information and broaden the scope, or manage users‟ 
expectations. 
However, 
besides 
these 
requests 
for 
improvement, users seem to experience more advantages 
than disadvantages in using the AI Application, given the 
steady use and greater amount of positive than negative 
remarks. 
Combining the quantitative log data analysis with 
qualitative user satisfaction interviews strengthens our 
understanding of the application‟s use: task supporting 
content is used most often, and is also most prevalent in our 
user comments. Also on other levels, log data support user 
comments and vice versa, thereby strengthening our view on 
application use and appreciation. Combining log data 
analysis with other methods is therefore recommendable to 
gain insight into why an (online) intervention is used (or 
not), as stated by others [24]. 
C. Considerations for implementation 
Nurses 
spend 
much 
time 
and 
effort 
gathering 
information, so surely an application that centralizes 
information has much to offer. However, this implies that 
somehow the information from different sources needs to be 
centralized and the ability to do this automatically depends 
heavily on the type of information sources that need to be 
centralized. In our case, „filling‟ the AI Application and 
managing 
its 
content 
was 
done 
manually 
because 
automatizing this process would be too complex and costly 
in this pilot phase. Individual hospitals and sometimes even 
individual wards use different information systems (thus, 
many different types of information sources to centralize), so 
a one fits all solution may be difficult to achieve. For long 
term implementation and sustainment this is an issue that 
must be resolved, for example by assigning quality staff or 
specialized nurses to keep information up to date. Expanding 
the application‟s scope to all types of medication should be 
taken into account too, as users explicitly requested this and 
problems with antibiotic information finding during 
formative research applied to these other types of 
medications as well. 
With regard to implementation throughout the hospital, 
nurses outside our pilot ward found the AI Application on 
the intranet of the hospital and wanted to use it. In this sense, 
the application implemented itself just by being available and 
easily accessible. In addition, physicians to whom the AI 
Application was demonstrated expressed interest in a 
physician-aimed 
version. 
These 
findings 
show 
that 
implementation success depends on the operationalization of 
early design phases when user needs and context are studied, 
and meeting these needs within the boundaries of clinical 
settings. In this case, the mismatch of expert-driven content 
and user needs that was resolved with the application 
facilitated initial implementation. We tailored the various 
expert-based sources to fit clinical practice, something that is 
not done often because it costs time, effort, and 
multidisciplinary cooperation and understanding. In this 
sense, human centered design can help to meet end-user 
needs [27]. However, when these needs require highly 
tailored information via applications with dynamic content 
that requires frequent quality checks and updates, this poses 
some challenges. Design teams should then find a balance 
between available sources to manage the information, and 
generalizability and up-scaling possibilities. 
D. Antibiotic Stewardship 
The motive for creating the AI Application was to 
empower nurses so that they can make a contribution to 
antibiotic stewardship programs (aimed at more prudent use 
of antibiotics). Even though this study‟s results suggest the 
AI Application supports nurses‟ antibiotic related tasks, the 
extent to which it contributes to antibiotic stewardship 
remains unclear. To detect the effects of the AI Application 
on work processes regarding antibiotic stewardship is 
difficult. As nurses are not the actual prescribers of 
antibiotics, the effect of more knowledge and empowerment 
can indirectly influence actual antibiotic use. Surely, 
executing preparation and administrating tasks correctly 
contributes to prudent antibiotic use. This study shows that 
task support is a relevant persuasive strategy to reach this 
goal. Nonetheless, the log data indicate that information on 
side effects, acute responses, interactions and appropriate 
dosage is not used often. To benefit from the monitoring, 
recognizing and alerting role nurses can fulfill as „eyes and 
ears‟ of the physician, we expected these types of 
information to be important for nurses. However, this type of 
information is not accessed often, possibly because critical 
moments occur scarcely. Another explanation can be that 
nurses are unaware that they can play an important role in 
recognizing the critical moments and/or lack time or 
motivation to pay attention to this. We found some evidence 
217
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for this hypothesis in our formative study and preliminary 
analyses of app efficiency [1][17]. Thus, it appears the AI 
Application offers more information that nurses actually 
wish to utilize during their work, but there are no indications 
that this overload hampers usability and applicability. In 
addition, instead of information support, awareness and 
(e)learning may be more a more relevant approach to 
activate knowledge in the currently less popular information 
categories of the application. This view is supported by a 
study that showed that more active learning methods did 
result in increased awareness and knowledge of nurses 
regarding ASP [28]. In addition, the ASP-related nurse tasks 
possibly ask for a change in safety, cooperation and 
communication  culture, which likely is influenced  by 
communication tools or socially-aimed strategies [29]. 
Possibly, persuasive strategies such as social support might 
be more appropriate in these situations [10]. 
E. Limitations 
The outcomes of this research must be interpreted with 
appropriate caution because of several possible limitations. 
First of all, the AI Application was developed and tested 
with the help of nurses of two wards in one teaching hospital. 
Generalizing the results greatly depends on the specific 
information sources in place and the AI Application‟s 
effectiveness may differ in other settings. This is to some 
extent a consequence of the design approach of zooming in 
in local needs and local contexts. Agile methods can be used 
for re-design in other wards or institutes. In this case, 
identification of local information sources and integrating 
them in the AI Application are among such up-scaling 
activities.  
With regard to the log data it must be remarked that in 
the current use and log setup, no individual user can be 
identified. Therefore, some ambiguity remains with regard to 
the actual amount of users that use the AI Application. 
Possibly, a few nurses of the pilot wards use the AI 
Application often, or, a lot of nurses use it occasionally. Our 
interview data tells us that in our sample, the majority of 
respondents claim to use the AI Application whenever they 
need to look up information on antibiotics. How often this 
occurred, was very hard to assess by asking respondents. 
Using a personal login helps to overcome this user identity 
issue. However, we applied an IP-based login because this 
does enable easy (unobtrusive) access, which is of 
paramount 
importance 
for 
information 
accessibility. 
Furthermore, sharing logins can pose validity threats 
regarding correct identification of user identity, especially 
when multiple users use the same computer. The 
consequence of our approach is that outcomes can be 
interpreted on a population (ward) base, but not on an 
individual level. Still, the data are meaningful, because of the 
communicative nature of nursing: asking a colleague who is 
standing next to you is often the fastest way of resolving an 
information need, as other studies also demonstrate [30]. 
Therefore, information availability improves the information 
situation of an entire ward, even if not all individual nurses 
access the AI Application. 
Another important consideration when interpreting the 
results lies in the pilot-ward setup of this research. Even 
though not all nurses were fully aware of ongoing evaluation 
of AI Application use during the pilot period, satisfaction 
measurements via user comments could have been slightly 
more positive because of nurses‟ positive attitude towards 
(participating in) the pilot and research instead of the AI 
Application. To identify and limit these types of biases, 
combining multiple methods to measure and correctly 
interpret use are crucial [24]. As we found that our user 
remarks correspond with prolonged AI Application use, we 
think this possible bias is negligible. 
F. Future Work 
Additional measurements are currently being analyzed 
and include scenario-based tests during which nurses are 
asked to resolve scenarios by searching for information with 
or without the app, to measure actual information seeking 
efficiency. Outcomes of these tests include time needed to 
search, number of encountered problems during search, and 
number of times a scenarios was resolved correctly. In 
addition, questionnaires to measure satisfaction pre- and 
post-implementation change regarding information seeking 
and applying information will be analyzed [1].  
The AI Application will be introduced on different 
wards and in other hospitals, following a re-design or 
adaptation of the application and its content to fit local work 
methods. This broad implementation will be accompanied 
by evaluations regarding stakeholder needs, use context and 
user satisfaction, following the CeHRes roadmap [8].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the European Interreg IV 
“EurSafety Health-net” project. We thank the various 
participants in the pilot for their cooperation in this research: 
the nurses, and the chest physicians of the A4/C4 department 
of the Medisch Spectrum Twente hospital in Enschede, The 
Netherlands. We further acknowledge Marjolein Hartgerink 
for her assistance in analyzing data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Wentzel and J. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Antibiotic Information 
App for Nurses,” The Sixth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 
2014) IARIA, March 2014, pp. 174-179, ISSN: 2308-4359, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-327-8. 
[2] S. H. Koch, C. Weir, M. Haar, N. Staggers, J. Agutter, M. 
Görges, et al., “Intensive care unit nurses' information needs 
and recommendations for integrated displays to improve 
nurses' situation awareness,” J Am Med Inform Assn, 2012, 
19(4), pp. 583-590. 
[3] M. Prgomet, A. Georgiou, and J. I. Westbrook, “The impact 
of mobile handheld technology on hospital physicians' work 
practices and patient care: a systematic review,” J Am Med 
Inform Assn, 2009, 16(6), pp. 792-801. 
[4] C. A. Caligtan, D. L. Carroll, A. C. Hurley, R. Gersh-
Zaremski, and P. C. Dykes, “Bedside information technology 
to support patient-centered care,” Int J Med Inform, 2012, 
81(7), pp. 442-451. 
218
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[5] A. Holzinger, M. Baernthaler, W. Pammer, H. Katz, V. 
Bjelic-Radisic, and M. Ziefle, “Investigating paper vs. screen 
in real-life hospital workflows: Performance contradicts 
perceived superiority of paper in the user experience,” Int J 
Hum-Comput St, 2011, 69(9), pp, 563-570. 
[6] B. Middleton, M. Bloomrosen, M.A. Dente, B. Hashmat, R. 
Koppel, J.M. Overhage, et al., “Enhancing patient safety and 
quality of care by improving the usability of electronic health 
record systems: Recommendations from AMIA,” J Amer Med 
Inform Assn, 2013, 20(e1), pp. e2-e8. 
[7] R. J. Katz-Sidlow, A. Ludwig, S. Miller, and R. Sidlow, 
“Smartphone 
use 
during 
inpatient 
attending 
rounds: 
Prevalence, patterns and potential for distraction,” J Hosp 
Med, 2012, 7(8), pp. 595-599. 
[8] J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, 
H. C. Ossebaard, S. M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, et al., “A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies,” J Med Internet Res, 2011, 13(4), pp. 
e111. 
[9] L. van Velsen, J. Wentzel, and J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, 
“Designing eHealth that matters via a multidisciplinary 
requirements 
development 
approach,” 
JMIR 
research 
protocols, 2013, 2(1), pp. e21. 
[10] H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems 
design: Key issues, process model, and system features,” 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
2009, 24(1), pp. 485-500. 
[11] F. Drozd, T. Lehto, and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, Exploring 
Perceived Persuasiveness of a Behavior Change Support 
System: A Structural Model, in Persuasive Technology. 
Design for Health and Safety, M. Bang and E. Ragnemalm, 
Editors, 2012, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 157-168. 
[12] N. de Jong, A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A. Voss, R. 
Sanderman, and L. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Combining user-
centered design with the persuasive systems design model; the 
development process of a web-based registration and 
monitoring system for healthcare-associated infections in 
nursing homes,” International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences, in press. 
[13] F. Verhoeven, When staff handle staph: user-driven versus 
expert-driven communication of infection control guidelines, 
2009, University of Twente: Enschede. 
[14] C. MacDougall and R. Polk. “Antimicrobial stewardship 
programs in health care systems,” Clin Microbiol Rev, 2005, 
18(4), pp. 638. 
[15] R. Edwards, L.N. Drumright, M. Kiernan, and A. Holmes, 
“Covering more territory to fight resistance: considering 
nurses‟ role in antimicrobial stewardship,” Journal of 
Infection Prevention, 2011, 12(1), pp. 6-10. 
[16] J. Wentzel, M. van Limburg, J. Karreman, R. Hendrix, and L. 
van Gemert-Pijnen, “Co-creation with stakeholders: a web 2.0 
antibiotic stewardship program,” The Fourth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2012) IARIA, Jan-Feb 2012, pp. 196-202, 
ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3. 
[17] J. Wentzel, L. van Velsen, M. van Limburg, N. de Jong, J. 
Karreman, M.G.R. Hendrix, et al., “Participatory ehealth 
development to support nurses in antimicrobial stewardship,” 
BMC Med Inform Decis, 2014, 14(1), pp. 45. 
[18] Wordpress, accessed on 31-01-2014 via: http://wordpress.org 
[19] Demo Information Application for nurses. Accessed on 31-
01-2014 via http://abnurseapp.infectionmanager.com 
[20] Google 
Analytics, 
accessed 
on 
2-9-2014 
via: 
http://www.google.com/analytics/ 
[21] K.A. Ericsson and A. Herbert, Protocol analysis: verbal 
reports as data, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993. 
[22] N. de Jong, J. Wentzel, S. Kelders, H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and 
J. 
van 
Gemert-Pijnen, 
“Evaluation 
of 
perceived 
persuasiveness constructs by combining user tests and expert 
assessments,” The Second International Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS2014), May 2014, 
pp. 7-15. 
[23] T. Lehto, H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and F. Drozd. “Factors 
affecting perceived persuasiveness of a behavior change 
support system,” The 33th International Conference on 
Information Systems (ICIS 2012), Dec. 2012.  
[24] J.Y. 
Han, 
“Transaction 
logfile 
analysis 
in 
health 
communication research: challenges and opportunities,” 
Patient Educ Couns, 2011, 82(3), pp. 307-312. 
[25] S. M. Kelders, E. T. Bohlmeijer, and J.E.W.C. Van Gemert-
Pijnen, “Participants, usage, and use patterns of a web-based 
intervention for the prevention of depression within a 
randomized controlled trial,” J Med Internet Res, 2013, 15(8), 
pp. e172. 
[26] J. Karreman, N. Ummelen, and M. Steehouder, “Procedural 
and declarative information in user instructions: what we do 
and don't know about these information types,” Professional 
Communication Conference (IPCC 2005). IEEE, July 2005, 
pp. 328-333, ISBN: 0-7803-9027-X. 
[27] S. Kujala, “User involvement: A review of the benefits and 
challenges,” Behav Inform Technol, 2003, 22(1), pp. 1-16 
[28] E. Gillespie, A. Rodrigues, L. Wright, N. Williams, and R.L. 
Stuart, “Improving antibiotic stewardship by involving 
nurses,” Am J Inf Cont, 2013, 41(4), pp. 365-367. 
[29] M. Leonard, S. Graham, and D. Bonacum, “The human 
factor: the critical importance of effective teamwork and 
communication in providing safe care,” Qual Saf Health Care, 
2004, 13(1), pp. i85-i90. 
[30] M. Ndosi and R. Newell, “Medicine information sources used 
by nurses at the point of care,” J. Clin Nurs, 2010, 19(17-18), 
pp. 2659-2661
 
219
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

