233
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach ‘Denk je zèlf!’ for Emotional Eaters 
through the Design of Emotion-Enriched Personas 
 
Aranka Dol1, Olga Kulyk2, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen2, Tatjana van Strien3 
1Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanzehogeschool UAS, Groningen 
2Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede 
3Behavioural Science Institute and Institute for Gender Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen 
3Department of Health Sciences and the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam 
e-mail: 1{a.dol, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl, 2{o.a.kulyk, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl, 3t.vanstrien@psych.ru.nl 
 
Abstract — Obesity is a fast-growing societal threat, causing 
chronic conditions, physical and psychological health problems, 
as well as sickness absence and heavy healthcare costs. Despite 
numerous attempts to promote physical activity and healthy 
diet, existing interventions do not focus on the common 
emotional causes of obesity. There is a need for self-management 
support of this vulnerable target group: emotional eaters. This 
paper presents the results of the design case study focusing on a 
holistic design and evaluation of a personalised virtual mHealth 
coach that provides self-management training ‘Denk je zèlf!’ 
(Dutch for ‘Develop a wise mind and counsel yourself’). The 
target group are young adults with an emotional eating disorder 
and who are obese. The contextual inquiry study was conducted 
to gain insights into the needs and experiences of the target 
users, including interviews and questionnaires with emotional 
eaters, patients undergoing obesity treatment, and healthcare 
practitioners. Personas and the use-case scenario were derived 
from these results and translated into the new ‘Denk je zèlf!’ 
virtual coach, based on Dialectical Behaviour Therapy and 
experience sampling measures to capture user experience and 
emotional state. The main contributions of this paper are: (a) 
combining holistic eHealth design, behavior chain analysis, and 
dialectic behaviour therapy in one personalised virtual mHealth 
coaching application for emotional eaters; (b) applying emotion- 
enriched Personas to guide the design; (c) the results of the 
initial user evaluation. Preliminary results suggest that the 
‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach is useful for helping the target 
group. Future research will be aimed at further iterative (re)-
design and evaluation, as well as development of the dialectical 
dialogues for the virtual coach and content for the education and 
instruction modules.           
Keywords-obesity; emotional eating; Dialectical Behaviour 
Therapy; Persona; personalised care; virtual coach; persuasive 
design; young adults.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The fast growth of obesity is a major threat to society. 
Treatment of obesity and obesity-related conditions imposes a 
heavy societal burden due to high healthcare costs, reduction 
of life spans and increased risk of developing other chronic 
conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, osteoarthritis, and 
certain cancers [1]-[4]. Obese patients often suffer from 
psychological comorbidities, such as depression and low self-
esteem [5]. Obesity is defined as an abnormal or excessive fat 
accumulation that may impair health and is classified as such 
by a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or higher [6]. 
Nearly 50% of the Dutch population suffer from being 
overweight and 12% from obesity [5]. 
     Obesity is associated with poor eating habits and lack of 
physical activity, unhealthy family lifestyle and low socio-
economic status. Increasing physical activity and reducing 
food intake (dieting) are considered cornerstones in the 
prevention and treatment of obesity. However, though many 
of the existing interventions are successful and help patients 
lose weight in the short run, long-term randomised studies 
demonstrate that “diets are not the answer” [7]. Existing 
interventions and online weight loss programs, such as Weight 
Watchers [8], My Diet Coach [9] and Lose it! [10] focus 
primarily on the ‘Big Two’ aspects, namely:  eat less, exercise 
more. They do not provide the necessary support in the long 
run, as people are unable to maintain their bodyweight over a 
longer period.  
A. Emotional eaters and obesity  
Recent studies have shown that a considerable group 
(40%) of the obese population overeat due to negative 
emotions [11]. Emotional eating is an atypical stress 
reaction. A normal reaction to stress and negative emotions 
would be loss a of the appetite. Emotional eaters show this 
atypical behaviour because they confuse negative emotions 
with hunger. They have a narrow view of what happens in 
their bodies (poor interoceptive awareness) and they are 
experiencing 
difficulties 
identifying 
and 
describing 
emotions and feelings (alexithymia). Emotional eaters are 
facing problems with emotion regulation - the ability to keep 
one’s emotional system in a healthy condition [12]. Diets 
and behaviour therapies do not help people with high 
degrees of emotional eating as they do not tackle the 
underlying emotional regulation difficulties, that lead to  
emotional eating [13][14].  
Most emotional eaters have a long history of dieting, 
followed by the inevitable overeating and starting dieting 
again. They gain weight because of poor emotion regulation, 
not just due to poor eating habits or an insufficient level of 
physical activity [15]. Many times, they have tried to lose 
weight and when the emotional eating behaviour kicked in 
again, they ende up being heavier than when they started 
their previous dieting episode. This is an example of the so-
called ‘yo-yo effect’ in health behaviour [16][17]. It is highly 
conceivable that this is the cause of an accumulation of 
disappointments and a growing lack of confidence that one 
will ever succeed.  

234
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
B. Emotional eaters and eHealth 
Evidence suggests that eHealth and Cognitive Behaviour 
Therapy can be just as effective as face-to-face treatments. 
Evidence-based therapeutic procedures can be delivered 
online [18]. In addition, emotional eaters need personalised 
anonymous support that is always available. Not only do 
emotional eaters need moral support, but a personalised self-
management support could also clear away obstacles that 
keep emotional eaters away from face-to-face contact with 
a therapist.  
Obese emotional eaters form a particularly vulnerable 
group of people. To avoid further setbacks, they need 
support they can rely on, that is both trustworthy and 
promising, but realistic, and that matches with their needs. 
Such support needs to be accessible and comfortable so that 
one feels safe and secure. There is a need for supportive 
training programs for this specific target group of emotional 
eaters. This paper presents a design case study aimed at the 
development of a personalised virtual mHealth coach 
application for self-management support of young adult 
emotional eaters who are obese.  
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, related 
work on online eHealth interventions for emotional eaters 
and obesity is discussed. Next, in Section III the approach 
and methods are presented for developing Personas and 
applying them to guide the design process. In Section IV, 
the results are presented including a use case scenario and 
the first prototype of the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach. 
Finally, a discussion and conclusions are presented in 
Section V. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Dialectical Behaviour Therapy  
Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) is a new way of  
treating emotional eating behaviour. DBT was originally 
designed to help people who are suffering from Borderline 
Personality Disorder [19]. The therapy focuses on the process 
of ‘reduction of ineffective action tendencies linked with 
dysregulated emotions’ [20]. Recent research into the  
deployment of Dialectical Behaviour Therapy shows positive 
results in weight loss management and weight maintenance 
in obese emotional eaters [13]. DBT might be successful in 
patients where insufficient progress was achieved using  
Cognitive 
Behavioural 
Therapy 
(CBT) 
[12][21][22]. 
Currently, CBT is considered the state-of-the-art in treating 
eating disorders, aimed at treating eating disorders such as 
Boulimia Nervosa (BN), Anorexia Nervosa (AN) and Eating 
Disorders Not Otherwise Specified (EDNOS). The core of 
these eating disorders is the patient’s over-evaluation of his  
control of weight, shape and/or eating. The efficacy of DBT 
for the treatment of Binge Eating Disorder (BED) and 
emotional eating behaviour has been demonstrated in the 
results of various studies and trials [23][24][25][26].  
 
B. The dialectical focus 
One of the most powerful ‘mechanisms of change’ or 
mediators in DBT is its dialectical focus. Since an 
invalidating environment plays an important role in the lives  
of emotional eaters, it is important that they are treated with 
a well-balanced mix of being validated in their perception of 
negative emotions and being confronted with a practical 
focus on changing problem behaviour. “Based in the 
biosocial theory, DBT has a unique approach to targeting 
behavioural dysfunction that is not typically seen among 
other cognitive-behavioural treatments; one key difference 
is the emphasis placed on emotions and emotion 
dysregulation.” [20]. 
C. DBT and eHealth  
There is a broad variety of eHealth self-management 
treatments available but the majority focus on weight loss 
and behaviour change. The discussion on the effectiveness 
of such interventions is progressing only slowly [27]-[33].  
Little knowledge in the field of eHealth treatment using 
Dialectical Behaviour Therapy or even emotion regulation 
has been acquired so far, let alone about emotion regulation 
focused on emotional eating behaviour.  
The results of one quasi-experimental study on the 
effectiveness of the mobile “DBT Coach”, that focused only 
on one particular skill in DBT (Opposite Action),  showed 
that emotion intensity decreased within each coaching 
session in participants suffering from Borderline Personality 
Disorder [34][35]. The target group uses the DBT Coach 
when it is needed most for them – after engaging in 
dysfunctional behaviour. One paper discusses the lack of 
user-friendliness of a DBT self-management mHealth 
application [36].  
A small number of DBT-based self-management 
mHealth apps can be found in the Google Play Store and in 
the Apple App Store. However, they typically lack scientific 
grounding, user involvement in the design process, 
psychological aspects, and personalization.  
D. Virtual coach and behaviour change 
Substantial research has been dedicated to the employment 
of virtual coaches [37][38]. A virtual coach, as an interactive 
and self-learning persuasive system, can assist in attitude 
and/or long term behaviour change by providing immediate 
and personalised support [37][39]. Various definitions of 
virtual coaching exist in research studies, focusing either on 
mediated communication via internet or phone, or on the 
telemonitoring of health but not on the personalised feedback 
side of coaching [37][40]. In this research, we adopt the 
definition of eCoaching by Lentferink et al. [38, p.16]: 
“…eCoaching is defined as the remote and automatic 
provision of just-in-time tailored feedback for healthy lifestyle 
management, by enabling users to set personal goals and 
encouraging to track personal progress towards their goals, 
adapting the feedback to the usage patterns and context, and 
encouraging 
long-term 
use.” 
Current 
eCoaching 
developments and studies often lack user and stakeholder 
involvement and are not grounded by the behavior change 
theories, which leads to low usability and therefore low 
adherence [38].  
 

235
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
III. 
APPROACH AND METHODS 
The objective of this research is to develop a personalised 
self-management 
intervention 
based 
on 
Dialectical 
Behaviour Therapy for young adult emotional eaters who 
are obese. We regard young adults as people in the age range 
of 18-44 years. Midlife transition, starting at the age of 40 to 
45, might bring along other circumstances. Development is 
guided by the CeHRes roadmap (Center for eHealth & 
Wellbeing Research, University Twente) – a holistic 
eHealth framework for developing eHealth interventions 
based on a participatory design process and persuasive 
design approach to maximize the impact of the behavior 
change support intervention [41]. It is essential to emphasise 
the effect of the ‘look and feel’ of the intervention interface 
design on the adherence of the user. The interface design 
should be attractive and engaging to the user, otherwise he 
or she is unlikely to use it. User- centered design and an 
inter-disciplinary approach are therefore incorporated in the 
CeHRes roadmap framework [42]. In addition, it is 
important to determine which design features are used in 
successful eHealth interventions. Other essential aspects are 
suitable input modalities (such as speech, text, gestures, 
mouse, touch, haptic, and tangible) [40] and interactivity, 
information architecture, the degree to which information is 
updated, aesthetics, usability, credibility, and entertainment 
factor [43][44]. 
A. eHealth Intervention Architecture 
The intervention consists of a series of education and 
instruction modules on emotional eating behaviour and 
emotion regulation. A personalised virtual coach will guide 
the user through four modules. First an ‘intake procedure’ will 
take place: the user will be invited to make a commitment 
never to lose him or herself in emotional eating behaviour 
again, followed by educational modules on mindfulness, 
emotion regulation, and stress tolerance (Fig. 1).  
Figure 1.  Schematic drawing of ‘Denk je zèlf!’ mHealth intervention 
The training offers exercises based on practical experience in 
daily life. Modules are replaceable – they can be replaced by 
modules with content that might be focused on users with low 
socio-economic status. Users are invited to fill in their 
behaviour chain analysis (Fig. 2) and emotion diary on a daily 
basis. The behaviour chain analysis is to be performed at the 
moment a participant has given into cravings and poor eating 
behaviour or is just about to do so. The behavioural chain 
analysis is utilised to analyse problem behaviour and 
determine prompting events and vulnerability factors. People 
can also fill in new personal goals and consider ways to 
prevent prompting events and to think of solutions to reduce 
susceptibility in the future. Reminders to log in to the 
application and fill in the behaviour chain and the diary are 
sent out at the fixed times previously agreed with the user.  
Both components are considered indispensable in the face-to-
face training being daily ‘homework’ for the participants. 
 
Figure 2.  Behaviour  chain analysis model by Linehan [19].   
B. Contextual inquiry 
This study focused on the contextual inquiry and early 
design phases. First, the contextual inquiry phase was carried 
out. To become familiar with what kind of support emotional 
eaters really need, it is important to understand the target 
group [45]. Even though interventions can be evaluated as 
positive in terms of effectiveness, if the target group is not 
captivated by its design and functionalities, they are not 
going to use it.  
The use of user profiles and Personas as a tool to inform 
design is still rare in social sciences. We used the LeRouge 
classification model [45] and Van Velsen’s additions to it 
[46] as a guideline to develop two Personas to guide the 
design of a virtual mHealth coaching intervention. Personas 
contain information on their technology skills and 
smartphone use, demographic facts, and healthcare 
specifics such as current practices in managing one’s own 
healthcare, support network, and information seeking 
attitude. In addition to the standard Persona classification 
model [41], Persona Lisanne is enriched by emotions and 
feelings in second iteration of contextual inquiry.   
To gather input for user profiles and Personas, 
questionnaires (N=321) were circulated via social media and 
the network of contacts. The target group was “young adults, 
18-44 years of age” who are self-declared emotional eaters. 
Examples of questionnaire questions: “For what purposes do 
you use your smartphone? (social media, news gathering, 
mail, gaming)”, “At what specific moment in time would you 
like to/are you in need of contact with a help system?”,  “What 
kind of support do you expect from a smartphone 
 

236
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
application?” We approached healthcare practitioners for 
expert interviews (N=13). In the next sections, we present the 
results of this design case study, including Personas, the use 
case scenario, and a description of the architecture and design 
of the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach. 
The use-case scenario is developed based on Personas 
(Fig. 3) and the specific lifestyle characteristics of the 
emotional eaters from the literature and interviews.  
 
Personas 
Lisanne, 25 years, high educated 
Anita, 46 years, limited education  
 
 
“I wish that I was more confident 
about myself ….” 
“When I am stressed out I start 
snatching the cookie tin” 
Background 
Lives alone, single / High school 
graduate / Suffers from obesity / 
Co-morbidity unknown / l. 1.62 
mtr., w. 91 kgs.  
Lives with husband and two sons / 
low SES / Suffers from obesity / Co-
morbidity unknown / l. 1.65 mtr., w. 
85 kgs.  
Attributes 
Feels insecure about her body / Is 
not able to sense the difference 
between hunger, appetite or 
emotion / Fears  experiencing 
what she really feels. 
Is worried about putting on more 
weight / Suffers from stress and 
finds comfort in food / Has a 
‘sweet tooth’ / Hates to be 
patronized by authorities. 
User needs 
Education on eating behaviour / 
Self-confidence / Help to set 
realistic goals / Support from 
peers. 
Stop gaining more weight / 
Education about healthy food / 
Getting support from her family / 
Stop harassing thoughts. 
Figure 3.  Key Personas Lisanne and Anita 
C. Design & prototyping 
During the design phase, a first clickable prototype of the 
graphical user interface was designed, based on two Personas, 
namely Lisanne and Anita (Fig. 3), and the Gestalt design 
principles [47], Nielsen’s usability heuristics [48], and 
Gomez’s heuristics on mobile devices [49]. The wireframes 
were created in Adobe Illustrator and reshaped to screens in 
Adobe Photoshop. Interactivity was added using InVision. 
The prototype consists of loading screen (visible when the 
application is loading), a login screen and a link to Frequently 
Asked Questions. The user is shown an informative text about 
how to use this application. Navigation is divided into four 
buttons: ‘coach’, ‘modules’, ‘diary’ and ‘profile’. The user 
can start a conversation with the coach through dialogues in a 
Whatsapp (messaging application for smartphone) layout 
style. The button ‘modules’ leads to subsets of learning 
modules on mindfulness, emotion regulation, and stress 
tolerance. In ‘diary’, the user can record feelings experienced. 
In ‘profile’, he or she can adjust settings and personal 
information such as uploading a personal picture. The user can 
also store encouraging items such as favorite pictures and 
quotes. Via the ‘central’ button the user can navigate back and 
forth to all the modules and functions available in this 
prototype.   
To develop an architecture of the personalised virtual 
coach, including the two vital parts - the behaviour chain-
analysis and the emotion diary, the Persona and use-case 
scenario were translated into user stories (example: 'As a user 
(Lisanne) I would like to get an overview of my diary so that I 
can see my history'). Next, user stories were translated into a 
functional prototype of the architecture of the virtual coach. 
D. Heuristic expert evaluation  
Iterative user evaluation in the early design stage is 
essential to obtain early feedback from the potential users and 
so improve the protoype. An expert evaluation of the first 
version of the clickable prototype of the user interface was 
conducted by a usability expert (a lecturer in User Centered 
Design at Hanze University of Applied Sciences) This expert 
was asked to perform eight different tasks. The heuristics 
[48][49] were scored using a 5-point Likert-scale  (1=does 
not fulfil requirements; 5=fulfils requirements). Examples of 
the applied heuristics include: “Is there an option to navigate 
back (button)?”; “Is there a facility for horizontal 
scrolling?”; “Do drop-down menus have a logical order?”; 
“Is there sufficient contrast between text and background?”  
The expert was guided through a task scenario. Tasks 
were: Log in to the app; Read the introduction about the app; 
Read the Frequently Asked Questions; Communicate with the 
Virtual Coach about your eating behaviour; Setup/configure 
your profile; Set the alarm to receive daily notifications; 
Figure 4.   Screen capture from the usability test: eye tracking gaze plot 
video 
 

237
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Check on available modules and Fill in your diary. The 
results were used to modify and to adjust the prototype. 
E. Usability evaluation with eye-gaze tracking 
Next, a usability evaluation of the second improved 
version of the clickable prototype was conducted among the 
target group (N=10).  
Participants, procedure & materials: Task scenarios were 
created. Tasks were presented as short stories to give more 
context. In total, ten participants [50] volunteered to  perform 
a test with eight tasks. Among the ten participants, five were 
university students studying behavioural sciences, three were 
self-declared) emotional eaters and two were user interface 
designers. Participants were recruited via the Facebook social 
network used by the students.  The usability test took around 
30 minutes. Participants first received a pre-briefing on the 
goals of the usability test and the nature of volunteer 
participation. Next, users executed the task scenarios followed 
by a post-test interview.  
During the usability tests (Fig. 4), participants were 
monitored by eye tracking, using a ‘Tobii Mobile Device 
Stand’ (MDS) [51], followed by an interview in accordance 
with the Retrospective Think Aloud Method [52]. A calibrated 
eye tracker (one that follows the eye pupils of a test user) 
registered what the user is looking at while performing each 
task using the second clickable prototype. The evaluator is 
able to see what parts of the interface the user is looking at, 
even if the test user scrolls, or zooms in while interacting with 
the user interface [51]. The results are plotted on so-called 
gaze plots and the evaluator is able to watch a slow-motion 
replay.  
With participants' permission real-time gaze replay video 
is recorded of the eye-tracking sessions.  
Measures: we measured the task performance by 
recording some quantitative measures, such as registering 
how much time is needed to complete each task, the number 
of times a particpant made ‘wrong’ choices/clicks, how many 
tasks were completed, and the number of taps or swipes that 
were needed to perform each task. The ways in which the 
designer performed the tasks was taken as a reference point. 
Tasks were measured on a scale 1-3 (1 = user failed to perform 
the task; 2=user performed the task but with errors; 3=user 
performed the task without any errors). Qualitative measures 
were 
extracted 
from 
the 
post-test 
interviews. 
The 
Retrospective Think Aloud (RTA) method [52] is used to 
collect additional information about the motivation of the 
choices users make while performing the tasks. After each 
user test session, post-interviews are conducted with each 
participant in order to give the user the opportunity to further 
explain why he or she made specific choices, as well as to 
obtain feedback on the user experience as additional input to 
improvement of the prototype. The RTA method - in 
combination with the eye-tracking allows a user to focus 
completely on the task. Research has shown that in 
retrospective think-aloud protocols, more problems were 
detected by means of verbalization, because the participants 
had more time to verbalize the problems [53]. Analysis of the 
gaze plots is not yet finalized and is work-in-progress.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Questionnaires and interviews 
In total, 321 responses were collected from the 
questionnaires and 13 interviews with healthcare practitioners 
(dieticians, physical therapists and psychologists) were 
conducted. The interviews were all transcribed and coded. We 
used a free coding style (no pre-set codes) so as not to lose the 
richness of the data. In addition, six obesity therapy patients 
were interviewed to obtain insight into the daily needs and 
experiences of the emotional eaters.  
Data extraction from the questionnaires was processed for 
the purpose of creating user profiles and Personas according 
to the method proposed by LeRouge [45]: (a) personal and 
demographic information; (b) technical capabilities and 
limitations; and (c) needs and desires concerning support and 
care. Data derived from the interviews with experts and 
patients gave information about eating styles and the problems 
that emotional eaters encounter.    
B. Personas and use-case scenarios 
Two Personas were derived from the questionnaire data: 
Lisanne (25 years) and Anita (46 years). Figure 3 shows their 
personal profiles. Lisanne is a highly educated young woman. 
She is an obese emotional eater. Her eating behaviour is 
caused by a negative self-image. Eating gives her a feeling of 
comfort as long as the eating lasts. Afterwards, she feels guilty 
and depressed. Anita is 46 years old and a mother of two. She 
worries about the family’s financial situation and overeats in 
stressful situations. Anita left school at an early age. She is 
from a low socio-economic background.  
What we learned by creating the Personas is that we 
achieved a better understanding about the specific needs of the 
target group. We obtained a better comprehension of the 
moments and situations that cause emotional eating behaviour 
and the kind of intervention that might be helpful to them. 
During the design process, you can ask questions such as: 
“What would Lisanne think of this? Would she like it? Would 
she consider this as useful?” 
To illustrate how Lisanne will benefit from the virtual 
coaching application, we created a use-case scenario (Fig. 5) 
in which she is about to give in to emotional eating craving. 
Use-case scenarios [54][55] are derived from Personas, 
interviews, and questionnaire results by describing the user 
goals, motivations, actions, and reactions while using the 
virtual mHealth coaching application.  
In the ”Day of Lisanne’s life” scenario (Fig. 5) – the most 
common characteristics are mentioned, such as suffering 
from negative emotions and low self-esteem. Persona 
Lisanne is enriched with emotional characteristics and 
personal feelings. All her emotions are linked to realistic and 
possible causes, such as difficult situations at work or at 
home. Personas are distinguished from each other in terms of 
technical skills, demographic backgrounds and healthcare 
status specifics. As a result, they are realistic personifications 
of their very specific sub-target groups. The existing Personas 
Lisanne and Anita both are emotional eaters but the emotions 
and feelings that urge them to overeat, diverge widely.  

238
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  Persona Lisanne translated into use-case scenario aspects        
Lisanne gives in to cravings, driven by disgust, while Anita 
binges when she is under a lot of stress.The next step in this 
research is to develop a use-case scenario for all the Personas 
next to Lisanne, each of them enriched with their own specific 
emotional characteristics. 
C. Prototype of a “Denk je zèlf! personalised virtual Coach 
The first prototype of the architecture of the virtual coach  
and a clickable prototype of the user interface were  developed 
during the pre-design phase. The Personas Lisanne and Anita 
served as a starting point for a concept design (Fig. 5) of the 
Day of Lisanne’s life – a Use Case Scenario 
User Profile 
The alarmclock goes off; Lisanne presses the snooze button. She had a bad night. Probably because she spent 
a lot of time on her tablet and watching television last night, but she couldn’t sleep anyway.... 
Lisanne gets out of bed eventually. She is standing in front of her drawer. What to wear? She slips into an 
oversized black sweater and a pair of jeans. She is way too fat to wear a fashionable dress. 
 “Oh bummer... no time for breakfast...” The bus is leaving within 5 minutes. The bus stops exactly in front 
of the building Lisanne is working. She meets colleague Esther at the coffee corner. Esther convinces 
Lisanne to come with her to the supermarket on the other side of the street. Esther didn’t have any breakfast 
herself and she fancies a bite. Lisanne wants a freshly baked sandwich. That way she could make up for her 
missed breakfast. It is very busy in the store. She should focus  on her presentation, scheduled for less then 
10 minutes from now. Esther yells at her, waving, her hands full with donuts and soft drinks. Lisanne: “Oh 
well, I will get a healthy sandwich later in the day....”   
Ok, one last sip of coke and off she goes. The meeting is about to start now. Lisanne is nervous – she hates 
presenting in front of a group.  She thinks that everyone in the room is convinced that she is dumb and that 
she looks fat. Her clothes look ugly on her.  
It is noisy in the hall. The door opens. A colleague is standing in the door opening. She is carrying a birthday 
cake and starts handing out cake to everyone in the room. Lisanne is upset. She hates to do presentations and 
now she is interrupted too.... The colleagues don’t seem to care so Lisanne decided to keep her mouth shut.  
Coffee time! Esther brings Lisanne a mug and nestles herself on Lisanne’s desk. She fancies going out 
tonight to their favorite bar. Tonight is Fry-night: all-you-can-eat chips & snacks for a fixed price. Lisanne 
doesn’t feel like going, she’d better have something more healthy to eat. But Esther persuades her, saying it 
will be fun. “Mm, I really should stop nagging.... why am I making all this fuss about nothing? Why care? 
Tomorrow is another day. Tomorrow we will start eating healthily!”  
Esther turns around on her way out and throws a bag of chocolate peanuts on Lisanne’s desk. Here, 
something to nibble while you are working. Now Lisanne is totally miserable... doesn’t Esther realise what 
she is doing? The bag with chocolate peanuts is empty and the amount of work still high. She has got only 
two hours left and she starts panicking. She was not able to get a lot of work done. She is about to cry. Esther 
appears in the door opening. Time to go! Lisanne brings up some poor excuses - she really doesn’t feel like 
going out. But Esther doesn’t want to hear it and drags her along. The Fry-night has started of and both the 
girls are served a large plate with fries and chicken satay. Esther babbles along, as she usually does. In the 
meanwhile everybody in the bar is a bit tipsy. Lisanne feels lonely. Esther is standing at the counter, talking 
to some guys. She invites Lisanne to come over and join them. Lisanne grabs her handbag. She is going 
home. She waves and gestures to Esther that she feels nauseous and that she is leaving. On the one hand she 
feels relieved that she has left but on the other hand she is disappointed in herself. Why can’t she just enjoy 
an evening out and have fun just like everybody else? Why is she so damn shy?  
Aspects of a sedentary lifestyle: computer, 
television; poor sleeping habits (sleep 
hygiene: going to bed too late); people 
with obesity often suffer from sleeping 
problems. 
 
Obese people often suffer from low self- 
esteem and low body image. 
 
Poor eating habits– no breakfast; no 
decent meals, just snacks, sugary soft 
drinks; little knowledge about what is 
healthy food. 
 
What the hell effect: totally giving up on 
set goals (diet, exercise) after one single 
slip and feeling justified in giving in to 
poor habits (binging) because the 
intention is already ‘ruined’. 
 
Negative self image: people who are  
overweight suffer from a lack of self-
confidence and have an inferiority 
complex. 
 
(unrealistic) Assumptions about what 
others might think of you; not assertive, 
not able to stand up for oneself. 
 
Mindless eating (mostly snacks and 
sweets); eating as a coping-strategy to 
cope with stress – emotion regulating 
eating behaviour. 
 
Social introversion – quiet and reserved in 
large groups and around unfamiliar 
people. 
Low self-esteem and a bad body image. 
 
Having difficulties acknowledging and 
expressing feelings and emotions. 
Emotional eaters have trouble recognizing 
feelings of hunger and thirst, pleasure or 
discomfort. Most of the negative feelings 
are translated into appetite.  
 
situation upcoming food craving: 
Lisanne comes home and plumps down on to her couch, next to the pile of laundry that still needed to be 
done. She is hungry. She feels lonely. Nobody likes her...  
Her stomach is rumbling and she takes a quick glance at the kitchen cupboard. Lisanne is about to giving in 
to her food craving. Butter biscuits and potato chips. She feels tempted to rip open the bag of potato chips 
and plunge into it,  grabbing chips by the handful at the same time. Binge eating lies in ambush for attack 
and she senses a crying need for some kind of support, for someone who could provide her with advice to 
pull her through this situation. After finishing the bag of chips, she eats some leftover portions of ice cream 
she ordered at the take-away yesterday, and some mouldy cookies she found in the bread box. 
situation upcoming food craving – consulting the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach: 
Lisanne comes home and plumps down on to her couch, next to the pile of laundry that still needed to be 
done. She is hungry. She feels lonely. Nobody likes her...  
She reaches for her phone and activates the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ app. The virtual coach welcomes her with: “Hi 
Lisanne, how can I help you?” Lisanne starts typing:  
-When I come home at night I start craving for snacks and chocolate… I just can’t resist them… 
-Hi Lisanne, I really feel sorry for you. Let me try to help you. The greater part of emotional eating occurs at 
night, due to feelings of loneliness or experiencing stress, but it can also happen because of irregular eating 
behaviour. Shall we give it a try to investigate this?  
The virtual coach refers Lisanne to the behaviour chain analysis. Lisanne finds comfort in the reassuring 
words of the virtual coach and starts with the behaviour chain exercise. 
After finishing the chain exercise Lisanne feels somewhat relieved.  The coach urges her to reward herself. 
She treats herself with a hot bath. The perfumed bath water makes her feel calm and sleepy... 

239
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
user interface and content of ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach 
modules: intake, mindfulness, emotion regulation and stress 
tolerance. The Java-based virtual assistant (developed on the 
Play framework) makes use of the Alpino open-source natural 
language parser. This Dutch linguistic language analyser [56] 
is self-learning and produces ‘tree diagram’ data in XML 
format.  The output is stored in a graph database (NEO4J).  
 The virtual coach was developed to meet the needs of the 
user  for immediate support. Every time a user is experiencing 
negative emotions, he or she can connect to the virtual coach 
and ask questions and start a dialogue. The virtual coach is the 
very heart of the e-DBT ‘Denk je zèlf!’ training. It supplies 
users with so-called dialectical dialogues – providing answers 
to their need for change and to their need for acceptance. 
According to Lynch et al. [20], dialectical theory is defined as: 
“The thesis (behaviour change) brought forth the antithesis 
(the need for acceptance), and both acceptance and change-
based strategies were integrated into the treatment package 
(synthesis). Dialectical theory provides the theoretical 
undercurrent needed to balance and synthesize these 
strategies. Core acceptance-based strategies derive from 
client-centered approaches and Zen practice and these 
involve 
mindfulness 
skills, 
validation, 
and 
radical 
acceptance.” [20, pp. 463].  The goal of the training is to teach 
people how to develop their own wise mind and to learn to  
make decisions that have positive consequences for the 
quality of life. By providing dialectical dialogues, the virtual 
coach can help the user to practise this process of decision-
making by identifying the possible consequences of making 
decisions. The output of the virtual coach is personalised by 
data derived from the behavioural chain analysis and the 
emotion diary. The virtual coach is a self-learning system. 
Ecological momentary assessment (EMA), often termed  
experience sampling measures (ESM), is applied within the  
virtual mHealth coaching application to assess behavioural 
aspects [57][58], for instance by assessing subjective 
momentary states several times a day via a user-experience 
diary integrated into a virtual mHealth coach application.  
D. Evaluation of the first prototype:‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual 
coach   
The expert user was asked to perform eight task scenarios 
based on 15 heuristics [44][45]. The overall impression, 
conveyed by the user expert was good, but he remarked that:  
• 
the functionalities horizontal and vertical scrolling 
are not yet fully operational; 
• 
no clarity about where to find oneself in the process; 
• 
difficulties in locating the virtual coach; 
• 
some modules do need additional explanation.  
The feedback given was processed and the second clickable 
prototype was built. Ten test users performed the eye tracking 
test and a Retrospective Think Aloud session.  
According to the results of a usability test (see Table 1), the 
virtual coach application scored highly on the usability, 
which in this case is defined as the accurate execution of a 
given task via a user interface. The accuracy of the tasks were 
assessed on a scale of 1-3. A task is graded 1 if the user fails 
to perform the task, grade 2 when the performance is done 
with (some) difficulties and a 3 for a problem-free 
performance. Two of the tasks scored as unsatisfactory: users 
found it difficult to navigate to and to find the biography, and 
to adjust the settings for a notification and to understand its 
purpose. Users tend to tap on the ‘No logon code? Read this’ 
link because they had no idea of how to log in to the 
application. They tried to utilize a non-active link in the text 
or to navigate back to the login page. Adjusting the personal 
profile was a difficult task because the corresponding button 
was labelled ‘settings’ and that made it hard to find. Some 
users had difficulties with setting up a notification. The 
routing via the start button and the ‘hamburger menu’ (icon 
with three parallel horizontal lines) was considered accurate 
but the alarm icon was not recognised. Test users delivered 
feedback such as: ‘It is not easy to obtain a login code’, “It is 
difficult to locate personal settings’ and ‘I don’t like the color 
orange.’ The designers used clickable prototypes. That 
means that the interface does not offer unlimited navigation 
and interactivity.  This should have been communicated more 
accurately to the users. 
TABLE I.   TASKS AND THEIR SCORES
 

240
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Four users suggested that the layout color should be 
adjustable by the user. In the third clickable prototype the 
label of the button ‘settings’ is changed to ‘profile’.  The 
alarm functionality has a standard icon attached to it, and 
setting the alarm itself is made more explicit. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
The main contributions of this paper are: (a) emotion- 
enriched Personas Lisanne and Anita as a new approach to 
guide the empathic design, which contributes to a better 
understanding of the mental model of the target group; (b) use-
case scenario describing the daily challenges of an emotional 
eater, namely Persona Lisanne, which can be used for 
designing other lifestyle support and eCoaching applications 
for this vulnerable target group; (c) a clickable prototype of 
the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual eCoach user interface; (d) results of 
the first user evaluation with the usability expert via a heuristic 
evaluation. The usability of the second clickable visual 
prototype was tested with users via thinking aloud usability 
tests using eye tracking. First results demonstrated that users 
are positive towards the virtual coach prototype. However, the 
first results are rather limited due to a small number of 
participants and the incomplete analysis of the eye gaze 
tracking data.  
As a next step, the user interface of the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ 
virtual coaching application will be modified, further 
developed and iteratively evaluated by a larger number of 
target users. Within this next design and evaluation phase, the 
preferred appearance of the virtual coach will be investigated, 
in order to ensure that the virtual character, whether a peer or 
a health professional, is visually appealing and motivating for 
the emotional eaters. In addition, the content of the dialectical 
dialogue feedback messages of a virtual coach will be derived 
and iteratively validated with users, based on handbooks for 
therapists and online user forums. The users will be given 
small assignments such as navigating to the virtual coach and 
starting a conversation. Participants of the next user 
evaluation session will be asked to judge the responses of a 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  clickable visual prototype of the user interface with screens 
virtual coach, module mindfulness and profile 
virtual coach in terms of their persuasiveness, faithfulness and 
truthfulness. The output will not only benefit the quality of the 
user experience and the virtual coach interface, but will also 
inform future design and summative evaluation.     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
     Lisanne and Anita are imaginary persons. Photos are 
retrieved from Shutterstock.  
We thank all participants of the user studies, as well as 
students of the minors Healthy Ageing, Applied Psychology, 
and Web & Mobile Services at Hanze University of Applied 
Sciences for collecting data and supporting this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Dol, “Denk je zèlf! Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach for 
Emotional Eaters using Personas,” The Eighth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2016), ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-470-1, pp. 
42-47. 
[2] 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.volksgezondheidenzorg.info/onderwerp/overgewicht/cijf
ers-context/gezondheidsgevolgen#node-maatschappelijke-gevolgen 
05-01-2016 [retrieved: November 25, 2016] 
[3] 
L. Kristén, A. Ivarsson, J. Parker, and K. Ziegert,  “Future challenges 
for intervention research in health and lifestyle research  - A systematic 
meta-literature review. International,” Journal of Qualitative Studies 
on Health and Well-Being, v. 10, 2015. 
[4] 
T.I. Van den Berg, S.M. Alavinia, F.J. Bredt,  D. Lindeboom, L.A.  
Elders, and A. Burdorf, “The influence of psychosocial factors at work 
and life style on health and work ability among professional workers,” 
Int Arch Occup Environ Health, 81(8), 2008, pp. 1029-1036. 
[5] 
World HO. WHO | Obesity and Overweight. January 2015; Available 
at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ [retrieved: 
November 25, 2016] 
[6] 
Statistics Netherlands (Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek). 
Webmagazine, 
Available 
at: 
http://www.cbs.nl/nl-
NL/menu/themas/gezondheid-
welzijn/publicaties/artikelen/archief/2014/2014-3939-
wm.htm?RefererType=RSSItem [retrieved: November 25, 2016] 
[7] 
T. Mann, A.J. Tomiyama, E. Westling, A. Lew, B. Samuels, and J. 
Chatman, “Medicare's search for effective obesity treatments: Diets are 
not the answer,” Am Psychol,  04;62(3), 2007, pp. 220-233. 
[8] 
Weight Watchers. Available at https://www.weightwatchers.com/us/ 
[retrieved November 25, 2016]. 
[9] 
My Diet Coach. Available at http://www.mydietcoachapp.com 
[retrieved November 25, 2016].  
[10] Lose It! Available at https://www.loseit.com [retrieved November 25, 
2016].  
[11] T. Van Strien, A. Cebolla, E. Etchemendy, J. Gutiérrez-Maldonado, M. 
Ferrer-García, C. Botella, and R. Baños, “Emotional eating and food 
intake after sadness and joy,” Appetite, 7/1;66, 2013, pp. 20-25. 
[12] T. Van Strien, C.P. Herman, and M.W. Verheijden, “Eating style, 
overeating and weight gain. A prospective 2-year follow-up study in a 
representative Dutch sample,” Appetite, 12;59(3), 2012, pp. 782-789. 
[13] M.A. Roosen, D. Safer, S. Adler, A. Cebolla, and T. van Strien,  
“Group dialectical behavior therapy adapted for obese emotional 
eaters; a pilot study,” Nutr Hosp,  07/20;27(4), 2012, pp. 1141-1147.  
[14] Z. Cooper et al. “Testing a new cognitive behavioural treatment for 
obesity: A randomized controlled trial with three-year follow-up,” 
Behav Res Ther, 8;48(8), 2010, pp. 706-713. 
[15] P.G. Koenders and T. van Strien, “Emotional eating, rather than 
lifestyle behavior, drives weight gain in a prospective study in 1562 
employees,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,  
11;53(11), 2011, pp. 1287-1293. 
[16] A.I. Concepción, “Effects of diets and their role in weight control,” 
Psychol Health Med, 05;12(3), 2007, 321-327. 

241
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[17] A.J. Blair, V.J. Lewis, and D.A. Booth, “Does emotional eating 
interfere with success in attempts at weight control?” Appetite, 
10;15(2), 1990, pp. 151-157. 
[18] J. Ruwaard, “The efficacy and effectiveness of online CBT,” 
Department op Clinical Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 2012. 
[19] M.M. Linehan, “Skills training manual for treating borderline 
personality disorder,” New York, NY US: Guilford Press, 1993. 
[20] T.R. Lynch, A.L. Chapman, M.Z. Rosenthal, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. 
Linehan, “Mechanisms of change in dialectical behavior therapy: 
Theoretical and empirical observations,” J Clin Psychol, 04;62(4), 
2006, pp. 459-480. 
[21] A.H. Robinson and D.L. Safer, “Moderators of dialectical behavior 
therapy for binge eating disorder: Results from a randomized 
controlled trial,” Int J Eat Disord, 05;45(4), 2012, pp. 597-602. 
[22] P. Daansen, “Eetbuien en affectregulatie: het gebruik van dialectisch-
gedragstherapeutische 
principes 
bij 
de 
behandeling 
van 
eetstoornissen,” Directieve Therapie, 26, 2006, pp. 79-89. 
[23] D.L. Safer, C.F. Telch, and E.Y. Chen, “Dialectical Behaviour Therapy 
for Binge Eating and Bulimia,” New York: The Guilford Press, 2009.  
[24] D.L. Safer, A.H. Robinson, and B. Jo, “Outcome from a randomized 
controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating disorder: Comparing 
dialectical behavior therapy adapted for binge eating to an active 
comparison group therapy,” Behavior Therapy, 03;41(1), 2010, pp. 
106-120. 
[25] C.F. Telch, W.S. Agras, and M.M. Linehan, “Dialectical behavior 
therapy for binge eating disorder,” J Consult Clin Psychol, 12;69(6), 
2001, pp. 1061-1065. 
[26] E.Y. Chen, L. Matthews, C. Allen, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. Linehan, 
“Dialectical behavior therapy for clients with binge-eating disorder or 
bulimia nervosa and borderline personality disorder,” Int J Eat Disord, 
41(6), 2008, pp. 505-512. 
[27] M. Bardus, J. Smith, and C. Abraham, “Are eHealth interventions for 
obesity prevention effective? A systematic review of reviews,” The 
European Journal of Public Health, v. 25 (suppl 3), 2015.  
[28] B. Khokhar et al. “Effectiveness of mobile electronic devices in weight 
loss among overweight and obese populations: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis,” BMC Obesity, 2014, 1:22. 
[29] M. De Zwaan et al. “INTERBED: internet-based guided self-help for 
overweight and obese patients with full or subsyndromal binge eating 
disorder. A multicenter randomized controlled trial,” Trials, 11/21;13, 
2012, pp. 220-220. 
[30] J. Harvey-Berino et al. “Internet delivered behavioral obesity 
treatment,” Prev Med, 08;51(2), 2010, pp. 123-128. 
[31] M.J. Hutchesson et al. “eHealth interventions for the prevention and 
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review with 
meta-analysis,” Obesity Reviews, 16, 5, 2015, pp. 376-392. 
[32] G.M. Manzoni, F. Pagnini, S. Corti, E. Molinari, and G. Castelnuovo, 
“Internet-based behavioral interventions for obesity: An updated 
systematic review,” Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental 
Health, 2011, 7, pp. 19-28. 
[33] M. Svensson et al. “The Change in Eating Behaviors in a Web-Based 
Weight Loss Program: A Longitudinal Analysis of Study Completers,” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11;16(11), 2014, 1-1. 
[34] L.A. Dimeff, S.L. Rizvi, I.S. Contreras, J.M. Skutch, and D. Carroll, 
“The mobile revolution and the DBT Coach,” the Behavior Therapist, 
09;34(6), 2011, pp. 104-110. 
[35] S.L. Rizvi, L.A. Dimeff, J. Skutch, D. Carroll, and M.M. Linehan, ”A 
Pilot Study of the DBT Coach: An Interactive Mobile Phone 
Application for Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder and 
Substance Use Disorder,” Behavior Therapy, 12/01;42(4), 2011, pp. 
589-600. 
[36] M. Washburn and D.E. Parrish, “DBT Self-Help Application for 
Mobile Devices,” Journal of Technology in Human Services; 31(2), 
2013, pp. 175-183. 
[37] O.A. Kulyk, H.J.A. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, and J.E.W.C. van 
Gemert-Pijnen, “Personalized Virtual Coaching for Lifestyle Support: 
Principles for Design and Evaluation,” International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, 6;3&4, 2014, pp. 300-309. 
[38] A. Lentferink et al., “Self-tracking and Persuasive eCoaching in 
Healthy Lifestyle Interventions: Work-in-progress Scoping Review of 
Key Components,” Proceedings of the Fourth Int. Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS16), co-located with the 11th 
Int. Conference PERSUASIVE 2016, Salzburg, Austria, April 5, pp. 
15-35. 
[39] E. Hudlicka, “Virtual training and coaching of health behavior: 
Example from mindfulness meditation training,” Patient Education and 
Counseling, 92, (2013), pp. 160–166.  
[40] H. Geissler, M. Hasenbein, S. Kanatouri, and R. Wegener, “E-
Coaching: Conceptual and Empirical Findings of a Virtual Coaching 
Programme International,” Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and 
Mentoring, Vol 12 (2), pp. 165 – 187. 
[41] E.J. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al. “A holistic framework to improve the 
uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 
13, no. 4, 2011, p. e111.  
[42] D. Morris, T.S. Saponas, and T. Desney, “Emerging Input 
Technologies for Always-Available Mobile Interaction,” Found. 
Trends Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, 4 (April 2011), pp. 245-316. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1100000023. 
[43] O. Kulyk, R. Kosara, J. Urquiza and I. Wassink Human-Centered 
Aspects. pp. 13-76. In Human-Centered Visualization Environments, 
A. Kerren, A. Ebert and J.-J.C. Meyer (eds), Springer Verlag, Berlin, 
2007. 
[44] L. M. Ritterband, F.P. Thorndike, D.J. Cox, B.P. Kovatchev, and L.A. 
Gonder-Frederick, “A Behavior Change Model for Internet 
Interventions,” Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 2009, 07;38(1), pp.18-
27. 
[45] C. LeRouge, J. Ma, S. Sneha, and K. Tolle, “User profiles and personas 
in the design and development of consumer health technologies,” Int J 
Med Inf, 82(11), 2013, pp. 251-268. 
[46] L. Van Velsen, L. Van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, D. Beaujean, and J. 
Van Steenbergen, “Personas: The linking pin in holistic design for 
eHealth,” The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2012), IARIA, 
ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3, pp. 128 – 133. 
[47] L. Graham, Gestalt Theory in Interactive Media Design (ISSN 
193407227) 2008 
[48] Nielsen, J., and Molich, R. (1990). Heuristic evaluation of user 
interfaces, Proc. ACM CHI'90 Conf. (Seattle, WA, 1-5 April), 249-
256. 
[49] R. Gomez, D.C. Caballero and J. Sevillano, “Heuristic Evaluation on 
Mobile Interfaces: A New Checklist,” 2014. 
[50] Nielsen, Jakob, and Landauer, Thomas K.: "A mathematical model of 
the finding of usability problems," Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI'93 
Conference (Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 24-29 April 1993), pp. 206-
213. 
[51] A. Rösler, “Using the Tobii Mobile Device Stand in Usability Testinhg 
on 
Mobile 
Devices,” 
Whitepaper. 
2012. 
Available 
at  
http://www.tobiipro.com/siteassets/tobii-pro/learn-and-
support/whitepapers/tobii_pro_whitepaper_mobiledevicetesting.pdf   
[retrieved: November 25, 2016]. 
[52] Z. Guan, S. Lee, E. Cuddihy, and J. Ramey, “The Validity of the 
Stimulated Retrospective Think-Aloud Method as Measured by Eye 
Tracking,” CHI 2006 Proceedings • Usability Methods.  
[53] M. J. van den Haak, Menno de Jong and Peter Jan Schellens, 
“Retrospective vs. concurrent think-aloud protocols: the usability of an 
online library catalogue,”  Behaviour & Information Tecnology, sept-
okt. 2003, vol 22, p339-351 
[54] J.M. Carroll, “Five reasons for scenario-based design,” Interacting with 
Computers, 13(1), 2000, pp. 43-60. 
[55] A. Pommeranz, W-P. Brinkman, P. Wiggers, J. Broekens, and C.M. 
Jonker, “Design Guidelines for Negotiation Support Systems: An 
Expert Perspective Using Scenarios,” VTT symposium, 258, 2009, pp. 
323-330. 

242
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[56] University of Groningen, “PIONIER Project,” Available at 
http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/  [retrieved: November 25, 
2016]. 
[57] S. Shiffman, A.A. Stone, and M.R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary 
assessment,” Annu Rev Clin Psychol, 2008, 4:1–3.6.  
[58] I. Myin-Germeys et al. “Experience sampling research in 
psychopathology: opening the black box of daily life,” Psychol. Med. 
39, 2009, pp. 1533–1547. 
 

