 
Technology-Enhanced Language Learning: A Case Study  
of a Global Classroom in Second Life 
Kevin Oh, Natalie Nussli 
School of Education 
University of San Francisco, United States 
{koh2@usfca.edu, ncnussli@usfca.edu} 
 
Abstract—This 
study 
reports 
on 
a 
case 
study 
about 
conversation practice in Second Life, a three-dimensional (3D) 
virtual environment, between 12 English language learners and 
18 special education teachers. The purpose of the study was to 
examine participants’ perceptions of the usability of virtual 
worlds as a language learning platform and to identify the 
unique skills required for successful teaching in a 3D 
environment. Specifically, the anxiety-reducing features of the 
virtual, anonymous environment in which oral language skills 
can be practiced through avatars were investigated. Extensive 
challenges inherent to the lesson design and audio quality were 
identified in this study. Guidelines on how to address these 
challenges as well as ideas for alternative, more effective 
learning designs, such as the discussion group format, are 
outlined. The study resulted in nine suggestions for virtual 
conversation practice in 3D environments. These findings will 
be relevant to other language instructors who plan to use 
Second Life or a similar virtual world for oral fluency 
enhancement in collaborative language practice. 
Keywords-Second Life, virtual worlds, foreign language 
acquisition, oral fluency, collaboration, conversation partners, 
anxiety, oral production, teacher education 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This article reports on an investigation of the usability of 
Second Life, a highly compelling visual and immersive 
virtual world, to improve English language learners’ (ELLs) 
oral fluency by engaging them in purposeful interaction with 
English 
native 
speakers 
[1]. 
Second 
Life 
(http://secondlife.com) is a popular example of a 3D 
interactive environment. 
Oral fluency is a complex, difficult-to-measure construct. 
It has been defined as the ability to produce language without 
undue pauses or hesitations [2]. Four types have been 
identified [3]. These include the ability to (i) fill time with 
talk, (ii) produce logical and semantically dense language, 
(iii) have appropriate things to say in a wide range of 
contexts, and (iv) express oneself in a creative and 
imaginative way, using a wide variety of alternative 
linguistic devices and choosing the one that is most situation 
appropriate. 
The current study is situated in a 3D immersive virtual 
world. Virtual reality has been defined as “a computer-
generated display that allows or compels the user (or users) 
to have a sense of being present in an environment other 
than the one they are actually in, and to interact with that 
environment” [4]. Educational platforms can be found in the 
areas of astronomy, medicine, music, literature, biology, 
history, mathematics, forensic science, ecology, and 
tourism, to name a few. The Abyss Observatory [5], for 
example, is a museum and aquarium of earth and oceanic 
science, marine life, and underwater technology. Sploland 
[6] is a virtual science museum with more than 100 hands-
on exhibits.   
Second Life provides a powerful platform for situational 
language practice. Recent studies [7]-[11] indicate that a 
virtual world can assist language learners by extending the 
traditional language classroom. It provides an environment 
for stress-free, one-on-one oral practice through activities, 
such as role-playing, discussions, presentations, debates, 
games, and simulations. English language learners, in 
particular Chinese students, tend to be apprehensive of 
spoken communication for fear of being negatively 
evaluated [12]. The results of a study by Wehner et al. [13] 
suggest that virtual worlds may help to reduce student 
anxiety and increase their motivation to learn a foreign 
language. Virtual worlds could be an effective way to help 
Chinese ELLs overcome these fears and inhibitions.  
In a group of 313 Chinese ELLs, Mak [14] identified 
five factors leading to speaking-in class anxiety. These 
include: “speech anxiety and fear of negative evaluation; 
discomfort when speaking with native speakers; negative 
attitudes towards the English classroom; negative self-
evaluation; and fear of failing the class/consequences of 
personal failure” (p. 202). Appropriate wait-time has 
particularly strong implications for Chinese-speaking ELLs 
because it helps to reduce their anxiety. Chinese students 
appreciate a longer wait-time to speak up and respond than 
European language learners “because ‘group unity’ and 
‘face’ are important elements of their culture” [14]. These 
two constructs may be at risk when the students are under 
pressure. Given the linguistic and cognitive demands on oral 
language production, learners should be given ample 
preparation time prior to giving a speech or presentation in 
front of an audience in order to reduce their anxiety. Large 
amounts of teacher talk and limited student talk obstruct 
students’ speech in the classroom [15] [16]. While Chinese 
ELLs may be willing to participate in interpersonal 
conversations, for example with one conversation partner at 
a time, they may be reluctant to speak English in class, that 
is, in front of an audience, for fear of negative evaluation 
[17].  
240
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
The current study contributes to the research about 
language learning in virtual worlds by identifying ELLs’ 
and special education (SPED) teachers’ perceptions of 
Second Life as a language learning platform, the unique 
skills required for teaching in a 3D space, and potential 
challenges. Recent studies in the field of second and foreign 
language acquisition are reviewed in the next section, 
followed by the purpose of the present study. The sample, 
the six data collection instruments, the procedures, and data 
analysis are described in the method section. Results are 
organized around the instruments and are presented from the 
perspective of both the ELLs and the SPED teachers. The 
discussion section is organized around the research 
questions and concludes with suggestions for alternative 
learning designs. The conclusion summarizes the impact of 
the study and concludes with the study’s limitations and 
suggestions for future research. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
This review starts with a discussion of recent findings 
suggesting the superiority of 3D virtual environments over 
traditional learning environments for specific tasks. The 
second part of the review elaborates on virtual worlds 
research in the field of second language acquisition. 
A. Objective Measurement of Learning Outcomes 
Overall, despite an abundance of studies examining 
teachers’ and students’ perceptions of their virtual world 
experiences, only few studies have objectively measured 
learning outcomes. Chau et al. [18], for example, evaluated 
whether 3D virtual environments could facilitate students’ 
learning outcomes. The task required students in an 
introductory management information system course to 
identify information security issues in a virtual office set-up 
in Second Life. The experimental group using Second Life 
gained higher test scores in the tasks than students in the 
control group who watched a video showing the exploration 
in the 3D virtual environment. The difference reached a 
statistically significant level (p < 0.0001). 
Using a true experimental design with two randomized 
groups, Farra [19] investigated the longitudinal effects of 
virtual reality simulation on the learning outcomes and 
learning retention of disaster training with nursing students. 
The experimental group completed Web-based modules and 
a virtually simulated disaster experience, whereas the 
control group only completed the Web-based modules. The 
main effect of the virtual simulation was found to be 
significant (p < .0001). Although both groups showed 
similar improvement of scores following the teaching 
interventions on the first post assessment, significant 
differences were seen in the scores at the two-months 
follow-up, indicating that the virtual reality simulation 
demonstrated stability over time, whereas the non-
simulation control group showed declining scores. 
Another recent example demonstrating the superiority of 
virtual worlds to traditional environments for specific tasks 
comes from Moskalium, Bertram, and Cress [20] who 
compared three training conditions (virtual condition, 
standard condition, and control condition). The training was 
designed for police officers whose communication skills 
were being trained for collaboration between ground forces 
and a helicopter crew during an operation. In terms of 
knowledge transfer, the findings showed that the virtual 
training was significantly more efficient than in the standard 
condition and the control condition (p = 0.02). Also, virtual 
training was equally efficient as standard training regarding 
knowledge acquisition, indicating that virtual training is an 
effective tool for training complex collaborative tasks that 
cannot be fully trained for in reality due to excessive risks. 
B. Language Acquisition in Virtual Worlds 
Specifically in the field of language learning situated in 
virtual worlds, a review of the literature by Peterson [21] 
has produced broadly encouraging findings, such as the 
reduction of constraints on learning (e.g., inhibition) 
through the use of avatars, an enhanced sense of presence 
and copresence, increased access to diverse groups of 
interlocutors, and enhanced participation for target language 
use, provided that teachers take full advantage of the unique 
affordances of a virtual environment. At the same time, 
Peterson also identified a number of challenges, for 
example, that the management of the virtual world interface 
can cause technostress, which, in turn, may hamper 
participation.  
Through interactions with target language speakers in 
Second Life, ELLs can benefit from immersive language 
practice; tasks for learners at all levels can be designed [22]. 
Second Life has been shown to offer an “interactive, 
immersive and content-rich virtual environment for input, 
interaction, task-based learning and output production” [22]. 
Virtual worlds offer a suitable platform for synchronous 
language interaction and the opportunity for conversation 
and collaboration between language learners and native 
speakers of the target language.  
Wang et al. [23] investigated effective and practical ways 
to integrate Second Life into an English as a Foreign 
Language 
(EFL) 
program 
for 
students 
in 
Chinese 
universities, in which Chinese students conversed with 
American native speakers. Their findings suggested that 
virtual worlds not only extend the language learning 
classroom but that they also offer practice opportunities that 
a traditional instructional setting does not allow. Second Life 
can complement face-to-face learning, for example, by 
conducting interviews, surveys, literary tours, or practicing 
giving directions in Second Life. Many study participants 
reported having a positive attitude towards using Second 
Life for language learning and perceived the collaboration 
with their American conversation partners as interesting, 
effective, and helpful in improving their English skills. 
Meaningful and authentic interactions with the American 
students were identified as key motivational factors. Once 
the Chinese students were immersed in Second Life, they 
demonstrated more active and sustained speaking events, 
241
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
which helped them to improve their communicative abilities. 
Their positive experiences were, however, tarnished by 
technical problems, including poor audio quality (echoing 
and interrupted audio) and frozen screens to an extent that 
they seriously interfered with smooth communication and 
task completion in Second Life. Wang et al.’s [23] 
recommendations for facilitating language learning events in 
Second Life include: preparing students for task completion, 
setting a time limit for any given task, closely monitoring 
student 
language 
performance, 
encouraging 
post-task 
reflection, and providing feedback. Despite technical issues, 
the collaboration was found to enrich the cultural and 
communicative experience. 
Similarly, Knutzen and Kennedy [24] reported on a 
partnership between ELLs in Hong Kong and student 
teachers enrolled in a Teaching English to Speakers of Other 
Languages (TESOL) program at a university in the U.S.. The 
two groups met in Second Life at a virtual American diner 
and communicated through text-chat and voice. Among the 
conditions that resulted in the most productive interactions 
was the use of voice communication to practice speaking and 
listening, as well as the use of separate sound parcels in the 
form of Cadillac diner booths to allow private conversations. 
Support also comes from Wehner et al. [13] who 
investigated the relationships between motivation, virtual 
worlds, and foreign language acquisition. One section of a 
Spanish course used Second Life as part of its instruction, 
while the other section participated in the traditional 
curriculum. 
Overall, 
the 
group 
using 
Second 
Life 
consistently reported more positive feelings in all areas of 
motivation and lower levels of anxiety than the traditional 
group.  
The findings of Ishizuka and Akama [25] were also 
supportive of the potential of Second Life for second 
language acquisition. Good scenarios and controlling 
learning environments based on second language acquisition 
theories have the potential to change language teaching and 
learning. Several attempts to use Second Life for language 
learning have been made in the past. A number of EU-
funded, large-scale projects include the Access to Virtual and 
Action learning Live Online (Avalon) project, the 
Networked Interaction in Foreign Language Acquisition and 
Research (NIFLAR) project, and the Talk with Me project. 
These projects aim to facilitate cross-cultural language 
learning by taking advantage of virtual worlds to simulate 
communicative acts and provide information on learning 
models and practices using Second Life as a language 
learning platform [25]. 
The current study reports on the findings of an 
exploratory case study with two groups. International 
students enrolled in an ELL program and SPED teachers 
studying at the same university in the United States met in 
Second Life for conversation practice. The overarching 
question that framed this research was to identify the 
usability of Second Life for oral fluency enhancement. The 
study was guided by the following research questions: 
1. What are the English language learners’ and the 
special education teachers’ perceptions of Second Life 
as a language-learning platform?  
2. What are the unique skills that a teacher should have 
to teach in Second Life and similar 3D virtual worlds?  
3. What types of problems associated with language 
instruction in Second Life were identified?  
III. METHODS 
A. Needs Assessment 
Prior to the conversation practice workshop, an 
extensive needs assessment was conducted to identify the 
ELLs’ performance gap in terms of oral fluency. It revealed 
that many Asian, particularly Chinese students, at this 
university were experiencing a performance gap between 
their actual oral proficiency in American English and the 
proficiency they needed to fully contribute to class 
discussions and be understood when they speak. Multiple 
class sessions of courses intended for international students 
were observed, a self-report oral proficiency survey was 
administered to those students, and their instructors were 
interviewed.  
Fifty-eight percent of Asian students (i.e., of 80% of 
international students), were from China, which explains the 
student homogeneity in some English as a Second Language 
(ESL) classes. Some oral skills classes consisted of Chinese 
students exclusively. Class observations indicated that the 
Chinese students tended to speak in English only when 
necessary (in front of the class or when speaking with the 
teacher), otherwise conversing in Chinese.  
Oral comprehension was found to be much less of a 
challenge for these students than oral production. It was 
determined that the main reason for the performance gap 
was a lack of interaction with English native speakers and a 
resulting lack of oral fluency skills. The lack of more 
teacher time to work one-on-one with each student, in 
addition to the lack of time and frequent feedback in 
situations close to students’ lives seemed to reinforce 
students’ low self-confidence and their constant use of the 
mother tongue to communicate with each other. 
A lack of motivation was identified as another cause for 
the performance discrepancy. Because the community of 
Asian students at this university is very large, these students 
feel no social pressure to improve their oral skills. They 
have the tendency to lead insular lives within their 
communities, where they speak their native language and 
where English is not a necessity. If their grades are 
sufficiently high to continue their studies, they may have 
little motivation to work on their oral English skills 
although they may be aware of their inadequate oral 
fluency. 
Finally, a lack of knowledge and skill was identified as 
another cause for the lack of oral fluency. Many Asian 
learners tend to focus their efforts on reading and writing, 
whereas they neglect their comprehension and production 
skills. Only 19% of the Chinese students in oral skills 
classes have spent at least one year in an English speaking 
country, compared to 59% of the culturally more 
242
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
heterogeneous, higher-level classes. The short duration of 
their time spent in an English speaking country (6 months or 
less) explains the need to further develop their oral 
production skills. 
B. Purpose 
The purpose of the conversation practice workshop was to 
improve learners’ oral fluency and comprehensibility by 
engaging them in purposeful, extended interaction with 
English native speakers in Second Life. 
C. Sample 
Twelve ELL undergraduate students at a university in 
California were teamed up with 18 SPED teachers enrolled 
in a graduate course at the same university for the purposes 
of English conversation practice. 
D. Data Collection 
Six different instruments were used for data collection. 
The two groups, ELLs and SPED teachers, each received a 
different set of the following instruments: a preliminary 
survey, a mid-reflection, and a post-survey (see Table I). 
 
Table I. Overview of Instruments  
Instrument 
ELLs 
SPED Teachers 
Preliminary 
survey 
37 items 
Multiple choice; rating 
and open-ended 
questions 
17 items 
Multiple choice, open-
ended and rating 
questions 
Mid-reflection 
6 items 
Open-ended and rating 
questions 
7 open-ended questions 
Post-survey 
33 items 
Multiple choice; open-
ended and rating 
questions 
5 open-ended questions 
  
The preliminary survey was completed after watching a 
5-minute 
video 
showing 
a 
tour 
of 
the 
National 
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
Second Life region and prior to the two virtual meetings for 
conversation practice. In the preliminary survey, the ELLs 
and the SPED teachers were asked about demographic 
information, their technology background, and their 
perception of the usability of Second Life as a language 
learning platform. In addition, the ELLs were asked to share 
their perceptions of their oral fluency in English, their 
attitude toward English native speakers, and their perception 
of their motivation and self-efficacy in learning and speaking 
English. Participants replied to the mid-reflection prompts 
after the first of two meetings in Second Life. The prompts 
were designed around the research questions and provided an 
opportunity to reflect on the usability (i.e., practical 
applicability) of virtual worlds for language learning. The 
post-survey offered an opportunity to reflect on the 
experiences after the second virtual meeting. Respondents 
were expected to be able to make informed decisions about 
the usability of Second Life for language learning after the 
two virtual meetings. Both researchers kept a researcher 
journal to take field notes. Although most studies 
investigating the potential of Second Life as a language 
learning platform reported positive findings, the practical 
issues that make Second Life-based language learning 
“conceptually applicable but difficult to conduct” [26] 
remain unsolved. The purpose of the researcher journal was 
to identify such issues and develop appropriate solutions. 
E. Procedures 
The two groups, ELLs and SPED teachers, were each 
introduced to Second Life by their instructors, respectively. 
The SPED teachers spent 30 minutes in Sploland as a class 
to experiment with hands-on activities and then teleported to 
Spaceport Alpha for a short fieldtrip. The purpose of these 
preliminary fieldtrips was to provide students with a chance 
to familiarize themselves with navigation and voice 
communication. The instructor was physically present in the 
computer laboratory together with the SPED teachers, 
whereas the second author joined the group in-world as a 
technical facilitator. The following week, a small group of 
ELLs met in Second Life with a small group of SPED 
teachers on EduNation. ELLs and SPED teachers met twice 
for one to two hours each. Sound checks were conducted 
before the meetings. All participants were required to use 
USB headphones. The meetings were organized by an 
external English instructor, who was commissioned to design 
and lead the workshop on account of her specialization in 
teaching ELLs in Second Life. Examples of the activities 
include: playing domino to increase vocabulary (see Fig. 1), 
a scavenger hunt requiring the oral description of interactive 
household items in the instructor’s virtual house, a TV quiz 
show in a TV studio, conversation practice in a conference 
room (see Fig. 2), playing taboo, a grammar rummy, 
brainstorming ideas at a lounge (see Fig. 3), and a murder 
mystery in a castle. 
 
 
Figure 1. Playing domino. 
243
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2. Conversation practice in Second Life. 
 
 
Figure 3. Collaborative brainstorming. 
F. Data Analysis 
In this exploratory case study, the qualitative data, which 
emerged from the preliminary survey, the reflection, and the 
post-survey, have been used to gain insight into the personal 
reflections and perceptions of the participants. Emerging 
themes were identified through open coding and combined 
into recurring patterns. Quantitative data from the surveys 
inform the story and substantiate the qualitative information.  
IV. RESULTS 
The results have been arranged chronologically. 
A. Preliminary Student Survey (ELLs) 
(1) Demographic information: The sample consisted of 
12 ELLs between 18 and 21 years old. Most students’ 
mother tongue was Chinese. The sample consisted of 8 
women (67%) and 4 men (33%), mostly (87%) ranging 
between 18 and 21 years old. All, but two, students had 
Chinese as their mother tongue.  
(2) Technology background: Twenty percent of the 
ELLs reported using technology for less than an hour each 
day, a slight majority (53%) between 2 and 5 hours, and 
27% for at least 6 hours a day. On a 10-point rating scale, 
they self-reported their technological expertise at 7.33 
(1=lowest, 10=highest). In terms of 3D virtual worlds, 76% 
reported having no or little experience.  
(3) Oral proficiency: While these learners reported 
relatively good aural comprehension in English, they had 
difficulty understanding conversations among their English-
native peers. Most, however, reported struggling to express 
what they wanted to say, rarely speaking up voluntarily in 
English, and lacking the confidence to do so.  
(4) Intelligibility: All, but one, reported that they 
believed they could be understood mostly well. When asked 
about the reasons why people may have difficulty 
understanding them, 87% reported that it was due to a lack 
of vocabulary.  
(5) Motivation: On average, respondents’ motivation to 
learn English was 5.4 on a 7-point rating scale (1=weak, 
7=strong). On average, their attitude toward English native 
speakers was 5.7 (1=unfavorable, 7=favorable). When asked 
to rate how worried they were about speaking English 
outside of class, the average rating was 2.4 (1=very little, 
7=very much). Their attitude about their English course(s) 
was, on average, rated at 5.7 (1=negative, 7=positive). 
(6) Anxiety: Most respondents (67%) reported that they 
were not nervous when they had to speak English to 
someone they just met, whereas 33% reported being 
somewhat nervous. Seventy-three percent agreed that they 
did not have to worry about losing face in Second Life 
because their conversation partner could not see their real 
face. In the same vein, 80% replied that the use of an avatar 
in Second Life made them feel more at ease because it 
helped them disguise themselves. 
(7) Usability of Second Life: A clear majority stated that 
they perceived Second Life as easy (88%) and interesting 
(100%) to use. In terms of the usability of Second Life for 
language learning, 95% perceived it as useful. Everyone 
reported being interested in communicating with others in 
Second Life. While most students (80%) were looking 
forward to the Second Life meetings with English native 
speakers, 20% were undecided. 
B. Students’ Mid-Reflection (ELLs) 
The mid-reflection was completed after the first virtual 
meeting with their native English-speaking partners, that is, 
the SPED teachers. All ELLs reported finding the virtual 
meeting with their English native speaking partners useful. 
They all appreciated the opportunity to practice speaking in a 
relaxed environment. They suggested that the virtual 
environment may have helped them to overcome shyness, to 
save face even when mistakes were made, and that they felt 
more comfortable speaking in an online setting than face-to-
face. Being able to make friends, engaging in interesting 
interactions in a relaxing, game-like, and visually appealing 
environment were mentioned as critical factors.  
The activities in Second Life, however, could have been 
more interesting, entertaining, and interactive. There were 
too many people at the same place at the same time (lack of 
functioning sound parcels) and it was hard to understand 
each other and the teacher. For example, due to poor sound 
quality and interference, instructions were unclear so that 
tasks could not be completed accurately. Also, Second Life 
was perceived as being too complicated. The ELLs would 
have liked to practice pronunciation and grammar, have 
244
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
more activities, and have separate sound parcels for private 
conversations. Despite these challenges, the average rating of 
the usability of Second Life for language learning on a scale 
from 1 (useless) to 10 (excellent) was still quite high at 7.7. 
Most students were looking forward to the second meeting. 
C. Students’ Post-Survey (ELLs) 
In contrast to their answers in the pre-survey, no one 
reported difficulties in understanding their native-English 
speaking partners. No one reported difficulties in expressing 
their own thoughts and opinions in English. Everyone was 
confident that they were able to express the full nuance of 
their thoughts and opinions to varying degrees (very 
confident: 
33%, 
quite 
confident: 
50%, 
moderately 
confident: 17%). On average, respondents’ motivation on a 
7-point rating scale (1=weak, 7=strong) was unchanged at 
5.4. The statements about being nervous when they had to 
speak English to someone they just met were almost 
unchanged, compared with the pre-survey. Their attitude 
toward English native speakers was almost unchanged at 5.8 
(1=unfavorable, 7=favorable). When asked to rate how 
worried they were about speaking English outside of class, 
the average rating was almost unchanged at 2.1 on a 7-point 
rating scale (1=very little, 7=very much). The perceptions in 
terms of losing face remained unchanged compared with the 
pre-survey. 
Again, the majority (58%) reported technical difficulties. 
Most students reported having sound issues, although their 
English instructor had conducted a sound check with them 
in an Adobe Connect classroom. Even when they did have 
sound, some voices could not be heard clearly. In terms of 
the Second Life viewer software, some students were 
frequently logged off and lost valuable time having to log in 
again or having to restart their computer. One student 
reported motion sickness due to the navigation in a 3D 
immersive space. As in the preliminary survey and the mid-
reflection, all students, but one, agreed that the use of an 
avatar in Second Life made them feel more at ease due to the 
anonymity. All students found Second Life easy and 
interesting to use and confirmed its usability for language 
learning, although 83% stated that Second Life was not 
necessary for the type of language practice they had 
experienced. The same learning effect could have been 
achieved through other means with less hassle. Despite 
various challenges, everyone reported having enjoyed 
interacting through their avatar.  
Benefits of using Second Life for speaking practice were 
identified as: communicating without seeing each other, 
more opportunities to meet native speakers, reduced 
nervousness, increased confidence, and overall more 
opportunities to speak than in real life. When asked what the 
external ELL instructor, who had conducted the activities, 
could have done differently, several students stated that they 
would have liked more opportunities to speak with their 
partners and more interesting activities. All students reported 
being satisfied with the experience and encouraged their own 
instructor to use Second Life as a language-learning 
platform. 
D. Preliminary SPED Teacher Survey 
(1) Demographic information: The convenience sample 
consisted of 18 (16 female and 2 male) special education 
teachers. All teachers were between 20 and 30 years old, 
except for two older participants. 
(2) Technology background: In terms of virtual worlds 
experience, 61% reported having no experience, 22% 
reported having little experience, and 17% reported using 
virtual worlds occasionally. Seventy-one percent reported 
using technology for up to five hours a day, while 29% were 
using technology for more than five hours a day. When 
asked to rate their computer expertise on a 10-point rating 
scale (0=lowest, 10=highest), the average rating was 7.1, 
which is a little lower than the ELLs’ self-reported expertise. 
Respondents were also asked to describe themselves in terms 
of Roger’s technology adopter categories [27] (see Table II). 
 
Table II. Technology Adopter Categories 
Adopter Category 
Responses 
Innovator (“techies”, guaranteed to adopt 
technology as a pedagogical tool) 
22% 
Early adopter (“visionaries”, will adopt 
technology earlier than majority) 
28% 
Early majority (“pragmatists, will adopt 
technology as soon as majority of teachers does) 
44% 
Late majority (“skeptical”, reluctant to adopt 
technology) 
6% 
Laggard (unlikely to adopt technology as a 
pedagogical tool) 
0% 
 
(3) Usability of Second Life: Based on the NOAA video 
they watched, the average rating of Second Life for 
education 
on 
a 
10-point 
rating 
scale 
(1=useless, 
10=extremely useful) was 6.28. Overall, their first 
impression of Second Life was that it had potential for 
education and seemed user-friendly. When asked what they 
hoped to gain from the two virtual meetings with their ELL 
partners, most said they hoped to identify the best techniques 
to work with ELLs and to see some of the educational 
applications of Second Life from a more active role, rather 
than just being a student in it. 
(4) Unique affordances: The experiential value emerged 
as one of the key affordances of virtual worlds for 
educational purposes. “Very usable for education. It appears 
to be a very professional approach to virtual reality, allowing 
people to interact in a social way while maintaining the 
capability to have an emphasis on education.” The 
immersiveness of the 3D environment emerged as another 
unique affordance. 
I think it is a great idea to use Second Life for education. 
It immerses the student into what they are learning about. 
In the video it says users can actually experience how a 
tsunami looks and how why it happens. This learning 
experience is more fulfilling than just reading from a 
textbook. 
245
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
E. SPED Teachers’ Mid-Reflection 
Nine out of 18 SPED teachers submitted the mid-
reflection. Their usability ratings went down quite markedly 
from 6.28 (preliminary survey, N=18) to 4.33 (mid-reflection 
N=9) on a 10-point rating scale (1=useless, 10=extremely 
useful). The ratings ranged from 1 to 10, which reflects the 
wide variety of attitudes. Due to the frustrations of the first 
meeting, nine participants failed to submit their mid-
reflection, but it can be assumed that the mean rating might 
have been even lower than 4.33 if everyone had submitted 
their comments. Only one participant found the first meeting 
useful. She described that when she and her conversation 
partner met at the ELL instructor’s virtual house, they had to 
describe household items. Being able to interact with the 
objects that the ELL student was trying to describe was 
perceived as useful.  
The remaining eight respondents provided several 
reasons for not finding the meetings useful in terms of 
getting teaching experience. The set up (i.e., planned 
activities) failed to encourage discussion between the two 
groups. There were too many people and it was hard to talk 
because everyone else could be heard too. Although each 
team worked in a separate room of a house, the lack of 
(functioning) sound parcels resulted in the participants 
hearing everyone speak, which made it challenging to 
identify one’s team members’ voices. Separate sound parcels 
would also have satisfied the participants’ desire for private 
communication in a less threatening environment without 
public exposure. The following statements illustrate that the 
potential loss of face was a concern not only among ELLs, 
but also among SPED teachers, “I felt uncomfortable trying 
to talk when I knew the whole group would hear me” and “I 
could imagine how hard it was for the other students who 
were not native English speakers to have to speak English in 
front of everyone”.  
More interaction and better time management would 
have been appreciated. The following statement describes 
the amount of spoken interaction between SPED teachers 
and ELLs that was distinctive of all sessions that the authors 
observed (eight sessions totaling approximately 10 hours for 
all teams combined). 
I asked the student I was working with questions about 
herself to get to know her, and she wouldn’t even respond 
to my questions even though I tried to rephrase what I 
was saying to her to help her understand.  She would just 
stay quiet.  Maybe it’s because it was online, but actually 
working with the ELL student in person may have been 
more helpful.  Since it was online and you can’t see her 
face that could be why she didn’t respond at all. She then 
only read the prompt to me when asked to by her 
professor and only asked for help on three words. I asked 
the student if she needed help understanding anything in 
the prompt, and she said no. That was as much time as 
we talked with each other out of the whole hour and a 
half. 
As evidenced by the following statement, the virtual 
presence did not seem to promote interaction, rather, it 
encumbered interaction.  
The ELLs seemed very apprehensive to engage, even 
laughingly reverting to chats in their native languages 
when they perceived no one to engage with in English. 
The facilitators encouraged all to engage freely.  
However, without the prompts, neither group seemed to 
readily approach the other. 
The second prompt asked how useful the virtual meeting had 
been in terms of expanding their experience of using a virtual 
world. Only a minority found the first virtual meeting useful. 
A unique affordance, however, was identified as, “Being 
able to virtually meet with my ELL partner was nice, and I 
couldn’t imagine doing the activity over the phone.” The 
remaining comments were mostly negative. Respondents 
were disappointed because mostly they “just stood there”, 
without having a purposeful role assigned. Due to the lack of 
interaction, they did not have the impression that the meeting 
had helped to improve the ELL partners’ oral fluency. It was 
suggested that a tour would have encouraged interaction 
more effectively. 
The third prompt inquired about features they liked about 
the interaction and their perceptions of the unique benefits of 
Second Life for this type of learning activity. While some 
respondents liked nothing about it, several respondents 
appreciated that there were no limitations by location or by 
physics. The potential to establish personal rapport in a 
virtual setting was emphasized.    
We actually had a few minutes at the end of the activity to 
explore the boathouses’ kitchen and we both agreed that 
it (the kitchen) was very nice and we chuckled about that. 
It was nice being able to connect to my buddy about 
something we both appreciated.  
The virtual environment was described as offering language 
immersion to ELLs and as a way to introduce teachers to 
novel technologies. 
I realized the usefulness and the possibilities for offering 
an environment that may be less intimidating than face-
to-face meeting for ELLs. I liked interacting exclusively 
with a group that had a facilitator who helped to orient 
the Cohort to the space, and who provided us with a 
shared set of expectations and goals. The unique benefits 
were that it not only provided ELLs with a means for 
immersion, it also gave new teachers access to 
technologies that we may not have engaged before. 
The following comment illustrates the importance of having 
a back-up plan in case of technical issues. 
It’s hard to say what I liked about this interaction 
because I only spent about 10 minutes working with my 
ELL student while 60 minutes were spent on tech 
glitches from other students and 20 minutes were based 
on directions from the other professor.  However, overall 
I think the concept of using Second Life is a great idea 
because you get to integrate technology in the lesson and 
stay at home while interacting with another student. You 
still have chances to communicate and interact with 
them (such as seeing the written cue cards the ELL 
student was reading) while online. 
The fourth prompt specifically inquired about challenges the 
SPED teachers had experienced. Although some spaces 
246
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
offered separate sound parcels, they did not offer privacy: 
You and your ELL partner had to go to a separate 
corner to work but other people would come and sit with 
you, this loud TV background noise kept interrupting the 
conversation, and other noises were distracting so it was 
hard to work with this student. 
All eight sessions were heavily impeded by technology 
glitches. “Some people’s headphones, microphones, and 
speakers were not working, which is what took a majority of 
the time,” thereby minimizing the time that could actually 
be spent productively. “All of the technology glitches 
caused us to only really work on the activity for half an 
hour.” 
Getting 
everyone 
on 
the 
same 
page 
and 
understanding the directions of the activity were also 
perceived as difficult. The inability to see a partner’s facial 
expression, the lack of sound parcels, the difficulty to access 
note cards, programming errors, and the apparent group 
divide were other challenges. One respondent who did not 
have sound wrote, “Also, as an observer, I noticed each 
group’s inclination to remain comfortably divided.” 
The last prompt asked what could have been done to 
improve their virtual experience. Three respondents wrote 
that they would have liked to know exactly what was 
planned for them to do during their virtual experience. It 
was also criticized that the sound issues should have been 
resolved sooner. Some respondents would have preferred to 
be together at the school’s computer laboratory, similar to 
the introductory fieldtrip to Sploland and the International 
Space Museum. “As new users of the program, it would be 
helpful for us to have support as we try to support ELLs.” 
Finally, one respondent who had problems logging in 
suggested that there should have been a checklist of things 
to do beforehand. They had received a comprehensive 
manual but it is unclear how many of them had actually 
browsed the manual. Only two out of nine respondents were 
looking forward to the second meeting with their ELL 
partners.  
Overall, the first virtual meeting was neither perceived as 
useful for the development of teaching skills nor as an 
expansion of their virtual worlds skills and experience. The 
unique affordances of virtual worlds were perceived as being 
useful for language immersion (given adequate settings and 
time and room for private discussions), distance learners, and 
for learning activities that would benefit from the absence of 
physical boundaries. The two major challenges were the lack 
of a setting and lesson design that would encourage 
discussion, the lack of effective private sound parcels, and 
the apparent technical glitches that consumed the major 
portion of the lessons. Due to these impediments, the SPED 
teachers’ usability ratings of Second Life decreased 
dramatically after the first virtual meeting with their ELL 
partners, to the extent that the majority of SPED teachers 
were not looking forward to the second meeting. 
F. SPED Teachers’ Post-Survey 
Nine themes emerged from the SPED teachers’ post-
survey. 
(1) Maximized Interaction  
All 18 SPED teachers completed the post-survey after the 
second meeting. The first prompt asked, “Do you think that 
the meetings between you and your ELL partner(s) have 
helped them to enhance their oral proficiency? How would 
you have designed the meetings to help them improve their 
oral proficiency?” Only two out of 18 participants stated that 
the meetings might have helped the ELLs to increase their 
oral fluency. Specific instructions and scenarios that would 
have guided the interactions would have been appreciated, 
such as guessing games, giving a tour, and speed rotation 
activities.  
I would have designed the meetings to get more voice 
time with their English counter parts, or even have them 
do a “speed rotation” activity where they would talk to 
someone for a few minutes, practice common phrases 
“my name is, I am ___ years old, I live in, something I 
like doing is _____” etc. and then have them move onto 
the next English speaker. 
(2) Purposeful Roles 
The SPED teachers would have appreciated the 
allocation of specific roles to justify their presence and 
promote involvement. They sometimes perceived themselves 
as by-standers rather than active participants due to the 
lesson design. 
An activity that might have been more successful would 
have been one that would have required not only 
speaking but actual interaction between the ELLs and the 
native speakers like a guessing game such as a version of 
20 questions or Guess Who. These would give the ELLs a 
chance to practice speaking more than just two words. It 
would also give the native speakers a reason to be there 
and involved. 
(3) Extensive Second Life Training 
The following statement highlights the need for more 
extensive training in the use of Second Life and the need for 
an effective set-up, time management, and trouble-shooting. 
I felt that the sessions were poorly run and inefficient. I 
think that more training was needed, especially on the 
ELLs’ part, on how to use Second Life. They seemed 
very confused about how to navigate the software and it 
took most of each session just to get them set up. By the 
time everyone was set up and “ready to go” the session 
was over and nothing was accomplished besides both 
parties feeling frustrated.  
(4) Clear Instructions and Prior Information 
Similar to the mid-reflections, it was criticized that the 
instructions were confusing. Several respondents stated that a 
face-to-face meeting would have been more effective and 
doubted the effectiveness of Second Life for these purposes. 
It was suggested that prior information about the activities 
and expectations would have been helpful to prevent the 
ELLs from disengaging. 
The activities and set up were so confusing for English 
speakers I cannot imagine how difficult it must have 
been for ELLs to follow. Also, when we were all at the 
brink of frustration they would start speaking to each 
247
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
other in Chinese. There should definitely have been 
some trouble shooting and background information 
given to all participants prior to the first session. 
(5) Reduced Anxiety 
Most SPED teachers acknowledged that Second Life has 
great potential because it allows for more interaction than 
other media, such as a video call, and because 
communicating through avatars appears to be less 
intimidating and to reduce anxiety levels. It provides 
anonymity for the ELL student and allows them to relax.  
(6) Technical Facilitator 
“I think that using Second Life as a language learning 
platform makes things harder than they need to be,” even to 
the extent that technology is a barrier to learning. One 
participant pointed out the risk of cognitive overload due to 
the dual focus on language learning and technical aspects. 
Extensive Second Life training and support by a technical 
facilitator can help to prevent cognitive overload. 
There may be times where a student is unsure how to use 
the program (such as opening the notecards, using the 
programs to write on boards, etc.), which can make it 
hard for that student to focus on language-learning when 
they are too occupied trying to figure out the technical 
things.   
(7) Compensating the Lack of Social Cues 
The lack of social cues, such as facial expressions, was 
evident. It was unclear whether silence meant active 
listening, confusion, disinterest, or headphone issues. The 
design of the activities needs to be carefully thought out in 
order to compensate these deficits.  
(8) Taking Advantage of the Unique Affordances 
When asked if the two teaching sessions on EduNation had 
taken advantage of the potential of virtual worlds, most 
respondents reported that the tools, such as a game show set, 
were not used in a way to promote oral communication 
successfully and that the lesson design failed to allocate the 
SPED teachers a purposeful role. The following statement 
describes several of these challenges, for example, excessive 
teacher talk making the SPED teachers redundant. 
The dominos game was a clever idea but there was 
almost no opportunity for interaction and the native 
speakers did not seem to have much purpose in being 
there. With the game show activity again the idea was 
clever but the reality was that the ELLs were the only 
ones participating and their participation consisted of 
saying only two numbers at a time. The native speakers 
just sat and watched and every once in a while were able 
to give definitions if we knew them but the majority of 
the time the host would give the definitions eliminating 
any need for the native speakers. 
Among the benefits were the convenience of working from 
one’s home and the integration of multimedia into Second 
Life. In addition, most respondents agreed that Second Life 
would allow for interaction in shared activities that they 
might not ever have the opportunity to do, but “in terms of 
actually taking advantage of the virtual worlds and letting 
two students explore something together was limited. The 
sessions were low contact, low learning environments and 
activities.” One suggestion was, “We could have explored 
different parts of the island we were on, or gone swimming 
in the ocean to see what we could find, etc.” 
When asked to describe how this project had helped 
them to familiarize themselves with virtual worlds, most 
SPED teachers agreed that it had, indeed, helped them to see 
how Second Life could be used and, in particular, how it 
could have been used differently. Surprisingly, it also 
became evident that even experienced users of virtual 
worlds and videogames had difficulties with the voice chat 
configuration. 
(9) Mastery of the Unique Teaching Skills Required for 
Teaching in 3D Environments 
The final prompt inquired about the unique skills that a 
teacher should have to teach in Second Life. A long list of 
unique characteristics and abilities was generated: patience, 
kindness, understanding, non-judgment, technical expertise, 
strong 
communication 
skills, 
excellent 
Second 
Life 
expertise, creativity in order to make materials enjoyable and 
accessible to many different learners, the ability to anticipate 
student needs without being able to read body language and 
facial expressions, the ability to diagnose a technical 
problem and troubleshoot, the ability to plan and implement 
a virtual lesson, the ability to specify and explain 
expectations and give clear directions in a calm manner, the 
ability to be clear and concise, the ability and willingness to 
organize activities in a way that everyone gets an opportunity 
to engage in an extensive conversation in a private chat area, 
the ability to stay calm in the face of technical glitches and 
not let the participants feel one’s frustrations, think through 
the language demands of any given activity, and the ability 
to accommodate the needs of ELLs in a culturally sensitive 
way in order to allay their anxieties. A teacher in Second 
Life needs a back-up plan if technological errors take over 
the lesson. 
The following statement summarizes many of the unique 
skills required to teach in Second Life from the SPED 
teachers’ perspective: 
Know how to have everyone set up ahead of time, how to 
give clear, concise directions to everyone, both written 
and oral, give group wide instructions more frequently, 
keep everyone on the same page and interested, pick 
good material and topics that both groups of student can 
discuss and participate in, and create quick, friendly 
opportunities between each pairing/group with clear 
objectives of what the conversation should be based 
around with small sheets providing words to be used 
throughout the conversation. 
Despite the numerous frustrations that these SPED teachers 
experienced, the post-survey reflected that, overall, the 
respondents found the experience interesting because it 
showed them practical examples of teaching in Second Life, 
although they thought that the unique affordances of Second 
Life were not fully taken advantage of. The potential of 
virtual worlds was recognized, provided that the activities 
248
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
are carefully planned and that technical glitches can be 
drastically minimized to enhance everyone’s experience. 
Fun experience. Frustrating at times, but awesome to see 
where technology can go in education. The thought of 
kids being able to do this on an iPad with more ease and 
perhaps a webcam feature with kids from across the 
planet is a very exciting concept! 
V. DISCUSSION  
The discussion of the results has been arranged around 
the three research questions.  
1. 
What are the English language learners’ and the 
special education teachers’ perceptions of Second Life as a 
language-learning platform? Almost all ELLs perceived 
Second Life as a useful and interesting language-learning 
platform. A perception that was shared by many was that 
they had more opportunities to speak with native speakers 
than in real life. On the one hand, this statement is surprising, 
considering that all ELLs were actually studying at a 
university in the United States where the majority of students 
were English native speakers. On the other hand, it could be 
an indicator of the difficulties that these students may have in 
engaging in conversations with native English speakers. 
ELLs have frequently indicated that communicating through 
a virtual world helped them to alleviate their anxiety, which 
is in agreement with Wang et al. [26] and leads to the 
suggestion that learning activities be designed in a way that 
only the instructor knows the true identity of an avatar for 
assessment purposes. 
2. 
What are the unique skills that a teacher should 
have to teach in Second Life? The SPED teachers provided a 
long list of qualities that they would like to see in a teacher 
teaching in Second Life, which were informed by their own 
experiences in this workshop. Many of these skills should 
not only apply to virtual worlds teachers, but should be 
present in all teachers. Examples include patience, kindness, 
and understanding. It is hypothesized, however, that a virtual 
teacher may need even stronger skills in these areas when 
teaching in a virtual environment where social cues and non-
verbal gestures are mostly absent. To give directions, for 
example, an avatar cannot rely on supporting verbal 
directions by gestures. Especially the lack of smiling and eye 
contact makes it more challenging to establish rapport and to 
convey kindness and understanding. Among the most 
frequently mentioned skills of a virtual teacher were: the 
ability to give clear and concise directions in a 3D 
environment, the ability to stay calm in the face of technical 
glitches, and the willingness and flexibility to resort to plan 
B if the lesson is not working out the way it was planned. 
3. 
What types of problems associated with the EFL 
program in Second Life were identified? Although the ELLs’ 
perception of the usability of Second Life for language 
learning was much more positive than that of the SPED 
teachers, both groups identified the same two main 
challenges. First, the way that the lessons were set up failed 
to encourage interaction between the two groups. On the few 
occasions when they spoke with each other rather than 
listening to the instructor, the ELLs tended to give 
monosyllabic answers. It is possible that the Chinese 
students were reluctant to reply or elaborate on their answers 
because they were under pressure and had not been given 
appropriate wait-time [15] [16]. To reduce anxiety in ELLs, 
it is recommended that language-learning activities in 
Second life be designed in a way that opportunities for 
interaction in private sound parcels are maximized. The risk 
of negative evaluation by either the instructor or other 
listeners should be minimal. The visually stimulating and 
interactive environment in Second Life lends itself to 
extensive and engaging collaborative activities in relatively 
authentic and contextualized settings, such as a collaborative 
scavenger hunt at the Star Trek Museum of Science in 
Second Life [28]. 
Technical issues, mainly related to voice communication 
in Second Life, were the second major challenge. Instead of 
the use of Second Life voice chat, it is recommended that 
Skype be used instead to accommodate both text and voice 
chat [16]. It is also recommended that an in-world facilitator 
support the instructor. Prior to the actual Second Life 
assignments, students will wish to familiarize themselves 
with Second Life. The authors described an 11-Step Virtual 
Worlds Teacher Preparation Workshop with an introductory 
fieldtrip to five Second Life islands to ensure that students 
master the navigation skills required for the subsequent 
training steps [28]. 
Overall, nine guidelines emerged from the SPED 
teachers’ post-survey (see Table III).  
Table III. Nine Guidelines 
# 
Themes 
1 
Maximized interaction 
2 
Purposeful roles 
3 
Extensive Second Life Training 
4 
Clear instructions and prior information 
5 
Measures to reduce anxiety 
6 
Technical facilitator 
7 
Compensating the lack of social cues 
8 
Taking advantage of the unique affordances of virtual worlds 
9 
Mastery of the unique teaching skills required to teach in 3D 
environments 
 
Virtual worlds have provided broad access to native 
speaking communities and virtual spaces for learning and 
collaboration [24] and provide the potential to address the 
five 
components 
of 
the 
National 
Standards 
for 
Communication, Culture, Connections, Comparisons, and 
Communities [24]. Collaborative project design, however, 
can be challenging in virtual worlds. The findings of this 
study concur with Warburton and Pérez-García [29] who 
identified a set of guidelines that address factors fostering 
collaboration in 3D environments, such as running a social 
event 
before 
the 
main 
activity, 
ground 
rules 
for 
communication, making collaboration intrinsic to the tasks, 
guidance and regular briefing in order to scaffold gradually 
increasing levels of task complexity, video tutorials, and live 
mentoring/assistance.  
In conclusion, alternative activities and learning designs 
have to be found in order to make Second Life more 
appealing for ELLs and their native or nonnative English 
speaking conversation partners. In addition to the ideas 
brought forward by the SPED teachers, such as giving tours, 
249
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
speed rotation activities, and guessing games, the discussion 
group format may be an effective alternative. Morgan [30], 
for example, described the integration of the U.S. Holocaust 
Museum in Second Life into a history classroom using a 
student-led discussion format through voice chat. Similarly, 
Prude [31] described teaching Asian religions in Asian-
inspired destinations in Second Life, also using a 
synchronous discussion format. Although the latter chose 
text chat for communication, the learning design could easily 
be adapted for voice communication in order to practice oral 
production in a foreign language. The discussion group 
format would allow ELLs sufficient preparation time, which 
would likely reduce their anxiety in oral production [15] 
[16]. Having students explore a virtual space prior to the 
discussion would allow them to take advantage of the unique 
affordances of virtual worlds, such as spatial representation, 
experiential learning, motivation, transfer, and collaboration 
[32]. 
VI. CONCLUSION  
Despite serious challenges, the participants perceived 
Second Life as a useful, supplementary tool for instructors 
because it promotes contextualized language practice, 
provided that the lesson design follows the nine guidelines 
suggested earlier. Most importantly, the teacher should 
master unique teaching skills required to teach in 3D 
environments. Failing this, the same or possibly superior 
learning effects can be achieved in alternative environments 
(e.g., Skype) with less hassle. The time needed to prepare 
participants for the technical requirements of Second Life or 
other virtual worlds should not be underestimated. More than 
one fieldtrip as a class is recommended. 
The findings, practical guidelines, and ideas for 
alternative lesson design will be relevant to other language 
instructors who plan to use Second Life for oral fluency 
enhancement. Virtual meetings between ELLs and English-
native speakers in Second Life have the potential to offer an 
innovative, creative, and stimulating way to practice 
speaking English in contextualized settings, provided that the 
activities are framed by a pedagogical rationale that justifies 
the use of 3D technology. If ELLs are teamed up with native 
English speakers, specific roles should be assigned to the 
latter. But, even without the presence of native speakers, 
language learners can benefit from mutual interaction by 
practicing their language skills in content-rich virtual worlds 
[24]. Increased speaking opportunities with English-native 
speakers is likely to enhance ELLs’ confidence and may 
encourage them to transfer the skills practiced in virtual 
worlds to the real world, specifically their university settings. 
Limitations of this research are that all instruments relied on 
self-reporting and the teams only met twice for one or two 
hours each, which made it impossible to measure potential 
gains in oral fluency. No statistical analysis of the usability 
ratings could be conducted because half of SPED teachers 
failed to complete the mid-reflection. 
Recommendations for future research include a more in-
depth investigation of the effectiveness of virtual worlds on 
the oral fluency of ELLs and how instructors can design in-
world activities effectively to take full advantage of the 
unique affordances of virtual worlds. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Julie Johnson and Alejandro Rodriguez for 
their valuable contributions in the needs assessment of 
Chinese students in this university’s English as a Second 
Language department as an integral part of an instructional 
design project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Oh and N. Nussli, “Creating a global second language 
acquisition 
classroom 
using 
a 
virtual 
environment,” 
Proceedings of The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, 
Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLML), Spain, 2014, pp. 30-
36. 
[2] C. J. Fillmore, in C. J. Fillmore, D. Kempler and W.S.W. 
Wang (Eds.), Individual differences in language ability and 
language behavior, NY: Academic Press, 1979, pp. 85-102.  
[3] P. Skehan. Second-language acquisition resarch and task-
based instruction. In J. Willis, & D. Willis, Challenge and 
change in language teaching, Oxford: Heinemann, 1996, pp. 
17-30. 
[4] R. Schroeder, “Defining Virtual Worlds and Virtual 
Environments,” Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, vol. 1, 
2008, p. 2-3. 
[5] H. Nishimura, K.Y.T. Lim, and K. Koyamada, “The Abyss 
Observatory designing for remote collaboration, self-directed 
discovery and intuition development in multi-user interactive 
3D virtual environments,” Journal of Virtual Worlds 
Research, vol. 5, 2012, pp. 1-11. Retrieved from: 
http://journals.tdl.org/jvwr/index.php/jvwr/article/view/6304 
[6] R. Rothfarb and P. Doherty, “Creating museum content and 
community in Second Life”. In J. Trant and D. Bearman 
(Eds.). Museums and the Web 2007: Proceedings, Toronto: 
Archives 
& 
Museum 
Informatics. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2007/papers/rothfarb/rothfarb.html 
[7] K. Yee and J. Hargis, “Jumping head first into Second Life 
for higher education,” International Journal of the Scholarship 
of Teaching and Learning, vol. 6, 2010, pp. 1-15. 
[8] S. 
Aydin, 
“Second 
Life 
foreign 
language 
learning 
environment: A review of research,” Turkish Online Journal 
of Distance Education, vol. 14, January 2013, pp.53-63. 
[9] C. Balcikanli, “Language learning in Second Life: American 
and Turkish students’ experiences,” Turkish Online Journal of 
Distance Education, vol. 13, April 2012, pp.131-141. 
[10] S. Grant and R. Clerehan, “Finding the discipline: Assessing 
student activity in Second Life,” Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 27, 2011, pp. 813-828.  
[11] M. Henderson, H. Huang, S. Grant, and L. Henderson, “The 
impact of Chinese language lessons in a virtual world on 
university students’ self-efficacy beliefs,” Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 28, 2012, pp. 400-
419. 
[12] C. X. Wang, B. Calandra, S. T. Hibbard, and M. L. McDowell 
Lefaiver, “Learning effects of an experimental EFL program 
in 
Second 
Life,” 
Educational 
Technology 
Research 
Development, 
vol. 
60, 
2012, 
pp. 
943-961, 
doi 
10.1007/s11423-012-9259-0. 
[13] A. K. Wehner, A. W. Gump, and S.  Downey, “The effects of 
Second Life on the motivation of undergraduate students 
learning a foreign language,” Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 
vol. 
24, 
2011, 
pp. 
277-289, 
doi 
10.1080/09588221.2010.551757 
250
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[14] B. Mak, “An exploration of speaking-in-class anxiety with 
Chinese ESL learners,” System, 39, 2011, pp. 202-214. 
[15] X. Ma, “Teacher talk and EFL in university classrooms,” MA 
Thesis, School of Foreign Languages and Literature, 
Chonquing 
Normal, 
University 
and 
Yangze 
Normal 
University, China, 2006. 
[16] X. Lei, “Communicative teacher talk in the English 
classroom,” English Language Teaching, vol. 2, 2009, 
http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/elt/article/viewFile/338/301
.. [retrieved: June 29, 2014] 
[17] M. Liu and J. Jackson,  “An exploration of Chinese EFL 
Learners’ unwillingness to communicate and foreign language 
anxiety,” Modern Language Journal,  vol. 92, Spring 2008, 
pp. 71-86. 
[18] C. Chau, A., Wong, M. Wang, S. Lai, K.W.Y. Chan, T.M.H. 
Li, D. Chu, I.K.W. Chan, and W. Sung, “Using 3D virtual 
environments to facilitate students in constructivist learning,” 
Decision Support Systems, vol. 56, 2013, pp. 115-121. 
[19] S. Farra (2012) “Effects of Disaster Training With and 
Without 
Virtual 
Simulation.” 
(Electronic 
Thesis 
or 
Dissertation, document number ucin1330024525). Retrieved 
from https://etd.ohiolink.edu/ 
[20] J. Moskaliuk, J. Bertram, and U. Cress, “Impact of virtual 
training environments on the acquisition and transfer of 
knowledge,” 
Cyberpsychology 
Behavior 
and 
Social 
Networking, vol. 16, 2013, pp. 210-214. 
[21] M. Peterson, “Towards a research agenda for the use of three-
dimensional virtual worlds in language learning,” CALICO 
Journal, vol. 29, 2011, pp. 67-80. 
[22] M. T. Thomasy Blasing, “Second Language in Second Life: 
Exploring interaction, identity and pedagogical practice in a 
virtual world,” Slavic and East European Journal, vol. 54, 
2010, pp. 96-117.  
[23] C. Wang, H. Song, D. E. Stone, and Q. Yan, “Integrating 
Second Life into an EFL program in China: Research 
collaboration across the continents,” TechTrends, vol. 63, 
November/December 2012, pp. 14-19. 
[24] B. Knutzen and D. Kennedy, “The global classroom project: 
Learning a second language in a virtual environment,” The 
Electronic Journal of e-learning, vol. 10, 2012, pp. 90-106.  
[25] H. Ishizuka and K. Akama, “Language learning in 3D virtual 
world: Using Second Life as a platform,” eleed, vol. 8, 2011, 
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0009-5-31706 
[retrieved: 
January, 2014] 
[26] F. Wang and E. Shao, “Using Second Life to assist EFL 
teaching: We do not have to sign in to the program”, 
TechTrends, vol. 56, 2012, pp. 15-18. 
[27] E.M. Rogers, Diffusions of innovations, Glencoe: Free Press. 
[28] K. Oh and N. Nussli, “Teacher training in the use of a three-
dimensional immersive virtual world: Building understanding 
through first-hand experiences,” Journal of Teaching and 
Learning with Technology, 3, 2014, pp. 33-58. 
[29] S. Warburton and M. Pérez-Garcia, “3D design and 
collaboration in massively multi-user virtual environments”. 
In D. Russell (Ed.) Cases on collaboration in virtual learning 
environments: processes and interactions, Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global, 2009, pp. 27-41. 
[30] E.J. Morgan, “Virtual worlds: Integrating Second Life into the 
history classroom,” The History Teacher, vol. 46, 2013, pp. 
547-559. 
[31] M.A. Prude, “A classroom of bunnies, blimps, and 
werewolves: Teaching Asian religions online in Second Life,” 
ASIA Network Exchange, vol. 20, 2013, pp. 1-12. 
[32] B. Dalgarno and M.J.W. Lee, “What are the learning 
affordances of 3-D virtual environments?” British Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 41, 2010, pp. 10-32. 
 
 
251
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

