 
 
Digitizing Health Care in Collaboration Between Nursing and Engineering 
Two cases of strategic learning and implementation of robots in the homes of elderly people  
 
 
Britt Östlund 
Department of Biomedical Engineering and Health Systems 
Royal Institute of Technology, KTH  
Stockholm, Sweden 
brittost@kth.se 
Gunilla Björling, Sara Stridh, Madeleine Sahlström, Janet Mattsson   
Swedish Red Cross University College  
Stockholm, Sweden 
 
 
Abstract - Digitization exceeds the limits of healthcare 
meetings, which gives renewed relevance to examine the 
collaboration between engineers and nurses. Caring for people 
is no longer just something going on in the hospital but at new 
arenas at home and in the middle of people's everyday lives. In 
caring situations nurse's responsibility is, unlike the physician, 
to make observations and to follow in detail the patient's 
caring needs, and where engineers provide technological 
devices to support and monitor the course of the disease. When 
digitizing the caring situation person-centered care gets a new 
meaning. For engineers the understanding of how technology is 
contextualized and domesticated becomes even more important 
to make applications and systems work outside laboratories. 
This paper presents two cases of interaction between engineers 
and nurses aimed at improving the implementation of robots 
and sensors in elderly people´s homes; and learning how to 
improve patient safety in hospitals. The result shows that 
conflicting 
epistemologies, 
differences 
in 
professional 
languages and lack of joint learning opportunities are factors 
that create obstacles for interactions. The conclusions reject 
the idea of linear innovation processes and show that successful 
ccollaboration take more than just adding two and two 
together. Especially digitization is breaking up traditional 
barriers and hierarchies. For nurses to be proactive requires 
knowledge about technological developments and the ability to 
participate in design and innovation processes. For engineers a 
more thorough understanding of caring situations and users 
will contribute to a more reliable provision of digital solutions 
and point at new ideas leading up to innovations. The main 
output of the paper is that it is deepening the understanding of 
what factors leading to successful collaborations between 
nursing and engineering and what are the missing links.  
 
Keywords-digitization; caring; nursing; engineering  
I . INTRODUCTION 
A proposal for a new research subject including nurses 
and engineers was presented at the Ninth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine and Social Medicine, 
eTelemed 2017 [1]. The background is the fact that today´s 
health care systems face a number of challenges related to 
technological developments. The Global Commission on 
Education of Health Professionals for the 21st Century 
describes a mismatch between the care offered and people's 
demands and needs; lack of cooperation; discontinuous care 
chains; tenacious hierarchies, and not least, a focus on 
technology founded on flawed understanding of the context 
in which the technology is used [2]. The gender system that 
locks structures what perceived as male and female work is 
deemed particularly difficult to change. Significant is also 
the lack of good examples of how to meet these types of 
challenges. Other publications confirm these results, 
reporting on a lack of accuracy in technological support for 
health care, not least the confidence in individual solutions. 
There are reports on an imbalance between the success 
factors in health care - increased life expectancy and better 
treatments - and the expectations of what you want done and 
what to expect [3] [4]. At the same time, the belief in 
technology as the ultimate solution still prevails. The 
Swedish Society for Nursing identifies a lack of knowledge 
about the impact of technology on nursing interventions. To 
meet this, they emphasize individual health as an important 
aspect to investigate and call for possibilities to actively 
participate in design, implementation and assessment of new 
technology [5] [6]. Others stress the economic value of 
returning to patient centred strategies [7]. To mention one 
11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
example, creating digital health care records and digital 
information to citizens are among the most difficult tasks to 
accomplish despite the wide access to Internet and digital 
infrastructures. Google declared a few years ago that their 
investment in Google Health was one of their biggest 
failures due to its complexity [8]. Instead they are now 
developing databases focusing on health and aging sciences. 
A. The caring situation in focus 
A question that has been discussed for a long time to 
make development and implementation work is the 
collaboration 
between 
engineers 
and 
health 
care 
professionals. Ever since C.P. Snow presented his thesis on 
the two cultures in 1959 stating that "the intellectual life of 
the whole of western society" was split into the two cultures 
— sciences and the humanities — creating a major obstacle 
for solving the world's problems [9], the need for 
multidisciplinary collaboration has grown in importance. 
Today there are a number of examples of international 
multidisciplinary collaboration, e.g., “the Bio design 
Fellowship program” at Stanford University since 2003 
which was also implemented in Sweden as The Centre for 
Technology in Medicine and Health (CTMH), the Canadian 
Newfoundland and Labrador Support program, or the 
Erasmus MC program in Netherlands taking on a patient 
perspective, just to mention a few. These types of 
commitments 
are 
key 
elements 
in 
promoting 
interdisciplinary research and development in medicine 
focusing problem-solving in general between stakeholders, 
health care professionals and patients.  
However, it is rare to find evidence for how to create 
successful collaborations focusing the caring situation 
including nurses and explanations to why this is difficult to 
achieve. Biomedical engineering and clinical trials are for 
the most part related to doctors collaborating with engineers. 
Lately the need for nurses to be involved is discussed [10]. 
especially when it comes to teamwork [11] [12]. Inter-
professional collaboration during education is pointed out as 
a good opportunity to overcome professional barriers [13]. 
and some experiences published [14]. This is especially 
asked for in times of increasing specialization [15]. Beyond 
this, interventions into caring situations and nursing are for 
the most part about studying them, interviewing them about 
their work environment [16] [17] [18] [19], musculoskeletal 
disorders or other physiological problems in working life 
[20] [21], job demands [22], exposure for abuse or other 
risks [23] [24] [25] [26] [27], workload [28] or to prevent or 
plan for interventions [29] [30] [31]. Interventions with a 
participative approach include e-training programs [32], 
ergonomic preventative programs [33] [34] or integrated 
care [35] or are discussing success factors for interventions 
in nursing in general [36]. However, there are no 
conclusions 
about 
what 
limits 
multidisciplinary 
collaborations or what makes it possible. 
When turning the health care meeting, or caring situation, 
as it will hereinafter be called, into the research object and 
focus for this paper we do not include any health care 
professionals. The caring situation is defined as the situation 
where nurses and biomedical engineers are both interfering 
with caring for the patient. Unlike the physician who is 
responsible for making diagnosis, it is the nurse who has the 
responsibility for the caring situation. Nurses are making 
observations following in detail the patient's caring needs 
and providing relevant and sufficient care while engineers 
provide technological support for monitoring the course of 
the disease. In a critical situation where technology fails or 
the patient status changes in an unexpected way, engineers 
immediately start to search for technological problems while 
nurses immediately direct his or her concentration on the 
patient. This is good and well and according to their training 
and competencies, but at the same time they interfere with 
the same patient and in the same situation, and not least in 
connection with digitization and implementation in new 
arenas. One can assume that their interaction and 
communication is a vital factor that influences the outcome 
of critical situations and the patient’s wellness. Furthermore, 
digitization 
provides 
us 
with 
new 
challenges 
and 
opportunities to examine the collaboration. 
 
B. Engineering and nursing when digitizing  
The initiative presented in this paper takes place in the 
era of digitization and digitizing health care is the overall 
context in which this is under development, in fact one of 
the most important advances, compared to when the 
healthcare system developed on a scientific basis [2]. At that 
time, modern science was integrated in medical training 
leading up to reforms and knowledge that doubled the life 
expectancy during the 20th century. Today digitization 
encompasses bio-medical engineering used by health care 
professionals in hospitals, and home health care systems, as 
well as digital tools used by both health care professionals, 
citizens at home and in mobile settings.  
Engineering and nursing, including caring sciences, have 
a long history together in developing modern health care. 
While engineers have provided tools and instruments in 
accordance with technological advancements, nurses have 
had the role as users of these applications in patient contexts 
and have been responsible for the safety around the patient. 
In this context engineering includes technical research 
across the borders of engineering and medicine important to 
medical applications and health care in its widest meaning 
encompassing research on cellular and molecular level to 
complex systems and materials and energy. Traditionally, 
doctors at hospitals are pointed out as the target group for 
medical technologies. With digitization breaking up 
hierarchies there are reasons to point out other health care 
professions beyond the role of the doctors, nurses having a 
central role close to patients. 
In the Nordic countries, nursing as a research subject, 
have for thirty years, developed in parallel with “caring 
sciences”. Both have been expansive including caring 
12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
informatics and caring theory. Nursing, which is the broad 
international field, has its focus on guiding nurses in 
practice such as routines and regulations and patient safety. 
Caring sciences, published in Journals, such as the 
Scandinavian JN for Caring Sciences among other JN, 
originate from phenomenology and the interest to 
understand principles for utilization [37] [38] [39]. Caring 
science is today related to person-centred care, self-
sufficiency and independence.  Especially since the core of 
caring has been revealed as central, holistic, individualized 
and at the same time providing expert physical care 
combined with fulfilling emotional needs in an adaptive 
environment [40]. 
Digitization takes place in parallel with another 
characteristic of our time - demographic developments – in 
fact the most contemporary social change of our time taken 
place today in most parts of the world. Drastic reductions of 
child mortality and increased living standards in developing 
countries have increased the average life expectancy. 
Children and old populations constitute the groups that will 
increase the most until 2050, hence being the main patient 
target groups for the coming decades both locally and 
globally. It is estimated that within a decade, the majority of 
the world’s population will have accesses to virtually all the 
world's information in a machine that fits in its own palm. 
These profound changes occurring within one generation 
naturally has a great impact on digital media, robots and 
sensors creating new opportunities to practice disaster 
response and care, in dangerous situations and in the 
monitoring of health. 
In this paper digitization is understood in its historical 
context being an extension of the use of IT, converting even 
more information into digital form. The telephone system 
used by broad groups of citizens is one example of an 
everyday technology with multiple uses now being 
digitized. A long used technology is the safety alarm that 
has been in operation in home care since the 1970s and now 
being digitized. There are good reasons to assume that 
previous experiences of use and technological changes 
affect individuals approach to new technologies. Following 
the classic theory of Everett Rogers, adoption is a process 
that deals with the uncertainty in deciding about a new 
alternative to those previously in existence [41]. From this 
theory the widespread use of the safety alarms can probably 
be explained by the long experience of using telephone 
applications. Second, digitization occurs in everyday life, 
not in limited and controlled environments, since exchanges 
between people are mediated digitally to an increasing 
degree. This provides more complex challenges since most 
of medical technologies traditionally are developed and 
tested in laboratories away from real life settings. To 
understand why digital applications and systems do work or 
do not work in people´s everyday life requires a subtler and 
theoretical understanding of contextualization of technology 
and domestication processes.  
Hence, with digitization we refer to the on-going 
development of mobile and virtual communications between 
hospitals, homes and caring units moving focus from 
hospital- 
and 
function-based 
organizations 
to 
personalisation and new arenas for health care. In other 
words, from talking about health care in terms of patients, 
diseases, wards and elimination of risks with single 
technical applications, towards a focus on health, home 
health care such as cancer and palliative care, monitoring 
and communication on distance, digitized and accessible 
patient care records requiring active patients and citizens 
and more of inter-professional collaboration and teamwork 
between health care professionals. These shifts in the way 
care and contacts with citizens are understood is already 
underway applied in a wide range of ideas but less 
supported by empirical evidence.  
Digitization will definitely challenge the way engineers 
and nurses interact, both in real life caring situations but 
also in developing and implementing digital health care. For 
digital applications to be supportive in local practice it is 
dependent on engineering competence but also relevant 
implementation outside laboratories, in real life settings, and 
situated caring competence provided by nurses in close 
collaboration with patients. On the other hand, digitization 
offers new opportunities to collaborate in areas not yet 
occupied by any specific interest. The potential to improve 
collaboration is still embedded in the interaction between 
technology, user experiences and the way the context is 
organized. 
C. Patient´s new role 
One of the most important areas today in which inter-
professional and multi-disciplinary collaboration is crucial is 
the implementation of telemedicine for outpatient care 
including system design for monitoring, design of care 
robots and applications for self-care. This development has a 
number of consequences, primarily a further shift from in-
patient care to caring activities outside hospitals and for 
engineers the challenging transition moving new applications 
from the laboratory out to practice. The patients themselves 
have become an indispensable factor in making the systems 
work, since the implementation of digitized home health care 
is taken place outside controlled hospital environments and 
laboratories. This in turn implies understanding the 
domestication of technology and awareness of the 
environment and the situation where the systems are 
supposed to work. In addition, these systems are increasingly 
complex. The way to understand technological worlds and 
social worlds has long been perceived as “socio-technical 
systems. Factors that help coordination and adaption in 
complex socio-technical systems have been brought forward 
such as shared visions and common goals [42] and active 
learning environments [43] [44]. The traditional way to 
apply already made technology is criticized for being 
unaware about the social context and the human being 
exposed to a more or less deterministic development [45] 
[46]. One reason is that technology evaluated as one-
13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
dimensional building on a linear model of innovations makes 
recommendations that are underestimating complexity [41]. 
Consequently, it is hard to find empirical evidence that 
implementations benefit from linear systems. On the 
contrary, it is estimated that two-thirds of organizations’ 
efforts to implement change fails [48]. For these reasons it is 
suggested that one must leave the linear model and consider 
all factors that influence implementation [49]. Actually, this 
is a point where multidisciplinary collaboration is needed 
based on a more informed and critical perspective on 
innovation and implementation. From an engineering point 
of view, mathematicians can contribute to a more non-linear 
thinking by providing the central distinctions between 
linearity and non-linearity. A broad range of researchers in 
caring science and social science can contribute with 
empirically justified concepts of the role of technology in 
human 
contexts 
by 
providing 
concepts 
such 
as 
domestication, behaviors and context. 
So far, however, the uptake of digital technologies 
designed for patient centered care and use implemented in 
people´s everyday life [50] has remained disappointing. 
They typically run up against acceptability problems and 
widespread non-use when they meet the muddled realities of 
everyday 
life 
and 
complex 
market 
forces. 
Their 
interventionist potential has not been realized because the 
complexities 
are 
both 
under-theorized 
and 
over-
instrumentalized [51]. For children in long-term intensive 
care the needs for design that allow them to live an active 
life are crucial. For example, children with respiratory 
disorders in need of carrying around oxygen equipment at 
home are still to a great extent discriminated by heavy and 
stigmatizing design. The same goes for elderly people. The 
way the most common technologies provided by home 
health care reflects images that these users have very low 
expectations. In fact, this can be experienced as stigmatizing 
[52].  At the same time investments in systems to meet 
increasing needs in health care to provide help and support 
for ageing populations aiming at facilitating for elderly 
people to stay in their own homes as an alternative to 
nursing homes are huge. European Union invested more 
than €1 billion euro in research and industry collaborations 
in long-term monitoring in combination with robots in the 
homes of elderly people between 2008 and 2013 and 
continues to do so in Horizon 2020.  
D. Digitization goes beyond single applications 
Digitization in this paper is framed in the discourse of 
eHealth, implementation and learning, understanding 
digitization as leading up to a greater complexity and 
especially for engineers, a new sometimes puzzling context 
coined in terms of implementing technology “out in the 
wild”, outside the laboratory. We are entering a new phase 
where it is more about interconnected systems and no longer 
just individual applications. Today, the use of different 
types of IT applications is not unknown to anyone in health 
care. Examples of products that can add value are digital 
patient records, alarms, and sensors for monitoring health, 
robots with various appearances such as social robots and 
rob cats, digital incontinence indicators, and remote surgery, 
decision support for diagnosis and balance training for 
stroke sufferers. Many of these examples have been shown 
to increase the quality of care and have already become 
successful business solutions. At the same time, this raises 
awareness about the fact that individual technical artefacts 
are hardly the solutions to the health care problems. This 
leads to a number of questions which need to be addressed: 
How can we permanently and sustainably integrate new 
applications in health care? What is the best way to 
implement accurate solutions in health care with a 
comprehensive and ongoing digitization?  
Another important question concerns what is called the 
technological imperative in relation to caring values: are we 
always obliged to do what can be done in terms of 
technological development? Or can we find ways to criticize 
such deterministic views? Although technology is closely 
associated with the development of modern medical care, 
the relationship to technological development is divided 
[53]. Here is a criticism that high-powered specialization 
risks creating problems can become counterproductive. The 
German philosopher George Henry Gadamer asserted, for 
example, that it is precisely in highly developed technical 
civilizations that the phrases "quality of life" and "whole" 
are expressed, because something is lost. A narrow technical 
perspective 
sometimes 
tends 
to 
give 
healthcare 
professionals the role of managing technology instead of 
people. It also contributes to the technological imperative, 
i.e., what is possible to be measured must be measured even 
if the benefit is unclear. Meanwhile, with a critical 
perspective on technology development, we can see its 
growing importance and that it is a force for change.  
To sum up, while engineering understands the increased 
complexity, patient context is more familiar to nurses. As 
digitization increasingly moves in to the realms of health 
and self-care, the relationship between the caregiver and the 
individual citizen, patient or care receiver, becomes more 
important. In order to successfully implement and promote 
self-care 
management, 
personalized 
medicine” 
and 
consequences of the demographic development this paper 
will contribute to open up the “black box” providing new 
findings from the inside of collaboration and learning 
activities between engineers and nurses [46] [55]. 
E. Aim 
With this background, how much can we expect 
engineers and nurses to collaborate and what can be defined 
as factors leading to successful interactions and what are the 
obstacles? We can assume that collaborating in order for the 
patients and citizens to benefit from digitization and be safe 
and cared for in a relevant way both inside and outside 
hospitals encompasses both common interests but also 
potential conflicts. These conflicts can be of a more general 
nature such as differences in understanding technology and 
its role in caring situations, power relations in providing and 
14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
receiving care and how to influence technological 
developments, as well as more specific context dependent 
conflicts for example personal relations.  
More precisely, how do engineers understand the caring 
situation and how do nurses understand technology in caring 
situations and what makes it work? How does this 
interaction take place in research and development projects 
and how can this interaction be prepared for and facilitated 
already during education and training?  
This paper aims at deepening the knowledge on 
collaborations between nursing and engineering; what are 
the 
factors 
leading 
to 
successful 
interactions 
and 
collaboration and what are the missing links?  What are the 
challenges considering the practical context in which 
digitization 
takes 
place 
and 
asks 
for 
successful 
implementations 
as 
a 
result 
of 
multidisciplinary 
collaborations? 
F. The structure of the paper 
This first section, which is an introduction to the 
empirical results presented in the next section, has shown 
how digitization is characterized more by systems and 
complexities rather than individual artifacts, and therefore 
requires enhanced collaboration between engineers and 
healthcare professionals to get systems to function outside 
the laboratories and outside hospitals, in the homes of 
patients and caregivers. Section II provides the empirical 
result from two cases. The first paragraph presents the result 
from an in-depth analysis of the collaboration between 
engineers and nurses in two European based projects on 
robotics related to health care. The second paragraph 
presents the evaluation of joint learning activities between 
engineering and nursing students during their last semester. 
These activities were taken place as pilots to develop a 
strategic program in collaboration between Royal Institute 
of Technology (KTH) and the Swedish Red Cross 
University College (SRCUC) and the new subject: 
Technology in Health Care.  Both cases are original 
research elaborating on what are the common interests and 
existing conflicts between nursing and engineering when 
implementing and evaluating new technologies in caring 
situations. 
Section 
III 
discusses 
this 
result 
and 
methodological weaknesses and strengths related to the 
cases. Section IV provides conclusions of use for future 
engineering-nursing collaboration. 
 
II. 
EMPIRICAL FINDINGS IN TWO CASES 
Result from two empirical cases is presented including 
methodology, research design and result. Targets groups for 
both cases are engineers and nurses in collaboration and 
their relation to patients in caring situations.  
A. First case: implementing robots and systems in elderly 
people´s homes in joint collaboration between nurses 
and engineers 
1) Methodology and research design 
The first case is a meta-analysis of two research and 
development projects funded by the European Commission 
within call FP7-ICT-2011-7. The project GiraffPlus was 
aiming at the implementation of a system with sensors and a 
tele robot (half autonomous) for monitoring health care 
needs and communicating with health care professionals and 
municipal home help services. The second project, HOBBIT, 
was aiming at a robot companion to help elderly people at 
home picking up things from the floor, retrieving glasses or 
medication or call for help in case of falling. From these 
projects, which lasted for three years, there are a lot to learn 
even though the projects in themselves had a limited time to 
make changes that affected the project plan including project 
goals and the level of ambition.  
The analysis is based on a review of critical situations 
that emerged during the work and demanded a joint 
discussion in the project teams or any kind of change of 
plans. The critical situations that were defined derived from 
projects combined and their protocols, notes from meetings 
and from the on-line bug trucker. The critical situations 
discussed in protocols or in notes from meetings or pointed 
out as problems in the on-line bug trucker were organized in 
line with the project plan including developing ethics and 
ethical vetting; catching needs in scientific literature reviews; 
translating needs into technological applications; laboratory 
tests; tests in the homes of elderly people; and exit strategy. 
The competencies involved a number of professional 
actors but for this analysis engineers and nurses and patients 
were selected as focus points. The projects were organized in 
different ways. Test sites were organized in seven homes in 
the HOBBIT project in three European countries and in total 
15 homes in three countries in the GiraffPlus project over 
periods from three weeks up to eighteen months. While 
HOBBIT were centrally organized with one coordinator for 
all tasks and engineers moving around to different partner 
countries with different test sites, the GiraffPlus project were 
organized in test site teams in each of the three partner 
countries being responsible for in total fifteen the test sites. 
The test site teams had regular contact or immediate contact 
in case of emergencies or technical problem. The test site 
teams included four functions: managing the project, 
coordinating the system, contacting users and solving day to 
day technical problems. Half way into the GiraffPlus project 
an online bug trucker was installed in the report system 
managed by the test teams to get a better overview of what 
kind of problems that the elderly users encountered.  The on 
line bug trucker registered technical bugs and other test site 
problems i.e. in the homes of the elderly users. In total five 
engineers and two nurses were part of the HOBBIT project 
and six engineers and five nurses in the GiraffPlus project.  
The elderly participants thus had a central role in the 
planning of both projects being involved in every step of a 
user centric development cycle. They were selected as 
primary users and asked for participation on the basis that 
15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
they met the following inclusion criteria: being 60 years or 
older; willing to try out a robot in the home for three weeks 
in the HOBBIT projects and 6-12 months in the GiraffPlus 
project; living in their own homes, not in a nursing home or 
sheltered home for elderly people; being frail with walking 
instability and risk of falling and feelings of being insecure; 
at least one chronic condition such as: diabetes, high blood 
pressure or cardiovascular disease; and being on medical 
treatment (taking pills). Not having any diagnosis such as 
dementia or other cognitive disease was an important 
exclusion criterion. Their participation encompassed tests of 
a variety of products in a laboratory related to the monitoring 
system such as blood pressure measurer and remote controls 
for the robot. Second, they were having a monitoring system 
with a telerobot in the GiraffPlus project or a mutual care 
robot in the HOBBIT project installed in their own homes.  
 
2) Result: 
Common 
interests 
and 
conflicting 
epistemologies 
The results show that critical situations appeared in 
relation to problem interpretations and to the need to develop 
and follow ethics approved, catching and translating needs 
when designing robots and tools, finding test sites, 
conducting field tests and in the end, withdrawing from the 
homes, the exit strategy. These critical situations did not 
always bring about changes but exposed conflicting 
epistemologies and how they affected implementation and 
involvement of users. To solve these dilemmas without 
risking the progress of the project it goes without saying that 
the participants completed the project being in for different 
reasons. Four critical situations, or epistemological gaps, 
were found: 
 
a) Cultivating images of elderly in need of technology 
In the first category, we learn something about the 
validity of the project result, namely that the input engineers 
needed, despite the user-centered approach were more often 
guided by their images of elderly rather than of what the 
older participants in the project expressed. This was 
confirmed in a master thesis published in August 2017 
within this KTH-SRCUC program [56]. The aim of using a 
user centered design approach was to ensure active 
involvement of elderly users during the entire development 
cycle ranging from the analysis, observation, design and 
verification phase in order to catch the most relevant needs 
of this target group. This was an important requirement for 
getting funding for the project. For this reason, their 
involvement as such was legitimizing the project.  
However, to what extent did that lead up to catching 
relevant needs? One of the first tasks was to map out 
scientific evidence for elderly people´s needs of home 
health care systems as a base for making the first 
questionnaire before testing in the homes. Results of a 
literature review in the GiraffPlus project was reported in 
the first delivery to the EC and followed-up twice compared 
with what the elderly themselves asked for along the way. It 
turned out that the result from the literature review was not 
confirmed by the elderly persons who tested the technology 
in their homes. There was a lack of useful concepts to catch 
context-based factors and experiences. It turned out that the 
relation between individual physiological and social needs 
related to single applications did not match with what the 
elderly users tried to convey. For this reason, the project ran 
the risk to continue to be shaped by stereotypic views of 
elderly rather than broadening the understanding of aging 
and later life in a technological landscape. Also, the elderly 
themselves seem to refer to stereotypic views when they 
most often said that the technological solutions that was 
presented probably would be useful for other elderly but not 
for themselves.  
b) Being in for different reasons  
Second, we learn that engineers and test persons can be 
in the same project and perform tasks in parallel but with 
very different reasons. Both the engineers, social scientists 
and health care professional were motivated to participate in 
the project out of their scientific perspective or engagement 
in certain questions. The main objective was to develop or 
study the communication and information transfer between 
patients in their homes and their health center (physician, 
nurse, physio therapist or occupational therapist) using 
robots and sensors. The goal was to make this contact more 
efficient, but not necessarily to give more opportunities for 
personal contacts. However, the reason for the elderly to be a 
part of the project was exactly that, to gain more contacts 
with health care and a feeling of being watched over and 
taken care of. The presence of project people going in and 
out of their home even became too much for one person who 
dropped out, but many of them expressed expectations to be 
more in contact with the health center as a result of the 
project. To conclude, while the engineers tried to rationalize 
contacts and ease the burden for health care providers, the 
elderly users saw this as a way to gain more contacts with 
health care. It can be added that the ambition of rationalizing 
contacts would have required re-organizations of doctor’s 
routines and health care organization that was beyond this 
project. 
c) Making robots work 
Third, testing communication between the elderly person 
at home and the robot itself was the main objective for the 
HOBBIT project. Also for the GiraffPlus project there were 
possibilities for the elderly person to self-initiate a 
communication, for example in emergencies, in need for 
rehabilitation with support from a physio-therapist; or getting 
virtual visits from a nurse. To create systematic dialogues 
possible to evaluate, engineers used scripts i.e., predefined 
dialogues and behaviors, that test persons were supposed to 
follow. In the GiraffPlus project hardly anyone initiated the 
robot. In the HOBBIT project tests with script and users 
focusing a situation were tested in a laboratory, trying out for 
example the need for entertainment or asking for help 
picking up something.  
16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
What happened in the GiraffPlus was that the wider 
context interfered; a domestication process took place 
meaning that the robot became a part of the social context at 
home including routines, habits and the moral economy of 
the household [57]. While scripts made them isolated from 
their social context, the robot became meaningful when it 
was given a name and became a symbol for the elderly 
persons being part of the most advanced technological 
progress. As a consequence, one of the most important 
aspects for them was to make sure that visitors could see the 
robot and learn about their participation in the project. From 
this experience it can be questioned if the script tested in the 
lab would be possible to be implemented in the home in the 
way it was expected. To conclude, while the engineers were 
trying 
to 
predefine 
dialogues 
and 
behaviors, 
the 
domestication process that took place in the context of 
private homes alternated the result given in a laboratory. 
With domestication, elderly users came to use and evaluate 
the technology in different ways. An assessment of how 
useful the new technology was in relation to what they 
already had led to lower or higher usage. If it was easier to 
call the phone instead of getting connected to the telerobot 
this is what they did. Another example is how visible one 
wanted the new technology to be at home, which had 
consequences for where it was placed. Another example was 
how well the new technology could be adapted to daily 
routines. One refused to use it if it was inconvenient and 
made everyday life more complicated or even intrusive. This 
might be the most obvious proof of the difference between 
controlled laboratories and people’s social world and the 
factors which affects implementation. 
d) Making them ours 
Fourth, the project aims to define relevant applications 
and make technology work was overshadowed by the fact 
that the elderly participants put great emphasis on the robots' 
appearance. The initial workshops about what to use a robot 
for and its design and appearance engaged groups of elderly 
persons invited to draw pictures and discuss these matters. 
Already at these workshops it was obvious that the 
appearance of the robots engaged more compared with 
technological functions. As part of the domestication process 
these artifacts turned into family members. Other signs of 
domestication were that the robots were given names and 
that the elderly users tried to fit the system as much as 
possible into their daily life, meaning as few changes as 
possible. One example was the refusal to be micro-managed, 
i.e., that their behaviors were monitored just for the interest 
of the project.  
Three design briefs of potential robot appearances were 
developed and tested in three countries. With reference to the 
project's limited time and funding it was not possible to test a 
variety of prototype appearances, but the picture was 
commented on by the elderly as an important part of the 
interior style of their homes.  One can assume that this 
affected their use of the robot and their assumptions about 
having such a “machine” at home. With this background, one 
plausible assumption is that while the engineers were 
focusing technology, the elderly users focused on the looks 
of the robots. 
B. Second case: joint learning activities for engineers and 
nurses preparing for technological hazards 
1) Methodology and research design 
The second case is about preparing biomedical 
engineering students and nursing students for collaboration 
in caring situations in which these two professional groups 
will meet and handle any risk and hazard that might occur 
when caring for patients. Testing this joint learning initiative 
has two aims: to improve communication between them and 
to make them more proactive in, not only avoiding risks but 
also in taking part of technological development and 
collaborate around producing new applications and 
innovations to secure patient safety. 
This learning activity took place within the collaboration 
between The Royal Institute of Technology, KTH, and 
Swedish Red Cross University College, SRCUC, in 
Stockholm Sweden, implemented in parallel with a new 
interdisciplinary postgraduate program and teaching subject 
- Technology in Health Care (in Swedish: Teknisk 
vårdvetenskap). The Nursing Science program at SRCUC 
will therefore have the potential to add a unique 
technological profile to its 150-year tradition of training 
nurses. At KTH, the Department for Technology and health 
will be given new opportunities to implement new 
technologies in health care successfully and to improve its 
research on how technology works in caring settings. Three 
goals was set in 2014, in the beginning of the strategic 
development: 1) to better understand medical technology, 
safety aspects and functions; 2) to increase the ability to 
proactively participate in the development, implementation 
and evaluation of technology; 3) to understand how 
technical developments affect professional roles and 
working methods. One strategic meeting point early defined 
was between engineering and nursing students. 
Preparations for learning activities of which one is 
presented in this paper include publications focusing patient 
safety, learning and innovation. The first articles in this 
context were published by Mattsson & Stevens [54] [58] 
and Björling on coated endotracheal tubes and central 
venous catheters with focus on patient safety [60] [61]. 
During the same period Östlund published several articles 
on innovation processes, design and ethics especially 
dedicated to the use of robotics in elderly care [62] [63] 
[64].  
The first attempts to joint learning opportunities for 
engineers and nurses took place in 2016 and was followed 
up 2017, conducted in collaboration between teachers from 
KTH and SRCUC. The exercise is organized as a part of the 
curriculum in which students in nursing and students in 
medical engineering meet for a joint activity during their 
last and sixth semester of education, in total 80 students 
participated. The starting point for the joint exercise was the 
17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
caring situation where they both have their professional 
roles but rarely access to each other’s perspectives. The 
education goals were to increase the understanding of each 
other’s way of approaching a caring situation with advanced 
medical technology, more precisely to increase the 
understanding of each other’s perspectives, competence, 
tasks and way of communication; to start to communicate 
with each other; and to solve a problem that is supposed to 
be as realistic as something they will approach as part of 
their future work situation.  
The work material consisted of a report from the Swedish 
Accident Investigation Authority about a serious failure at a 
Swedish hospital causing the death in the cardiac intensive 
department in 2010. This accident was the object for an 
investigation published in an official report [65]. The 
students prepared themselves before the exercise by reading 
this report. They were also prepared with the theoretical 
model of a “Man-Machine-Organization” model which were 
a part of both nursing and engineering educations. The 
exercise took place during one day and gave them the 
opportunities to elaborate on the education goals in groups, 
presenting the result of the group work for the entire group 
and to make an individual statement of the learning 
outcomes.  
A total of 59 students participated in the workshop in 
2016, whereof 39 engineering students and 20 nursing 
students. When giving the same workshop with a new set of 
students in 2017 a total of 69 students participated, whereof 
39 engineering students and 33 nursing students. At both 
workshops all students were asked to voluntarily hand in an 
anonymous written reflection about the joint workshop 
described above. They were asked to evaluate the activity 
by responding three questions: 1. What are your views on 
patient safety after today’s workshop? 2. What are your 
views on collaboration between biomedical engineers and 
nurses after today’s workshop? 3. What did you learn from 
today’s workshop?  All students handed in their evaluations.  
  
2) Result 
The result of this joint learning activity gave overall very 
positive result, which is a conclusion drawn from 
anonymous written evaluations the same day as the exercise 
took place. The most referred experiences were that this was 
educational and surprisingly interesting to deepening the 
understanding 
of 
nursing 
respectively 
engineering 
perspectives. Common insights were that technology is an 
important support but dependent on the way it is organized 
and that there are no unrelated actions that does not have 
consequences in such a situation. Critical comments asked 
for more preparations and the need for follow ups out there 
in real working life. 
If we consider how this activity affects long-term 
collaboration between engineers and nurses, we can say that 
the result proves that they have gained new insights in 
professional jargons and not least the awareness that there 
are other professions involved in making the caring situation 
into what it is. Both these groups will in a few months meet 
out in the labour market. They have no problems to find 
employments since there is a shortage of both nurses 
providing care and engineers working at hospitals with 
providing equipment and support for surgery and a wide 
range of follow-up health care activities within the 
responsibility of hospitals. But at that time it might not be 
possible to create the communication that in this case is 
provided already during the education. The possibility for 
joint learning activities between nursing students and 
medical engineers during their education will broaden their 
understanding, enhance patient safety and ensure a 
sustainable care.  
III. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper is looking for factors leading to successful 
interactions and collaboration between engineers and nurses 
and what are the missing links. While such collaboration is 
taken for granted as something that will automatically lead 
to more useful technologies and implementations and no 
one opposes such an approach it is rare to find explanations 
to why it works or does not work. The results reported in 
this paper point to the lack of a common understanding of 
what creates successful implementation and why the results 
of testing of products in laboratories cannot automatically 
be transferred to real life settings without taking into 
account the user´s expectations, skills and social contexts. 
This is described in the analysis as engineers and nurses 
have different epistemologies.  
Engineers expect laboratory testing to be a reliable 
method to make technological products work outside 
laboratories, while nurses are expected to learn to use the 
technological devices that they are provided with by 
engineers. Both groups under-estimates the domestication 
processes that takes place as a result of the interaction 
between new technologies and user´s in real life contexts 
and interactions happening in caring situations. Nurse´s 
experiences of using technologies in caring situations was 
not counted as part of their technological competencies or at 
least not asked for when prototypes were developed and 
testing was planned. Neither did the nurses see themselves 
as part of the technological development. It was the 
engineer´s responsibility. The nurses relied on published 
result on what factors are of importance for independent 
living in relation to daily activities.  
The key user group – the elderly users involved in the 
projects described in this paper – constitutes a third 
collaborator that also brought in their expectations and 
which turned out to be quite different from the nurse´s and 
engineer’s expectations. The elderly users can be described 
as being “implicated” users or “lay end user”, meaning that 
they are talked about and involved in responding to 
interview questions and even observed in the home, but still 
not involved in modifications or design [66]. It seems as if 
engineers, nurses and elderly users can be involved in the 
same development project but for very different reasons. It 
18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
can be assumed that there are hidden aspects not properly 
explored in this design process that might be innovative. 
The relationship between these three collaborators could for 
example be studied in terms of power and who has the 
advantage of formulating problems and solutions. That 
would probably reveal more of these mechanisms of why 
they were in for different reasons.  
 
Besides the four critical situations that are 
described in this paper and that reflect the phenomena of 
being in for different reasons there were also other findings 
pointing at elderly user’s context being invisible even 
though they were supposed to be at the heart of the project. 
They were aspects related to safety and security. Since 
security is well linked to transfer of information and private 
data, more or less unknown aspects occurred with the 
implementation of technologies in the homes, such as the 
capacity 
of 
the 
infrastructure 
that 
caused 
severe 
interruptions; the interios design and furnishing not adapted 
to robots moving around; the social context having its own 
routines which was interrupted by the system and sometime 
experienced as intrusive.  
Digitizing health care places new demands on a 
long-established organization of engineers being employed 
at the medical technology unit and nurses who have their 
main workplace with patients at the ward. With digitization 
it is no longer enough for engineers to provide and manage 
the technology at the hospital and nurses to learn to use 
individual machines. Now health care is taken place with 
new involvements of patients and at new arenas in people´s 
homes and on the move. The result challenges the way 
innovation processes are normally organized as linear, 
putting two and two together under limit time pressure and 
predictable outcomes. For engineers this will probably 
widen their scope from the hospital to environments outside 
the hospital and for nurses it will generate new tasks and 
new professional roles such as partake in distance surgery, 
keeping in touch with patients at home via robots or being 
genetic guides for patients finding out about their health 
heritage. Already comprehensive investments are in motion 
where engineers and nurses are supposed to collaborate 
around design and implementation and tests.  
      Being in for different reasons tells us that a deeper 
analysis of the actual collaboration and critical situations in 
joint projects show where the limitations are. It is not about 
testing the design of interfaces only or pre-decided effects of 
using certain devices. Neither is the result of implementing 
lab tested technology in real life settings predictable. What 
makes a difference are factors such as the expectations of 
user’s ability, very often concluded from generalized user 
requirements leaving out the context. Second, user’s own 
expectations, in this case they were not interested in the 
robot per se but to be involved in frontier project and 
increase contacts with health care. Third, it is what´s in it for 
me that makes the domestication process successful, not 
technological imperative such as monitoring behavior and 
involving relatives just because it is possible. These findings 
challenges both engineering and nursing paradigms since it 
is not about patients only or not about technology only but 
about the interaction and the caring situation.          
These 
findings 
should 
be 
of 
interest 
for 
policymakers and planners of research and development 
programs on national and European levels when elaborating 
on what should be the criteria for investments in future 
home health care systems. In connection with the discussion 
of an aging population and the potential of technology, these 
results are important in understanding what can make a 
difference. For engineers these results can help to take their 
technologies a step further by closing the gap between the 
laboratory and real life settings, sometimes called “out there 
in the wild” as some robotic engineers sometimes call this 
world where people interact with their result.  
Some of these findings can be generalized to health 
care professionals beyond nurses while other findings are 
specifically relevant for nurses and for the caring situation. 
Being close to the patient, following in detail the patient's 
caring needs provides a processual understanding of the 
development and a deeper sense of tacit knowledge 
compared to temporary consultations or surgeries.  
         How 
to 
teach 
technology 
in 
nursing 
is 
a 
comprehensive question, not least educational. This 
discussion is taken place within the teachers group, 
appointed to be responsible for teaching aspects of 
technology. The second case on joint learning activities is 
based on two pedagogic ideas: not starting with change but 
first understanding what is already in motion (engineers and 
nurses side by side in a caring situation), and second, 
present ideas that are a truer expression of what kind of 
knowledge these two groups need to be prepared for. Since 
technology is always in progress finding ways to collaborate 
and communicate independent of what kind of technological 
changes be considered to be more sustainable than inventing 
the wheel for every new innovation.  
Even though the joint learning activities show 
promising result, to plan for this becoming a permanent part 
of nursing and engineering education programs is not 
without 
difficulties. 
These 
education 
programs 
are 
organized based on deeply rooted perceptions of what 
nurses and engineers need to learn. Changes in curriculum 
require clear initiatives and can conflict with both space and 
focus. 
Beside learning activities in bachelor education the 
KTH-SRCUC program also include PhD training and 
research cooperation, not least joint seminars. One 
suggestion leading the attempts to find joint research 
questions is to meet within non-invested areas. A non-
invested area is defined as a context or an intellectual 
discourse where none of the collaborators has invested 
interests. At least it can be expected to decrease the level of 
conflicts that can occur in between paradigms. One way of 
creating a non-invested area is when groups meet that have 
not met before as in the second case presented above. 
Another option is to create spaces for collaboration with 
19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
care providers outside the education or research department. 
To fill these spaces with a content, depend on the needs and 
demands of the care providers and requires a thorough 
completion of initial dialogue currently underway.  
These two cases presented in this paper are selected out 
of several attempts to create the KTH-SRCUC program. The 
strengths of the cases are their unique approach of 
deepening the understanding of what makes collaboration 
possible or not possible. It opens windows for new ideas 
and innovations. The weakness of the first case is that the 
analysis is made after the completion of the project, not 
planned on beforehand, which could have included a more 
systematic collection of different kind of information data. 
In the second case evaluations were conducted but not yet 
published in detail. In this paper we draw conclusions in 
accordance to the aim at deepening the knowledge on 
collaborations between nursing and engineering by taking 
on a new perspective pointing out the factors leading to 
successful interactions and collaboration and what are the 
missing links.   
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Collaboration between nursing and engineering has long 
been requested. This initiative suggests that it takes more 
than just adding two and two together. There is a need for 
renewed views on what drives technical development in 
care and how it can be adapted in a socio-technical system. 
From previous experiences we learn that preparations for 
collaboration must include the awareness of epistemological 
differences as well as common interests to critically 
examine the understanding of how caring practices are 
constructed and implemented. For nurses to be proactive 
requires knowledge about technological developments and 
the ability to collaborate with engineers and participate in 
design and innovation processes both for healthcare 
professionals and concerned citizens. For engineers a more 
thorough understanding of caring situations and users will 
contribute to a more reliable provision of developed 
solutions and point at new ideas leading up to innovations.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Östlund, B. Björling, G. Mattsson, J., Stridh, S. & Sahlström. 
M. Technology in Health Care. A new research and teaching 
subject in collaboration between nursing science and 
engineering. Ninth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine and Social Medicine, eTelemed 2017 March 
19-23. 
[2] J. Frenk, L. Chen, Z. A. Bhutta, J. Cihen, N. Crisp, T. Evans, 
H. Fineberg, P. Garcia, Y. Ke, P. Kelley, B. Kistnasam, D. 
Naylor, A. Pablos-Mendez, S. Reddy, S. Scrimshaw, J. 
Sepulveda, 
D. 
Serwadda 
and 
H. 
Zurayk. 
“Health 
professionals for a new century: transforming education to 
strengthen health systems in an interdependent world,” The 
Lancet 376, No. 9756, 2010: 1923-1958.  
[3] I. R. Hallberg, “Moving nursing research forward towards a 
stronger impact on health care practice,” International 
Journal of Nursing Studies, 46, 2009: 407-412. 
[4] Swedish Society of Medicine, Onödiga eller skadliga åtgärder 
i 
svensk 
allmänmedicin 
– 
ett 
diskussionsunderlag, 
[Unnecessary or harmful actions in Swedish general medicine 
- a basis for discussion], Stockholm: Swedish Society of 
Medicine, 2013.   
[5] Swedish Society for Nursing: 
- Kunskapsluckor inom omvårdnad. En första inventering 
[Gaps within caring. A first inventory], Stockholm 2013.  
- Strategi för sjuksköterskors arbete med eHälsa [Strategy for 
nursing and eHealth], Stockholm 2012. 
- Värdegrund för omvårdnad [Valuebased caring], Stockholm 
2010. 
[6] S. Bakken, “Informatics for patient safety: a nursing research 
perspective,” Annual Review of Nursing Research, 24, 2006: 
219 
254.  
[7] M. E. Porter and E. Olmsted Teisberg, “Redefining Health 
Care. Creating Value-Based Competition on Results,” 
Harvard Business Review Press, 2006: 98-148, 2006. 
[8] L. Kurzweil, “2045: The Year when Man Becomes 
Immortal”. Time Magazine February 10, 2011. 
[9] C.P. Snow, “The Two Cultures. And a second look”. London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1964. 
[10] D.J. Mick, and M.H. Ackerman, “Nursing and biomedical 
engineering transdisciplinary clinical trials collaboration”. 
Medical Devices, 2, No. 2, 2005: 131-133. 
[11] C. Hurlock-Chorostecki, C. Forchuk, C. Orchard, S. Reeves, 
and M. van Soeren, “The value of the hospital-based nurse 
practitioner role: development of a team perspective 
framework”, Journal of Interprofessional Care, 27, No. 6, 
2013: 501-508. 
[12] K. Perkin, “Nurse practitioners and interprofessional 
collaboration”, Journal of Interprofessional Care, 25, No. 4, 
2011: 243-244. 
[13] J.D. Gonzalo, B.M. Thompson, P. Haidet, K. Mann and D.R. 
Wolpaw, “A Constructive Reframing of Student Roles and 
Systems 
Learning 
in 
Medical 
Education 
Using 
a 
Communities of Practice Lens”, Academic Medicine, 20, No. 
10, 2017  
[14] B.F. Brandt, F.B. Cerra, and C.W. Delaney, “The United 
states Center for Interprofessional Practice and Education: 
Integrating an informatics approach to interprofessional 
work”, Journal of Interprofessional Education, 29, No. 6, 
2015: 592-595. 
[15] P. Hall, “Interprofessional teamwork: professional cultures as 
barriers”, Journal of Interprofessional Care, 2005: 188-196. 
[16] F. Abdelrazek, B. Skytt, M. Aly, M.A. El‐Sabour, N. Ibrahim, 
and M. Engström, “Leadership and management skills of 
first-line managers of elderly care and their work 
environment,” Journal of Nursing and Management,18, No.6, 
2010: 736-745. 
[17] H. Hagerman, M. Engström, E. Häggström, B. Wadensten, 
and B. Skytt, “Male first-line manager’s experiences of the 
work situation in elderly care: An empowerment perspective,” 
Journal of Nursing Management, 23, No. 6, 2015: 695-704. 
[18] L.W. Samia, C.H. Ellenbecker, D.H. Friedman, and K. Dick, 
“Home Care Nurses Experience of Job Stress and 
Considerations for the Work Environment,” Home Health 
Care Quarterly, 31, no.3, 2012: 243-265. 
[19] T. Suominen, N. Savikko, K. Kiviniemi, D. I. Doran, and H. 
Leino-Kilpi, “Work Empowerment as Experienced by Nurses 
in Elderly Care,” Journal of Professional Nursing, 24, No. 1, 
2008: 42-45, 2008. 
[20] K.G. 
Davis 
and 
S.E. 
Kotowski 
“Prevalence 
of 
Musculoskeletal Disorders for Nurses in Hospitals, Long-
term 
Care 
Facilities, 
and 
Home 
Health 
Care: 
A 
20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Comprehensive Review,” Human Factors, 57, No. 5, 2015: 
754-792. 
[21] M. Simon, P. Tackenberg, A. Nienhaus, M. Estryn-Behar, and 
C.P. Maurice, H.M., Hasselhorn, “Back or neck-pain-related 
disability of nursing staff in hospitals, nursing homes and 
home care in seven countries-results from the European 
NEXT-study,” International Journal of Nursing Studies, 45, 
No. 1, 2008: 24-34. 
[22] V. T. Elst, C. Cavents, K. Daneels, K. Johannik, E. Baillien, 
A. Van Den Broeck, and L. Godderis,” Job demands-
resources predicting burnout and work engagement among 
Belgian home health care nurses: A cross-sectional study,” 
Nursing Outlook, 64, No. 6, 2016: 542-556. 
[23] R.R.M. Gershon, M. Pogorzelska, K.A. Qureshi, M. and      
Sherman, Home health care registered nurses and the risk of 
percutaneous injuries. A pilot study,” American Journal of 
Infection Control, 36, No.3, 2008: 165-172. 
[24] A. Hogh, H. Giver, H. Hannerz, B. Pedersen, and B. Holbæk 
“Bullying or violence during training snd the risk of dropout 
from the eldercare sector 2 years later,” Scandinavian Journal 
of Caring Sciences, 26. No.4. 2012: 730-737. 
[25] J.K. Leiss, J.T. Lyden, R. Mathews, K.L. Sitzman, A. 
Vanderpuije, D. Mav, M. Kendra, M.A. C. Klein, and C. J. 
Humphrey, Blood exposure incidents rates from the North 
Carolina study of home care and hospice nurses,” American 
Journal of Industrial Medicine, 52, No. 2, 2009: 99-104. 
[26] P. Markkanen, C. Galligan, A. Laramie, J. Fisher, S. Sama, 
and M. Quinn, “Understanding sharp injuries in home 
healthcare: The Safe Home Care qualitative methods study to 
identify pathways for injury prevention. “Environmental and 
Occupational Health”, 15, No.1, 2015. 
[27] R.Rugulies, I.E.H. Madsen, P.U. Hjarsbech, A. Hogh, V. 
Borg, I.G. Carneiro, and B. Aust, “Bullying at work and onset 
of a major depressive episode among Danish female eldercare 
workers,” Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and 
Health, 38, No.3, 2012: 218-227. 
[28] J. Gené Badia, S. A. Borràs, C.S.J. Carles, C. Camprubí, M 
Dolors ; F. Cegri Lombardo, T. Heras Antonio ; R.R. 
Noguera, S. Martinez González, A. Oliver Olius, M. Piñeiro 
González, T. Montanuy Baró, Teresa, E. Limón Ramírez, M. 
A. Aranzana L. R. Pedret, M. M. Borrell, G.A.Hidalgo, 
“Nursing workload predictors in Catalonia (Spain): A home 
care cohort study,” Gaceta Sanitaria, 25, No. 4, 2011: 308-
313. 
[29]  A.Larsson, L. Karlqvist, M. Westerberg, and G. Gard, 
“Identifying work ability promoting factors for home care 
aides and assistant nurses,” BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders, 
13, 2012. 
[30] G.B. Morgan,” Job satisfaction in the home health care 
context: Validating a customized instrument for application,” 
Journal of Healthcare Management, 55, No.1, 2010: 11-21. 
[31] C. Westermann, A. Kozak, M. Harling, and A. Nienhaus, 
“Burnout intervention studies for inpatient elderly care 
nursing staff: Systematic literature review,” International 
Journal of Nursing Studies, 51, No.1, 2014:63-71. 
[32] A. Nilsson and M. Engström “E-assessment and e-training 
program among elderly care staff lacking formal competence: 
results of a mixed-methods intervention study,” BMC Health 
Services Research, 15, 2015. 
[33] C.D.N. Rasmussen, A. Holtermann, O.S. Mortensen, K. 
Sagaard, and M.B. Jargensen,” Prevention of low back pain 
and its consequences among nurses ‘aides in elderly care: a 
stepped-wedge multi-faceted cluster-randomized controlled 
trial,” BMC Public, 13, 2013. 
[34] C.D.N. Rasmussen, N.K. Lindberg, M.H. Ravn, M.B. 
Jørgensen, K. Søgaard, and A. Holtermann,” Processes, 
barriers and facilitators to implementation of a participatory 
ergonomics program among eldercare workers,” Applied 
Ergonomics, 58, 2017: 491-499. 
[35] G. Syson and J.Bond “Integrating health and social care teams 
in Salford,” Journal of Integrated Care, 18, No. 2, 2010: 17-
24. 
[36] I. Vedel, M. De Stampa, H. Bergman, J. Ankri, B. Cassou, F. 
Blanchard, and L. Lapointe, “Healthcare professional’s ad 
managers´ participation in developing intervention: A pre-
intervention 
study 
in 
the 
elderly 
care 
context,” 
Implementation Science, 4, 2009. 
[37] V. Sorlie, L. Jansson and A. Norberg, “The meaning of being 
in ethically difficult care situations in paediatric care as 
narrated by female Registered Nurses,” Nordic College of 
Caring Sciences, 17, 2003: 285-292.  
[38] L. Fagerstrom, K. Eriksson and I. B. Engberg, ”The patient's 
perceived caring needs: measuring the unmeasurable,” 
International Journal of Nursing Practice, 5, No. 4, 1999: 
199-208. 
[39] P. E. Benner, C. A. Tanner and C. A. Chesla, Expertise in 
nursing practice : caring, clinical judgment & ethics, 2d. ed. 
New York: Springer Pub. 2009. 
[40] J. Mattsson, M. Forsner, M. Castrén and M. Arman, “Caring 
for children in pediatric intensive care units: An observation 
study focusing on nurses’ concerns,” Journal of Nursing 
Ethics, 20, No. 5, 2013: 528-538.  
[41] E.M. Rogers, “Diffusion of innovations” 4th.ed., New York: 
Free Press, 1995. 
[42] J.C. Gorman, N.J. Cooke, and E. Salas,“Preface to the Special 
Issue on Collaboration,Coordination, and Adaptation in 
Complex Sociotechnical Settings,” Human Factors Journal 
Special Issue on collaboration, coordination, and adaptation 
in complex Sociotechnical Systems, 52, No. 2, 2010: 143-146. 
[43] J. Y. Mattsson and L. Stevens, “Development of an individual 
assessment instrument for critical care nursing students,” 
Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 7, No. 2, 2017: 
54-61. 
[44] H. 
Engstrand 
and 
J. 
Mattsson, 
“The 
non-verbal 
communication in handover situations are the spice between 
the lines, to understand the severity of the patient´s 
condition,” Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 7, No. 
5, 2017: 1-8. 
[45] T. Greenhalgh, F. Macfarlane, P. Bate, and O. Kyriakidou. 
Diffussion of innovations in service organizations: 
systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly, 
82: 2004: 581-629. 
[46] Damschroeder, D.C. Aron, R.E. Keith, S.R. Kirsh, J.A. 
Alexander & J. Lowery. Fostering implementation of health 
services research findings into practice: a consolidated 
framework 
for 
advancing 
implementation 
science. 
Implementation Science, 4, No. 50, 2009. 
[47] E. Callahan Hunt, S. Breckenridge Sproat, and R. Rutherford 
Kitzmiller, (2010) “Nursing Informatics Implementation 
Guide”. New York: Springer, Health Informatics Series. 
[48] S. Koch, M. Hägglund & I. Scandurra. Informatics and 
Sociotechnical Challenges when Designing Solutions for 
Integrated eCare. [Retrieved from www.igi-global.com. 
2018-02-13]  
[49] L. 
Huniche 
& 
F. 
Olesen 
(eds), 
”Teknologi 
i 
sundehetspraksis”. Kobenhavn: Munksgaard, 2014. 
[50] K. Brittain, L. Corner, L. Robinson, L, and J. Bond, “Ageing 
in place and technologies of place: the lived experience of 
people with dementia in changing social, physical and 
technological environments”. Sociology of Health & Illness, 
32(2), 2010:272-287. 
21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[51]  A. Peine, A. Faulkner, B. Jæger, and E. Moors, “Science, 
technology 
and 
the 
‘grand 
challenge’ 
of 
ageing—
Understanding the socio-material constitution of later life. 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 93, 2015: 1-9. 
[52] S. Frennert, “Older People and the Adoption of Innovations. A 
study of the expectations on the use of social assistive robots 
and telehealthcare systems”. Lund University: Faculty of 
Engineering, 
Division 
of 
Rehabilitation 
Engineering, 
Licentiate thesis, 2013. 
[53] H. Eriksson, ”Vårdvetenskap för en postmodern tid” [Caring 
Sciences 
for 
a 
Postmodern 
Era], 
Lund 
Sweden: 
Studentlitteratur, 2014: 29-48. 
[54] C. Frostell, G. Björling, E. Strömberg, S. Karlsson, and R.E. 
Aune. “Tracheal implants revisited”. Lancet, 389;2017: 
10075- 1191. 
[55] I. 
R. 
Hallberg, 
”Omvårdnadsvetenskapen 
i 
ett 
framtidsperspektiv [Caring science in future perspectives],” In 
E. Hamrin, M. Kihlgren, A. Rinell Hermansson and G. 
Östlinder (eds.), ”När omvårdnad blev vetenskap”. De första 
decennierna  [When caring became science. The first 
decades], Stockholm: Liber AB, 2014: 328-337. 
[56] B. Fischer, “Configuring Users in Laboratories: Elderly Users 
and Robots”. Master Thesis GEO-2239X. Utrecht University 
and KTH, 2017. 
[57] S. Frennert, H. Eftring, and B. Östlund, “Case Report: 
Implications of Doing Research on Socially Assistive Robots 
in 
Real Homes,” International Journal of Social Robotics, 9, No. 
3, 2017: 401-415.  
[58] J. Y. Mattsson and L. Stevens, “Development of an individual 
assessment instrument for critical care nursing students,” 
Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 7, No. 2, 2017: 
54-61. 
[59]  H. 
Engstrand 
and 
J. 
Mattsson, 
“The 
non-verbal 
communication in handover situations are the spice between 
the lines, to understand the severity of the patient´s 
condition,” Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 7, No. 
5, 2017: 1-8. 
[60] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, S. Jalal, I. Kohn, C. 
Frostell and S. Kalman, S, “Tolerability and performance of 
BIP endotracheal tubes with noble metal alloy coating – a 
randomized clinical evaluation study,” BMC Anesthesiology, 
15, 2015. 
[61] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, J. Sanchez, A. 
Strekalovsky, C. Frostell and S. Kalman, “Central Venous 
Catheters Coated with a Noble Metal Alloy – A Randomized 
Clinical Pilot Study,” Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, 
61, No. 8, 2017: 1049-1049. 
[62] S. Frennert and B. Östlund, “What happens when seniors 
participate in new eHealth schemes?” Disability and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology. July, 2015: 1-9.  
[63] B. Östlund, Säker vård i hemmet [Patient safety at home] In: 
M. Ekstedt, and M. Flink, Hemmet som vårdplats – säker 
hemsjukvård [The home as a safe place for home health care]. 
Stockholm: Liber Publishing, in print, 2018. 
[64] S. Frennert, H. Eftring and B. Östlund, “Case Report: 
Implications of Doing Research on Socially Assistive Robots 
in Real Homes,” International Journal of Social Robotics, 9, 
No. 3, 2017: 401-415.  
[65] Swedish Accident Investigation Authority, ”Slutrapport 
Dödsfall på hjärtklinikens hjärtintensivavdelning N25 vid 
Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset i Solna, Stockholms län, den 
17 oktober 2010” [Final report on cardiac failure at 
Karoloniska Hospital Solna, Stockholm, October 2010], 
Stockholm: Swedish Accident Investigation Authority, Report 
02, 2013. 
[66] N. Oudshoorn and T. Pinch, 2003. “Introduction: How Users 
and Non-Users Matter.” In How Users Matter: The Co-
Construction of Users and Technology, edited by N. 
Oudshoorn and T. Pinch, 1–25. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

