267
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
DiClas-Grid,
Discussing and Classifying eHealth Interventions
Saskia M. Akkersdijk∗, Saskia M. Kelders†,
Louise M. A. Braakman - Jansen ‡ and Julia E. W. C. van Gemert - Pijnen§
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management
University of Twente,
Enschede, the Netherlands
Email: {s.m.akkersdijk∗, s.m.kelders†, l.m.a.braakman-jansen‡, j.vangemert-pijnen§}@utwente.nl
Abstract—It is often unclear why one eHealth application
is successful and the other is not, because eHealth is usually
approached as a black box. Evaluation is often done in the same
way for treatment like and non-treatment like application, with
a focus on effects and outcomes. This leads to applications being
wrongfully put away, because their expected measurements did
not performed as well as expected. But in reality, it may not
be fair to use these measurements for these applications. Based
on discussions around the terms of user and usage, as well as
differences found among eHealth application when looking at
the literature, two dimensions were selected. These dimensions
help discussion needed to make conscious choices during the
(re)design and evaluation process of eHealth applications and
to opening the black box. These two continuous dimensions
are: use-structure and caregiver involvement. Combining them
in a grid results into the DiClas-grid. The position on the
DiClas-grid inﬂuences what a ’user’ and ’usage’ means in the
application, but also has implications for how to best evaluate and
(re)design the application. To further help facilitating discussion,
six complementing dimensions to the DiClas-grid are discussed.
The DiClas-grid is a discussion and classiﬁcation tool that can
help make conscious choices in (re)design and evaluation of
applications.
Keywords—eHealth; discussion; classiﬁcation; evaluation; de-
sign.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Akkersdijk et al. [1] the grid was introduced. This article
elaborates on the grid, names it, and further explores the
possibilities of the grid.
In eHealth, there is a diverse range of seemingly successful
and unsuccessful applications and interventions. We observe
that applications that represent a kind of treatment, for example
eMentalHealth interventions [2], tend to be more successful
than those that are more supportive of nature, for example
those that try to change behavior [3]. It is often unclear why
one application is successful, when the other is not. A reason
why we cannot always explain the difference in success is
because eHealth is often approached as a black box, without
knowledge of what happens inside of this box. We search for
the effects of the black box and focus on outcomes. Examining
eHealth technology from a holistic perspective, in which the
technology has value itself, makes it possible to also focus on
the mechanisms behind the success. To ﬁnd these mechanisms
it is necessary to open the black box. An important reason why
we observe differences in success might be that we evaluate
non-treatment-like applications the same way as we evaluate
treatment-like interventions, i.e., focused on outcome measures
or usage numbers. This results in applications that might be
wrongfully put away because their expected measurements did
not perform as well as expected, while in reality it may not
be ’fair’ to use these measurements for these applications. In
this paper, we search for a way to give more insight in the
black box of the application, by helping with a (re)design and
evaluation of that application.
One of the ways evaluation of applications is often done,
is by measuring to which extent therapies are followed as
intended. One of the ways applications are often evaluated
is by measuring to which extent therapies are followed as
intended. This measurement of adherence is one of the primary
determinants of success in treatments [4], and overall effec-
tiveness of health systems decreases by poor adherence [4].
Although adherence is used as one of the primary determinants
of success in therapy, there are also examples in eHealth of
applications with a low adherence that are successful. An
example of this is QuitNet, a program for smoking cessation
[5][6][7]. Adherence to this program is low (23%) [8], but
the program can be successful in promoting cessation and
preventing relapse [5]. These studies show that it is possible
for an eHealth application to have a low adherence but still
be successful for a certain group of users.
It is often assumed that a higher exposure and more usage
of an application leads to a better outcome. Studies with
eMentalHealth interventions often ﬁnd this high dose – re-
sponse relationship (also called a usage – outcome relation).
An example of this is the study of Bolier et al. [9]. However,
this assumption does not hold for all applications. Donkin et al.
[10] further explored the usage – outcome relation. The study
of Donkin investigates which usage metrics are important in
predicting and explaining outcomes for an internet-delivered
trail targeting depressive symptoms for those with risk factors
for or diagnosis of cardiovascular disease. Their study shows
that there is not always a linear dose – response relation, but
could be curvilinear (e.g., reaches a saturation point where no
further beneﬁt is obtained), or even more complex.

268
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
There is a broad range of different eHealth applications
and variety in how these applications should be used. These
variations can be put on a continuous scale. At one end of
the continuum we see applications that require the user to use
the intervention in a speciﬁc way, for example a ﬁxed order
of the modules. These applications are often a (web-based)
program of a method, course or intervention. At the other
end of the continuum we see applications that leave the usage
free, without a strict protocol for each user. Another important
factor that varies among different eHealth applications is the
involvement of a caregiver. Some eHealth applications are used
in close collaboration between patient and caregiver, others
with no involvement of a caregiver at all and all variations in
between.
Knowing where your application is positioned on these two
dimensions can help with (re)designing and evaluating your
application. These two dimensions form the DiClas-grid, and
applications can be put somewhere on this grid depending on
its usage-structure and caregiver involvement. The positioning
of an application on the two dimensions inﬂuences the term
’user’ and ’usage’ but also has implications for the way we can
(re)design and evaluate the application. The aim of this paper
is to present a tool to give more insight in the application,
which helps with (re)design and evaluation of that application.
In Section II (The DiClas-Grid), we will take a closer look
at the grid, after which we will discuss implications based
on the different positions an application can take on the grid
in Section III (Implications). We will end this paper with
a discussion and conclusion in Section IV (Discussion and
Conclusion).
II. THE DICLAS-GRID
In this section, we will take a closer look at the two
dimensions of the DiClas-grid (see Figure 1). We will ﬁrst
look at the dimension of use-structure, after which we will
look at the dimension of caregiver involvement. Finally, we
will describe some eHealth applications and their positions on
the DiClas-grid.
The dimension of use-structure has at one end of the
continuum applications that force or require the user to use the
intervention in a speciﬁc way (railroading them). This can be
in a speciﬁc order, for a speciﬁc number of times or lessons,
or for a speciﬁc duration. These interventions often have a
speciﬁc end that is known beforehand and are often based
on theories about mental health behavior like acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT) or cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT). Because they often ﬁnd their origin in known theories
and therapies, they are often more ‘treatment’ like and help
deliver a kind of short-term care. As discussed in the intro-
duction, ‘Living to the full’ is a good example for this end
of the continuum. The intervention consists of nine lessons,
which have to be completed in a speciﬁc order in a 12 weeks.
Whether participants worked through a lesson in one session
or in multiple sessions was up to them [11][12].
Fig. 1. The DiClas-grid
At the other end are applications that leave the usage
free without a strict protocol for each user. There is no
speciﬁc order or duration for which this application should
be used, therefore, they have no speciﬁc end. These free-
to-use applications often focus more on support and long
term care. As discussed in the introduction, ‘QuitNet’, the
application for cessation treatment, is a good example for
this end of the continuum. This website offers advice to quit
smoking, assistance in setting a quit date, tailored information,
assessment of motivation and nicotine dependence, practical
counseling (skills training and problem solving), tailored as-
sistants in selecting pharmacotherapies and intra- and extra-
treatment social support. How QuitNet is used is completely
up to the user [5][6][7].
The vertical dimension represents the amount of caregiver
involvement, which varies among eHealth applications. For ex-
ample, treatment-driven applications often involve caregivers,
while lifestyle interventions often can be used autonomously.
Research indicates that caregiver involvement is important, but
it is not clear what the dosage and frequency of involvement
should be [13][14][15][16][17]. In applications that target
people with chronic conditions, usually, there is some form
of caregiver involvement. However, these applications often
struggle to ﬁnd their ﬁt into daily life, and adherence is often
low [18]. Users ﬁnd it difﬁcult to embed these applications in
their own life, while caregivers struggle to embed them into
their daily practice [19]. Nonetheless, caregiver involvement is
often found to be necessary to ensure adherence and increase
effects for web-based interventions for people [20][21].
To illustrate the positioning of an eHealth application on
the DiClas-grid, we will now position four applications on the
DiClas-grid: ‘Living to the full’, ‘QuitNet’, ‘Minddistrict’ and
‘My Health Platform’.
As discussed in the introduction, ‘Living to the full’
(LttF) consists of nine lessons, which have to be completed
in a speciﬁc order in a 12-week period. While there are
different versions of this intervention, we will now focus on

269
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the version with automated feedback and without involvement
of a caregiver [22].
We would place ‘Living to the Full’ at the bottom left corner
on the DiClas-grid (see Figure 2) for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of ‘Living to the Full’ (such
as how it is used, how often) is pre-deﬁned. Exactly when
(time) a lesson is completed is left to the user, and it
contains some extra options that are optional for the user
to complete. Therefore, we would place ‘Living to the
Full’ almost all the way to the left on the horizontal
dimension.
• vertical dimension: ‘Living to the full’ is a standalone
program without caregiver support, usage is completely
left to the user. Therefore, we would place ‘Living to the
Full’ completely at the bottom of the vertical dimension.
Fig. 2. Positioning of ‘Living to the full’ on the grid
‘QuitNet’ (QN) is a website for cessation treatment. There
are two versions of QuitNet: a basic version, and an enhanced
version, which provides direct access to online cessation
counselors and social support systems. Usage frequency of
the program is left to the user [5][6][7]. For this example we
will discuss both versions. Firstly, we will look at the basic
version, ‘QuitNet basic’ (QN basic), after which we will look
at the enhanced version, ‘QuitNet enhanced’ (QN enhanced).
We would place the basic version of QuitNet (QN basic) at
the bottom right of the DiClas-grid (see Figure 3 (QN basic))
for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of the basic version of
QuitNet (such as how it is used, how often and when
it is used) is completely left to the user. Therefore, we
would place QuitNet completely at the right side.
• vertical dimension: There is no involvement of a caregiver
in the basic version of QuitNet. Therefore, we would
place QuitNet completely at the bottom of the vertical
dimension.
We would place the enhanced version of QuitNet (QN
enhanced) at the right side of the DiClas-grid, at the lower
half of the vertical dimension (see Figure 3 (QN enhanced))
for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of the enhanced version of
QuitNet is the same as for the basic version (completely
left to the user). Therefore, we would place QuitNet
completely at the right side.
• vertical dimension: Usage of QuitNet in the enhanced
version does provide direct access to online cessation
counselors, though usage of this feature is up to the user.
Because we have no knowledge about how often this
feature is used, we assume that half of the users used
this feature and probably not that often. Therefore, we
would position QuitNet on the lower half of the caretaker
involvement dimension.
Fig. 3. Positioning of the basic and enhanced version of‘QuitNet’ on the
DiClas-grid
‘Minddistrict’ [23] provides an online doctor’s ofﬁce for
caregivers. It is designed to help deliver personal care tai-
lored to the client, enhance independence in clients, help to
go beyond routines, and is always accessible. The platform
assists caregivers from triage through blended treatment and
relapse prevention. The online platform provides caregivers
with an overview of their clients and their progress. The
online platform gives the caregiver various tools to do part
of the treatment and communication online. Communication
between the caregiver and client is enabled through a secure
messaging system or by video calling. A triage instrument
of questionnaires, either pre-deﬁned or custom-made, can be
assigned to clients. Caregivers can give additional psychoed-
ucation through online “modules”, consisting of text, video,
animation and/or exercises. These modules can be tailored
to the client by removing parts of the modules or adding
parts from another module. Clients can complete modules on
their own or in cooperation with their caregiver. There are
many modules to choose from, with subjects ranging from
self-help, addiction, chronic pain, eating disorders, depression
and anxiety, rehabilitation, ADHD, and everything in between.
Finally, there are self-monitoring diaries that can be added to

270
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the treatment.
Placement of Minddistrict on the DiClas-grid can be done
by looking at the context of both users of the application
individually. Placement on the DiClas-grid would be different
in a different context.
In the context of the way a client/patient works with it, we
would place Minddistrict at the left-hand side, in the upper-
side of the vertical dimension on the DiClas-grid (see Figure
4 (MD tech)) for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: How many modules a user should
complete and the order in which they should be com-
pleted is ﬁxed for a patient. How often a client should
do a session is agreed with the caregiver. When exactly
a session is completed is up to the client. Therefore, we
would place Minddistrict (looking at it from the context
of the client/patient) just a small bit to the right out on
the horizontal dimension.
• vertical dimension: Usage of Minddistrict is prescribed by
the caregiver and modules are selected and adjusted by
the caregiver. The client can do modules by themselves or
in cooperation with their caregiver. Therefore, we would
place Minddistrict at the top half of the DiClas-grid.
We would not place Minddistrict completely at the top
because clients still can do the sessions on their own and
not all sessions only in cooperation with their caregiver.
In the context of implementation and the way a caregiver
works with it, we would place ‘Minddistrict’ at the right-hand
side, in the top of the vertical dimension on the DiClas-grid
(see Figure 4 (MD impl)) for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Which modules and sessions are
selected is completely left to the caregiver. Therefore,
we would place Minddistrict at the right side of the grid.
• vertical dimension: The client can do modules by them-
selves or in cooperation with their caregiver. We would
not place Minddistrict completely at the top because
clients still can do the sessions on their own and not
all sessions only in cooperation with their caregiver. This
is not changed compared to looking at Minddistrict from
the context of the client/patient.
In case of Minddistrict, the caregiver tailors the content of
the technology closely to the patient, and caregiver involve-
ment is high. Seen from the perspective of the client/patient
as user of the technology Minddistrict is very structured.
However, seen from the perspective of the caregiver as user
of the technology, and the way Minddistrict is implemented,
Minddistrict is free in use.
Placing Minddistrict on the DiClas-grid when taking a
different context into account shows that the context of an
application is an important factor when placing an application
on the DiClas-grid. Changing the context in which you look
at the application can change the placement of an application.
Fig. 4. Positioning of Minddistrict on the DiClas-grid for both
contexts(technology and implementation)
‘My HealthPlatform’ (MHP) is an online platform to
support self-care and self-management for people with a
chronic illness (e.g., increased cardiovascular risk, COPD,
Diabetes mellitus type 2). It is designed to help users keep
an overview of and be a director of their own health and
lifestyle, alone or in cooperation with a caregiver or expert.
In MHP they can monitor their health, ﬁnd information about
their conditions, but also use one of the lifestyle coaches (quit-
smoking, nutritional, and exercise coach). While the usage
of most of the platform is unstructured, the lifestyle coaches
follow a 12 week schedule.
We would place My HealthPlatform at the right-hand side,
in the middle of the vertical dimension on the DiClas-grid (see
Figure 5) for the following reasons:
• horizontal dimension: Usage of MHP (such as how it is
used, how often, and whether or not a coach is used) is
left to the user. We would not place MHP completely at
the right side, because the coaches do require the user
to use them in a speciﬁc way and for a predetermined
number of weeks.
• vertical dimension: Usage of MHP is mostly left to the
user. When MHP is used in cooperation with a caregiver,
the caregiver is able to see at home measurements of
the user, which provides more insight in the health
status of their patient. Because MHP is used with and
without caregiver involvement, we would place MHP in
the middle of the vertical dimension.
You can position MHP on a different position on the
DiClas-grid based on other arguments. In this case, especially
the vertical dimension of the DiClas-grid leaves room for
discussion. We would like to emphasize that when we would
ask multiple people to position the same application on the
DiClas-grid we are very likely to end up with as many different
positions as we asked people. We would like to argue that
this is perfectly ﬁne, because the main purpose of the DiClas-
grid is to help you think about certain characteristics of you

271
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
application and about the implications of the positioning on
the DiClas-grid.
Fig. 5. Positioning of My HealthPlatform on the DiClas-grid
This section consists of examples of how placing an appli-
cation on the DiClas-grid can work. The examples show that
based on another argumentation you can place an application
on a different position (as shown in the example of My
HealthPlatform), and that the context of an application can
play an important role in positioning on the DiClas-grid (as
shown in the example of Minddistrict). In the next section,
we will talk about some of these implications of the different
positions on the DiClas-grid.
III. IMPLICATIONS
Positioning on the DiClas-grid has several implications
for the terms ‘usage’ and ‘user’ and for the (re)design and
evaluation of eHealth applications. In this section, we will
discuss some of these implications. We will start with the
implications on the terms ‘user’ and ‘usage’, after which we
will discuss implication for (re)design and evaluation.
A. User
Deﬁning when someone is a user is quite clear when you are
dealing with applications that are on the left-hand side of the
DiClas-grid. A person that uses the application is a user, and
one who does not is not a user. With applications that leave
the usage up to the user the way people use the application can
vary widely, which leads to a discussion about the term ‘user’
in this context. We will discuss some questions around the
term user, after which we will give our view on the answers.
An important question is: when does a person become a
user of the application? This is important because we, for
example, use the number of users as an outcome measurement,
or we want to know the reach of an application. There are
several possible answers to this. We could argue that a person
who uses the application is a user, but is there a minimum
amount of usage before that person becomes a user, or is 10
seconds enough? And what about someone who does not use
the application for a long period of time? Is that person not a
user during this period? And could we deﬁne certain activities
in the application that a person must have done before that
person is marked as a user?
For applications that focus on monitoring health or increas-
ing health awareness (mostly positioned on the right-hand side
of the DiClas-grid), we can argue that by only becoming aware
of such an application a person could potentially be triggered
to become more involved in his own health. This means that,
in order to have an effect on a person, it does not automatically
require that person to use that application. Is this person then
a user? We might argue that this person is not a user of the
application because he/she did not interact with it. However,
the application could still have an effect. In this case the person
is not a user in the most common sense of the word, but due
to the effect that the application had it balances on the edge
of the deﬁnition of ‘user’.
When we consulted the people who used MHP (Figure
5), it became clear that they had their own view on being
a user. There were quite a lot of people who had used the
application only a couple of times and therefore, declined to
join several studies (interviews, questionnaires, and usability
testing) because they did not see themselves as ‘users’. In their
minds, their deﬁnition of a user involves a certain number of
reoccurring visits to the application, entering some monitoring
data into the system, or participating in the program of a coach.
Because they did not meet their own standards of the term
user, they thought they could not participate in the study. This
example shows that using the system does not equal being a
user, at least not for the people who used it. People might
have expectations about the intended usage of an application,
and it is relevant to communicate the intended use to avoid
misunderstanding about the usage.
For evaluation purposes, the deﬁnition of what we would
call a user can focus on several aspects:
1) The percentage of registered users who see themselves
as user, could be a measurement for evaluation of an
application. The number of registered users who see
themselves as user tells you about their involvement
with an application and this in turn can show which
role the application holds in their lives and whether the
application helps them.
2) You do not always know beforehand who will be a
‘user’. When evaluating an application, it is important to
deﬁne which group of people can be deﬁned as a user,
and this group does not always include the people you
expected beforehand. For a certain type of evaluation,
questionnaire, or interview, a speciﬁc group of users
might be suitable.
3) An important user that is often forgotten is the caregiver.
The caregiver can have his own section in the application
where he can see caregiver-speciﬁc functionality. He can
have his own version of the application, or he can have
the same functionality as a patient user. It is important

272
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to realize that the caregiver is a user as well, a user
with different needs than a ‘patient’. Additionally, both
users (the caregiver and the ‘patient’) affect each other
and how they use the application, which means that both
types of users should be included in the (re)design and
all evaluations.
Finally, a point that we need to take into consideration is
that the user, in the sense of usage characteristics, can change
over time. That means that when someone starts using an
application, their usage can change over time. This change
can be caused by a different expectation of the content (they
were expecting to ﬁnd A in the application and were using
it that way, but it actually contained B and now they have
adapted their usage to B). But is can also be the evolution
of the user over time. Knowing that the user can change is
important to keep in mind during the design and evaluation
process.
B. Usage
The term ‘usage’ (in the context of an application) can
mean a lot of things, such as: How often people return to a
website, paths that users follow on a website, how often certain
elements on a site are used, etc. This can all be measured by
logging user actions with timestamps on a website. Depending
on the position on the horizontal use-structure dimension of
the DiClas-grid measurements can be used differently and they
tell different things about the system/application. Measuring
the use of a system or application is useful and insightful for
both ends of the spectrum, but evaluating this use differs and
the implications/interpretations are different.
For ‘railroaded’ applications, like ‘Living to the full’ (see
Figure 2), usage measurements can tell you much about the
applications. ‘Railroaded’ applications, positioned at the left-
hand side of the DiClas-grid, often are similar or represent
a therapy. The user has to follow the structure within the
application, do certain actions in a certain order, and use it
for a certain amount of time for it to be successful. Therefore,
we can deﬁne ‘normal’, or ‘ideal’ use. We can compare the
measured use with the way the application should be used
(this can be whether someone completed the application, or
the use within an application). Knowing where the occurred
usage deviates from the normal or ideal use can help identify
problems with the application, or give an explanation why an
application does not have the expected results.
Achieving the goal of the application is not completely
dependent on the use (the amount and which parts). While
a high-dose response relation is often found in eMentalHealth
interventions [9], we know that this relation can be far more
complex [10]. With applications that leave the user free (right-
hand side of the DiClas-grid) the duration of usage is often
longer and different situations can be seen than with the use
of a ‘railroaded’ application. For applications positioned at the
right-hand side of the DiClas-grid there is no easy deﬁnition
of ’normal’ use, in quantity or in order. This is in contrast with
applications positioned at the left-hand side of the DiClas-grid,
where the ‘correct’ following of the structure is essential.
Because there is no prescribed use for applications at the
right-hand side of the DiClas-grid, we cannot measure to
which extend the measured usage deviates from the optimal
use. For example, the measured use of an application posi-
tioned at the right-hand side of the DiClas-grid (like ‘MHP’
in Figure 5) could show users that were dormant for maybe
months or years, after which they suddenly used it again. This
is unlikely to happen in an application that is ‘railroaded’.
Because we cannot easily deﬁne ‘normal use’ and it is more
likely to vary for different users, adherence, in which we
compare the occurring usage with the optimum usage, cannot
easily be measured for applications on the right-hand side of
the DiClas-grid.
The occurring usage and the use-structure of an application
go together. When your application is ‘railroaded’ and posi-
tioned at the left-hand side of the DiClas-grid, all users have
a similar usage pattern, while with an application that leaves
the use up to the user the occurring usage patterns can vary
greatly. It might be good to take this into consideration with
evaluation, but also during the design process.
Even though measurements like adherence might not really
be suitable for applications that are positioned at the right-
hand side of the DiClas-grid, usage measurements can still be
very valuable. These measurements can tell you much about
the interaction with the application, which parts are used most
often, which parts are often used subsequent of each other,
after which part users often stop, etc. Knowing more about
the interaction with the application is valuable for improving
applications, but can also be valuable for ﬁnding mechanisms
behind application success. Combining usage measurements
with use context (what triggered the session) can be used
to ﬁnd a better ﬁt of the content to the context, or improve
interaction with the application. By improving the system, and
better tuning it to the needs of the users (based on context
en measured usage) we can probably increase the effect of
applications.
Finally, when we are looking at the usage of an application
we should not forget to observe the usage of the application
by the caregiver. Caregivers play an important role in the
usage of an application by their ‘patients’ because their usage
can be driven by input of said caregiver. When a caregiver
does not work with the application as intended or adequately,
this will inﬂuence the usage of the ‘patient’ user as well.
When the application is meant to be used with a form of
caregiver involvement and the caregiver is less involved than
the ‘patient’ expects, the ‘patient’ user will experience less
added value of the application.
C. Implications on (re)Design
With an existing application, the DiClas-grid can be used
during the redesign process. Determining the current position
of the application on the DiClas-grid based on the charac-
teristics of the application can help you to reﬂect on your

273
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
current application by facilitating the thought process about
your applications and its characteristic. A ﬁrst step in the
redesign process is to reﬂect whether it is feasible to reach
the objectives of the application from its current position; is
it possible to accomplish the goal of the application from this
position or is the position of the application on the DiClas-grid
not suitable for the goal of the application. The second step is
to determine if the current position is the best, or if there are
better alternative positions. When the current position and the
desired position are known, the next step is to identify their
differences. Knowing these differences, it is then possible to
determine if the application should be changed and can give
a indication about how the application should be changed.
Designing an application is not supposed to be an individual
process. It should involve all stakeholders [24], one of the most
important being the end users. They have to use it, and can
indicate what is most important for them [25]. The DiClas-
grid is meant as a discussion and classiﬁcation tool to help
in the design and evaluation process. It can help facilitate the
thought process of design choices and their effects to make
better conscious decisions.
D. Implications on Evaluation
All implications based on how an application is used
(the position of an application on the use-structured on the
DiClas-grid) have consequences for the evaluation procedures.
‘Railroaded’ applications can be evaluated by measuring the
usage and comparing it to the optimum usage, in contrast
to applications on the right-hand side of the DiClas-grid
where usage can vary widely. Because usage can vary so
widely, it is also harder to link measured effects to a speciﬁc
element of the application. Applications on the right-hand
side of the DiClas-grid are less feasible to evaluate with an
Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT), because they are used
for a much longer time, which makes it difﬁcult to keep the
circumstances constant. Secondly, because large groups and
free use often occur together, it might be harder to ﬁnd changes
in measurements like quality of life for applications on the
right-hand side of the DiClas-grid. This does not imply that
these changes are unimportant. It would be more suitable to
evaluate applications that are positioned on the right-hand side
of the DiClas-grid on processes rather than on effects. On
the other hand, applications that are positioned on the left-
hand side of the DiClas-grid are easier to evaluate on effects,
because they have a ﬁxed setting and use-time.
When discussing the implications on the term of user, we
discussed that a user (in the sense of usage characteristics)
can change over time. This can be true for both sides (left
and right) of the DiClas-grid. It is more likely to occur
on the right side of the DiClas-grid, because usage there
has more freedom. This asks for a process evaluation rather
then a effect evaluation. Evaluations more focused on process
can include methods like, analysis of logdata [26], machine
learning (supervised or un-supervised) [27], Markov modeling
[28], [29], Market-basket analysis [30], or time-series analysis
[31].
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
There are different ways to classify eHealth that provide
an overview of eHealth, such as device driven, based on the
medium the technology uses (web-based, mobile apps, etc.),
context-of-care driven (eCare, eTherapy, eAppointment, ePre-
vention, etc.), or actor driven (based on the interaction between
the actors of such a system). The DiClas-grid we propose
is not meant to replace these classiﬁcations, because they
provide an overview that our DiClas-grid does not provide.
However, our DiClas-grid serves as an extension of these.
The different classiﬁcations mentioned above serve a different
need, while they did not serve our need for a simple way to
have some guiding when (re)designing and evaluating eHealth
applications. We were looking for a better way to help make
a conscious choice in order to ﬁnd a better ﬁt (in (re)design
and evaluation). Positioning of an eHealth application on the
DiClas-grid helps to become more aware of implications this
has (as discussed in Section III).
Blended care always is a combination of face-to-face and
online therapy, and both modalities contribute substantively
and procedurally to the treatment process [32]. Therefore,
blended care itself always has a high caregiver involvement.
When only looking at the technology this is not automatically
true, because there can be forms of blended care in which the
caregiver plays a small role in the technology.
Based on the position of an application on the DiClas-
grid we discussed that the term ‘user’ can include a different
group of people. Those who ‘use’ an application do not always
perceive themselves as a ‘user’, because they have expectations
about the intended usage of an intervention. It is relevant
to communicate the intended use to avoid misunderstanding
about the usage. The percentage of users who see themselves
as a user might be an additional measurement for evaluating
an application, because it includes values about involvement
with the application. An important group of ‘users’ that is
often forgotten are the caretakers. They often also use the
application, and their use or their communication about the
application inﬂuences the use of the application by their
patients.
Adherence is an important measurement for applications
positioned on the left-hand side of the DiClas-grid. For these
applications, we can deﬁne ‘normal’ or intended use. Because
‘normal’ or intended use is often a lot harder to deﬁne for
applications positioned on the right-hand side of the DiClas-
grid (there often is no prescribed use) and usage patterns
can vary widely, the measurement of adherence might not be
suitable. However, usage measurements can be valuable for
process evaluations and improvement of the application.
The DiClas-grid can help with the (re)design process by
gaining more insight facilitated by the thought process needed
for placement of the application on the DiClas-grid. It is

274
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
important to think about whether the intended (or current)
position of the application is suitable for the goal of the
application, or whether another position might be better.
Positioning of an application on the DiClas-grid (left versus
right, and with or without caregiver involvement) inﬂuences
which sorts of evaluations are suitable. Evaluations can be
focused on process or effects and positioning on the left-hand
of the DiClas-grid are more suitable for effects evaluations
than positions at the right-hand side of the DiClas-grid.
When using a time series in a process evaluation, the
DiClas-grid can also help determining the frequency and
number of point measurements. Because, positioning on the
DiClas-grid gives an indication about the usage.
We selected the two dimensions of the DiClas-grid based on
our needs in the discussions we had around the terms of user
and usage, as well as differences we found among eHealth
application when looking at the literature. The DiClas-grid is
a good way to have a simple tool to compare applications and
to facilitate discussions around the (re)design and evaluation
process. To complement the DiClas-grid other dimensions can
help to facilitate discussions around design choices and evalu-
ation. It is interesting to think about what these dimensions can
be. In the following section we will discuss, in random order,
some ideas about other dimensions as well as what different
positions on these dimensions can implicate.
The ﬁrst dimension is also a dimension of use, but in a
different context: a social context. Whether a user uses an
application solitary or the application provides a form of
contact or social support can make a difference in the dynamic
of the application and how it is used. The social aspect can
for example come from others with the same condition/goals,
others using the same application, or maybe from their own
social network. The occurring dimension can be found in
Figure 6 (A). Hardiker and Grant [33] found that social aspects
of use was one of the four factors which inﬂuences public
engagement with eHealth. Placing an eHealth application on
this dimension can help in the discussion if, and how to
incorporate the social context in the application. It also can
help to determine how to evaluate this part of an application.
When social context is an important factor in your design, it
is important to evaluate this accordingly.
Use context consists of two elements. The ﬁrst element
(see Figure 6 (B)) is whether the application has to be
used in private only, or in a more public setting in which
sharing of (personal) information plays a role (such as a work
environment). Both settings ask for a different approach and
different decisions in the design process. At one end of the
dimension is an application that is only used in a private
setting, while at the other side of the dimension there will be
applications used in a public setting, a less comfortable setting
and a setting in which sharing (personal) information with
others plays an important role. This will inﬂuences privacy
matters. But also, the willingness to share information [34].
The second element, and third dimension, is how well the
application ﬁts in the patient’s regular life and schedule (see
Figure 6 (C)). If you keep getting reminders to exercise more
while you are at work and in a meeting, chances are that you
stop using the application. Also data exchange between you
and your caregiver sounds great, and if your caregiver gets
them without problems even better. But what if your caregiver
then has no time to do something with the data you send
during a consultation because working with the data does not
have a place in the protocols, and he keeps running out of
time to actually look at your data? Therefore, an interesting
dimension (mostly from an evaluation point of view) might
be implementation/ﬁt into daily life, with at one end of the
spectrum applications that ﬁt smoothly into daily life and at
the other end applications that have an awful ﬁt. It can be
argued that all applications should be unobtrusive, because the
application is more likely to be used when it is unobtrusive and
does not require lots of effort. However, it can also be possible
for an application to have a less than perfect ﬁt into daily
live especially because this is annoying, motivating the user
to change his behavior to the intended goal of the application
(where the intended behavior is less obtrusive in daily life). As
long as the application supports the changes required to make
this change it is unobtrusive, as is also discussed in Laurie
and Blandford [35]. Discussing which factor contribute to a
perfect ﬁt [36], how to achieve a better ﬁt, and which elements
lead to this ﬁt can also be interesting.
A fourth dimension could be a dimension of user target
(see Figure 6 (D)): Does the application target a large diverse
group, or does it target a small uniform group? Think about
an application that targets users with only diabetes versus an
application that targets users with a chronic disease. Firstly,
when you ﬁnd that you target a diverse group, it also might
be that it is not clear what makes the group you target unique.
Therefore, try to think of characteristics of the target group
that make this group unique. Secondly, when only targeting
a small speciﬁc group you can tailor the application more
speciﬁcally to their needs. Serving a large diverse group, you
have to make sure you cover their needs enough to not lose
them, or ﬁnd clever ways to still tailor to their speciﬁc needs.
When evaluating an application that targets a large diverse
group it is possible that the application works ﬁne for a speciﬁc
group within the larger group. This should be looked at while
evaluating.
A ﬁfth dimension is related to the goal of the application:
Is the goal of the application disease management, prevention
or treatment of an illness? This dimension could be a scale
with prevention at one end, and treatment at the other, while
disease management is exactly in the middle (see Figure 6 (E)).
What kind of consequences does positioning on this dimension
have? The content of the application would be different for
all of the applications depending on the positioning. Intrinsic
levels of motivation of your users probably also would vary, for
the simple reason that users of an application that is focused
on treatment probably experience problems, and therefore, are
more likely to be intrinsically motivated. On the other hand,
users of an application focused on prevention probably do

275
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
not yet experience problems, therefore, there is less (obvious)
need to used the application. This inﬂuences decisions about
content of the application as well as functioning of the system
itself, and the service. Positioning of an application further
to the right of this scale also inﬂuences the evaluation. When
measuring effects of an application that is focused on treat-
ment, you look for positive change in speciﬁc variables. When
dealing with disease management these variables are more
far fetched (there probably is not one outcome measurement,
but a larger combination). Effects of an application focused
on prevention can take a long time to become clear and
measurable. Secondly, the duration over which the application
should be used differs depending on the position on this
dimension [2]. Prevention and lifestyle applications in general
have a longer duration, while treatment often is shorter.
A sixth dimension could be: How proactive or reactive is
the application? A proactive application is an application that
for example gives alerts, send reminders, or emails. A reactive
application is an application that only reacts to what the users
does with the application (if it even is reactive). The dimension
can be seen in Figure 6 (F). Some parts of this dimension are
already implemented in applications. However, most eHealth
applications are still mostly reactive. Proactive, ﬁne-tuned apps
are still work for the future, but have a lot of potential.
Fig. 6. All dimensions: from top to bottom: A) social context, B) use
context, C) ﬁt into life, D) target users, E) goal dimension, F)
reactive/proactive
We have discussed six complementing dimensions for the
DiClas-grid. These dimensions can help facilitate discussion
about other subjects for design and evaluation purposes. They
do not replace the DiClas-grid, or a speciﬁc dimension of the
DiClas-grid, but serve as an addition.
While the six dimensions complement the DiClas-grid, they
do not focus on keeping users and their experience. Other
important subjects to have a discussion about include e.g.,
persuasiveness, tailoring of the application, engagement of the
user and involvement of the user.
The DiClas-grid is a tool to classify eHealth, to gain
insight, facilitate thought processes, and start discussions, and
is not meant to be a formal and rigid model. The DiClas-
grid combined with the dimensions as discussed can help
facilitate discussion and help make conscious choices around
many different subjects concerning evaluation and design of
eHealth applications.
REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Akkersdijk, S. M. Kelders, J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen,
and L. M. A. Braakman-Jansen, “The Grid , Classiﬁcation of eHealth
Applications Towards a Better ( re ) Design and Evaluation,” in
Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social
Medicine, eTelemed 2016, Venice, 2016, pp. 98–103.
[2] S.
M.
Kelders,
R.
N.
Kok,
H.
C.
Ossebaard,
and
J.
E.
W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, “Persuasive system design does matter:
a
systematic
review
of
adherence
to
web-based
interventions.”
Journal
of
medical
Internet
research,
vol.
14,
no.
6,
p.
e152,
jan
2012,
[accessed:
2016-11-30].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3510730&
tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract
[3] L. T. Webb, J. Joseph, L. Yardley, and S. Michie, “Using the internet to
promote health behavior change: A systematic review and meta-analysis
of the impact of theoretical basis, use of behavior change techniques,
and mode of delivery on efﬁcacy,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 12,
no. 1, p. e4, Feb 2010, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jmir.org/2010/1/e4/
[4] E. Sabat, “Adherence to long-term therapies,” World Health Organiza-
tion, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[5] A. Graham, N. Cobb, L. Raymond, S. Sill, and J. Young, “Effectiveness
of an internet-based worksite smoking cessation intervention at 12
months,” Journal of Occupational & Environmental Medicine, vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 821 – 828, 2007.
[6] J. Saul, B. Schillo, S. Everred, M. Luxenberg, A. Kavanaugh, N. Cobb,
and A. L, “Impact of a statewide internet-based tobacco cessation
intervention,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 9, no. 3, 2007.
[7] N. K. Cobb, A. L. Graham, B. C. Bock, G. Papandonatos, and D. B.
Abrams, “Initial evaluation of a real-world internet smoking cessation
system,” Nicotine & Tobacco Research: Ofﬁcial Journal of the Society
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 207 – 216,
2005.
[8] D. S. Kelders, “Understanding adherence to web-based interventions,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Universiteit Twente, Enschede, 2012, [accessed:
2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/81967/
[9] M. L. Bolier, M. M. Haverman, P. J. Kramer, D. G. J. Westerhof,
P. H. Riper, P. J. A. Walburg, B. Boon, and P. E. Bohlmeijer,
“An internet-based intervention to promote mental ﬁtness for mildly
depressed adults: randomized controlled trial,” Journal of medical
internet research, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1 – 18, 2013, [accessed:
2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/83748/
[10] L. Donkin, I. B. Hickie, H. CHristensen, S. L. Naismith, B. Neal, N. L.
Cockayne, and N. Clozier, “Rethinking the dose-response relationship
between usage and outcome in an online intervention for depression:
Randomized controlled trial,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 15, no. 10, p. e231, 2013.
[11] D. J. van Gemert-Pijnen, D. S. Kelders, and P. E. Bohlmeijer,
“Understanding the usage of content in a mental health intervention
for depression: An analysis of log data,” Journal of medical internet
research, vol. 16, no. 1, p. e27, 2014, open access, [accessed:
2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/88658/

276
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[12] M. S. Kelders, T. E. Bohlmeijer, and E. J. Van Gemert-Pijnen,
“Participants, usage, and use patterns of a web-based intervention for
the prevention of depression within a randomized controlled trial,”
J Med Internet Res, vol. 15, no. 8, p. e172, Aug 2013, [accessed:
2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available: http://www.jmir.org/2013/8/e172/
[13] G. Andersson and P. Cuijpers, “Pros and cons of online cogni-
tive–behavioural therapy,” The British Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 193,
no. 4, pp. 270–271, 2008.
[14] ——, “Internet-based and other computerized psychological treatments
for adult depression: A meta-analysis,” Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 196–205, 2009, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/16506070903318960
[15] Z. Hilvert-Bruce, P. J. Rossouw, N. Wong, M. Sunderland, and
G.
Andrews,
“Adherence
as
a
determinant
of
effectiveness
of
internet cognitive behavioural therapy for anxiety and depressive
disorders,”
Behaviour
Research
and
Therapy,
vol.
50,
no.
78,
pp. 463 – 468, 2012, [accessed: 2016-03-08]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796712000708
[16] P. Musiat and N. Tarrier, “Collateral outcomes in e-mental health: a
systematic review of the evidence for added beneﬁts of computerized
cognitive behavior therapy interventions for mental health,” Psycholog-
ical Medicine, vol. 44, pp. 3137–3150, 11 2014.
[17] V. Spek, P. Cuijpers, I. Nykl´ıcek, H. Riper, J. Keyzer, and V. Pop,
“Internet-based cognitive behaviour therapy for symptoms of depression
and anxiety: a meta-analysis,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 37, pp. 319–
328, 3 2007.
[18] M. F. Sieverink, D. S. M. Kelders, D. L. M. Braakman-Jansen, and
D. J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, “The added value of log ﬁle analyses
of the use of a personal health record for patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus: Preliminary results,” Journal of diabetes science and
technology, 2014, published online before print, [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/89290/
[19] M. F. Sieverink, D. L. M. Braakman-Jansen, Y. Roelofsen, S. H.
Hendriks, R. Sanderman, H. J. Bilo, and D. J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen,
“The diffusion of a personal health record for patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus in primary care,” International journal on advances
in life sciences, vol. 6, no. 3&4, pp. 177 – 183, 2014, [accessed:
2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/93390/
[20] J. D. Piette, A.-M. Rosland, D. Marinec, N. S.and Striplin, S. J.
Bernstein, and M. J. Silveira, “Engagement with automated patient
monitoring and self-management support calls: Experience with a
thousand chronically-ill patients,” Medical Care, vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 216 – 223, 2013, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e318277ebf8
[21] C. D. Mohr, P. Cuijpers, and K. Lehman, “Supportive accountability:
A
model
for
providing
human
support
to
enhance
adherence
to ehealth interventions,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 1,
p.
e30,
Mar
2011,
[accessed:
2016-11-30].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.jmir.org/2011/1/e30/
[22] S. M. Kelders, E. T. Bohlmeijer, W. T. Pots, and J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen,
“Comparing human and automated support for depression: Fractional
factorial randomized controlled trial,” Behaviour Research and Therapy,
vol. 72, pp. 72 – 80, 2015, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796715300061
[23] Minddistrict.
(2016,
November)
Minddistrict.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.minddistrict.com/
[24] D. L. van Velsen, M. M. Wentzel, and D. J. E. van Gemert-
Pijnen,
“Designing
ehealth
that
matters
via
a
multidisciplinary
requirements development approach,” JMIR research protocols, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. e21 –, 2013, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/87481/
[25] M. J. Wentzel, D. L. van Velsen, M. M. van Limburg, N. de Jong,
D. J. Karreman, R. Hendrix, and J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen,
“Participatory ehealth development to support nurses in antimicrobial
stewardship,” BMC medical informatics and decision making, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 45 –, 2014, open access [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online].
Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/91558/
[26] F. Sieverink, S. Kelders, S. Akkersdijk, and M. Poel, “Work in Progress
: A Protocol for the Collection , Analysis , and Interpretation of
Log Data from eHealth Technology,” in Persuasive Technology Fourh
International Workshop on Behavior Change Support Systems, BCSS
2016, no. April, 2016, pp. 56–60.
[27] J. Han, M. Kamber, and J. Pei, Data mining: concepts and techniques.
Elsevier, 2011.
[28] E. Seneta, “Markov and the birth of chain dependence theory,”
International Statistical Review / Revue Internationale de Statistique,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 255–263, 1996, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online].
Available: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1403785
[29] J.
Borges
and
M.
Levene,
“Evaluating
variable-length
markov
chain
models
for
analysis
of
user
web
navigation
sessions,”
IEEE
Trans.
on
Knowl.
and
Data
Eng.,
vol.
19,
no.
4,
pp.
441–452, Apr. 2007, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2007.1012
[30] S.
Anand,
A.
Patrick,
J.
Hughes,
and
D.
Bell,
“Kdd:
Techniques
and
applications
a
data
mining
methodology
for
cross-sales,”
Knowledge-Based
Systems,
vol.
10,
no.
7,
pp.
449
–
461,
1998,
[accessed:
2016-11-30].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705198000355
[31] R. B. Penfold and F. Zhang, “Use of interrupted time series analysis
in evaluating health care quality improvements,” Academic Pediatrics,
vol. 13, no. 6, Supplement, pp. S38 – S44, 2013, quality Improvement
in Pediatric Health Care [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876285913002106
[32] M. J. Wentzel, M. R. van der Vaart, P. E. T. Bohlmeijer, and D. J. E.
van Gemert-Pijnen, “Mixing online and face-to-face therapy: how to
beneﬁt from blended care in mental healthcare,” JMIR mental health,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. e9 –, 2016, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online].
Available: http://doc.utwente.nl/99360/
[33] N. R. Hardiker and M. J. Grant, “Factors that inﬂuence public
engagement
with
ehealth:
A
literature
review,”
International
Journal
of
Medical
Informatics,
vol.
80,
no.
1,
pp.
1
–
12,
2011,
[accessed:
2016-11-30].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1386505610002091
[34] A. Lentferink, H. Oldenhuis, O. Kulyk, and M. de Groot, “Self-
tracking and Persuasive eCoaching in Healthy Lifestyle Interventions:
Work-in-progress Scoping Review of Key Components,” in Persuasive
Technology Fourh International Workshop on Behavior Change Support
Systems, BCSS 2016, no. April, 2016, pp. 15–35, [accessed: 2016-
11-30]. [Online]. Available: ftp://ceur-ws.org/pub/publications/CEUR-
WS/Vol-1573.zip
[35] J. Laurie and A. Blandford, “Making time for mindfulness,” Interna-
tional Journal of Medical Informatics, 2016, [accessed: 2016-11-30].
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.02.010
[36] D. N. Nijland, D. J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, D. S. M. Kelders, B. J.
Brandenburg, and P. E. R. Seydel, “Factors inﬂuencing the use of a
web-based application for supporting the self-care of patients with type
2 diabetes: a longitudinal study,” Journal of medical internet research,
vol. 13, no. 3, 2011, [accessed: 2016-11-30]. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/85159/

