Africa’s Telenursing Today (and Tomorrow?) 
Siinclair Wynchank, Jill Fortuin 
Telemedicine Platform 
Medical Research Council 
Cape Town, South Africa 
SWynchank@mrc.ac.za; Jill.Fortuin@mrc.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract— Although telenursing is well established in 
developed nations, developing nations have much less 
such activity. In Africa, and particularly South Africa, 
some effective pilot telenursing schemes have been 
introduced and are presented here. A further success 
has been in a wide variety of teleeducation programmes 
which target nurses. Usually telenursing equipment and 
procedures that have been successful in the well-
resourced world are inappropriate for transfer, without 
modification, to developing countries. However African 
telenursing applications have used relevant prior 
knowledge in the field, wherever possible. These 
applications, with a likely future course and means of 
accomplishing it, will be outlined using what little 
quantitative data is available.    
 
Keywords - Telenursing; Africa; Telemedicine; 
Teleeducation; Distance learning. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Because of a general shortage of physicians in 
Africa, its nurses often have greater responsibilities than in 
many other countries and much of the continent’s public 
health care is provided by nurse practitioners in village 
clinics. Such nurse-directed clinics, also found in some 
small towns, form the backbone of African primary health 
care (PHC) services. These facilities are commonly far from 
the nearest medical doctor, or hospital, and they are usually 
located in regions where local infrastructure and transport 
services are poor. So, African nurses often have much 
authority. Telenursing can greatly aid their provision of 
PHC, and their management of both chronic conditions and 
certain acute situations. But there are significant differences 
between telenursing in developed countries and Africa, 
because of funding available, experience with, and 
availability of, information and communication technology 
(ICT), other infrastructure and physical conditions, the 
nature of their patients’ illnesses, stage of presentation of 
the diseases encountered, etc. Many of these differences are 
also applicable to telenursing in other poorly-resourced 
regions.  
 
Telenursing has many definitions, but we consider 
it as the use of ICT and electronic transfer of information 
relevant to nursing. As we shall show, telenursing can 
support virtually all aspects of nursing activity, often in 
ways not otherwise possible. This is especially true in 
Africa, where personnel, equipment and expertise often 
lack, as is the case sometimes in the developed world’s most 
remote rural situations. In this report a nurse is deemed 
someone, often a female, who has been trained to care for 
those experiencing illhealth; the sick, infirm and disabled. 
Equally importantly, a nurse promotes healthy growth and 
development in children and the establishment and 
maintenance of health in all age groups. Telenursing is 
closely associated with telemedicine [1], which has been 
available since before the invention of the telephone, whose 
availability greatly increased telenursing and telemedicine 
activity in the first half of the last century. However 
telenursing has greatly increased in the last few decades. 
This results from the recent vast explosion of computer 
power and the wide variety of readily available electronic 
communication modalities, whose costs are steadily  
decreasing.   
 
From a search of the U.S. National Library of 
Medicine’s database it was determined that there are over 
150 times more publications on telenursing from developed 
countries than on African telenursing, which today is in its 
infancy [2]. Hence its practices, norms and applications are 
still in the process of being established. Because application 
of ICT is necessary for telenursing, it was first set up where 
there was appropriate funding, technical expertise and 
infrastructure. Therefore in developed countries, telenursing 
grew steadily and, after its utility was confirmed, it began to 
be applied to the needs of the poorest nations in Africa and 
other developing regions.  
 
Today’s level of African telenursing justifies a 
critical study of its history, current applications and impact. 
This study is based mainly on South African telenursing. 
Using South African experience is particularly apposite 
now, for several important reasons. In contemporary rural, 
and much of peri-urban, South Africa there are social and 
economic conditions that are characteristic of the poorest 
nations of Africa. (In contrast, there are also infrastructure, 
nursing and medical services in South Africa of a high 
standard, principally in the private health care domain of 
large urban centres.) Before democracy was established in 
1994, South Africa was almost totally isolated from other 
African nations. Since that date warm relations have 
developed between South Africa and other nations of the 
continent, resulting in steadily increasing numbers of 
165
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cooperative projects in all medical fields and throughout 
Africa. Such health care endeavours have increasingly 
allowed South Africa to use its expertise and experience, 
gained in its own poorly developed remote rural regions, for 
the benefit of others. Also experience gathered in well-
resourced nations is relevant to Africa’s telenursing, for 
lessons learned elsewhere can reduce wasteful duplication. 
At the same time it is essential to appreciate that often 
telenursing practice, training, equipment and application in a 
wealthy country may be inappropriate to be transferred 
without change to a public health service in Africa. Here the 
physical and other circumstances and needs often differ 
from those of the developed world. So for effective 
introduction of telenursing, modification is frequently 
essential.  
There is a world-wide lack of all types of health 
care workers (HCWs), especially so in the most 
economically-deprived nations, many of which are found in 
sub-Saharan Africa. [3] Nurses are usually the principal 
HCWs in poorly-resourced nations, especially in their rural 
regions.  Yet the attitudes of patients to nursing practitioners 
in developing countries have not been extensively 
investigated, in contrast to the USA. There such nurses, with 
more independence and clinical responsibility, have been 
practising for over 40 years and their professional activity is 
known to the vast majority of the USA population. They are 
in great demand and about 60% of that nation’s population 
have used their services. A large majority (82%) of their 
patients were satisfied, or better, with their ministrations. [4] 
Similar or better results are probable in Africa, where fewer 
health care alternatives are available. In South Africa most 
public health service rural clinics and dispensaries are 
located in villages, with rare visits (or often no visits at all) 
from medical doctors. Thus, the potential for telenursing to 
support and improve these nurse practitioners’ service to 
their local public is very great. Another aspect of 
telenursing, particularly valuable for Africa, is provision of 
continuing 
professional 
development 
using 
distance 
learning. This important topic is already the subject of 
current successful projects and will be considered in greater 
detail below.  
 
Worldwide there are few formal qualifications 
concerning the practice of telenursing and in most African 
countries very little incorporation of telenursing and 
associated 
subjects 
in 
the 
state-approved 
nursing 
curriculum. Although South Africa has many, varied, 
ongoing telenursing activities, the South African Nursing 
Council, a statutory body, which, “controls and exercises 
authority in respect of all matters affecting the education 
and training of registered nurses, midwives, enrolled nurses 
and enrolled nursing auxiliaries” and determines nursing 
curricula, has no material on telenursing in the official 
curriculum of 2010, although ICTs do feature. So in South 
Africa and most other countries telenursing is usually 
informally taught with few recognised requirements for its 
practitioners. However in Queensland, Australia, the State 
Government has introduced the formal qualification of 
“Telenurse”. This can only be obtained by a state-registered 
nurse, who must then undergo further study and training. [5] 
Most persons involved in telenursing (both telenurses and 
callers) are female, so gender issues can play an important 
role in telenursing. A telenurse must be able to interact with 
a caller in a wide variety of ways. This is because on 
occasion the telenurse may be required to advise, assess, 
refer, support, teach and also offer selfcare advice and 
triage, if necessary. [6] Therefore telenursing requires a 
marked level of competence. African state-registered nurses 
have this in abundance, for often they have more 
responsibility than their equivalents in developed countries 
and their professional instruction is of a high standard. This 
is confirmed by the ongoing brain drain of African state-
registered nurses to European and other developed nations 
and the frequent lack of examinations that they must pass 
before they are allowed to practise after emigration.   
 
A shortage of HCWs exists in all developing 
countries and detailed World Health Organisation (WHO) 
studies of HCW needs in Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi 
and Tanzania suggest approaches to improve this situation. 
These include increased use of modular education and ICTs. 
[7] Telenursing can also play a major role in such 
programmes in all African developing countries. There, over 
60% of health problems result from largely preventable 
infections (e.g., malaria, tuberculosis (TB) pneumonias and 
viral infections [8]). Adaptations necessary for African 
telenursing to be practical and effective and the roles of 
educational and clinical telenursing activity will be outlined 
and discussed below.   
II. 
AFRICAN TELENURSING’S STATE OF THE ART 
Recent publications have indicated that in the last year there 
have been many significant advances in African telenursing. 
However since infrastructure is often lacking, simple 
modalities of communication are most often employed. In 
developing countries about half of reported telemedicine 
uses Email, with many fewer real time interactions. [9] 
Mobile phones are readily available .throughout Africa and 
their utility to support management of the chronically ill of 
the poorest Hondurans has been reported. [10] Moves are 
afoot to reproduce this in Africa.  A successful pilot scheme 
in Malawi combines mobile phones and text messages to 
contact patients up to 100 miles from the base health care 
facility. [11] After 6 months, 2000 hours of travel time were 
saved and the number of patients in an anti-TB programme 
doubled. Cervical carcinoma is very common in Africa and 
a novel telenursing network attempts “to bridge the gap 
between screening and diagnosis” in Zambia. [12] Use of 
digital cervicograms allows participating nurses to discuss 
their significance with patients and permits further 
consultation as required. But in spite of these successes, it is 
very clear that “The human touch is essential. A named 
health care provider with access to telehealth” facilities 
must, wherever possible, be available. [13] Incidence of 
166
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cardiac problems is steadily increasing in Africa and it has 
been clearly demonstrated that a telenursing programme 
directed towards aiding chronic heart failure results in 
“improved patient care and medication concordance and 
reduced use of health care services”. [14] Similar 
advantages have been reported for preventive care where 
telenursing intervention improved cardiovascular disease 
risk awareness. [15] This work presents the current situation 
of African telenursing and some indications of how it may 
evolve.  
III. 
TELEEDUCATION IN AFRICA FOR NURSES 
Teleeducation applications of telemedicine in 
Africa have demonstrated even more success, than clinical 
health care. [16] Although telenursing links are usually set 
up to transmit queries, requiring a consultant’s response, 
and information concerning patient healthcare, their 
bidirectional nature also enables educational material to be 
sent to nurses at telenursing sending locations. African 
nurses have enthusiastically embraced such teleeducation. It 
can provide both theoretical and practical knowledge. Also 
it can allow the sharing of experience to improve the quality 
of professional services offered to patients. Conventional 
face-to-face, teaching methods, whether residential or not, 
can achieve the same ends, but these may involve travel 
(often over large distances for rural African nurses), 
significant time spent away from the usual workplace and 
accommodation expenses. Teleeducation can overcome 
many of these limitations and costs. Teleeducation for 
nurses in Africa can not only provide possible future 
theoretical educational possibilities. It is important to 
recognise 
that 
there 
have 
already 
been 
concrete 
achievements at a variety of levels in African distance 
learning for nurses.  
Web-based distance learning is now possible for all 
countries with Internet connections and according to 
UNESCO (the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organisation) there are at least 53 such African 
nations. [17] Its success has been clearly demonstrated in 
several existing African nursing projects, which are web-
based, sometimes totally so. For example nurses usually 
play a crucial role in palliative care.  The only recognised 
qualifications obtainable in Africa in this field of study are a 
postgraduate diploma and degree (M Phil), both offered by 
the University of Cape Town, South Africa. These courses 
depend almost entirely on web-based distance learning. 
Since the course‘s beginning, 11 years ago, it has trained 
over 200 students from 12 English speaking African 
nations. A very recent educational evaluation of this 
programme considered the 125 registrants of the course, 
who were enrolled between 2000 and 2007. [18] It 
concluded that it is, “applicable to current community needs 
and appropriate for the participants”. Further, the 
assessment expects that, “palliative and hospice care no 
doubt will evolve into a mainstream service within South 
Africa’s health care system”. Such are the impressive 
consequences of one specific African teleeducational 
course. This postgraduate programme is only open to nurses 
and medical doctors. Its curricula are adjusted for conditions 
in the student’s homeland and emphasise family dynamics, 
both for extended and nuclear families, since they must have 
much relevance for the current scourge of HIV/AIDS that is 
now sweeping across sub-Saharan Africa. Although there is 
a clear need for these skills in Africa, many of the 
continent’s countries have no expertise in palliative care. 
[19] In 2011, the same university will offer another Master’s 
degree course in Public Mental Health, based on 
teleeducation. 
This 
too 
will 
be 
directed 
towards 
postgraduate nurses and in its first year will emphasise 
planning and implementation of policy. [20] The University 
of Cape Town has also made available 14 modular, 
computer-based teleeducation courses on community 
paediatrics. These are intended for nurses in rural 
community health centres and clinics, who often have no 
direct access to paediatricians. [21] Teleeducation in other 
nursing fields is also available and/or under development. In 
South Africa there is compulsory community service of one 
year for newly graduated nurses, who are usually assigned 
to remote rural areas where there is the greatest lack of 
HCWs. In spite of working with experienced colleagues, 
they frequently feel very isolated. With telenursing facilities 
at their workplace this sense of isolation is greatly reduced, 
leading to a happier and more productive community 
service, in addition to valuable acquisition of knowledge. 
Moroccan nurses have available a paediatric 
oncology-haematology web-based programme that also 
serves nurses in other developing countries. [22] Overall, 
paediatric cancer cure rates are about 75% in developed 
countries and a third of this in developing nations, where it 
can be the leading cause of death in children aged 5-15 
years. Hence such a programme can save many lives, for 
about 80 - 85% of all childhood cancers occur in developing 
countries, where survival can be under 10%. [23] Another 
application of a web-based site has been for a nursing study 
in Ethiopia, and other developing countries, investigating a 
mother’s mental health and her child’s nutrition status.  This 
work “confirms that promotion of maternal mental health 
may be important for the improvement of child nutrition.” 
[24] Obstetric complications are a frequent cause of death in 
developing countries and worldwide this causes >500,000 
deaths yearly. [25] The assessment and improving of skilled 
birth attendants in Benin, Rwanda and other developing 
countries has recently been underway, with WHO support. 
A website played an important role in training local 
assessors and this successful pilot scheme has been 
extended to Niger and Kenya. [26] A joint Eritrean-USA 
teleeducation programme for nurses provides instruction in 
challenging aspects relevant to their practice in Eritrea. One 
of its aims is to train tutors for local nursing schools. [27] 
Midwifery was selected as the first discipline for this 
approach. Appropriate technology was introduced and the 
167
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

overall emphasis was on clinical application. Student input 
and flexibility were crucial parts of the curriculum design. 
 
A particularly distressing statistic is that of recent 
trends in infant mortality rates. In many developing 
countries they have either remained static or have increased 
(as in South Africa) during the last few years. Such deaths 
are mainly preventable and most often are caused by 
infectious diseases (pneumonias, tetanus, etc) in the first 
week of life. Such mortality can be reduced by appropriate 
and sufficient nutrition, particularly breast feeding. This 
assists in giving the infants antibodies to fight infectious 
diseases, as well as nourishment. UNICEF, the WHO and 
other bodies recognise that nurses can play an important role 
in improving this situation. So an “essential newborn care 
programme” to decrease high infant mortality rates was 
drawn up and has been evaluated. Use of a self 
administered, computer based course was found to be 
equally successful in increasing relevant knowledge as the 
conventional face to face course in South African and 
Zambian studies. [28] In developing countries, resources are 
lacking and the lower cost of a teleeducation course in this 
critical field can allow much greater dissemination of 
relevant knowledge, for a given level of funding. 
 
In order to benefit from telenursing advances in 
developed nations, without duplication of the efforts 
required to make these advances, it is essential to examine 
how established telenursing programmes, and those under 
development, can be adapted for use in Africa. Some 
examples follow. Disaster aid in regions affected by abrupt 
deterioration/destruction of health care facilities or sudden 
and overwhelming need for such facilities is often provided 
by nurses. A British postgraduate qualification in nursing 
for post disaster relief uses teleeducation and emphasises 
aspects of transcultural nursing. All these characteristics 
make it especially useful in the African context. [29] In the 
Netherlands nurses drive a pilot programme to enable 
appropriate and vulnerable patients to monitor, and if 
necessary change, their risk profile for vascular disease, by 
teaching them to self-manage more effectively. [30] This 
interactive 
principle 
is 
suitable 
for 
some 
African 
applications, for it is noted that vascular disease prevalence 
is steadily increasing in Africa, paralleling the continent’s 
rapid urbanisation of the last few decades and the resulting 
life style changes. 
 
Developing countries often lack proficiency in 
paediatric emergency care and the necessary facilities are 
scarce. A training scheme to address this lack in Vietnam 
was established initially in Australia for Vietnamese nurses 
with different professional backgrounds, and others. It also 
undertook instructor training and provided organisational 
experience. 
[31] 
This 
training 
programme 
proved 
sustainable for transfer to the developing regions in need of 
this expertise. African nations can clearly benefit from this 
approach, to obtain improved expertise in this and other 
fields and moves are under way to establish such a course in 
Africa. The programme and necessary updates use 
telenursing techniques. 
 
In Malawi, as elsewhere in Africa, malaria is a 
principal cause of morbidity and mortality, especially for 
children, in whom about 90% of the life threatening form 
occurs. The greatest mortality is found in those less than 5 
years of age. Relevant clinical management in Malawi was 
studied [32] and the principal result was that the care 
offered to children at the first referral level, principally 
given by nurses, required revision. Telenursing can provide 
the necessary information to those in PHC clinics to 
implement this important finding, in the many countries of 
Africa where malaria is a serious health problem.  
 
In South Africa a video programme, transmitted 
from a central location and operating for 4 years, is directed 
by nursing staff for the benefit of those in waiting rooms of 
public health service facilities. This programme aims to 
improve the patients’ understanding of HIV/AIDS and other 
conditions. Results are very encouraging and it is to be 
extended to neighbouring nations. [33] 
IV. 
TELENURSING’S ADAPTATIONS FOR  AFRICA 
 
African public health budgets are usually meagre, 
so extensions or modifications to existing telenursing 
equipment must be carefully evaluated to prevent waste of 
resources. The simplest procedure for telenursing, to 
purchase equipment and then connect it to an existing 
communications network, is often inappropriate for Africa. 
[34] So before embarking on an African telenursing project 
the complete project and its integration with available 
facilities should be very carefully reviewed. Obtaining the 
supportive involvement of central government, local 
medical bodies and leaders is crucial, especially for 
questions of regulation and incorporation with pre-existing 
health services. [35] The technology and procedures finally 
selected will depend on the users’ computer literacy 
abilities, available infrastructure, etc. All these points may 
be self-evident, but they are too often passed over for many 
reasons, ranging from a lack of technical knowledge, to 
equipment 
sellers’ 
lack 
of 
scruples. 
Because 
of 
incoordination between the nine South African provinces’ 
ICT standards, there is no single ICT system for HIV/AIDS 
management that can be used in the whole country. [36] 
Hence, adequate preparation before setting up a telenursing 
network is essential. If possible, nurse users should be 
invited to use the equipment, before a final choice is made. 
Frequently their suggested modifications in procedures, 
equipment, etc., may be of great benefit, for this can 
improve network and other function. [37] As an example of 
such benefits, a ruggedised, simple, telenursing workstation, 
designed in South Africa, was modified by adding a remote 
control and simplified menus. So then it became much more 
acceptable for its nurse users, whose previous ICT 
experience was minimal or zero.  
 
Cellular/mobile 
phone 
systems 
have 
been 
introduced into almost all African countries and adopted so 
168
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

enthusiastically at all levels of society that 40% of Africans 
have a mobile phone. [38] Since many poor regions of 
African nations have satisfactory phone signals, this 
technology can be incorporated into African telenursing, as 
has been successfully done in India. [39] Such application 
has been beneficial for management of serious chronic 
conditions [40] and to ensure appropriate action in medical 
emergencies, such as those occurring in childbirth. The 
latter suggestion was made for Burkina Faso. [41] What is 
now new in developed nations’ telenursing will later often 
become available, if required, in Africa. But local African 
needs and conditions must be considered to ensure the most 
effective application. For example software used to aid 
decision making by telenurses has both pros and cons. It 
simplifies telenursing and often complements telenurses’ 
knowledge. But also it can be incomplete and in conflict 
with their independently formed decisions. Overall 
telenurses preferred having it available, although it cannot 
always replace their own nursing expertise. [42] Such 
software, being considered for use in Africa, should be 
modified, for example to include and emphasise conditions 
common in the continent, but much rarer elsewhere.  
 
Kenya is the only sub-Saharan African developing 
nation with a nursing database. [43] It provides reliable 
nursing 
information 
about 
workforce 
capacity, 
demographics and migration patterns, so allowing assistance 
in determining optimum distribution and most effective use 
of health personnel.  
V. 
AFRICAN CLINICAL TELENURSING 
 
African telenursing has been able to benefit from 
experience in developed nations where telenursing has been 
applied and steadily developed. Resulting knowledge and 
experience gained there have been adapted and expanded as 
necessary to provide telenursing most suitable for Africa. 
Transfer of such activity and knowledge to Africa has 
accelerated as costs of equipment have decreased and ICT 
availability and expertise have both improved in recent 
years.  
 
It is well known that HIV/AIDS is currently 
savaging Africa. About 60% of the world’s HIV infections 
are in sub-Saharan Africa [44] and the world’s largest 
current anti retroviral therapy programme is in South Africa. 
[45] Applications of telenursing can alleviate many aspects 
of this scourge. Feeding of infants by mothers infected by 
HIV/AIDS has been studied by the WHO and guide-lines 
drawn up to aid prevention of virus transmission from the 
mother to infant. Three clear conditions for this feeding 
have been established, to greatly reduce the occurrence of 
infant infection. However, over two thirds of South African 
HIV/AIDS infected mothers do not fulfil these criteria, with 
increased risk of viral transmission to their infants. 
Appropriate counselling of these mothers at their baby 
clinics, or elsewhere, is urgently required, not only in South 
Africa but in many other similarly affected African nations. 
Telenursing links can facilitate provision of guidelines for 
nurses to provide such counselling and also to make 
available counsellor training. [46]  
 
Stigma of those infected by HIV remains a serious 
problem in many African societies and this has been 
unambiguously shown to violate human rights in South 
Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Lesotho and Malawi. [47] 
Until this stigma is overcome and the associated damage 
redressed many believe that the pandemic will continue, 
because of the consequent difficulty in ensuring that 
individuals’ HIV status known. A recent detailed survey in 
Tanzania, Zimbabwe and South Africa, indicates that 
education and widespread HIV testing are essential to 
produce any significant reduction of HIV related stigma. 
[48] A teleeducation programme, outlined above, attempts 
to provide such education. [33] A report has shown that 
Zambian nurses, either infected with HIV/AIDS or caring 
for HIV positive patients, can be greatly aided by 
participating in local support groups, which focus on 
appropriate training and monitoring. [49] Telenursing 
techniques allow such assistance to be rendered more 
effectively at reduced cost, than by using traditional 
methods.  
 
A South African project illustrates how an initial 
emphasis on clinical consultation via telenursing can lead to 
improved nursing ability and service to the public in several 
different ways, which include teleeducation. At a nurse-
directed clinic, in a poor region where there is much 
alcoholism and violence, disturbed patients often present. 
This provides a dilemma, especially at the weekend, when 
specialist opinion is unavailable. The nurses have had little 
training in psychology and the only management available 
at the weekend is for the patient to be transferred to police 
cells, to await the arrival, on the following Monday, of the 
district surgeon. S/he likewise may have had little 
psychological training. A department of psychology (of the 
University of the Western Cape, in South Africa), located in 
the provincial capital, is responsible for this clinic’s mental 
health practice, but due to its location 450 km away, there is 
infrequent direct contact. An audio-visual telepsychology 
link greatly improved this situation and other benefits 
quickly followed. Psychology students in the university 
could experience pathology, rarely encountered in their 
urban setting, through the telenursing link. Practical training 
for the clinic nurses in managing disturbed, and other, 
patients became possible. Also two other distance learning 
programmes, provided by staff members of the department 
of psychology and using the telenursing link, resulted in 
much additional benefit. Both programmes trained volunteer 
lay 
counsellors. 
One 
was 
directed 
towards 
local 
professionals, such as clergymen, librarians, school 
teachers, social workers, etc. The other novel programme 
taught high school pupils, as peer-counsellors and this 
proved particularly effective. Such programmes would have 
been totally impractical without a teleeducation facility. It 
was much regretted that this programme ended abruptly 
because of equipment theft.   
169
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
South African telenursing programmes are being 
extended throughout the continent under the aegis of 
regional bodies, such as the Southern African Development 
Community (SADC) with 15 southern African members and 
the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD), 
with 18 nation members in all parts of Africa. Both SADC 
and NEPAD emphasise collaborative health programmes for 
African nations and actively encourage telemedicine.  
DISCUSSION 
 
It is clear that in Africa there are many telenursing 
activities underway; some are pilot schemes and others are 
well established. It is now appropriate to enlarge their scope 
and to involve more African countries. South Africa is ready 
to take a leading role in this extension, having had a head 
start, as shown by its current telenursing activities, some of 
which have been outlined above. African telenursing is 
changing rapidly, as is indicated by the recent publication 
dates (2007 and later) of about 80% of the references to this 
paper. Benefits of telenursing are well known and varied, 
including savings in travel costs and increases in nursing 
expertise. After several patients with similar conditions have 
been referred by a telenurse, subsequently s/he is often able 
to manage comparable patients without referral. This was 
clearly demonstrated by a local pilot dermatological 
telenursing project.  The referring telenurses very often 
encountered HIV infected patients, for >95% of HIV 
infected patients have dermatological lesions and the 
severity of such dermatological pathology closely reflects 
progress of the HIV infection. After the telenursing link 
provided management regimes, for a few weeks the 
participating nurses’ steadily increasing experience enabled 
them to diagnose and manage increasing numbers of HIV 
lesions without referral.    
Very little analysis of economic benefits of African 
telenursing has been performed. However in developed 
countries diminished travel costs provide clear savings and 
this benefit is becoming apparent in Africa too. The 
telenurses’ increased experience from telereferrals has 
already been outlined and its consequence is an improved 
local health care service. The principal advantages of 
teleeducation are plain, for the resultant nursing education 
of all sorts, especially continuing professional learning, is 
less costly when travel is eliminated. African telenursing is 
evolving to satisfy African needs. It recognises that 
technical and infrastructure conditions and pathology in the 
continent may differ from those of the nations where 
telenursing equipment and applications were first derived, 
so for an optimal role, modifications are often necessary, as 
summarised above.  
Overall the essential benefit of telenursing is an 
improved service for those whom the nurses serve, 
especially patients receiving PHC. This has been recently 
confirmed in an extensive pilot programme in Brazil, which 
is intended to a model for a National Telehealth Program. 
[50] Its findings substantiated South Africa’s related 
experience, which is that both direct PHC health care and 
the professional knowledge of the nurses who administer it, 
benefit significantly. A report on this pilot found that 
“Telehealth has strengthened the role of primary health 
care… It has reinforced primary care units … and has 
provided primary care staff with a powerful arsenal of up-
to-date information and tools”. [50] Telenursing is usually 
less expensive than traditional nursing, but there are 
situations when it may even be more costly, for in some 
rural areas of Africa it replaces a situation where no local 
service at all was previously available. Today, all 
Australasians have free access to nursing advice via the 
phone. [51] One day such telenursing service will be 
available in Africa. The path to this goal is long, but the first 
steps of this journey have been made, by preparing projects 
using the rapidly increasing numbers of mobile phones in 
Africa.  
 
CONCLUSION  
Telenursing activity in Africa has steadily increased, as 
the work of telenursing pioneers, in well-resourced nations 
has been studied and adapted according to African needs, 
conditions and infrastructure. It is essential to modify 
techniques and equipment in terms of the continent’s 
technical, infrastructural and computer literacy levels and its 
different range of pathologies. This can ensure effective 
application of telenursing in Africa. Also teleeducation has 
greatly benefited African nurses and, with the wide range of 
existing collaborations, it seems that Africa’s particular 
form of telenursing is now set to expand steadily, so that it 
will continue to contribute significantly to marked 
improvements in Africa’s health care.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Professors A. Flisher, E. 
Gwyther and M. Kibel for informative discussions. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] S. Wynchank and J. Fortuin, “African Telenursing: what is it 
and what’s special about it?”, eTELEMED 2010, 2nd Int Conf on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. Feb 10-15, 2010. St. 
Maarten, Netherlands Antilles, pp 17-22. 
[2]  Priv. comm., 2010, A. Wynchank. 
[3] L. Ogilvie, J.E. Mill, B. Astle, A. Fanning, and M. Opare, “The 
exodus of health professionals from sub-Saharan Africa: balancing 
human rights and societal needs in the twenty-first century”, Nurs 
Inq, 2007 Jun; vol 14(2): pp 114-24.  
[4] D.J. Brown, “Consumer perspectives on nurse practitioners and 
independent practice”, J Am Acad Nurse Pract. 2007 Oct; vol 
19(10): pp 523-9. 
[5] Anonymous, “Professional qualification of ‘telenurse’ 
(Queensland, 
Australia)”, 
2009 
from 
website: 
http://www.health.qld.gov.au/workforus/careers/Telenurse.pdf, 
Dec 2010.   
[6] E. Kaminsky, U. Rosenqvist, and I. Holmström,  “Telenurses’ 
understanding of work: detective or educator?”, J Adv Nurs. 2009 
Feb;65(2): pp 382-90.  
170
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[7] Anonymous, “WHO. World Health Report 2006: working 
together for health”, World Health Organisation, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2006 
[8] N. Crisp, B. Gawanas, and I. Sharp, “Training the health 
workforce: scaling up, saving lives”, Lancet. 2008 Feb 23; vol 
371(9613): pp 689-91.  
[9] R. Wootton R and L. Bonnardot,” In what circumstances is 
telemedicine appropriate in the developing world?”, JRSM Short 
Rep, 2010 Oct 1;1(5):37. 
[10] G.E. Quinn, C. Gilbert, B.A. Darlow. and A Zin, 
“Retinopathy of prematurity: an epidemic in the making”, Chin 
Med J (Engl). 2010 Oct;123(20):2929-37. 
[11]  N. Mahmud, J. Rodriguez, and J. Nesbit, “A text message-
based intervention to bridge the healthcare communication gap in 
the rural developing world”,  Technol Health Care 2010 
Jan;18(2):137-44 
[12] G.P. Parham, et al., “eC3--a modern telecommunications 
matrix for cervical cancer prevention in Zambia”, J Low Genit 
Tract Dis, 2010 Jul;14(3):167-73. 
.[13] I. Holmström, “Diabetes telehealth and computerized 
decision support systems: a sound system with a human touch is 
needed”, J Diabetes Sci Technol, 2010 Jul 1;4(4):1012-5. 
[14]  R. Berkley, S.A. Bauer, and C. Rowland, “How telehealth 
can increase the effectiveness of chronic heart failure 
management”,  Nurs Times. 2010 Jul 6-12;106(26):14-5. 
[15] L. Jensen, et al., “Impact of a nurse telephone intervention 
among high-cardiovascular-risk, health fair participants”,  J 
Cardiovasc Nurs, 2009 Nov-Dec;24(6):447-53. 
[16] M. Mars, “Health capacity development through telemedicine 
in Africa”, Yearb Med Inform. 2010:87-93. 
[17] J. Anderson, “ICT transforming education; a regional guide”, 
2010, UNESCO, Paris, France. ISBN 978-92-9223-325-9.   
[18] C.D.L. Ens, et al., “Postgraduate palliative care education: 
Evaluation of a South African programme”, S Afr Med J, 2011, 
Jan, 101(1) 42-44.  
 [19] Priv. comm., 2010, E. Gwyther. 
[20] Priv. comm., 2010, A. Flisher. 
[21] Priv. comm., 2010, M. Kibel.  
[22] J.A. Wilimas and R.C. Ribiero, “Pediatric hematology-
oncology outreach for developing countries”, Hematol Oncol Clin 
North Am. 2001 Aug;15(4): pp 775-87.  
[23] S.W. Day, P.M. Dycus, E.A. Chismark, and L. McKeon, 
“Quality assessment of pediatric oncology nursing care in a 
Central American country: findings, recommendations, and 
preliminary outcomes”, Pediatr Nurs. 2008 Sep-Oct; vol 34(5): pp 
367-73. 
[24] T. Harpham, S. Huttly, M.J. De Silva, and T. Abramsky, 
“Maternal mental health and child nutritional status in four 
developing countries”, J Epidemiol Community Health. 2005 Dec; 
vol 59(12): pp 1060-4. 
[25] M. Islam, “The safe motherhood initiative and beyond”, Bull 
World Health Organ, 2007, vol 85, p 735  
[26] S.A. Harvey, et al., “Are skilled birth attendants really 
skilled? A measurement method, some disturbing results and a 
potential way forward”, Bull World Health Organ, 2007, vol 85, p 
783  
[27] P. Johnson, G. Ghebreyohanes, V. Cunningham, D. 
Kutenplon, and O. Bouey, “Distance education to prepare nursing 
faculty in Eritrea: diffusion of an innovative model of midwifery 
education”, J Midwifery Womens Health. 2007 Sep-Oct; vol 52(5): 
pp e37-41.  
[28] E.M. McClure, et al., “Evaluation of the educational impact of 
the WHO Essential Newborn Care course in Zambia”, Acta 
Paediatr. 2007 Aug; vol 96(8): pp 1135-8.  
[29] K. Davies, P. Deeny, and M. Raikkonen, “A transcultural 
ethos 
underpinning 
curriculum 
development: 
a 
master's 
programme in disaster relief nursing”, J Transcult Nurs. 2003 
Oct;14(4): pp 349-57. 
[30] B.M. Goessens, et al., “A pilot-study to identify the feasibility 
of an internet-based coaching programme for changing the 
vascular risk profile of high-risk patients”, Patient Educ Couns. 
2008 Oct;73(1): pp 67-72. 
[31] S. Young, et al., “Teaching paediatric resuscitation skills in a 
developing country: introduction of the Advanced Paediatric Life 
Support course into Vietnam”, Emerg Med Australas. 2008 
Jun;20(3): pp 271-5. 
[32] P.P. Diep, L. Lien, and J. Hofman,  “A criteria-based clinical 
audit on the case-management of children presenting with malaria 
at Mangochi District Hospital, Malawi” World Hosp Health Serv. 
2007; vol 43(2): pp 21-9. 
[33] A. Deverell, et al., “An Evaluation of Mindset Health: Using 
ICT to facilitate an innovative training methodology for health care 
providers in South Africa” 11th Conf Int Soc Telemed eHealth, 
Cape Town, South Africa, Nov 2006. 
[34] P. Yellowlees, “How not to develop telemedicine systems”, 
Telemed Today 1997 May-Jun; vol 5(3): pp 6-7, 17.   
[35] E.K. Yun and H.A. Park, “Factors affecting the 
implementation of telenursing in Korea”, Stud Health Technol 
Inform. 2006;122: pp 657-9. 
[36] T. Sørensen, U. Rivet, and J. Fortuin, “A review of ICT 
systems for HIV/AIDS and anti-retroviral treatment management 
in South Africa”, J Telemed Telecare. 2008; vol 14(1) pp 37-41.  
[37] D. Hibbert, et al., “Lessons from the implementation of a 
home telecare service”, J Telemed Telecare. 2003;vol 9 Suppl 1: 
pp S55-6. 
[38] Anon., “The power of mobile money”, The Economist, 2009 
Sep 26; vol 392(8650): p 13.  
[39] G.R. Kanthraj and C.R. Srinivas, “Store and forward 
teledermatology”, Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2007 Jan-
Feb; vol 73(1): pp 5-12.   
[40] H. Blake, “Mobile phone technology in chronic disease 
management”, Nurs Stand. 2008 Nov 26-Dec 2; vol 23(12): pp 43-
6. 
[41] P. Byass and L. D'Ambruoso, “Cellular telephone networks in 
developing countries”, Lancet 2008 Feb 23; vol 371(9613): p 650.  
[42] A. Ernesäter, I. Holmström, and M. Engström, “Telenurses' 
experiences of working with computerized decision support: 
supporting, inhibiting and quality improving”, J Adv Nurs. 2009 
May;65(5): pp 1074-83 
[43] P.L. Riley, et al., “Developing a nursing database system in 
Kenya”, Health Serv Res. 2007 Jun;42(3 Pt 2): pp 1389-405. 
[44] Anon., “UNAIDS Report on the global AIDS Epidemic 
2010”, UNAIDS and WHO; Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNAIDS/WHO, 2010. ISBN 978-92-9173-871-7 
[45] M. Cornell, et al., “Monitoring the South African National 
Antiviral Treatment Programme, 2003-2007: The IeDEA Southern 
Africa collaboration”, 2009, S Afr Med J, vol 99, No 9, pp 653-
660. 
[46] T. Doherty, et al., “Effectiveness of the WHO/UNICEF 
guidelines on infant feeding for HIV-positive women: results from 
a prospective cohort study in South Africa”, AIDS. 2007 Aug 20; 
vol 21(13): pp 1791-7. 
171
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[47] T.W. Kohi, et al., “HIV and AIDS stigma violates human 
rights in five African countries”, Nurs Ethics. 2006 Jul;13(4): pp 
404-15. 
[48] B.L. Genberg, et al., “A comparison of HIV/AIDS-related 
stigma in four countries: negative attitudes and perceived acts of 
discrimination towards people living with HIV/AIDS”, Soc Sci 
Med, 2009 Jun; vol 68(12): pp 2279-87. 
[49] M.P. Vitols, E. du Plessis, and O. Ng'andu, “Mitigating the 
plight of HIV-infected and -affected nurses in Zambia”, Int Nurs 
Rev. 2007 Dec; vol 54(4):pp 375-82. 
[50] A. de Fàtima dos Santos, et al., “Telehealth in Primary 
Healthcare: An Analysis of Belo Horizonte's Experience”, 
Telemed J E Health. 2011 Jan 7 vol 17(1): pp 25-9. 
[51] I. St George, M. Cullen, L. Gardiner, and G. Karabatsos,  
“Universal telenursing triage in Australia and New Zealand - a new 
primary health service”, Aust Fam Physician. 2008 Jun; vol 37(6): 
pp 476-9.  
 
172
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

