Study of Generalization Performance on Non-Contact Estimation of Lumbar Load 
Using Webcam Image by Deep Learning                                                     
for Stationary Standing Forward Bending Posture 
 
Riku Nishimoto 
Kochi University of Technology 
Miyanokuchi 185, Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, Japan 
Kochi, Japan 
email: nishimoto.riku19990917@gmail.com 
 
Kyoko Shibata 
Kochi University of Technology 
Miyanokuchi 185, Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, Japan 
Kochi, Japan 
email: shibata.kyoko@kochi-tech.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract - To prevent lumbago, it is effective to have a system 
that enables people to improve their habitual bad posture. 
Therefore, we will develop a method of estimating body load 
without user burden for constant observation of posture. 
Hence, this study proposes the use of a web camera, which 
everyone has and can acquire images on a daily basis without 
any burden, as a non-contact sensing method, and the use of 
deep learning as a means of estimating body load from web 
images. Deep learning models are created by deriving body 
load values using musculoskeletal analysis based on skeletal 
position coordinates extracted from posture images and 
labeling the images with these as true values. Thus, if a pre-
trained deep learning model is created in advance, body load 
can be estimated from images alone, without the use of 
specialized software or cloud communication. If it is possible to 
easily visualize one's own body load in daily life, the system can 
be developed to provide feedback on posture evaluation and 
improvement plans based on the estimated body load. We 
consider that this will further increase the users' awareness of 
improvement and lead to the maintenance and promotion of 
health. In this paper, as the first step, a deep learning model is 
created for a stationary standing forward bending posture, and 
the accuracy of the lumbar load estimation by the deep 
learning model is evaluated. The results of individual learning 
using untrained data allowed us to estimate the lumbar load 
with high accuracy. Hence, the possibility of applying the 
proposed method to certain individuals is indicated. The other 
is, the results of ensemble learning confirmed models with high 
and low accuracy. Hence, the deep learning models that 
estimated untrained participants showed large variations in 
accuracy 
and 
insufficient 
generalization 
performance.  
Discussion of the results confirms that data bias is a 
contributing factor to the accuracy loss and indicates the 
possibility of obtaining generalization 
performance by 
improving data bias. 
Keywords- Deep learning; Single camera; Estimation; 
Musculoskeletal model simulation; Lumbar load. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many people of all ages and genders experience lumbago, 
and lumbago has become a social problem because of its 
potential impact on daily life. One of the causes of lumbago 
is the habit of a broken posture, which is very demanding on 
the body. From this, to prevent lumbago, it is useful to 
constantly observe posture in daily life. In cases where 
posture is out of balance, it is effective to have a system that 
allows people to improve their posture by themselves. To 
achieve this, this research group has been considering the 
quantitative estimation of the load on the lower back in order 
to determine whether the posture is good or bad. In the past, 
the lumbar region has been measured using optical motion 
capture, wearable inertial sensors, and bending sensors to 
non-invasively estimate lumbar load using biomechanics and 
statistics [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]. These estimation results showed 
qualitatively similar trends to the measured lumbar load 
ratios of Nachemson et al. [7] and Wilke et al. [8] and 
confirmed the usefulness of the estimation method. However, 
since specialized equipment and analysis are required, and 
users are burdened during measurement and estimation, it is 
difficult to apply this method to the observation, estimation, 
and evaluation of posture in daily life.  
Therefore, in this study, as a way to reduce the burden on 
the user during measurement, consider using an easily 
accessible, non-wearing sensing device. Muto et al. [9] 
evaluated the posture of an elderly person using Kinect v2 
for Windows (Microsoft), a depth camera, as a non-contact 
sensing device. However, the depth cameras essential to this 
research are not widely available to the public. On the other 
hand, several systems have been commercialized to evaluate 
posture based on the skeletal position that is detected by AI 
from 2D images that lack depth information (e.g., Posen 
[10]). Although joint angles and other factors are visualized 
in these systems, however, the loads applied to the body are 
not quantified. Hence, this study proposes a method for 
estimating body load using AI from a single camera image, 
which is a readily available device, as a method of constantly 
observing posture by self and quantitatively estimating body 
load [1]. If the proposed method can be realized, by creating 
a deep learning model in advance using specialized software, 
it will then be possible to visualize one's own body load in 
daily life simply by inputting posture images, without going 
through the cloud. In addition, it can be developed into a 
system that provides feedback on posture evaluation and 
improvement plans and evaluations based on this, it will 
62
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

enable posture condition to be evaluated without burden and 
lead to the prevention of lumbago. 
In this paper, as the first step in creating the proposed 
system, the deep learning model is created with only the 
lumbar load as the body load and the posture as a static 
standing forward-bending posture. After that, the proposed 
method will be evaluated by the accuracy of the lumbar load 
estimation using the deep learning model created. In the 
previous paper [1], a deep learning model was created using 
multiple experimental participants as training data and 
estimation using untrained data from participants used for 
training data. The results were shown to be useful, as high 
correlations and small errors were identified. However, 
scope of application remains unclear since the estimation of 
training participants by a deep learning model was created 
using several participants. Therefore, this paper verifies 
scope of application of the proposed method. First, it is 
verified that the proposed method is applicable to specific 
individual. A deep learning model is created using specific 
participant as training data, and its accuracy is confirmed by 
estimation using untrained data from the same participant. 
Furthermore, to verify the generalization performance of the 
proposed method. A deep learning model is created using 
multiple participants as training data, and the accuracy is 
confirmed 
by 
performing 
estimation 
on 
untrained 
participants.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methods of the lumbar load estimation system 
proposed in this paper. Section III determines the criteria for 
evaluating the accuracy of the deep learning model. Section 
IV provides the methods and conditions for creating the 
lumbar load estimation system proposed in this paper, and 
discusses the experimental results based on the evaluation 
criteria identified in Section III. Section V discusses the 
results of Section IV. Finally, the conclusions close the paper. 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed body load estimation system. [1] 
 
II. 
LUMBAR LOAD ESTIMATION SYSTEM 
This section describes the system proposed in this study. 
Figure 1 shows an overall view of the system to be 
developed in this study, as proposed in the previous report 
[1]. During system operation, user inputs an image of 
his/her posture, along with his/her height and weight, into 
the system, which estimates the body load and outputs 
improvement plans based on this. To achieve this, a deep 
learning model is created in advance during development.  
A method for deriving the body load to be learned by the 
deep learning model is described. Tagawa et al. [11] 
proposed a device to visualize the dynamic load of various 
body parts from video alone using skeletal detection 
software. In this system, the body load is calculated using 
the Newton-Euler method based on the coordinates of the 
detected skeletal position. However, it is not suitable for 
estimating static posture, which is the participant of this 
study, because no acceleration occurs. In addition, it is 
difficult to obtain an accurate body load from an estimation 
based on skeletal position alone, because muscle activity 
and other factors cannot be considered. Therefore, in this 
study, body load is derived using AnyBody [12]. AnyBody 
is a musculoskeletal analysis software that can derive 
various human body information by creating a virtual 
human body model from skeletal positions. Also, AnyBody 
can be obtained the account the amount of muscle activity 
and other factors to determine the force, moment (torque), 
and muscle tension applied to a region. In the field of 
healthcare, much research has been conducted that make 
effective use of AnyBody. Previous research used AnyBody 
to analyze the effects of age and height on the lumbar region 
during manual material handling [13] and the effects of 
lumbar disc herniation on spin loading characteristics [14]. 
However, the input data for AnyBody are the skeletal 
coordinate positions of the human body. An optical motion 
capture camera is generally used, although this device 
cannot obtain information from the images. Therefore, AI 
skeletal detection software is used to detect skeletal 
coordinates from images. The skeletal coordinates detected 
using such software are used as input data to AnyBody. 
Thus, in this study, the skeletal position coordinates are 
detected from images using VisionPose [15]. VisionPose is 
one of the AI skeleton detection software, a highly accurate 
AI posture estimation engine that can detect skeletons from 
2D camera images without using markers or depth sensors. 
VisionPose detects a total of 30 skeletal positions, including 
the hip and shoulder joints shown in Figure 2. Hence, in this 
study, the load applied to the body using AnyBody is 
derived from the skeletal position coordinates detected using 
VisionPose from the images. Out of the 30 locations 
detected by VisionPose shown on the right in Figure 2, the 
15 locations in deficit are used to derive the load by 
AnyBody. After that, a deep learning model is created by 
labeling this as the true value with the image. As described 
above, during system development, specialized software 
such as AnyBody and VisionPose is used to create deep 
63
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

learning models. Then, based on this, when the system is 
used by the user, a structure will be built to enable 
estimation using only AI applications, without the need for 
several specialized software. These are the primary 
characteristics of the proposed system. It is a novel 
approach to combine AnyBody with AI.  
In this paper, since we focus on lumbago, we use the 
lumbar load as the body load. In this process, a deep 
learning model is created for each body load that is 
appropriate for the posture to be observed because AnyBody 
can derive the load that occurs in any region from single 
image data. That is, many body loads can be estimated and 
visualized by the proposed system from single image data. 
Next, the lumbar loading used in this paper is described. 
According to previous research [16], positive agreement 
was observed between in vivo measurements of disc 
compression forces between L4L5 and the values derived by 
AnyBody, demonstrating the suitability of the AnyBody 
model. Based on these results, this paper uses the 
compression force of the intervertebral disc between L4L5 
derived from AnyBody as the lumbar load. In a previous 
report [17], as a preliminary step in creating a deep learning 
model, we evaluated the compression force of intervertebral 
disc between L4L5 derived by AnyBody using the skeletal 
position coordinates detected by VisionPose from web 
images of standing forward bending posture. This result 
showed an increasing trend of disc compression force with 
forward bending of the upper body, as measured by 
Nachemson et al. [7]. In response to this result, as one of the 
training data for the compression force of the deep learning 
model, the intervertebral disc between L4L5 derived by 
AnyBody is used as the true value in this paper. 
 
III. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING THE 
ACCURACY OF DEEP LEARNING MODELS 
In deriving the true value of the disc compression force 
for the proposed method, the relationship between the error 
in skeletal detection by VisionPose and the anterior tilt 
angle and the disc compression force will be clarified. This 
determines the evaluation criteria for the accuracy of the 
deep learning model to be created. 
 
A. Experiment 
Three male participants (age 21 ± 1.00, height 1.70 ± 
0.02 [m], weight 67.0 ± 1.70 [kg]) agreed to participate in 
the experiment in advance after obtaining approval from the 
University 
Ethics 
Committee 
and 
explaining 
the 
experimental details to the participants. A standing static 
posture image is acquired for them to obtain the anterior tilt 
angle and lumbar load by skeletal detection with VisionPose. 
One webcam (StreamCam: logicool) is used to get video. 
The camera is placed at the distance of 3 [m] from the 
center of the participant's body and at a height of 0.85 [m] 
from the floor. The movies are shot at 1080p/30fps. Three 
pictures are taken in each of the following conditions using 
the webcam: upright posture (0 degrees), 10 degrees, 20 
degrees, and 30 degrees of forward tilt angle of the upper 
body. The angle ofc forward bend is determined by pressing 
the board against the lower back and measuring with a 
digital angle meter. 
Based on the obtained images, one is, the skeletal 
position coordinates indicating the body center shoulder and 
hip positions detected by VisionPose are used to calculate 
the anterior tilt angle using a trigonometric function. After 
that, the error is calculated from the results of the measured 
and calculated values. The other is, based on the images, the 
skeletal position coordinates are detected from each image 
using VisionPose, and the skeletal position coordinates are 
input to AnyBody to derive the compression force of 
intervertebral disc between L4L5. In this process, the height 
and weight in the human body model in AnyBody are 
standardized to the participant's average in order to 
eliminate differences in the participant's physique in the 
derived values.  
 
B. Estimation Results 
Table I shows the error between the calculated and 
measured values of each forward tilt angle of the upper 
body, and the compression force of the intervertebral disc 
between L4L5 derived by AnyBody. Table I shows that the 
average absolute error of the forward tilt angle of the upper 
body detected by VisionPose is 3.20 [°]. Furthermore, the 
mean of standard deviation of the derived disc compression 
force between L4L5 was 13.1 [N], which is approximately 
2.00 [%] of the mean body weight, indicating a high 
accuracy with little variation between participants of the 
data. In addition, from the derivation results shown in 
Figure 3, it can be read that the L4/L5 intervertebral disc 
 
 
Figure 2. Skeletal position coordinates to be detected by VisionPose. 
Skeletal positions to be used for AnyBody are shown in red.    
(Source [15] on the left of the image) 
64
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR BETWEEN CALCULATED AND MEASURED VALUES AND COMPRESSION FORCE OF INTERVERTEBRAL DISC BETWEEN L4L5 
AT EACH UPPER BODY FORWARD TILT ANGLE 
 
 
Figure 3. Compression force of intervertebral disc between L4L5 derived 
using AnyBody for each angle of forward tilt of upper body. 
 
load increases almost linearly in 10-degree increments. The 
estimation results captured the trend of increased lumbar 
loading due to forward tilt of the upper body, as described in 
orthopedic clinical practice. Therefore, the lumbar load 
derived by AnyBody from the skeletal position coordinates 
detected by VisionPose can be used as the true value of the 
training data for the deep learning model. Following the 
results, the slope of the linear function of the approximate 
line was calculated to obtain an average change in 
compressive force per unit angle of 21.1 [N]. These results 
will be used to evaluate the deep learning models to be 
created in subsequent sections. 
 
IV. 
ESTIMATION OF LUMBAR LOAD USING DEEP 
LEARNING MODEL 
This section describes the experimental methods used to 
collect training and validation data, the preprocessing 
applied to the measured data, and the training conditions for 
CNN. Furthermore, the created deep learning model is used 
to estimate the lumbar load and confirm its accuracy.  
 
A. Experiment 
Three male participants (age 23.2 ± 0.748, height 1.73 ± 
3.49 [m], weight 67.2 ± 4.35 [kg]) agreed to participate in 
the experiment in advance after obtaining approval from the 
University Ethics Committee and explaining the 
experimental details to the participants. To efficiently 
acquire posture images for use in the creation and accuracy 
validation of the deep learning model, video is captured for 
the forward bending motion of standing posture. The 
 
equipment used and camera locations are the same as in the 
experiment in Section III. The body gradually bends from 
an upright standing posture to about 30 degrees in 2 seconds, 
then the body gradually raises in 2 seconds to an upright 
standing posture. This is taken as one trial, and 5 trials are 
obtained. A total of three videos are obtained for each 
participant. 
 
B. Estimation Methods 
In this estimation, it is desirable to obtain the posture 
load at a specific point in time, so frame-by-frame images 
should be used for learning and estimation, rather than 
processing with video that includes time information. Hence, 
the video obtained by the experiment for a total of 15 trials 
for 5 using the Python module OpenCV (image processing 
library). The video of each participant is converted to an 
image at each frame rate, generating 1800 images per 
participant for a total of 9000 images. In addition, the 
lumbar load to be used as the true value is obtained by using 
VisionPose to detect the skeletal position coordinates from 
the videos of 15 participants in the trials. The first through 
fourth images of each trial as training data and the fifth 
image as validation data. The training data for each model 
are 1440 images and the of 5 participants in the same 
experiment. The derived disc compression force is 
normalized by dividing it by height and weight to eliminate 
differences due to body size. The normalized values are 
labeled as the true values for each frame of training data to 
create a deep learning model. After that, using the deep 
learning model created, estimation of lumbar load is 
performed on the validation data, and the normalized values 
are converted to disc compression force [N] by multiplying 
by height and weight.  
TABLE II. CNN LEARNING CONDITIONS 
 
Set value 
Batch size 
64 
Classes 
100 
Epochs 
200 
Dropout 
0.2 
Convolution layer 
Filter size1 
32 
Filter size2 
64 
Stride 
1 
Pooling layer 
Size 
(2, 2) 
Fully connected layer 
64 
Upper body forward tilt angle [°] 
0 
10 
20 
30 
Mean value 
Mean absolute error of angle [°] 
2.17 ± 0.3 
2.58 ± 1.1 
4.58 ± 0.9 
3.46 ± 4.3 
3.20 ± 0.924 
L4/L5 intervertebral disc load [N] 
365 ± 16.4 
584 ± 6.50 
798 ± 10.3 
998 ± 19.2 
 
65
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4. The structure of the CNN learning conditions. 
 
In this paper, we use Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN) for deep learning to estimate lumbar load.  
Numerical estimation is based on images, we consider that 
the same mechanism can be used for estimation as in the 
classification problem. The values of each parameter are 
shown in Table II. Figure 4 shows the structure of the CNN 
learning conditions used in this report. The CNN structure 
in the deep learning model consists of an input layer, 
followed by two convolutional layers, one pooling layer, 
two convolutional layers with dropout to prevent overfitting, 
one pooling layer, smoothing to prevent dropout to prevent 
overfitting, and output to an output layer after passing 
through all coupled layers one layer. The Relu function is 
used as the activation function in the convolution layer, the 
Relu function is used in the all-coupling layer, the Softmax 
function is used in the output layer, and Adam [18] is used 
for optimization. Keras Documentation [19] was used to 
create 
the 
above 
structure 
in 
Python. 
Keras.Callbacks.EarlyStopping is used as the termination 
condition, with the training error used as the monitor and 
auto as the mode. 
 
C. Individual Learning 
In this section, a deep learning model created for an 
individual confirms the applicability of the proposed 
method to a specific individual. A total of five deep learning 
models (Models A, B, C, D, and E) are created for each 
validation data, which are 360 images. The accuracy of the 
lumbar load estimated by the deep learning model is 
evaluated from each of the 360 images of the validation data. 
Figure 5 plots the estimates for each angle of forward tilt. 
The anterior tilt angle is calculated using a trigonometric 
function with the skeletal position coordinates indicating the 
body-centered shoulder and hip positions detected by 
VisionPose, based on the upright posture as 0 [°]. All model 
estimation results captured the trend of increased lumbar 
load due to upper body forward tilt as described in 
orthopedic clinical practice. Then, the lumbar load derived 
from the same verification data using AnyBody is compared 
to the estimated value as the true value. Figure 6 plots the 
estimated values from the deep learning model and the true 
values derived by AnyBody. Table III shows the Pearson's 
correlation coefficient and mean absolute error for each 
deep learning model. Pearson's correlation coefficients were 
0.993 at maximum, 0.978 at minimum, and 0.987 ± 0.00770 
at mean, indicating a high correlation in all models. In 
addition, the mean absolute error between the deep learning 
estimates and the true values derived by AnyBody was a 
maximum of 28.8 [N], a minimum of 22.5 [N], and an 
average of 26.3 ± 5.22 [N]. This is approximately 3.91 [%] 
of the average weight. Further, based on the results of the 
experiment described in Section III-B, the compression 
force changes by 21.1 [N] per 1 [°] of forward tilt angle. 
The average absolute error of the results of this experiment 
is equivalent to an error of 1.25 [°] of forward tilt angle, 
which is smaller than the average detection error of 3.20 [°] 
for the forward tilt angle in VisionPose. Therefore, the error 
is small. 
In response to this result, the deep learning model for the 
standing forward bending posture that was created was able 
to estimate the lumbar load of the participant with high 
accuracy, and the proposed method is applicable as a lumbar 
load estimation method for the individuals used in the 
training.  Thus, the user can check the posture change by 
own self by creating a deep learning model specialized for 
own self in advance. 
 
TABLE III. PEARSON'S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT AND MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR FOR EACH DEEP LEARNING MODEL CREATED FOR AN INDIVIDUAL 
 
Model A 
Model B 
Model C 
Model D 
Model E 
Pearson's correlation coefficient 
0.983 ± 0.0101 
0.994 ± 0.00172 
0.993 ± 0.00271 
0.978 ± 0.0178 
0.990 ± 0.00617 
Mean absolute error [N] 
28.4 ± 4.05 
25.1 ± 3.79 
26.8 ± 5.91 
28.8 ± 7.39 
22.5 ± 4.94 
66
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5. Intervertebral disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
data by a deep learning model created for an individual at each 
anterior tilt angle. For example, Model A plots the results of a deep 
learning model created for participant a using the first through fourth 
images of each trial as training data, and the fifth image of each trial 
is estimated as validation data. 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
data by a deep learning model trained on an individual with the true 
values derived by AnyBody. 
 
D. Ensemble Learning 
In this section, a deep learning model created for several 
participants is used to verify the generalization performance 
of the proposed method. A total of five deep learning 
models (Models 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) are created by cross- 
validating four of the five participants as training data and 
one as validation data. The training data for each model are 
7200 images and the validation data are 1800 images. 
Evaluate the accuracy of the lumbar load estimated by the 
deep learning model from each of the 1800 images of the 
validation data. Figure 7 plots the estimated values for each  
 
Figure 7. Intervertebral disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
persons by deep learning models trained on multiple people for each 
anterior tilt angle. For example, Model 1 plots the results of a deep 
learning model created with participants B, C, D, and E as training 
data, with participant A estimated as validation data. 
 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
participants by a deep learning model trained on multiple people 
with the true values derived by AnyBody. 
 
angle of forward tilt. Although there were some outliers, all 
models captured the trend of increased lumbar load due to 
forward tilt of the upper body, as described in orthopedic 
clinical practice. Then, the lumbar load derived from the 
same verification data using AnyBody is compared to the 
estimated value as the true value. Figure 8 plots the 
estimated values from the deep learning model and the true 
values derived by AnyBody. Table IV shows the Pearson's 
correlation coefficient and mean absolute error for each 
deep learning model. Pearson's correlation coefficient was 
0.966 at maximum, 0.800 at minimum, and 0.888 ± 0.0274 
at the mean, indicating a high correlation, although inferior 
to individual learning. However, Figure 8 shows that 
67
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV. PEARSON'S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT AND MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR FOR EACH DEEP LEARNING MODEL WITH MULTIPLE PEOPLE TRAINED 
 
outliers were observed when the estimated values were 
between 300 and 400 [N]. In addition, the mean absolute 
error between the deep learning estimates and the true 
values derived by AnyBody was 126 [N] at maximum, 54.2 
[N] at minimum, and 79.2 ± 9.84 [N] on average. This is 
approximately 11.9 [%] of the average weight. Based on the 
results of the experiment described in Section III-B, the 
compression force changes by 21.1 [N] per 1 [°] of forward 
tilt angle. The average absolute error of the results of this 
experiment is 3.75 [°] of forward tilt angle, which is a 
higher value than the average detection error of 3.20 [°] for 
the forward tilt angle in VisionPose. Therefore, the error is 
large.  
However, Model 1 with the smallest average absolute 
error has an error equivalent to a forward tilt angle of 2.57 
[°], which is smaller than the average detection error of 3.20 
[°] for the VisionPose's forward tilt angle, and thus can be 
estimated with a small error. 
The deep learning models created for the standing 
forward bending posture target did not show sufficient 
generalization performance in estimation for untrained 
participants, due to variations in accuracy caused by some 
models satisfying the evaluation criteria and others not. 
 
V. 
CONSIDERATION 
The deep learning model created in Section IV-3 was 
used to estimate the lumbar load of untrained participants in 
several participants. The results showed that the estimation 
accuracy varied and the proposed method did not 
demonstrate sufficient generalization performance. This 
section considers the causes of this result and offers 
prospects for improving the accuracy of deep learning 
models. 
First, Figures 9 and 10 show the error rate and accuracy 
of Model 1. Model 1 has a relatively good Pearson's 
correlation coefficient and mean absolute error, with few 
outliers, among all deep learning models. Figure 9 shows 
the error rate per epoch during training for the Model 1 deep 
learning model. In the training data, the loss function 
decreases as the number of epochs increases. However, in 
the validation data, the loss function increases after a certain 
point. Furthermore, Figure 10 shows the accuracy per epoch 
during training for the Model 1 deep learning model. In the 
training data, the percentage of the accuracy increases as the 
number of epochs increases. However, in the validation data, 
there is no change in the accuracy value at a certain point in 
time. These figures suggest that overfitting has occurred. 
Citation [20] has been validated using MNIST and states 
that one of the causes of overfitting is lack of data. The 7200 
training data for the deep learning model created in this 
paper are extremely small compared to the 50000 training 
data for CIFAR-100, a data set with the same number of 
classifications. This indicates insufficient training data. 
Hence, the deep learning model is expected to be improved 
by increasing the training data. However, collecting huge 
amounts of data through experiments is costly and labor 
intensive. Therefore, one idea is to artificially edit image 
data through data expansion, as in previous research [21], to 
increase the training data without involving any actual 
experiments. Thus, it is expected to lead to an improvement 
in the accuracy of deep learning models. 
Second, Figure 11 shows the distribution of the image 
data acquired from the experiment for per normalized disc 
compression force. Figure 12 shows the distribution of 
 
 
Figure 9. Error rates for training and validation data for Model 1. 
 
 
Figure 10.   Accuracy for training and validation data for Model 1. 
 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
Model 5 
Pearson's correlation coefficient 
0.947 ± 0.0226 
0.801 ± 0.0357 
0.966 ± 0.00509 
0.921 ± 0.0237 
0.803 ± 0.0498 
Mean absolute error [N] 
54.2 ± 10.4 
89.4 ± 9.44 
126 ± 9.49 
57.0 ± 6.13 
69.5 ± 13.8 
68
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 11. Distribution of the number of image data acquired in the 
experiment per normalized disc compression force. 
 
 
Figure 12. Distribution of the number of images used as training data for 
Model 1 per normalized disc compression force. 
 
image data per normalized disc compression force used to 
train Model 1. Figure 12 shows that the amount of image 
data in the range of 30 to 35 normalized compressions used 
to train Model 1 was more than the other compressions. 
Further, a similar trend can be seen in all other models. 
Hence, the occurrence of outliers due to bias in the number 
of training data is another factor thought to reduce accuracy. 
Therefore, to verify the occurrence of outliers due to the 
bias in the number of training data, the number of image 
data is randomly deleted so that the number of image data 
between 30 to 35 becomes 800, the same level as the other 
range. A deep learning model was created using training 
data that had been adjusted to reduce bias in a simplified 
manner by this process, and the accuracy of the model was 
verified. Figure 13 plots the estimated values for each angle 
of forward tilt. All results of model estimation captured the 
trend of increased lumbar load due to forward tilt of the 
upper body as described in orthopedic clinical practice. 
Figure 14 plots the estimated values by the deep learning 
model using the training data after bias adjustment and the 
true values derived by AnyBody. Table V shows the 
Pearson's correlation coefficient and mean absolute error for 
each deep learning model created using the training data 
after bias adjustment. Pearson's correlation coefficients were 
0.971 at maximum, 0.843 at minimum, and 0.936 ± 0.0361 
at the mean, reducing the outliers seen in Figure 8 when the 
estimates were 300~400 [N], and showing a higher 
correlation than the results in Section IV-3, in which the 
training data were biased. In addition, the mean absolute 
error between the deep learning estimates and the true 
values derived by AnyBody was 126 [N] at maximum, 44.7 
[N] at minimum, and 80.1 ± 12.37 [N] on average. Next, the 
bias adjustment is made to confirm what changes occur in 
each of the deep learning models. For Model 2 and Model 5,  
 
 
Figure 13. Intervertebral disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
persons by deep learning models trained on multiple people using 
bias-adjusted training data for each anterior tilt angle. 
 
 
Figure 14. Comparison of disc compression forces estimated for untrained 
participants by a deep learning model trained on multiple people 
using bias-adjusted training data with the true values derived by 
AnyBody. 
69
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE V. PEARSON'S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT AND MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR FOR EACH DEEP LEARNING MODEL WITH MULTIPLE PEOPLE TRAINED 
USING BIAS-ADJUSTED TRAINING DATA 
 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
Model 5 
Pearson's correlation coefficient 
0.843 ± 0.159 
0.938 ± 0.00524 
0.972 ± 0.00439 
0.960 ± 0.00674 
0.968 ± 0.00590 
Mean absolute error [N] 
80.0 ± 35.2 
73.8 ± 3.18 
126 ± 9.47 
80.3 ± 6.65 
44.7 ± 7.32 
 
where many outliers can be seen in Figures 7 and 8, the bias 
adjustment 
significantly 
improved 
the 
outliers. 
Accompanying this improvement was an increase in 
accuracy in both Pearson's correlation coefficient and 
absolute mean error. However, Model 1 after bias 
adjustment was less accurate than Model 1 before bias 
adjustment for both Pearson's correlation coefficient and the 
absolute value of the mean error. Otherwise, Model 4 after 
bias adjustment improved the correlation coefficient and 
worsened the mean absolute error. Model 3 confirmed no 
change in accuracy due to bias adjustment. 
In the two indices used to evaluate the accuracy of this 
paper, the accuracy by average of all models was lower than 
the results in Section IV-3, in which the training data were 
biased. In some of these cases, the correlation coefficient 
improved and the mean absolute error worsened, while in 
other cases both Pearson's correlation coefficient and mean 
absolute error worsened. Although, the outliers are 
eliminated in all models. Figures 15 and 16 show the error 
rate and the accuracy per epoch during training for the 
Model 1 deep learning model after bias adjustment. 
Although a minute change, the results of the validation data 
track the results of the training data, indicating that 
overfitting can be prevented by correcting the bias in the 
data. Hence, the possibility of improving the accuracy of the 
deep learning model was observed by homogenizing the 
training data. Furthermore, in this study, the training data 
was acquired through continuous repetition of forward 
bending movements, thus there is probably room for 
improvement with respect to this approach. 
If these problems can be improved and applied to 
untrained users, it will be possible to estimate lumbar load 
with a deep learning model prepared in advance, without 
having created a deep learning model specific to the 
individual in advance. That is, the scope of application can 
be expanded to include untrained user for general use. As a 
result, the system will not only improve the posture of users 
who habitually have bad posture, but also enable healthy 
users to easily use the system as a preventive measure. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
To prevent lumbago, it is effective to constantly observe 
the posture of daily life. Therefore, we will develop a 
method to quantitatively estimate and visualize the load 
applied to the user's own body without any burden on the 
user. To achieve this, this study proposes a body load 
estimation method used on a deep learning model that uses 
web images and body load derived by AnyBody as training  
 
data. In this paper, as a preliminary step, we created a deep 
learning model using only lumbar load as the body load and 
assuming a stationary standing forward bending posture. 
After that, the accuracy of estimating lumbar load from web 
images using the created deep learning model was evaluated. 
In the individual learning model, a high correlation was 
obtained between the estimates by the deep learning model 
and the true values derived by AnyBody, indicating that the 
errors were small. Therefore, it is possible to create a deep 
learning model in advance specifically for a specific user by 
using specialized software to create a deep learning model 
to be applied to that user. Thereafter the user to estimate the 
lumbar load in the target posture simply by inputting images, 
and can check the posture transition by own self. Hence, 
improvement of posture suited to individual will be possible 
without repeated visits to the hospital. 
 
 
Figure 15. Error rates for training and validation data for Model 1 after bias 
adjustment. 
 
Figure 16.    Accuracy of training and validation data for Model 1 after bias 
adjustment. 
70
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The other is, ensemble learning models showed high 
correlations, but models with high and low accuracy were 
identified, with a large variation in accuracy, and they did 
not show sufficient generalization performance. However, it 
was confirmed that data bias was one of the contributing 
factors to the lower accuracy. Therefore, if the data bias is 
improved, the proposed method has the potential to be 
applicable as a lumbar load estimation method to untrained 
persons.  
The deep learning model created in this paper only 
covers the estimation of lumbar load in the forward bending 
posture of the upper body. However, the AnyBody used to 
derive the lumbar load in this paper can derive various body 
loads on the body from single measured data. Therefore, 
various body loads are obtained from a single image data, 
and a new deep learning model is created using this as 
training data. That is, it is possible to estimate selected body 
loads in each posture by acquiring various loads applied to 
each body part from images of postures that are considered 
to have a large load on the lumbar, such as hunching back 
and warped back, including the upper body forward bending 
posture targeted in this paper, and learning them together 
with the images. In addition, the accuracy of the deep 
learning model is improved by optimizing the program 
through filtering and attention mechanisms.  
If these methods can be used to estimate the body load 
of any posture with a high degree of accuracy, the system 
can be developed into a system that quantifies and presents 
the load based on the proposed methods, allowing users to 
observe their own posture without burden. Thus, raise 
awareness of improvement, prevent lumbago, and ultimately, 
maintain and promote health.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Nishimoto and K. Shibata, “Estimation of Lumbar Load 
from Webcam Images Using Convolutional Neural Network 
for 
Standing 
Forward 
Bending 
Stationary 
Posture,” 
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022, Lecture No. 70027, 2022. 
[2] 
K. Shibata, Y. Inoue, Y. Iwata, J. Katagawa, and R. Fujii, 
“Study on Noninvasive Estimate Method for Intervertebral 
Disk Load at Lumbar Vertebrae,” Transactions of the JSME, 
vol. 78, No. 791, 2012, pp. 130-141. (in Japanese) 
[3] 
Y. Tsuyoshi, K. Shibata, M. Sonobe, and Y. Inoue, “A 
Method to Estimate Lumbar Intervertebral Disk Load Using 
Inertial Sensors for Development of Postures Improvement 
Support System,” The Japan Society of Mechanical 
Engineers Chugoku-Shikoku Branch, Student Organization, 
The 56th Graduation Research Presentation by Students, 
Lecture No. 112, 2018. (in Japanese) 
[4] 
T. Iituka, K. Shibata, and Y. Inoue, "Estimation of Radius of 
Curvature of Lumbar Spine Using Bending Sensor for Low 
Back Pain Prevention," Human-Computer Interaction – 
INTERACT 2015, vol. 9299 of the series, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pp. 533-536, 2015. 
[5] 
Y. Suzuki, K. Shibata, M. Sonobe, Y. Inoue, and H. Satoh, 
"Noninvasive estimation of lumber disk load during motion 
to improve the posture," AHFE 2017 International 
Conference on Safety Management and Human Factors, 
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 604, pp. 
578-588, Code 193719, 2017. 
[6] 
H. Himeda, K. Shibata, and H. Satoh, "Estimation of Load 
on Lumbar Spine While Walking by Using Multiple 
Regression Analysis," Advances in Intelligent Systems and 
Computing, vol. 1205 AISC, pp. 282-288, 2020. 
[7] 
B. J. G. Andersson, R. Örtengren, A. Nachemson, and G. 
Elfström, “Lumbar Disc Pressure and Myoelectric Back 
Muscle Activity during Sitting,” I. Studies on an 
Experimental Chair, Scand J Rehab Med 6, pp. 104-114, 
1974. 
[8] 
H.J. Wilke, P. Neef, M. Caimi, T. Hoogland, and L.E. Claes, 
“New In Vivo Measurements of Pressures in the 
Intervertebral Disc in Daily Life,” SPINE, vol. 24, No. 8, pp. 
755-762, 1999. 
[9] 
Y. Muto, M. Sugou, H. Ito, K. Tsumurai, Y. Hosono, and T. 
Muto, “Application Method of Kinect for Evoluation of 
Physical Distortion of Elderly Adult,” Human Interface 
Society, vol. 19, No. 3, 2017. (in Japanese) 
[10] Posen, Inc., Available from: https://posen.ai/, September 
2023. 
[11] K. Tagawa, T. Kawan, and E. Matsuo, “Development of AI 
camera for visualizing physical workload,” The 63rd 
Conference of the Japan Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society, No. 2D2-06, 2022. (in Japanese) 
[12] AnyBody 
Technology 
A/S, 
Available 
from:  
https://www.anybodytech.com/, December, 2023. 
[13] T. Chihara, K. Iwahara, and J. Sakamoto, “Effect of age-
related muscle weakness and height on L5/S1 compression 
force during manual material handling,” Transactions of the 
JSME, vol. 85, No. 876, 2019, p. 19-00125. (in Japanese) 
[14] S. Kuai, W. Liu, R. Ji, and W. Zhou, “The Effect of Lumbar 
Disc Herniation on Spine Loading Characteristics during 
Trunk Flexion and Two Types of Picking Up Activities,” 
Journal of 
Healthcare 
Engineering 
vol. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1155/2017/6294503. 
[15] NEXT-SYSTEM 
Co., 
Ltd., 
Available 
from: 
https://www.next-system.com/visionpose/, December, 2023. 
[16] T. Bassani, E. Stucoviz, Z. Qian, M. Briguglio and F. 
Glbusera, 
“Validation 
of 
the 
AnyBody 
full 
body 
musculoskeletal model in computing lumbar spine loads at 
L4L5 level,” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 58, pp. 89-96, 
2017. 
[17] R. Nishimoto and K. Shibata, “Estimation of Lumbar Load 
from Webcam Images Using Musculoskeletal Model 
Simulation,” The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers 
Chugoku-Shikoku Branch, Student Organization, The 50th 
Graduation Research Presentation by Students, Lecture No. 
05b2, 2022. (in Japanese) 
[18] J.L. Ba and D.P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic 
optimization,” In Proceedings of International Conference on 
Learning Representations, 2015. 
[19] Keras Documentation, Available from: https://keras.io/, 
August, 2023. 
[20] K. Saito “Deep Learning from the Basic,” p. 190, O’Reilly 
Japan, 2016. (in Japanese) 
[21] L. Taylor and G. Nitschke, "Improving Deep Learning with 
Generic Data Augmentation," 2018 IEEE Symposium Series 
on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Bangalore, India, pp. 
1542-1547, 2018. 
71
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

