 
Inertial Sensors-based Lower-Limb Rehabilitation Assessment:  
A Comprehensive Evaluation of Gait, Kinematic and Statistical Metrics  
 
Salvatore Tedesco1, Andrea Urru1, James Peckitt2, Brendan O’Flynn1 
1WSN Group, Micro & Nano Systems - Tyndall National Institute  
2 Mardyke Arena Clinic 
University College Cork  
Cork, Ireland 
e-mail: salvatore.tedesco@tyndall.ie 
 
Abstract— Analysis of biomechanics is frequently used in both 
clinical and sporting practice in order to assess human motion 
and their performance of defined tasks. Whilst camera-based 
motion capture systems have long been regarded as the ‘Gold-
standard’ for quantitative movement-based analysis, their 
application is not without limitations as regards potential 
sources of variability in measurements, high cost, and 
practicality of use for larger patient/subject groups. Another 
more practical approach, which presents itself as a viable 
solution to biomechanical motion capture and monitoring in 
sporting and patient groups, is through the use of small-size low-
cost wearable Micro-ElectroMechanical Systems (MEMs)-
based inertial sensors. The clinical aim of the present work is to 
evaluate rehabilitation progress following knee injuries, 
identifying a number of metrics measured via a wireless inertial 
sensing system. Several metrics in the time-domain have been 
considered to be reliable for measuring and quantifying patient 
progress across multiple exercises in different activities. This 
system was developed at the Tyndall National Institute and is 
able to provide a complete and accurate biomechanics 
assessment without the constraints of a motion capture 
laboratory. The results show that inertial sensors can be used 
for a quantitative assessment of knee joint mobility, providing 
valuable information to clinical experts as regards the trend of 
patient progress over the course of rehabilitation.  
 
Keywords- Inertial Sensors; Wearable Microsystems; Signal 
Processing; Data Analytics; Lower-Limb Rehabilitation; Motor 
Performance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended presentation of [1], a study on 
the qualitative assessment of progress during rehabilitation via 
wearable inertial sensors, first published at Global Health 
2016. 
Biomechanics is the science related to the study of the 
internal and external forces acting on the human body and the 
effects produced by them [2]. In particular, one aspect of 
biomechanics analysis is the study of human locomotion and 
of the forces causing movement and human kinetics. 
This analysis is frequently used in both clinical and 
sporting practice by clinicians and can play a crucial role in 
athletes’ performance enhancement, injury prevention, and 
effective rehabilitation. More specifically, in the latter case, it 
is essential to track patient progress, and consequently to tailor 
patients-oriented rehabilitation programs, through the 
accurate assessment of human motion during the performance 
of clinically defined tasks.  
A common example of the technology regarded as being 
the ‘Gold-standard’ of quantitative movement analysis is 
shown by camera-based motion analysis systems (such as the 
ones provided by Vicon [3], Optitrack [4], or Codamotion [5]) 
which, during formal gait analysis by rehabilitation 
professionals, can help to ascertain measurements of 
Temporal (Time) and Spatial (Distance) characteristics 
associated with gait parameters. This enables clinicians to 
identify gait deviations in paediatric and amputee populations, 
in screening elderly people at risk of falling, to objectively 
monitor a patient’s progress, and to help determine the 
efficacy of surgical and therapy interventions [6-9]. 
While camera-based motion capture systems achieve very 
high performance, their application is not without limitations 
as regards potential sources of variability in measurements, 
relatively high costs of instrumentation including access to 
specialist motion labs, as well as practicality of application 
for larger patient/subject groups, as discussed by Chau et al. 
in [10]. Similar drawbacks have been demonstrated for other 
accurate, clinical grade, gold-standard measurement systems, 
such as marker less video [11], instrumented treadmills [12], 
walkway contact mats [13], or force platforms [14].  
From a clinical perspective, observational forms of 
clinical gait analysis frequently forms the corner stone of 
patient knee joint assessment, and is typically used in parallel 
with manual clinical assessment techniques. These include 
stress-testing evaluation of joint laxity, range of movement 
(ROM), and manual and/or isokinetic strength assessment, as 
well as contextual subjective patient questionnaires, such as 
Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), 
Oxford Knee Score (OKS), Tegner Lysholm Knee Scoring 
Scale, International Knee Documentation Committee 
(IKDC), and Western Ontario & McMaster Universities 
Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) [15][16], which employ a 
high degree of patient involvement. 
However, the use of observational gait analysis (non-
empirical assessments), even when utilised by experienced 
clinicians, may not be adequate or sensitive enough to detect 
subtle clinical pathological changes in movement following 
knee surgery [8] [9]. 
33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
An alternative approach, which has been explored as a 
more practical and viable solution to biomechanical motion 
capture and monitoring in sporting and patient groups, 
involves the use of  small-size low-cost wearable inertial 
sensors [17].  
There has been a wide variety of work presented in 
literature on inertial sensors applied to biomechanics. These 
have been typically adopted for monitoring the lower-limbs 
during rehabilitation or tele-rehabilitation and used to 
objectively assess the performance of impaired subjects 
throughout the process, in particular following knee injuries. 
However, most of those investigations were focused on a 
one-time assessment rather than a longitudinal evaluation 
over several weeks looking at change in gait over longer 
periods. 
The aim of the present work is to evaluate motor 
performance during lower-limb rehabilitation targeting 
activities normally assigned by clinicians for at-home 
rehabilitation. The work also addresses the assessment of the 
performance of body-worn kinematic sensors in a 
rehabilitative context, given their well-known potential in 
accurately extracting parameters that inform qualitatively and 
quantitatively movement parameters.  
Informed 
by 
clinical 
partners 
involved 
in 
the 
development and validation of the system, the study 
investigates and derives a number of features and metrics, 
related to gait and kinematic characteristics and statistical 
analysis. These data sets will be analysed to establish which 
of them are the most sensitive and helpful to determine 
changes in motor capacity over a longitudinal study of nine 
months. The data sets acquired will help develop, in future 
works, better models for objectively estimating the 
conditions and the motor performance of adults involved in 
lower-limb at-home rehabilitation following knee injuries.  
The derived outcome of this model will be analyzed by 
clinicians and sport scientists to gain a comprehensive picture 
of patients’ condition and provide more targeted medical 
feedback. 
The analysis is carried out by using a wearable inertial 
sensing system developed at the Tyndall National Institute, 
consisting of two sensors per limb, which is able to provide a 
complete biomechanics assessment for a series of scripted 
activities, based on best clinical practice.  
The present work is organized as follows. Relevant recent 
works are discussed in Section II while the description of the 
hardware and of the test protocol used during the data 
collection are described in Section III. The methodology 
behind the feature selection is illustrated in Section IV. The 
obtained results are shown in Section V and exhaustively 
analyzed and discussed. Finally, conclusions are drawn in the 
last section.  
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Inertial sensors are generally used in devices to measure 
velocity, orientation, and gravitational force, and are used in 
a great number of applications. These include industry quality 
control, robotics, navigation systems, sports, augmented 
reality systems, and so on [18-21]. Biomechanics, in 
particular, has achieved significant progress from the 
adoption of this technology [22]. 
More specifically, with regards to gait analysis, 
accelerometers and gyroscopes have been used worn on the 
lower-limbs to obtain gait parameters [23-26], which can be 
derived by the integration of linear acceleration or angular 
velocity, after the correct identification of the beginning and 
the end of each gait cycle. Interesting innovations have been 
proposed in [27] by L. Atallah et al.  in the development of 
an ear-worn sensor for gait monitoring, or by S. Kobashi et 
al. [28] who included magnetic sensors in combination with 
inertial sensing to estimate knee joint angle in three 
dimensions. 
This technology has not only been taken into account for 
healthy subjects. Such systems have also been used for the 
detection of pathologic conditions, discriminating clinical 
indications between symptomatic and asymptomatic subjects 
in a number of diseases. Conditions which have been 
investigated in this way include cerebral palsy [29], 
hemiplegia [30-31], Parkinson’s [32], dementia [33], old age 
[34], and Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) injury [35]. 
In recent years, researchers have increasingly been 
investigating the use of inertial sensors in gait rehabilitation. 
Most of the studies in this area focused on the implementation 
of a lower-limb monitoring system for remote rehabilitation 
or tele-rehabilitation [36-38], or in the performance 
assessment of specific rehabilitation exercises [39-46]. In the 
latter case, machine learning techniques are adopted to 
discriminate between the correct and incorrect execution of 
recommended exercises. The most advanced techniques can 
also highlight if multiple incorrect postures are present while 
performing the test. Typically, a number of body-worn 
sensors are used for the classification. However, there is a 
significant body of research in the investigation of the 
efficacy of the adoption of only one sensor [47-50]. This can 
be obtained also through the adoption of specific 
biomechanical models related to particular exercises. 
Immersive 
virtual 
reality, 
computer 
games, 
or 
visualization tools are recently being developed in order to 
enhance patients’ adherence to the rehabilitation program and 
enhance motivation [51-53]. The accuracy and reliability of 
those inertial sensors and biofeedback-based rehabilitation 
systems have been shown in [54-55]. 
To date, however, few studies considered the quantitative 
assessment of patients’ lower-limb performance via body-
worn sensors during the complete rehabilitation process. This 
task is particularly challenging as it consists of isolating the 
gradual changes in movements due to recovery and 
improvement despite the presence of a multitude of sources 
of variability. The temporal and spatial sources of intra- and 
inter-variability (e.g., dissimilarities in repetitions of an 
exercise when performed by one subject, and dissimilarities 
between different subjects, respectively) are already evident 
34
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
in healthy subjects, given the different characteristics of 
gender, age, height, and weight, etc…, and are even more 
significant in patients following rehabilitation, due to 
different levels of pain, fatigue, and possible compensations.    
For instance, Lin et al. [56] estimated the joint angles with 
a novel extended Kalman filter on 14 exercises performed by 
a cohort of elderly patients monitored from the first day of 
admission until discharge, with the average patient’s 
treatment lasting 5.7 days.  
Similarly, Field et al. [57] investigated the gradual 
changes of motion with new proposed metrics, by monitoring 
the symmetry between the left and right sides of the body for 
14 subjects over repeated rehabilitation exercises in a period 
of 12 weeks. However, despite the completeness of the 
method, the study required the patient to wear a motion 
capture suit consisting of 17 sensors, which is cumbersome 
and not feasible for at-home rehabilitation.  
Finally, in [58], a novel machine learning technique has 
been proposed that estimates the continuous measurement of 
patient improvement which is capable of handling a variety 
of rehabilitative exercises. The approach was tested by 
adopting two wearables sensors on thigh and shank on 
clinical data collected on 18 elderly patients involved in 
rehabilitation following hip and knee replacements for a 
range of 4-12 days.  
However, the main limitations of those studies are related 
to the short period for data collection which explores only the 
initial part of the rehabilitative process without considering 
the long-term effects or the pre-surgery conditions. Another 
limitation is the need of a large and specific initial dataset on 
which the machine learning method has to be trained. Finally, 
the lack of definition of the variation of the selected features 
throughout the analysis period and their impact on the final 
outcome is a constraint in using this approach. 
The present study, as an extended version of [1], will 
analyze the data collected from a patient in pre/post-surgery 
conditions for an overall period over nine months, with the 
twofold aim of: 
1. investigating, through body-worn inertial sensing, 
the effects of rehabilitation over different periods, 
also in the long-term, monitoring patient’s progress,  
2. understanding which parameters, taken from a wide 
range of features described in literature, and 
informed by clinical inputs, can be the most 
beneficial and sensitive for clinicians when 
monitoring patients in the course of lower-limb 
rehabilitation. 
 
III. 
HARDWARE AND PROTOCOL FOR DATA COLLECTION 
The biomechanical monitoring system consists of two 
Tyndall Wireless Inertial Measurement Units (WIMUs) [59] 
per leg, each one with 3D accelerometer and gyroscope (@ 
250 
Hz) 
and 
Bluetooth 
Low-Energy 
for 
wireless 
communication (Figure 1). WIMUs have been attached to the 
anterior tibia, 10 cm below the tibial tuberosity, and to the 
lateral thigh, 15 cm above the tibial tuberosity using surgical 
adhesive tape. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tyndall Wireless Inertial Measurement Unit (WIMU) 
The rehabilitation exercises (or scenarios) considered are 
walking, half squat, hamstring curl, and flexion/extension – 
defined by physiotherapists as good indicators of 
rehabilitation progress. These are described as follows: 
 
In the walking scenario, the subject walks on a treadmill, 
which is operated at defined speeds (3-4-6 km/h) for 
approximately one minute per test.  
 
In the half squat scenario, the subject stands with the feet 
shoulder’s distance apart and arms crossed on the chest. 
Keeping the chest lifted, the hips are lowered about 10 
inches, planting the weight in the heels. The body is then 
brought back up to standing by pushing through the 
heels. 
 
In the hamstring curl scenario, the subject stands and 
bends the knee raising the heel toward the ceiling as far 
as possible without pain, relaxing the leg after each 
repetition. This is repeated on both legs.  
 
In the flexion/extension scenario, the subject lies supine 
on the floor and bends the knee raising it toward the chest 
as far as possible without pain, relaxing the leg after each 
repetition. This is repeated on both legs.  
 
The system has been tested with an impaired subject. The 
impaired subject is a female athlete, age: 44, height: 161 cm, 
and weight: 52 kg, with good general health status, with a 
history of knee injuries and surgery (reconstructed anterior 
cruciate ligament in the left leg following a sporting injury). 
The tests were carried out during the course of the 
rehabilitation program, e.g., starting 1 month before surgery 
and finishing 7 months after surgery. Overall, the subject has 
been evaluated through three periods: once in pre-surgery 
conditions (e.g., 1 month before surgery), then 6 times in a 
range of 20 weeks starting one month after surgery (namely 
short-term post-surgery), and finally once 3 months after the 
last data capture (e.g., during long-term post-surgery period). 
 
A number of repetitions has been collected for each 
scenario, so as to provide an accurate picture of the overall 
conditions, and each scenario was evaluated during almost 
every data capture. The hamstring curl scenario as well as the 
walking test at 3 and 4 km/h was performed at every session. 
35
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Similarly, the flexion/extension test was always recorded 
except in the pre-surgery session due to subject’s impairment 
of movement. For the same reason, half squat and walking at 
6 km/h were not recorded in the first 2 sessions of the short-
term post-surgery period. 
 
IV. 
FEATURES SELECTION 
The metrics taken into account for the patient’s assessment 
are divided into three main categories: statistical metrics, gait 
characteristics, and time-domain kinematic measurements. 
 
i. 
Statistical Features 
This category takes into account various well-known 
statistical features extrapolated from the time-domain. Those 
variables are applied on every segmented walking 
stride/exercise repetition for both legs performed during the 
sessions. The selected features are described below:  
o 
Mean, standard deviation, variance, skew, kurtosis, root 
mean square, signal magnitude area,  energy (given by 
the integration over the repetition of the squared absolute 
signal) of the acceleration and angular velocity 
magnitudes; 
o 
Mean, minimum, maximum, median, standard deviation, 
coefficient of variation (CV), peak-to-peak (PP) 
amplitude, and root mean square of the x-, y-, and z-axis 
of the acceleration and angular rate signals; 
o 
Autocorrelation on the x-, y-, and z-axis of the 
acceleration and angular rate signals measured taking 
into account all the repetitions/strides in a session as a 
whole and not separately. 
 
All those features are calculated for each of the 4 sensors 
used for data collection. 
 
ii. 
Gait Characteristics 
Well-known gait measures [1] are calculated from the data 
recorded by the inertial sensors attached on the shanks as 
follows: 
o 
Gait cycle time (GCT), which is the time-interval 
between two consecutive toe-offs of the same leg; 
o 
Stance phase, defined as the weight-bearing phase of the 
GCT in which the body is supported, and is expressed by 
the difference between a heel-strike and the following 
toe-off of the same leg;  
o 
Relative stance phase, the ratio between stance phase and 
GCT; 
o 
Swing phase, which is the non-weight bearing phase of 
GCT, and is expressed by the difference between a heel-
strike and the previous toe-off of the same leg;  
o 
Relative swing phase, the ratio between the swing phase 
and the GCT;  
o 
Double support, the time-interval when both feet are in 
ground contact; 
o 
Stride length, indicated as the distance between two 
successive placements of the same foot, computed as the 
total trajectory on the sagittal plane made by the sensor 
attached to the shank. The approach is based on a double 
integration of inertial data collected in a stride. The 
integration process is reset at the end of each stride;  
o 
Stride speed, computed by the ratio between stride length 
and GCT; 
o 
Clearance, defined as the maximum height reached by 
the sensor during the swing phase and obtained by the 
vertical displacement calculated to establish the stride 
length during the swing phase. 
 
For each variable, also the related CV has been 
extrapolated, and consequently, also the associated 
symmetry, defined for each specific parameter as 
 
        (1) 
where 
 stride _ speed
 is the average of the measured stride 
speed for that specific session.  
Moreover, the Balance Index (B.I.), as shown in [31], 
expressed as the absolute ratio between the difference of the 
left and right leg’s values of a specific gait parameter and 
their sum, was obtained for all the variables. 
This information is obtained for both legs for the walking 
scenario only. 
 
iii. 
Kinematic Variables 
Finally, the third category is related to kinematic metrics, 
occasionally adopted for gait analysis, but that can provide 
useful information on the movement analysis, and have been 
proposed in recent works in literature. Those metrics are as 
follows: 
o 
Knee Range of Motion (ROM), defined as the peak-to-
peak amplitude of the knee joint angle during a 
repetition; 
o 
Regularity [60], e.g., the ratio between the unbiased 
autocorrelation coefficient at the first dominant period 
and the coefficient at the second dominant period, both 
measured taking into account all the repetitions within 
the same analyzed scenario; 
o 
Range of Angular Velocity (RANG) [61-62]: the 
difference between the minimum and the maximal value 
of the angular velocity magnitude within each repetition; 
o 
Jerk-based smoothness measures, where the jerk is the 
rate of change of the acceleration in a repetition. Several 
jerk-based metrics have been proposed, including 
integrated squared jerk (ISJ), mean squared jerk (MSJ), 
36
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
cumulative square jerk (CSJ), root mean square jerk 
(RMSJ), mean square jerk normalized by peak speed 
(N_MSJ), integrated absolute jerk (IAJ), mean absolute 
jerk normalized by peak speed (N_MAJ), and 
dimensionless 
square 
jerk, 
whose 
mathematical 
definitions are shown in [63]; 
o 
Vertical acceleration [64], defined as the maximum 
value over a repetition of the difference between the 
acceleration magnitude (filtered with a 2nd order 
Butterworth low-pass filter with cut-off frequency 3 Hz) 
and the gravitational force; 
o 
Vertical velocity [64], defined as the integration over a 
repetition of the difference between the acceleration 
magnitude (filtered with a 2nd order Butterworth low-
pass filter with cut-off frequency 3 Hz) and the 
gravitational force; 
o 
Fluency [64], e.g., the integration over a repetition of the 
absolute difference between the raw and the filtered x, y, 
and z-axis acceleration signals. Again the filter used is a 
2nd order Butterworth low-pass filter with cut-off 
frequency 3 Hz; 
o 
Stability [65], defined as the dynamic time warping of 
the x-, y-, and z-axis of the acceleration and angular rate 
signals measured at two consecutive repetitions/strides, 
then averaged based on all the repetitions present in a test 
session; 
o 
Kinetic Value (KV) [66], defined as the squared integral 
of the magnitude of the acceleration signal over a 
repetition, multiplied by m/2, where m is the subject’s 
body weight. 
 
All those features in this class are calculated for each of 
the 4 sensors used for data collection. 
 
The data analysis is implemented off-line over the data 
collected using a commercial software package (MATLAB 
R2015a, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, 2015) [67]. Each 
repetition/stride was visually segmented.  
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In each session, each scenario was divided in two separate 
tests (both logged for 60 sec), and in each of the two tests a 
series of repetitions have been carried out by the subject. The 
overall number of repetitions recorded for all the sessions was: 
184 hamstring curls (92 left and 92 right), 134 
flexion/extensions (67 left and 67 right), 66 half squats, 478 
strides for both legs when walking at 3 km/h, and similarly 
544 strides when walking at 4 km/h, and 512 strides when 
walking at 6 km/h. For each test, the features described in 
Section IV were extrapolated and compared among the 
different sessions, in order to provide a clear understanding of 
which metrics can be more valuable during rehabilitation. The 
results are summarized in different tables (collected in the 
Appendix, which is available as a PDF file at the following 
link: https://www.tyndall.ie/contentfiles/Tables_IARIA.pdf ) 
where each table consists of 9 columns given by all the 
sessions in which the test were carried out. Each session is 
divided in three sub-columns: one for indicating the results for 
the left leg, one for the right leg, and the last one for the mean 
difference (expressed in percentage) between left/right values 
(considering the right leg values as references), the Pearson’s 
r coefficient and the p-value between the left/right leg results, 
calculated when appropriate. The sub-columns related to left 
and right results are merged in case of gait metrics which in 
their calculation takes into account aspects from both legs. 
Due to the fact that the subject could not perform all the 
scenarios during each session, not all the columns in the tables 
are filled. Moreover, owing to malfunctioning issues during 
data recording, results from the right leg in the hamstring curl 
scenario on the first session are not available. 
Given the number of tables extrapolated from the data, 
only a small subset of those tables are included in this paper 
for clarification, while full details are shown in the Appendix. 
The mean difference, in particular, is an important 
estimator of the dissimilarities between the two legs which, in 
an ideal case, should be close to zero in any case for a healthy 
unimpaired subject. Given its definition, negative values of 
the mean difference indicate that results for the right leg are 
larger compared to the left one, and vice versa for positive 
values.  
Finally, in order to have the same reference system for 
both WIMUs worn on the same leg, the method proposed by 
Seel et al. [68] has been adopted to virtually rotate around an 
axis the raw inertial data recorded on the shank. As a result, 
for all the WIMUs involved, the x-axis represents the medio-
lateral axis, the y-axis is the anteroposterior one, while the z-
axis is the vertical axis. Thus, the plane y-z represents the 
sagittal plane.    
Results from data analysis, divided in three categories, are 
described below. 
 
i. 
Gait Metrics 
The analysis performed on the gait characteristics is 
summarized in Tables I-II-III available in the Appendix and 
in this paper, which represents the walking test at 3, 4, and 6 
km/h, respectively. All the gait features are indicated in those 
tables, with B.I. and symmetry calculated for each metrics 
and shown together in the same row. 
Considering the gait results at 3 km/h, there are several 
metrics which may be beneficial for showing the patient’s 
progress during rehabilitation. As an example, even though 
the p-value related to the GCT in all sessions is above 0.05 
(e.g., there is no statistical difference between the two legs), 
the calculated mean difference between left/right for this 
parameter has a clear convergence to zero during the 
monitoring phase, and the same trends are evident also for the 
mean difference of the CV, B.I., and symmetry associated to 
GCT. Similar considerations can be observed in the results 
37
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
provided by the CV obtained for the stance phase, swing 
phase, and double support. In particular, the mean difference 
associated to the CV of the stance phase shows a convergence 
after the second session, as it is evident a clear increase of the 
mean difference between the first two sessions (the pre-
surgery session, and the first test after surgery), due to the 
early stage of the recovery process post-surgery. 
Again, even though the p-values for the stride length is 
constantly below 0.05 in the different sessions (e.g., there is 
always a significant difference between the two legs), the 
Pearson’s coefficient continuously increases, while the mean 
difference tends to zero. The mean difference of the CV and 
the B.I. of the stride length shows a comparable convergence 
as well, also for what concerns the dissimilarities between the 
pre-surgery session and the first post-surgery one. Similar 
considerations may be drawn for the stride speed, also 
explained by the uniformity of the results given by the GCT.  
The gait scenario at 4 km/h shows similar trends for the 
GCT-related parameters, and the mean difference of the CV 
related to the stance phase and double support, with an 
evident convergence towards zero and a strong disparity in 
the first two sessions. However, no particular correlation is 
clear for the stride length values. On the other hand, clearance 
may highlight some significant information. P-values are 
always lower than the statistical threshold (0.05), except that 
in the last session recorded seven months after surgery, and 
its mean difference and the B.I. measure show a clear 
convergence 
toward 
zero 
during 
the 
rehabilitation 
assessment, indicating, thus, a certain gained equivalence 
between the two legs.  
Finally, gait results at 6 km/h show significant trends only 
for what concerns the mean difference of the CV of the 
double support and clearance-related parameters. 
In summary, it is evident how, at slow speed, temporal 
parameters (especially indicated through their CV) and the 
stride length values should be considered for assessing 
differences between left and right legs during rehabilitation, 
whereas, increasing the speed, clearance seems to gain higher 
priority than time-related parameters. Only the mean 
difference of the CV of the double support shows a similar 
trend at all the tested speeds. Some of the discussed results 
are illustrated in Figures 2-4. The markers in the figures 
indicate the mean value obtained for a specific session, while 
the green line is a reference for zero.       
 
ii. 
Statistical Features 
The statistical features described in Section IV has been 
calculated for each repetition/stride for all the four WIMUs 
adopted and for both acceleration and angular rate signals. 
Results are summarized for all the scenarios in the tables in 
the Appendix and discussed below.  
In the hamstring curl scenario, for example, the thigh is 
not significantly involved in the movement. Indeed, there are 
no specific variables showing improvements. Conversely, the 
shank is more informative. Standard deviation, variance, 
calculated on the acceleration magnitude, and standard 
deviation, CV, and peak-to-peak amplitude obtained from the 
z-axis acceleration all show clear convergences. Moreover, 
those trends are even more evident from metrics obtained by 
the angular rate collected on the shank. For instance, mean, 
standard deviation, variance, level of skew, signal magnitude 
area calculated from the magnitude signal, and minimum, 
maximum, standard deviation, and peak-to-peak amplitude 
on the three axis are all significant variables (Figure 5).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Mean difference for different gait parameters at 3 km/h showing 
the trends of progress during rehabilitation. CV GCT/stance phase/swing 
phase are shown 
 
Figure 3.  Mean difference and balance index for different gait parameters 
at 4 km/h showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Clearance 
CV GCT, and B.I. clearance are shown. Each variable is normalized 
according to its mean value for visualization purposes 
In the flexion/extension scenario, the movement requires 
a higher involvement of the thigh compared to the curl which, 
thus, present several metrics useful for progress monitoring 
(Figure 6). Examples are the mean, standard deviation, 
variance, skewness, kurtosis, signal magnitude area, and 
energy obtained from the angular rate magnitude, minumum, 
standard deviation CV, and peak-to-peak amplitude from the 
acceleration vertical axis, and minimum, maximum, standard 
deviation, and peak-to-peak amplitude from the angular rate 
collected around the sagittal axis. There are also numerous 
metrics related to the shank, such as the mean, standard 
38
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
deviation, variance, skewness, signal magnitude area, and 
energy obtained from the acceleration and angular rate 
magnitude, and a number of variables obtained from the 
single axis of the inertial sensors and associated to the sagittal 
plane. This higher number of metrics is due to the intrinsic 
movement as defined by the exercise which occurs almost 
completely on the sagittal plane and, thus, the information is 
highlighted around the rotation axis and not divided along the 
three axes. Indeed, this characteristic is not present in the 
remaining scenarios. 
 
Figure 4.  Mean difference and symmetry for different gait parameters at 6 
km/h showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Clearance, 
symmetry stride speed, and CV double support are shown. Each variable is 
normalized according to its mean value for visualization purposes 
 
Figure 5.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the curl 
scenario showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Mean/St. 
dev/skewness for the gyro shank magnitude are shown  
In the half squat scenario only a few metrics are evident 
on separate axes. For example, the maximum and peak-to-
peak value of the acceleration on the y-, z-axis measured on 
the thigh and shank, and the standard deviation, CV, and 
peak-to-peak amplitude measured along the sagittal axis on 
the angular rate of the lower-limbs illustrate a reasonable 
progress during the rehabilitation period, while the metrics 
(mean, level of skew, area, energy) calculated from the 
magnitude of the inertial data on the shank are more 
informative (Figure 7).  
 
Figure 6.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the 
flexion/extension scenario showing the trends of progress during 
rehabilitation. Minimum/st dev/PP amplitude for the acceleration thigh z-
axis are shown 
 
 
Figure 7.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the half 
squat scenario showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
Mean/skewness/energy for the gyro shank magnitude are shown  
Similar considerations are evident on the gait test (Figures 
8-10). The level of thigh movement, in this scenario, is not 
particularly informative, except for a reduced number of 
variables. Examples of these parameters are the root mean 
square calculated on the gyro magnitude and the standard 
deviation of the gyro around the vertical axis (when walking 
at 3 km/h), the CV of the acceleration/angular rate around the 
z-axis, and the maximum of the angular rate around the 
mediolateral axis (when walking at 4 km/h), and mean/peak-
to-peak amplitude over the gyro x-axis, and the minimum of 
the gyro z-axis (when walking at 6 km/h). A higher number 
of helpful metrics is instead detected in the inertial data 
collected on the shank consistently for all the speeds. For 
instance, variables obtained from the acceleration magnitude 
can reliably show patient’s progress over the rehabilitation 
course still highlighting the difference between left and right 
leg. Some parameters can be the mean, standard deviation, 
variance, level of skew, signal magnitude area, and energy 
when walking at slow speed, while increasing the speed may 
reduce the number of metrics to the standard deviation and 
39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE I.  
GAIT METRICS (3 KM/H) 
 
 
40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE II.  
GAIT METRICS (4 KM/H) 
 
41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE III.  
GAIT METRICS (6 KM/H) 
 
42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE IV.  
KINEMATICS METRICS - RANGE OF MOTION 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
variance (at 4 km/h), and level of skew and energy (at 6 
km/h). Analyzing the decomposed acceleration around the 
three components, other useful metrics are provided by the 
peak-to-peak amplitude/CV around the vertical axis (for both 
3-4 km/h), standard deviation over the sagittal plane (at 3 
km/h), mean around the x-axis (at 4 km/h), and the peak-to-
peak amplitude over the x-axis, and the y-axis maximum (at 
6 km/h). Finally, also the angular rate over its three 
components shows some trends. For example, the peak-to-
peak amplitude over the sagittal axis is present at every speed, 
along with the y-axis standard deviation and PP at 4 km/h. 
The minimum over the x-axis is a parameter showing specific 
trends at every speed as well, together with the x-axis 
maximum/y-axis minimum at 3 km/h.  
It is also evident how some of those features present a 
monotonic trend after the second session, showing a relevant 
performance gap between the first two sessions, due to the 
impact of the surgery event on the patient’s mobility.  
  
 
Figure 8.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the gait 
scenario (3 km/h) showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
Mean/skewness/energy for the acceleration thigh magnitude are shown 
 
 
Figure 9.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the gait 
scenario (4 km/h) showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
Mean/CV for the acceleration shank x-, z-axis are shown 
 
Figure 10.  Mean difference for different statistical parameters in the gait 
scenario (6 km/h) showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
Skewness/energy for the acceleration shank magnitude are shown 
 
 
Figure 11.  Mean difference for autocorrelation values in different scenarios 
showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. X-axis thigh 
acceleration/y-axis shank acceleration for the hamstring curl/flexion-
extension are shown  
  Finally, biased autocorrelation (e.g., the amplitude of the 
first dominant) has also been considered for all the scenarios 
(Figure 11). It has been calculated on both acceleration and 
angular rate from thigh and shank, but the computation has 
not been carried out on the single repetitions/strides but on 
the whole recorded session. In the hamstring curl test, 
autocorrelation on the x-axis of both acceleration and angular 
rate signals shows specific trends. On the other side, only y-
axis autocorrelation for the shank acceleration was helpful in 
the flexion/extension scenario. Moreover, x-, z-axis 
autocorrelation in the shank acceleration and y-, z-axis 
autocorrelation in the thigh angular rate presented an 
observable trend in the half squat test. Eventually, in the 
walking scenario, the z-axis autocorrelation in the 
acceleration (at 3-4 km/h) was detected as for the thigh, while 
the x-axis autocorrelation for the gyro (4 km/h) and the y-axis 
autocorrelation in the acceleration (at 6 km/h) were noticed 
on the shank. 
 
44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
iii. 
Kinematics Features 
Finally, the kinematic features described in Section IV 
have been calculated as well for each repetition/stride for all 
the four WIMUs adopted and for both acceleration and 
angular rate signals. Results are summarized for all the 
scenarios in the tables in the Appendix and discussed below. 
The table related to the ROM calculation is also integrated in 
the paper as an example (Table IV). 
In the hamstring curl scenario, most of the detected 
features are present on the sagittal plane, given that the 
movement is mostly performed on this plane. The ROM over 
the x-axis is a clear example, while thigh and shank present 
similar results related to all the jerk-measures along the y-
axis, and the fluency metrics over the sagittal plane. 
Moreover, the shank shows additional helpful parameters in 
the RANG and the vertical acceleration feature. 
Similar results are shown for the flexion/extension 
scenario. X-axis ROM is one of the key metrics for 
highlighting patient progress, together with RANG shared by 
both thigh and shank. The thigh is also characterized by other 
metrics (in particular, jerk-measures N_MSJ, IAJ, and 
M_MAJ over both the x-, z-axis), while the metrics 
associated to the shank can be reduced to most of the jerk-
measures and fluency both along the z-axis, as well as KV.    
In the half squat test, again, ROM over the x-axis proved to 
be a helpful metrics, together with all the jerk-measures over 
the y-axis (z-axis) obtained from the thigh (shank). 
Additional metrics were detected in the z-axis stability for the 
thigh, and the RANG and vertical velocity for the shank. 
Results for these three scenarios are illustrated in Figure 12. 
Gait tests have been also analyzed by using the kinematics 
variables. While ROM is not always showing particular 
trends (except at high speed over the x- and z-axis), there is a 
certain similarity among the feature detection at different 
speeds. 
For 
example, 
all 
jerk-measures 
over 
the 
anteroposterior axis on the thigh present clear convergence 
trends for every speed, while RANG and fluency over the 
thigh y-axis are more evident at 4-6 km/h, and stability is 
instead highlighted at slower speeds (3-4 km/h). Likewise, 
regarding the shank, jerk-measures are highly informative at 
every speed, especially over the y-axis, even though N_MSJ 
and N_MAJ trends are also clear over the x-axis. Finally, 
whereas vertical velocity and z-axis fluency metrics show 
clear indications at 6 km/h, KV is more impactful at slower 
speeds (3-4 km/h). Some of the results for the walking 
scenarios are illustrated in Figure 13. 
Regularity measures have been also obtained for all the 
scenarios (Figures 14-16). While y-axis regularity and x-axis 
one were observed in the shank acceleration and angular rate, 
respectively, during the hamstring curl, only the thigh y-axis 
regularity over the gyroscope was reliable for the 
flexion/extension. Regularity calculated in the squat scenario 
provides indications when obtained from the thigh data, in 
particular the y-axis acceleration, and the x-, y-axis of the 
angular rate. Conversely, in the gait test, the regularity 
obtained from the shank are more informative, in particular 
the acceleration y-, z-axis (for walking at 3 and 6 km/h 
respectively) and the gyro z-axis (when walking at 4km/h). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Mean difference for different kinematics variables in a number 
of scenarios showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
ROM/Fluency/RANG on the shank/thigh for the hamstring curl are on the 
top, RANG/NMSJ/KV on the shank/thigh for the flexion/extension in the 
centre, IAJ/Stability/RANG on the shank/thigh for the squat on the bottom 
   
 
45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Mean difference for different kinematics variables in a number 
of scenarios showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. 
Stability/NMSJ/KV on the shank/thigh for 3 km/h gait are on the top, 
Fluency/RMSJ/KV on the shank/thigh for 4 km/h gait in the centre, 
ROM/Fluency/NMAJ on the shank/thigh for 6 km/h on the bottom 
 
 
Figure 14.  Mean difference for regularity variables in a number of 
scenarios showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Y-axis on 
the shank acceleration for hamstring curl, x-axis on the gyro shank for 
hamstring curl, and y-axis on the gyro thigh for flexion/extension are 
shown. Each variable is normalized according to its mean value for 
visualization purposes 
 
Figure 15.  Mean difference for regularity variables for half squat scenario 
showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Y-axis on the thigh 
acceleration, x-axis on the gyro thigh, and y-axis on the gyro thigh are 
shown. Each variable is normalized according to its mean value for 
visualization purposes  
 
Figure 16.  Mean difference for regularity variables for gait scenario 
showing the trends of progress during rehabilitation. Y-axis on the shank 
acceleration, z-axis on the gyro shank, and z-axis on the shank acceleration 
are shown.  Each variable is normalized according to its mean value for 
visualization purposes  
46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  To summarize, this work analyzed the body-worn 
inertial data collected from a patient over the course of 
rehabilitation defining which features and metrics are the 
most sensitive for better understanding and monitoring 
patient’s progress in several test. As per gait metrics, 
temporal variables (and, in particular their CV) can be useful 
at slower speeds, while clearance-related parameters have 
higher impact at faster speeds. However, those metrics cannot 
be adopted for other types of movements which, in turn, can 
be described through statistical and kinematics variables. 
Given the movement typically performed on a 2D plane, 
hamstring curl and flexion/extension show a number of 
usable metrics obtained from both acceleration and angular 
rate of the shank and thigh, while the squat is characterized 
by less features. Probably, this can be due to the fact that the 
squat test, differently from the other exercises, requires a 
simultaneous movement of both legs which may involve 
some compensation between the injured and uninjured limbs 
not evident when only one leg is involved in the test. Gait can 
be also illustrated through metrics extrapolated from the 
inertial data collected on the shank, especially when 
associated to the sagittal plane. Finally, kinematics variables, 
in particular ROM, RANG, jerk-based measures, fluency, 
KV and stability, have proved their sensitivity for a different 
number of scenarios. 
Even though this paper reviewed a large number of 
features, there remain opportunities for further analysis. This 
work has not considered frequency-domain, entropy-based, 
or informatics-theoretic parameters. These parameters should 
be also evaluated in future studies with the aim of developing 
a complete framework for collecting data and monitoring 
patients’ progress over the course of rehabilitation. 
Moreover, as only one subject has been studied for the 
present proof of concept study, an enhanced number of 
athletes, with homogeneous characteristics, will also be 
tested in future so as to have a more robust base for the study 
and further validate the drawn conclusions in statistical terms. 
Additional clinical trials are, thus, currently being planned.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work presented a wearable inertial system equipped 
with both hardware and time-domain data analytics for an 
objective assessment of lower-limbs in patients over the 
course of rehabilitation. The analysis involved body-worn 
inertial data collected from thighs and shanks, and the 
implementation of a number of gait-related, statistical, and 
kinematics features available in literature, with the ultimate 
goal of defining which metrics are the most sensitive for 
better understanding and monitoring patient’s progress. 
Accurate results have been achieved in a number of 
scenarios. 
An enhanced number of subjects, with homogeneous 
characteristics, will also be tested in future so as to have a 
more robust base for the study and further validate the drawn 
conclusions in statistical terms. Additional clinical trials are, 
thus, currently being planned.  
However, the present study proved that inertial-based 
time-domain features can be used for a quantitative 
biomechanics monitoring and assessment of lower-limbs in 
different tests over the course of a nine month rehabilitation 
program, also defining which of those features should be 
taken into account by clinicians during their analysis.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Tedesco, A. Urru, J. Peckitt, B. O’Flynn, “Wearable inertial 
sensors as a tool for quantitative assessment of progress during 
rehabilitation,” Int Conf on Global Health Challenges, pp. 56-
59, 2016. 
[2] R. Bartlett, “Introduction to sports biomechanics: analysing 
human movement patterns,” (2nd ed.) Routledge, London 
(2007). 
[3] http://www.vicon.com/ (accessed 27/02/2017) 
[4] http://www.optitrack.com/ (accessed 27/02/2017) 
[5] http://www.codamotion.com/ (accessed 27/02/2017) 
[6] E. Mirek, M. Rudzińska, A. Szczudlik, ‘‘The assessment of 
gait disorders in patients with Parkinson's disease using the 
three-dimensional motion analysis system Vicon,’’ Neurol 
Neurochir Pol., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 128-133, 2007. 
[7] A.D. Segal, M.S. Orendurff, G.K. Klute, M.L. McDowell, J.A. 
Pecoraro, J. Schofer, J.M. Czerniecki, ‘‘Kinematic and kinetic 
comparisons of transfemoral amputee gait using C-Leg and 
Mauch SNS prosthetic knees,” J Rehabil Res Dev., vol. 43, no. 
7, pp. 857-870, 2006. 
[8] S. Lustig, R. A. Magnussen, L. Cheze, P. Neyret, ‘‘The 
KneeKG system: a review of the literature,’’ Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 633-638, 2012.  
[9] B. Shabani, D. Bytygi, S. Lustig, L. Cheze, C. Bytygi, P. 
Neyret, ‘‘Gait knee kinematics after ACL reconstruction: 3D 
assessment,’’ Int Orthopaedics (SICOT), vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 
1187-1193, June 2015. 
[10] T. Chau, S. Young, S. Redekop, “Managing variability in the 
summary and comparison of gait data,” J Neuroeng Rehabil., 
vol. 2, no. 22, pp. 1-20, 2005. 
[11] A. Castelli, G. Paolini, A. Cereatti, M. Bertoli, U. Della Croce, 
“Application of a markerless gait analysis methodology in 
children with cerebral palsy: Preliminary results,” Gait & 
Posture, vol. 42, supp. 2, pp. S4-S5, 2015. 
[12] J.F. 
Item-Glatthorn, N.C. 
Casartelli, N.A. 
Maffiuletti, 
“Reproducibility of gait parameters at different surface 
inclinations and speeds using an instrumented treadmill 
system,” Gait & Posture, vol. 44, pp. 259–264, 2016. 
[13] H.B. 
Menz, M.D. 
Latt, A. 
Tiedemann, M. 
Mun 
San 
Kwan, S.R. Lord, “Reliability of the GAITRite® walkway 
system for the quantification of temporo-spatial parameters of 
gait in young and older people,” Gait & Posture, vol. 20, no. 1, 
pp 20–25, 2004. 
[14] M. Piirtola, P. Era, “Force platform measurements as 
predictors of falls among older people – A review,” 
Gerontology, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1-16, 2006.  
[15] N.J. Collins, D. Misra, D.T. Felson, K.M. Crossley, E.M. Roos, 
“Measures of knee function,” Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken), 
vol. 63, no. 11, pp. S208–S228, 2011. 
47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[16] S. Tilley, N. Thomas, “What knee scoring system?,” J. 
Bone Joint Surgery, pp. 1-4, 2010.  
[17] D.T.P. Fong, Y.Y. Chan, “The use of wearable inertial motion 
sensors in human lower limb biomechanics studies: A 
systematic review,” Sensors, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 11556-11565, 
2010. 
[18] J. Barton, A. Gonzalez, J. Buckley, B. O'Flynn, S.C. 
O'Mathuna, “Design, fabrication and testing of miniaturised 
wireless inertial measurement units (IMU),” IEEE Electronic 
Components and Technology Conference (ECTC), pp. 1143-
1148, 2007.  
[19] M. Walsh, M. O'Grady, M. Dragone, R. Tynan, A. Ruzzelli, J. 
Barton, B. O'Flynn, G. O'Hare, C. O'Mathuna, “The CLARITY 
modular ambient health and wellness measurement platform,” 
IEEE Int. Conf. Sensor Technologies and Applications 
(SENSORCOMM), pp. 577-583, 2010. 
[20] D. Kennedy, M. Walsh, B. O'Flynn, “Development of a 
miniature, 
low-cost 
wave 
measurement 
solution,” 
IEEE Oceans-St. John's, 2014, pp. 1-6. 
[21] B. O'Flynn, J.T. Sanchez, S. Tedesco, B. Downes, J. Connolly, 
J. Condell, K. Curran, “Novel smart glove technology as a 
biomechanical monitoring tool,” Sensors & Transducers, vol. 
193, no. 10, pp. 23-32, Oct. 2015. 
[22] N. Ahmad, R. Ariffin, N.M. Khairi, V. Kasi, “Reviews on 
various inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensor applications,” 
Int J Signal Processing Systems, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 256-262, 
2013. 
[23] K. Aminian, B. Najafi, C. Büla, P.F. Leyvraz, P. Robert, 
“Spatiotemporal parameters of gait measured by an ambulatory 
system using miniature gyroscopes,” J Biomech, vol. 35, pp. 
689–699, 2002. 
[24] R.E. Mayagoitia, A.V. Nene, P.H. Veltink, “Accelerometer and 
rate gyroscope measurement of kinematics: an inexpensive 
alternate to optical motion analysis systems,” J Biomech, vol. 
35, pp. 537–542, 2002. 
[25] A.M. Sabatini, C. Martelloni, S. Scapellato, F. Cavallo, 
“Assessment of walking features from foot inertial sensing,” 
IEEE Trans. Biomedical Eng., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 486-494, 
2005. 
[26] E. Wade, M.J. Mataric, “Design and testing of lightweight 
inexpensive motion-capture devices with application to clinical 
gait analysis,” Int. Conf. Pervasive Computing Technologies 
Healthcare, pp. 1-7, April 2009.  
[27] L. Atallah, A. Wiik, G. Jones, B. Lo, J. Cobb, A. Amis, G.Z. 
Yang, “Validation of an ear-worn sensor for gait monitoring 
using a force-plate instrumented treadmill,” Gait & Posture, 
vol. 35, pp. 674–676, 2012. 
[28] S. Kobashi, K. Kawano, Y. Tsumori, S. Yoshiya, Y. Hata, 
“Wearable joint kinematic monitoring system using inertial 
and magnetic sensors,” IEEE Workshop Robotic Intelligence 
Informationally Structured Space, pp. 25–29, 2009. 
[29] J.C. Van den Noort, V.A. Scholtes, J. Harlaar, “Evaluation of 
clinical spasticity assessment in cerebral palsy using inertial 
sensors,” Gait & Posture, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 138–143, 2009. 
[30] Y. Guo, D. Wu, G. Liu, G. Zhao, B. Huang, L. Wang, “A low-
cost body inertial-sensing network for practical gait 
discrimination of hemiplegia patients,” Telemed J E Health, 
vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 748-754, 2012. 
[31] Y. Guo, G. Zhao, G. Liu, Z. Mei, K. Ivanov, L. Wang, “Balance 
and knee extensibility evaluation of hemiplegic gait using an 
inertial body sensor network,” BioMedical Engineering 
OnLine, vol. 12, pp. 83, 2013. 
[32] S. Das, L. Trutoiu, A. Murai, D. Alcindor, M. Oh, F. De La 
Torre, J. Hodgins, “Quantitative measurement of motor 
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease: A study with full-body 
motion capture data,” IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 
6789–6792, 2011. 
[33] J.R. Merory, J.E. Wittwer, C.C. Rowe, K.E. Webster, 
“Quantitative gait analysis in patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies and Alzheimer’s disease,” Gait & Posture, vol. 26, no. 
3, pp. 414 –419, 2007. 
[34] M. Monda, A. Goldberg, P. Smitham, M. Thornton, J. 
McCarthy, “Use of inertial measurement units to assess age-
related changes in gait kinematics in an active population,” J 
Aging Phys Act, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 18-23, 2015. 
[35] S. Tedesco, A. Urru, A. Clifford, B. O’Flynn, “Experimental 
validation of the Tyndall portable lower-limb analysis system 
with wearable inertial sensors,” Procedia Engineering, The 
Engineering of Sport 11, vol. 147, pp. 208-213, 2016. 
[36] R. Nerino, L. Contin, A. Tirri, G. Massazza, A. Chimienti, G. 
Pettiti, N. Cau, V. Cimolin, “An improved solution for knee 
rehabilitation at home,” Int Conf Body Area Networks, pp. 62-
68, 2014. 
[37] P. Fergus, K. Kafiyat, M. Merabti, A. Taleb-bendiab, A. El 
Rhalibi, “Remote physiotherapy treatments using wireless 
body sensor networks,” Int Conf Wireless Communications 
Mobile Computing: Connecting the World Wirelessly, pp. 
1191–1197, 2009. 
[38] S.L. Han, M.J. Xie, C.C. Chien, Y.C Cheng, C.W. Tsao, 
“Using MEMS‑based inertial sensor with ankle foot orthosis 
for telerehabilitation and its clinical evaluation in brain injuries 
and 
total 
knee 
replacement 
patients,” 
Microsystem 
Technologies, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 625-634, 2016. 
[39] O.M. Giggins, K.T. Sweeney, B. Caulfield, “Rehabilitation 
exercise assessment using inertial sensors: a cross-sectional 
analytical study,” J NeuroEng Rehab, vol. 11, pp. 158, 2014. 
[40] P.E. Taylor, G.J. Almeida, T. Kanade, J.K. Hodgins, 
“Classifying human motion quality for knee osteoarthritis 
using accelerometers,” IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 
339-343, 2010.  
[41] P.E. Taylor, G.J. Almeida, J.K. Hodgins, T. Kanade, “Multi-
label classification for the analysis of human motion quality,” 
IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 2214-2218, 2012.  
[42] E. Papi, D. Osei-Kuffour, Y.M.A. Chen, A.H. McGregor, “Use 
of wearable technology for performance assessment: A 
validation study,” Med Eng Phys, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 698-704, 
2015.  
[43] G. Fenu, G. Steri, “IMU based post-traumatic rehabilitation 
assessment,” Int. Symp. Applied Sciences in Biomedical and 
Communication Technologies , pp. 1-5, 2010.  
[44] P.C. Chen, C.N. Huang, I.C. Chen, C.T. Chan, “A 
rehabilitation exercise assessment system based on wearable 
sensors for knee osteoarthritis,” Int Conf Smart Homes Health 
Telematics, pp. 267-272, 2013. 
[45] K.H. Chen, P.C. Chen, K.C. Liu, C.T. Chan, “Wearable sensor-
based 
rehabilitation 
exercise 
assessment 
for 
knee 
osteoarthritis,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 4193-4211, 2015.  
48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[46] Y.C. Tseng, C.H. Wu, F.J. Wu, C.F. Huang, C.T. King, C.Y. 
Lin, J.P. Sheu, C.Y. Chen, C.Y. Lo, C.W. Yang, C.W. Deng, 
“A wireless human motion capturing system for home 
rehabilitation,” Int Conf Mobile Data Management: Systems, 
Services and Middleware, pp. 359–360, 2009. 
[47] V. Bonnet, C. Mazzà , P. Fraisse, A. Cappozzo, “A least-
squares identification algorithm for estimating squat exercise 
mechanics using a single inertial measurement unit,” J. 
Biomech., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 1472–1477, 2012. 
[48] V. Bonnet, C. Mazzà , P. Fraisse, A. Cappozzo, “Real-time 
estimate of body kinematics during a planar squat task using a 
single inertial measurement unit,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 
vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1920–1926, 2013. 
[49] V. Bonnet, V. Joukov, D. Kulic, P. Fraisse, N. Ramdani, G. 
Venture, “Monitoring of hip and knee joint angles using a 
single inertial measurement unit during lower limb 
rehabilitation,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 6, pp.1557-
1564, 2016.  
[50] O. Giggins, D. Kelly, B. Caulfield, “Evaluating rehabilitation 
exercise performance using a single inertial measurement 
unit,” Int Conf Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare, 2013. 
[51] J. Brutovsky, D. Novak, “Low-cost motivated rehabilitation 
system for post-operation exercises,” IEEE Int Conf Eng Med 
Biol Soc, pp. 6663–6666, 2006. 
[52] D. Fitzgerald, J. Foody, D. Kelly, T. Ward, C. Markham, J. 
McDonald, B. Caulfield, “Development of a wearable motion 
capture suit and virtual reality biofeedback system for the 
instruction and analysis of sports rehabilitation exercises,” Int 
Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 4870-4874, Aug. 2007. 
[53] S. Ananthanarayan, M. Sheh, A. Chien, H. Profita, K. Siek, 
“PT Viz: towards a wearable device for visualizing knee 
rehabilitation exercises,” SIGCHI Conf Human factors 
Computing Systems, pp. 1247-1250, 2013. 
[54] G. Lullini, L. Berti, M. Ortolani, A. Leardini, A. Valsecchi, 
“Are modern inertial sensor and bio-feedback based 
rehabilitation systems reliable enough? A validation study by 
standard gait analysis,” Gait & Posture, vol. 39, supp. 1, pp. 
S42-S43, 2014.  
[55] A. Leardini, G. Lullini, S. Giannini, L. Berti, M. Ortolani, P. 
Caravaggi, “Validation of the angular measurements of a new 
inertial-measurement-unit 
based 
rehabilitation 
system: 
comparison 
with 
state-of-the-art 
gait 
analysis,” 
J 
NeuroEngineering Rehab, vol. 11, pp. 136, 2014. 
[56] J.F.S. Lin, D. Kulic, “Human pose recovery for rehabilitation 
using ambulatory sensors,” IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, 
pp. 4799-4802, 2013. 
[57] M. Field, D. Stirling, M. Ros, Z. Pan, F. Naghdy, "Inertial 
sensing for human motor control symmetry in injury 
rehabilitation," IEEE/ASME Int Conf Advanced Intelligent 
Mechatronics, pp. 1470-1475, 2013. 
[58] R. Houmanfar, M. Karg, D. Kulic, “Movement analysis of 
rehabilitation exercises: distance metrics for measuring patient 
progress,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1014-
1025, 2016.   
[59] https://www.tyndall.ie/wireless-sensor-networks-2 (accessed 
27/02/2017) 
[60] R.M. Nilssen, J.L. Helbostad, “Estimation of gait cycle 
characteristics by trunk accelerometry,” J Biomechanics, vol. 
37, no. 1, pp. 121-126, 2004.   
[61] M. Zhang, B. Lange, C.Y. Chang, A.A. Sawchuk, A.A. Rizzo, 
“Beyond the standard clinical rating scales: fine-grained 
assessment of post-stroke motor functionality using wearable 
inertial sensors,” IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 6111-6115, 
2012.   
[62] C. Strohrmann, R. Labruyere, C.N. Gerber, H.J. van Hedel, B. 
Arnrich, G. Troster, “Monitoring motor capacity changes of 
children during rehabilitation using body-worn sensors,” J 
NeuroEngineering Rehab, vol. 10, pp. 83, 2013.   
[63] N. Hogan, D. Sternad, “Sensitivity of smoothness measures to 
movement duration, amplitude, and arrests,” J Mot Behav, vol. 
41, no. 6, pp. 529-534, 2009.   
[64] L. Schwickert, R. Boos, J. Klenk, A. Bourke, C. Becker, W. 
Zijlstra, “Inertial sensor based analysis of lie-to-stand transfers 
in younger and older adults,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1277, 
2016.   
[65] S. Jiang, B. Zhang, D. Wei, “The elderly fall risk assessment 
and prediction based on gait analysis,” IEEE International 
Conference on Computer and Information Technology, pp. 
176-180, 2011. 
[66] M. Gietzelt, G. Nemitz, K.H. Wolf, H.M.Z. Schwabedissen, R. 
Haux, M. Marschollek, “A clinical study to assess fall risk 
using single waist accelerometer,” Journal Informatics for 
Health and Social Care, vol. 34, no. 4, 2009. 
[67] https://uk.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html 
(accessed 
27/02/2017) 
[68] T. Seel, J. Raisch, T. Schauer, “IMU-based joint angle 
measurement for gait analysis,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 
6891-6909, 2014. 
 
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

