Personalized Virtual Coaching for Lifestyle Support: Principles for Design and
Evaluation
Olga Kulyk∗, Rieks op den Akker†, Randy Klaassen†, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen∗
∗Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
†Human Media Interaction, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
{o.a.kulyk, h.j.a.opdenakker, r.klaassen, l.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl
Abstract—There is a fast growing number of behavior change
support systems (BCSS) aiming at supporting a healthy lifestyle.
Existing lifestyle coaching services offer individual users access
to web portals where they can communicate about a growing
number of ingredients of everyday life concern: physical activity,
nutrition, medication, mood, sleep and sexual health. Mobile
technology in combination with body worn sensors support user’s
awareness of their physical condition and lifestyle. Despite the
large number of available lifestyle interventions and pilot trials,
only very few are successfully transferred into the real health care
practice. Low usability and lack of transparency on the reliability
and trustworthiness of the information are just a few examples
of the major barriers for successful implementation.Traditional
metric for measuring effects of behavior change support system
are not suited for early stage health technologies. Professionals
from the ﬁeld of health and social psychology, and potential
end users should be involved not only in the design and effects
evaluation of BCSS, but also in the iterative process evaluation of
these systems. Qualitative evaluation studies focused on the user
experiences with technology can help researchers to understand
what persuasive features can enhance adherence, motivate people
and how this technology should be further developed to optimally
match the needs of real users in daily healthcare practice. Based
on two user studies, we present general guidelines for design and
evaluation of lifestyle support systems with personalized virtual
coaching. The ﬁrst ﬁeld study focuses on design and evaluation
of a mobile physical activity coaching system. The second user
study focuses on design factors that inﬂuence the attitudes of
high-risk adolescents towards virtual coaching in mobile eHealth
applications and social media. We present a new approach that
integrates an animated digital coach in an activity monitoring
lifestyle change support system. The main contribution of this
paper are practical recommendations for persuasive design and
evaluation methodology combining established methods from
Human Computer Interaction and eHealth.
Keywords-Mobile Activity Monitoring, Personalized eHealth;
Persuasive
Feedback,
Usability;
Virtual
Coaching;
Behavior
Change; Lifestyle Support; Human Computer Interaction
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent massive media attention to the obesity epidemic
worldwide and a growing number of patients with chronic
diseases raise the demand for encouraging physical activity and
for raising health awareness [1][2]. Next to classical web-based
interventions, eHealth behavior change support systems for
healthy lifestyle promotion aim to motivate patients to healthy
behavior change [3][4][5]. Some systems become proactive
and provide real time information and feedback to their users
based on data gathered through various sensors and personal
devices [6][7].
Despite the large number of existing lifestyle interventions
and pilot trials, only very few are successfully transferred into
the real healthcare practice [8][9]. Users often have problems
to navigate through the system, they get lost or they do not ﬁnd
the information they are looking for [10]. Low usability and
lack of transparency on the reliabilty and trustworthiness of the
information are some of the major barriers for successful im-
plementation [5][8][9]. There is also a lack of standardization
for interoperability between various parts of the systems and
a lack of connection between the feedback, the actual usage
patterns and the task a user is involved in [11]. These problems
are often caused by a design that does not meet the actual
needs of the target users while using the system and a lack
of connection with ofﬂine, daily, activities. A holistic design
approach for eHealth intervention development, which we use
in our research has proven to contribute in overcoming these
barriers [9].
This paper presents new insights and general guidelines for
design and evaluation of lifestyle change support systems that
uses personalized virtual coaching [1]. The two user studies
discussed in this paper represent different perspectives on
lifestyle support systems, combining methods from Human
Computer Interaction and eHealth. The ﬁrst ﬁeld study focuses
on design and evaluation of mobile physical activity coaching
for diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. This study takes a
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) perspective and focuses
on the effects of using a virtual animated character at the user
interface. It was performed at the Human Media Interaction
group of the Computer Science Department at the University
of Twente in the context of the EU Artemis project Smarcos.
The second user study focuses on design factors that
inﬂuence the attitudes of adolescents towards virtual coaching
in mobile eHealth applications and social media. This study
was performed at the Center for eHealth Research and Disease
Management, Psychology Health and Technology group of the
Behavioral Sciences Department at the same university. The
data analysis for both studies is integrated using the persuasive
system design model [12]. We present persuasive factors and
general design guidelines for personalized virtual coaching in
mobile health applications.
300
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In the next section, we ﬁrst highlight ﬁndings from re-
lated work on physical activity monitoring, virtual coaching,
mobile eHealth applications and serious gaming for lifestyle
support. After that, we present a new approach for a multi-
device coaching system and general design guidelines based
on the outcomes of two user studies on virtual coaching for
lifestyle support. The ﬁrst study describes results of the user
evaluation of the mobile physical activity coaching system for
ofﬁce workers and diabetes patients. The second study focuses
on persuasive factors and attitudes of high-risk adolescents
towards virtual coaching, social media and mobile apps for
sexual health promotion. Summarizing the main outcomes, we
then present recommendations for the design and evaluation of
lifestyle support systems with personalized virtual coaching.
Finally, we present the main conclusions and discuss future
work.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
There have been various attempts in categorizing eHealth
technology [6][9][13][14][15]. In this paper, we focus on
monitoring physical activity and health related parameters
(blood pressure, weight) in lifestyle interventions for preven-
tive professional care support. A categorization is based on the
type of platform that the eHealth technology is realized on:
stand alone devices; integrated web-based interventions and
personal mobile devices; or a combination of various devices
to monitor online and ofﬂine activities of a target user.
A. Physical Activity Monitoring and Coaching
Wearable health technology, such as activity sensors, is
often used as a surveillance tool to objectively assess physical
activity patterns [7][16][17]. They provide an inexpensive
measure of physical activity by counting the number of steps
taken per day, enabling the accumulative measurement of
occupational, leisure time, and household activity, along with
activity required for everyday transportation. Real time moni-
toring offers the user immediate feedback on the accumulated
step count which is important for motivating him to sustain or
improve his activity level[17]. For a thorough review on this
topic see [18].
Engaging patients requires user friendly interfaces and user
friendly interaction with the systems. Patients often have to
cope with various physiological measurements instruments (ei-
ther active or passive): blood pressure, blood sugar and weight.
Willingness to measure these parameters strongly depends on
the complexity of the user interface of the measuring device
or sensor, as well as the data transfer process [19].
Based on an extensive literature study, H. op den Akker
et al. [20] identiﬁed six key areas for research to improve
digital coaching for physical activity by tailoring to the in-
dividual user. Two of them are of interest here: advanced
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and pervasive coaching.
To increase perceived intelligence of a coaching system, a
virtual coach offers an interesting opportunity as an interface
metaphor. Bickmore et al. [3] studied the effects of inter-
ventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational
agents as a coaching system. This study showed that virtual
conversational agent as a coach can have a positive effect on
perceived relationship of a patient with an eHealth system.
Computer tailoring and personalized eHealth offer great po-
tential for motivating people by providing personal information
and feedback [21]. Characteristics of an intervention, such as
enabling personal goal setting and providing tailored feedback
are thought to be among the important factors related to the use
of lifestyle change support systems. Next to tailoring, personal
feedback needs to be dynamic to provide new information
and real time feedback on the daily activities. The user study
of Consolvo et al. [16] reports that negative feedback or
paternalism has a negative impact on the users.
B. Mobile eHealth and Coaching
Mobile devices providing personalized feedback to inﬂu-
ence physical activity behavior are gaining more and more
popularity [22]. There are few examples of mobile health
applications (apps) speciﬁc for behavior change and physical
activity support [6][22][23]. Despite a huge range of health-
related apps on the market, there is little in depth research on
user experiences and views on a wide range of features that
apps can provide.
Fanning et al. [22] present extensive review on efﬁcacy of
mobile devices in the physical activity and recommendations
for implementation. This study concludes that mobile technol-
ogy applied in behavior change interventions is an effective
tool for increasing physical activity. User studies in mobile
health research are rarely performed with young adults, though
adolescents are forerunners of mobile technology. Dennison
et al. [23] present the ﬁndings of a focus group study with
students on the use of mobile apps to support a healthy
lifestyle, the attitude of adolescents on the usefulness of
various features of such apps. The results suggest that the most
important factors inﬂuencing the use and uptake of mobile
apps are accuracy, legitimacy, security, effort required, and
immediate effects on mood. Another features that young adults
valued were ability to record and track own behavior and
goals, as well as the ability to receive advice and real time
information. Interesting ﬁnding from this study is that context-
sensing capabilities of mobile apps and social media features
were perceived as unnecessary.
Consolvo et al. [16] reports a long-term user evaluation
with the UbiFit system, which aims at raising individual
awareness on physical activity level. The results show that
glanceable representations of information on personal, mobile
displays can stimulate the person to do more exercises. These
ﬁndings are consistent with another study [24].
C. Serious Gaming for Lifestyle Support
New forms of entertainment media such as serious gaming
are used for promoting healthy lifestyle [25]. The general
purpose of serious games can be deﬁned as: ’games to train,
educate, and persuade’ [26](pp. 14). The latest research shows
that the use of game mechanics for supporting non-leisure
activities has grown beyond serious games. This trend has
being deﬁned by the term gamiﬁcation: ’the use of game
design elements in non-game contexts’ [27](pp. 2). Serious
gaming and interactive gaming elements embedded in eHealth
technology offer great potential in innovative opportunities for
engaging adolescents and other patients in interventions pro-
moting healthy nutrition habits and physical activity changes
301
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

that can contribute to obesity prevention and healthier lifestyle
[25].
Existing applications that incorporate some gaming el-
ements and personal visual feedback demonstrate the lack
of a multidisciplinary approach in designing technology ap-
plications for care [28]. The main drawback of the current
gamiﬁcation applications aiming at behaviour change is the
lack of actual beneﬁts for the end user and the lack of focus
on positive user experience. In general, there is a lack of
research and evidence on the long-term user evaluations and
implementation of such health-oriented gaming technologies
[29].
D. Evaluation of Lifestyle Support Systems
The goal of every (health) behavior change support system
is to change a certain behavior or a habit. User evaluations of
a behavior change support system are usual focused to show
that the intended change in behavior did actually took place.
Measuring change in behavior requires multi-year studies with
repeated follow-ups [30]. Changes in behavior on short-term
are hard to measure and if they occur these changes are often
short-lived. According to Klasnja [30] evaluating behavior
change in the traditional clinical sense is not the right metric
for early stage technology that are developed in the context
of human computer interaction. Evaluating behavior change
support systems in the context of the ﬁeld of human computer
interaction can focus on narrower notion of efﬁcacy by looking
at the outcomes of particular interventions strategies and
whether the system is doing what it intended to do, even in
a early stage of the development of the system. Qualitative
studies focused on the experiences with technology can help
researchers understand who and why a system is working and
how the system should be further developed.
Technologies that promote a healthier lifestyle are gaining
popularity in the human computer interaction discipline. Para-
doxically, the evaluation of such technologies remains rather
unclear [31]. Different frameworks, like the Framework for
Ubiquitous Computing Evaluation Areas (UEAs) by Scholz
and Consolvo [32], the persuasive system design model (PSD)
by Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa [12] and the Fogg Behavior
Model (FBM) [33] could be used to evaluate behavior change
systems and the features and functionalities of these systems.
Evaluating the the perceived persuasiveness of a behavior
change support system is an ongoing challenge [31]. Klasnja
et al. [30] propose multi-methods approaches for evaluating
behavior change support systems where combining qualitative
and quantitative methodologies should be combined to provide
deeper insights into users experiences with technologies.
III.
USER EVALUATIONS OF A MOBILE ANIMATED
ACTIVITY COACHING SYSTEM
As humans interact with many different devices during the
day, cross media systems offer the opportunity for the activity
coach to travel with the user across those devices. Depending
on the needs and context of the user, coaching can thus be
provided on the most suitable device (e.g., smartphone, PC,
smart television) [34].
A. Digitial Coaching Architectures
A multi-device digital coaching can have a more central-
ized or a more decentralized architecture. The main difference
is in the measure of autonomy of the mobile coaching appli-
cation. The Continuous Care & Coaching Platform (C3PO),
developed at Roessingh Research and Development (RRD)
in the Netherlands, enables continuous remote monitoring of
elderly patients and patients with chronic disorders [35]. In
the C3PO platform, there is only one device with which the
patients users interact, the smartphone. The care givers can
view patient data that is uploaded to a server. An activity
monitoring and feedback system was designed to guide pa-
tients in reaching a healthy daily activity pattern. Objective
daily activity is assessed using an inertial sensor node that
captures and communicates wireless. The sensor can store
large amount of data and send the data over Bluetooth to a
PDA (an Android based HTC Desire) where further processing
and communication to the patient is handled. The users receive
feedback on their smartphone at scheduled times or if their
activity level calls for this. In this decentralized architecture the
coaching rules reside on the client-side mobile. In contrast to
this, in the centralized architecture of the Smarcos platform the
coaching rules reside on the server (see Fig. 1 for an overview).
Based on server side stored sensor data or on ﬁxed times,
the server sends a message to the client, who can receive the
message on the device of his own choice. To upload activity
data the user has to connect his sensor to the internet.
In the Smarcos system, feedback is a reminder to connect
the activity monitor to upload data, a motivating message when
activity is less than the target or an overview of daily, weekly
and monthly scores. A drawback of the Smarcos system
compared to the RRD system is that feedback is not real-time.
The RRD system allows immediate feedback based on recent
data collected from the sensor. A call for urgent medication
intake (e.g., in a diabetes I medication coach) requires real-
time feedback. In the Smarcos system, scores are presented
as percentages of a user set target score and in terms of kCal.
The user can get these activity overviews on his mobile device
app, as well as via a web portal.
B. User Evaluations: Animated Virtual Coach
User evaluations were performed throughout the devel-
opment of the Smarcos coaching system [34] for physical
activity support and diabetes II patients. We performed short
user evaluation with diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. We
focused on the graphical user interface, on the interaction
and on personal feedback in particular. We looked at timing,
content, modality and presentation format. We are particularly
interested in the application of animated virtual humans and
multi-modal natural dialog as a means for interaction between
the user and the digital coach. At the Human Media Inter-
action group we developed mobile technology for responsive
animated Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs) [37] for
the presentation of feedback on a mobile app. The system can
produce ECA behaviors (eye blink, eye gaze, head movements,
lip sync with natural speech and facial expressions) speciﬁed in
the Behavior Markup Language (BML) [38]. In the centralized
Smarcos system the server sends a feedback message to a
client containing a BML speciﬁcation. The BML contains the
302
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1: Overview of the multi-sensor multi-device digital coaching system developed in the Smarcos project [36].
text to be pronounced by the ECA as well as the non-verbal
embodiments.
The mobile animated virtual coach was used in several
short user experiments with the Smarcos architecture, as well
as with the decentralized coaching platform developed at
Roessing Research and Development [34].
In the second, a ’long-term’ user evaluation Smarcos sys-
tem was continuously evaluation by ofﬁce workers during the
six weeks period.
1) Subjects: Long-term Evaluation of Smarcos Coaching
System: Participants were asked to join the user evaluation
by email, social media and face-to-face communication. Par-
ticipants had to be ofﬁce workers (sedentary profession) and
had to own an Android smartphone with an operating system
Android version 2.3 or higher. Sixty ofﬁce workers indicated
they are willing to join the experiment. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the three groups: one group
(N=19) received feedback as text (text group: TXT), a second
group (N=15) received feedback by a virtual human coach
represented as an embodied conversational agent (embodied
conversational agent group: ECA). A third control group
(N=9) did not receive feedback message on the smart phone.
Participants of the control group could only get feedback via
the web portal. The distribution over the three groups was
random, but participants needed to meet some requirements to
be selected for the ECA group. The inclusion criteria for the
embodied conversational agent group was the ability to buy a
Dutch text-to-speech engine from the Google Play store.
2) Procedure: Long-term Evaluation of Smarcos Coaching
System: The duration of the complete evaluation was seven
weeks. This included one assessment week at the start of
the user evaluation. Before the start of the evaluation each
participant was visited at home or at the ofﬁce. The participants
were required to own a smartphone with Android 2.3 or higher.
Each participant received the activity sensor and an informa-
tion sheet with details about the user evaluation. The goal
of the study and the procedure was discussed. After reading
all the information material and making sure no questions
were left, participant had to sign two copies of the consent
form (one for the participant and one for the researcher).
Software, applications for the smartphone, user manuals about
the installation of software and links to questionnaire were
provided via email.
It was explained that the ﬁrst week was an assessment week
in order to establish their normal activity level to tailor the
system and generate a personal goal. During the assessment
week no feedback messages were given by the system. After
the assessment week participants received their personal goals
and used the system for six weeks. In these six weeks
feedback (updates, requests, reminders and overviews) about
their progress was provided. Participants were asked to upload
their activity data at least one time per day by connecting their
activity monitor to their computer. Halfway the evaluation the
system offers users how over or under performed in the ﬁrst
three weeks a new (higher or lower) goal. Participants were
free to accept this new goal.
Participants were asked to ﬁll in three questionnaires during
the evaluation. One in the ﬁrst week (assessment week), one af-
ter the third week and one after the sixth week. Questionnaires
were available online and participants received an email when
it was time to ﬁll in a questionnaire including a link to access
the questionnaire. Shortly after the evaluation the participant
was visited again to collect the materials. During this visit
the participant was invited for a post-interview to discuss their
experiences. This interview was voluntarily.
303
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3) Results: Long-term Evaluation of Smarcos Coaching
System: Forty three participants completed the user evaluation
by ﬁnishing the assessment week, using the system for at least
six weeks and completed all the questionnaires. Participants
were between 21 and 57 years old, and worked 36,1 hours
per week on average. All participants except two owned an
Android smartphone. Those two participants were included in
control group. All the participants were familiar with mobile
internet, 26 subjects indicated to have very much experience
with mobile internet, eleven participants indicated to have
much experience and four participants indicated to have less
experience with mobile internet. Most of the participants do
sports, 35 indicated to do sports every week for more than
one hour, ﬁve indicated to do sports every week for less
than one hour and four participants indicated not to do sport.
All participants, except one, were not familiar with behavior
change support systems at all. One participant (from the
control group) indicated to have a lot of experience with
behavior change support systems.
All the participants of the user evaluation were invited
for a semi-structured post-interview to discuss the system and
their experiences during the user evaluation. Twenty-one par-
ticipants accepted the invitation (text group: ten participants,
virtual human group: ten participants, control group: one par-
ticipant). During the interviews we asked the participants about
their general impression (good and bad experiences), problems
they have experienced during the evaluation, if they think that
such a coaching system could help people to be more physical
active, if they should recommend the system to others and the
two different ways of presenting feedback were discussed. At
the end there was some time left to discuss other remarks from
the participants. During the post-interview, participants were
asked about their general impression of the coaching system
and their own experiences while using the Smarcos system.
Other questions included: awareness on the amount of physical
activity; content and visual representation of the feedback
(text based / virtual human based); usefulness of the system
regarding motivation to live a healthier life; recommendation
regarding further use of the system and general remarks.
Interviews were transcribed and additional data analysis
was carried out in order to identify the persuasive features
according to the persuasive system design model [39]. It was
important to identify which persuasive features might inﬂuence
the response of participants regarding their experience with
using the personal coaching system. Several crucial persuasive
features were identiﬁed and categorized into (1) stimulating:
features that are perceived as having positive inﬂuence on
motivating the user, perceived usefulness and adherence, (2)
blocking: features that are perceived as having a negative
inﬂuence on motivating the user, perceived usefulness and
adherence, and (3) neutral features that are perceived as having
no effect on motivating the user, perceived usefulness and
adherence. Table I presents the stimulating features and quotes
from participants. Table II gives an overview of the stimulating
persuasive features that should be improved.
Next to the features presented in both tables, several other
important design factors have been identiﬁed based on the
extra interview data analysis. First, not only personal feedback
is important to motivate users, but also the timing of the
feedback messages on personal goals (achieved yet or not,
encouragement to continue): “No, the timing of the feedback
is wrong. You should be able to have more control over the
system and your data.”; “Feedback (timing and content) is
predictable. Feedback should be more targeted and timing
is important.”˙Second, the ’fun’ factor was mentioned several
times as an important feature inﬂuencing the motivation of the
users and interactivity with the personal coach: “For myself
it was fun to use and I would buy the system. It is good to
motivate people to be more physical active.”
TABLE I: RESULTS LONG-TERM EVALUATION
PERSONAL COACHING: STIMULATING PERSUASIVE
FEATURES
Persuasive feature
Quote
Self-monitoring
“It is nice to see your daily score of physical
activity and week overviews.” (text group)
Social role
“The system (virtual human coach) is like an ex-
ternal motivation to be more physically active.”
Praise
“It was nice to receive feedback about your own
behavior, also on the sensor itself.” (text group)
Liking
“I think a virtual human will be more fun. Text
is static and open for multiple interpretations. A
virtual human can help to present the right in-
terpretation by showing some empathy.” (virtual
human group)
Similarity
“The virtual human will add some social pres-
sure to the feedback.” (virtual human group)
TABLE II: RESULTS LONG-TERM EVALUATION
PERSONAL COACHING: STIMULATING PERSUASIVE
FEATURES TO IMPROVE ON
Persuasive feature
Quote
Tailoring
“Feedback (timing and content) is predictable.
Feedback should be more targeted and timing is
important. (virtual human group)”
Personalization
“I want to have more control over my goals. It
is my goal and not the goal of the system. Goals
can change day by day.. (text group)”
Results of a six weeks user evaluation with the physical
activity coaching system show that Physical Activity Level
(PAL) values do not differ between the ECA and TXT con-
dition. Thus feedback by means of an ECA has no added
value over feedback by means of a text message if we
look at the target objective. The control group that did not
receive feedback and no reminders to upload their sensor data
performed worse compared to both ECA and TXT group.
In particular, in the control group the mean of the PAL
values dropped from week 4 onwards. We used a Mann-
Whitney U test to compare the results between the different
groups. At the end of week 6 the PAL level of the ECA
group wa signiﬁcantly less than the mean for the TXT group
((Mdn = 1, 61), U = 36, 00, p = 0, 014, r = −0, 460). The
number of uploads of PAL data in the control group was
signiﬁcantly less than in the TXT group during all six weeks
((Mdn = 3, 00), U = 51, 00, p = 0, 045, r = 0, 378).
Interviews and questionnaires reveal that on smartphones
users prefer glanceable presentation of feedback messages.
304
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Reading the short text message is faster than listening to
the spoken message. Smart phones are for quick access and
glanceable presentation of feedback ﬁts the message and the
use context. In line with the conclusions of Lisetti et al. [40],
we believe that the opportunities offered by the technology of
animated conversational characters are exploited fully in multi-
modal spoken personalised emphatic dialogs with the user.
The user evaluations reported by Lisetti et al. had a similar
objective as but the research methods differ in a number of
ways. The most important is that Lisetti applied a lab user test.
whereas our study included a real-life evaluation. A second
important difference is that our ECA platform is based on the
BML framework and runs on mobile platforms. This offers
new opportunities for coaching systems in clinical applications.
A cross media or multi-device coaching system can support
the execution of an intervention program in which a team of
human and virtual coaches work towards a negotiated goal, or
to sustain a certain lifestyle. Such a blended format combining
virtual coaching with real-world coaching is a novelty in HCI
design.
IV.
USER EVALUATIONS: PERSUASIVE DESIGN FACTORS
FOR EHEALTH AND SOCIAL MEDIA APPS
Sexual health is a speciﬁc sensitive subject in many cultures
and there is little research on the effects of prevention-focused
interventions in this domain. The exploratory user study aimed
at identifying the design features interventions have to possess
to facilitate qualitatively well-designed and tailored eHealth
interventions in the future and to evaluate currently available
ones. We investigated which design factors are important using
focus group discussions with high-risk adolescents. The user
study focused on social media, serious games, mobile appli-
cations and the use of personal virtual coaching for lifestyle
support (see Fig. 2). Primary research question was which
persuasive design factors inﬂuence the use and adoption of
various eHealth interventions in public sexual health services.
Participants explored and gave feedback on a number of
existing and new social media applications and modern media
applications in a focus group setting. All sessions were audio
recorded with participants permission.
Participants were also asked to express their opinion about
the three new concepts for new media applications integrated
in modern social media, namely, (i) a serious game embedded
in the existing social network, e.g., Facebook, (ii) a mobile
application functionality embedded in Facebook, and (iii) a
personal virtual coach embedded in either a social network,
a website or a mobile application. Each concept represented
certain persuasive features, which were discussed using clear
visual examples without explicitly naming which persuasive
feature was represented.
In the last part, adolescents shared their own ideas and
tips about promoting public sexual health services and healthy
lifestyle via eHealth applications and social media. The script,
the power point slides and the duration of various parts of
the focus group session were ﬁrst tested during a pilot session
and adjusted based on the outcome. An assistant took notes
and answered questions about the group assignments.
During the data analysis, audio ﬁles were fully transcribed,
analyzed, coded and categorized. The persuasive features have
been coded according to the persuasive system design model
[39]. An analysis of the inﬂuence of persuasive features on
the response of adolescents towards various types of presented
media was done.
A. Result of the Focus Group Study
In total, thirty seven young adults with low socio-
economical and various ethnical backgrounds (51, 4% male
and 48,6% female) participated in four focus group discus-
sions. Participants are considered as having ethnic origin in
case if at least one parent is born in a different country.
Participants were between 12 and 24 years old (M=17,4
SD=3,1), and owned a mobile phone. Thirty four out of thirty
seven participants had internet access at home, and thirty two
participants had mobile internet access. From the thirty seven
adolescents who participated in a focus group study, 89,2%
participants were low-educated. All participants indicated they
use social media daily. Most popular social media among
adolescents were Facebook (27), Twitter (15), Instagram (20).
WhatsApp and Youtube are also popular.
The results of the focus group study showed that ado-
lescents have positive attitude towards the use of a personal
virtual coach for health promotion, as long as they perceive
there is a real human behind the virtual character. Several
important persuasive features were identiﬁed during the data
analysis. The identiﬁed features were categorized into (1)
stimulating: features that are perceived as having positive
inﬂuence on motivating the user, perceived usefulness and
adherence, (2) blocking: features that are perceived as having a
negative inﬂuence on motivating the user, perceived usefulness
and adherence, and (3) neutral features that are perceived as
having no effect on motivating the user, perceived usefulness
and adherence. Table III presents the stimulating features
and quotes from participants. Table IV presents the blocking
feature and quotes from the focus group study.
TABLE III: RESULTS FOCUS GROUP STUDY:
STIMULATING PERSUASIVE FEATURES
Persuasive feature
Quote
Trustworthiness
“I would use the coach if the answers are
reliable.”
Expertise
“I would like it (virtual coach) to be made by
someone who has the experience.”
Liking
“Mostly if it looks nice, you are more likely to
play with it (serious game).”
Tunneling
“If you just look on the Internet, for instance
stuff about sex, lots of things come up. With the
app it is much easier.”
TABLE IV: RESULTS FOCUS GROUP STUDY:
BLOCKING PERSUASIVE FEATURES
Persuasive feature
Quote
Recognition
“I really don’t want anyone to know that I
have been using this app (personal coach on
facebook).”
Based on the identiﬁed persuasive features, the following
important design factors were formulated. Anonymity was
found as the most important factor, which has important
305
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2: Focus group session: subgroup task where participants explore a serious game [1]. Picture was taken with
participants’ permission.
implications for the use of social networks for sexual well-
being enhancement. Social media networks lack privacy and
therefore eHealth applications, for example on Facebook, are
not a recommended media for enhancing sexual well-being of
high-risk adolescents. Instead, social networks can be used to
increase the familiarity of the target group with the existing in-
terventions. The next factor, level of interactivity was identiﬁed
as indispensable. Serious games and mobile applications are
expected to have a high level of interactivity to better engage
users and thus increase uptake of lifestyle interventions. The
type of platform the eHealth technology is realized on was
another essential factor. Personal mobile devices, and smart
phones in particular, were most preferred due to the high
level of privacy and familiar user experience. In addition to
the factors mentioned above, the reliability of the information
source was clearly an important issue across all media types.
Participants stated the importance of the clear visibility of the
information source, as well as the logo or the name of the
health organization behind the intervention. Another factor,
namely, support for visual aids, was also identiﬁed across all
types of applications. Speciﬁc to adolescents with low soci-
economical background, lifestyle change support systems have
to be more visually aided. The language use in the content has
to be simple, low threshold and preferably in several languages
to reach various ethnic groups. Applying these factors in the
design of eHealth technologies for lifestyle support should
increase their uptake and usefulness for enhancing well-being
of high-risk adolescents and contribute to healthier lifestyle.
V.
LESSONS LEARNED: DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR
PERSONAL COACHING AND LIFESTYLE SUPPORT
What have we learned from studies about the effects of a
virtual coach in lifestyle coaching systems? In general, user
studies showed positive attitude towards the use of a virtual
coach for lifestyle change support. Several stimulating persua-
sive features were identiﬁed in both studies. One persuasive
feature liking overlaps. Visual appeal is a crucial design factor
as it determines whether a user is will get motivated to start
with the lifestyle behavior change program. Various visual
aids and user-centered design methods can ensure that visual
representations of the interface are appealing to the target user
group. Personal tailoring plays an important role here, as one of
the participants stated even variation in how the virtual coach
looks like is desirable: “I think it is more human like to receive
a feedback message from a virtual human, but these messages
need to be less predictable. Messages should be a kind of
surprise (change the appearance of the virtual human every
now and then)”. This feature can be easily enabled by allowing
user to choose from various avatars with different appearances
and even different voices for the virtual coach.
Motivation is another important factor when it comes to
the willingness to use a particular lifestyle coaching system. It
makes a difference if an eHealth intervention is supported by
a real human healthcare professional. Effective coaching and
tailored feedback in terms of its timing, content and interaction
design are crucial elements in affecting behavioral change. The
next generation of the lifestyle coaching systems will be able to
predict the optimal timing for providing feedback by analyzing
previously given feedback messages. A personal target goal
has to be challenging and reachable, step by step, within a set
period of time.
Users prefer to be in control of how, when (right timing)
and on what device they want to receive personal feedback
from a virtual coach. Feedback messages have to offer enough
variation so that the users stay motivated. In addition, we
learned that users want to monitor their history and progress:
306
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

what they have done and what they should do next. They
expect a connection between the personal goal-setting features
for behavioral change and the personal coach to provide visual
feedback.
Next lesson is the need to provide personalized (tai-
lored) feedback: show progress towards target, adjust target,
motivate, suggest actions, provide real time information. In
addition, fun element has to be integrated in user interface
to make interaction with the coach more playful. Users get
bored by same messages and standard feedback. Variety in
output modalities can facilitate this by providing user the
choice to set the feedback presentation mode him/herself: test-
based / virtual human and speech / light, etc. Facilitating
navigation through information that user needs is also found
important, for example by offering a user to search information
by alternative interaction modalities such as speech input.
However, the coach should not talk to the user when the
head phone is unplugged. Therefore, a context-sensitive smart
sensors technology is needed to enable this feature.
Online coaching also needs to be better integrated with
ofﬂine feedback to stimulate the participation and commit-
ment of the user to a lifestyle change support program [41].
Combining real-time usage behavior data with personalized
virtual coaching and timely persuasive feedback can contribute
to higher engagement and better uptake of lifestyle change
support system by patients as well as healthcare professionals.
A. Challenges in Evaluating Lifestyle Change Support Systems
Evaluating lifestyle change support systems remains an
ongoing challenge [31]. One of the main future challenges in
evaluation of eHealth technology in general [11] is developing
a mixed methods approach and standards for evaluating the
effects of eHealth from a user perspective [6][9]. Validated
instruments for user evaluations are needed to measure the
effects of personalized eHealth interventions, such as changes
in lifestyle or other behavior change [30]. The ﬁeld of eHealth
technology and telemedicine can beneﬁt from adopting design
and evaluation methods from the ﬁeld of HCI. Professionals
from the ﬁeld of health and social psychology, and potential
end users should be involved not only in the design and effects
evaluation of eHealth applications for lifestyle support, but also
in the iterative process evaluation of these applications. Health
professionals and social scientists could augment about the
effectiveness of the content of a persuasive message, and end
users could provide feedback for constant improvements of the
applications. Researchers and experts from the ﬁeld of human
computer interaction could play a vital role in better designing
and evaluating persuasive features of the technology [31].
HCI evaluation methods are well suited for the short-
term user evaluation to measure the effects of intervention
before the long-term implementation. Naturally, HCI evalu-
ation methods need to be adjusted to the speciﬁc goal of the
eHealth technology and multi-device lifestyle support systems
in particular [32]. In return, HCI ﬁeld can beneﬁt from the
active logging methods and eHealth techniques for analyzing
usage behavior patterns for better tailoring of personalized
feedback [10][11][42]. In addition, psychological and moti-
vational factors need to be incorporated into HCI evaluation
techniques and measurements in order to identify how these
factors inﬂuence the uptake and use of technology for lifestyle
support.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Applying user-centered design techniques can signiﬁcantly
improve the appeal of the user interface and thus the en-
gagement with personal lifestyle coaching system [32]. Next
to the ease-of-use, visual appeal and clear presentation, the
user experience has to be enjoyable and rewarding. Active
engagement of the user in interaction with lifestyle intervention
is crucial to ensure prolonged use of an intervention.
There is a need for guidelines and standardization for
evaluation of eHealth technology in general [11], as well as
for the lifestyle support systems, in particular. In addition, the
multi-device architecture is necessary to enable easy exchange
of monitoring data between web-based and private mobile parts
of lifestyle support systems. Qualitative evaluation studies
focusing on the process evaluation and user experiences with
technology can help researchers to understand what persuasive
features can enhance adherence, motivate people and how this
technology should be further developed to optimally match the
ﬁnal design with the needs of real users in daily healthcare
practice. This paper combines methods from HCI and eHealth
and makes several contributions: (1) new insights into the
existing lifestyle change support systems with personal virtual
coaching, their limitations and recommendations for improve-
ments (lack of unanimity in interface and interaction, etc.);
(2) integrated approach by considering a multi-device eHealth
system with motivational design features (such as timely
feedback), which increases the involvement of patients as well
as healthcare professionals and (3) practical recommendations
for persuasive design and evaluation methodology combining
validated and widely used methods from eHealth and HCI
ﬁelds.
To conclude, lifestyle behavior support systems need to be
be evaluated throughout all stages of the eHealth technology
development cycle. Furthermore, it is also essential to evaluate
the effects of eHealth interventions that have already been
disseminated, using multidisciplinary approach and by inde-
pendent evaluators.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all participants of the focus groups and other
user studies, Municipal Health Services and social workers.
Special thanks are due to Irina Lehmann and Cristel Boom
for assistance in recruitment and data analysis. Part of the
work presented is funded by the EU, within the framework
of the ARTEMIS JU SP8 SMARCOS project 100249. Focus
group study is a part of Sense eHealth project funded by the
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (VWS) and is carried
out in collaboration with the Dutch National Institute for Public
Health and Environment (RIVM).
REFERENCES
[1]
O. Kulyk, R. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, and J. van Gemert-Pijnen,
“Let us get real! integrated approach for virtual coaching and real-time
activity monitoring in lifestyle change support systems,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social
Medicine (eTELEMED’14).
IARIA, 2014, pp. 211–216.
307
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2]
F. Yekeh and J. Kay, “Hypothesis evaluation based on ubicomp sens-
ing: Moving from researchers to users,” in Persuasive’13, ser. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, S. Berkovsky and J. Freyne, Eds., vol. 973,
2013.
[3]
T. W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated interventions
for multiple health behaviors using conversational agents,” Patient
education and counseling, vol. 92(2), August 2013, pp. 142–148.
[4]
T. W. Bickmore, L. Caruso, and K. Clough-Gorr, “Acceptance and
usability of a relational agent interface by urban older adults,” in
ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’05).
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 1212–1215.
[5]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Huis in ’t
Veld, D. V. M. Jones, D. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten,
P. M. M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, and P. H. J. Hermens, “Development
and evaluation of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and
treatment of chronic diseases - the continuous care & coaching
platform,” in 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and
Technologies, EHST 2012.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/83432/ [retrieved: Nov 30, 2014]
[6]
L. Van Velsen, N. Nijhof, and O. Kulyk, “Health 2.0 emerging tech-
nologies,” in Improving eHealth, J. van Gemert-Pijnen, O. Petersen, and
H. Ossebaard, Eds.
Boom Publishers, den Haag, The Netherlands,
2013, pp. 111–126.
[7]
S. Ananthanarayan and K. Siek, “Persuasive wearable technology
design for health and wellness,” in 6th International Conference on Per-
vasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth’12),
2012, pp. 236–240.
[8]
N. Nijland, “Grounding ehealth: towards a holistic framework for
sustainable ehealth technologies,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands, January 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/75576/ [retrieved: Nov 30, 2014]
[9]
E. J. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, C. H.
Ossebaard, M. S. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and R. E. Seydel, “A holistic
framework to improve the uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,”
J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 4, Dec 2011, p. e111. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22155738 [retrieved:
Nov 30, 2014]
[10]
M. S. Kelders, E. J. Van Gemert-Pijnen, A. Werkman, N. Nijland,
and R. E. Seydel, “Effectiveness of a web-based intervention aimed at
healthy dietary and physical activity behavior: A randomized controlled
trial about users and usage,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 2, Apr
2011, p. e32.
[11]
K. D. Ahern, M. J. Kreslake, and M. J. Phalen, “What is ehealth (6):
Perspectives on the evolution of ehealth research,” J Med Internet Res,
vol. 8, no. 1, Mar 2006, p. e4.
[12]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems design: Key
issues, process model, and system features,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, 2009, p. 28.
[13]
S. Pingree, R. Hawkins, T. Baker, L. duBenske, L. Roberts, and
D. Gustafson, “The value of theory for enhancing and understanding
e-health interventions,” American journal of preventive medicine, vol.
38(1), 2010, pp. 103–109.
[14]
H. Oh, C. Rizo, M. Enkin, and A. Jadad, “What is ehealth (3): A
systematic review of published deﬁnitions,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 7,
no. 1, Feb 2005, p. e1.
[15]
A. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, and K. e. a. Cress-
well, “The impact of ehealth on the quality and safety of health
care: A systematic overview,” PLoS Med, vol. 8(1), 2011, e1000387.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 [retrieved: Nov 30, 2014].
[16]
S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. McDonald, D. Avrahami, J. Froehlich,
L. LeGrand, R. Libby, K. Mosher, and J. A. Landay, “Flowers or a
robot army?: Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, mobile
displays,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing, ser. UbiComp ’08.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2008, pp. 54–63.
[17]
S. A. Clemes and R. A. Parker, “Increasing our understanding of
reactivity to pedometers in adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise, 2009.
[18]
H. op den Akker, V. M. Jones, and H. J. Hermens, “Tailoring real-time
physical activity coaching systems: a literature survey and model,” User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction (available online), 2014.
[19]
M. Kasza, V. Szucs, A. Vegh, and T. Torok, “Passive vs. active
measurement: The role of smart sensors,” in The Fifth International
Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and
Technologies, 2011.
[20]
H. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, V. Jones, and
H. Hermens, “Opportunities for smart and tailored activity coaching,” in
Proceedings of the 26th International Symposium on Computer-Based
Medical Systems (CBMS2013).
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2013,
pp. 546–547, iSBN=978-1-4799-1053-3.
[21]
W. Brouwer, A. Oenema, R. Crutzen, J. de Nooijer, N. de Vries, and
J. Brug, “An exploration of factors related to dissemination of and
exposure to internet-delivered behavior change interventions aimed at
adults: A delphi study approach,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 10(2):e10,
2008.
[22]
J. Fanning, P. S. Mullen, and E. McAuley, “Increasing physical activity
with mobile devices: A meta-analysis,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 14 (6),
Nov 2012, p. e161.
[23]
L. Dennison, L. Morrison, G. Conway, and L. Yardley, “Opportunities
and challenges for smartphone applications in supporting health behav-
ior change: Qualitative study,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 15, no. 4, Apr
2013, p. e86.
[24]
S. Bosch, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Marin-Perianu, P. Havinga, and H. Her-
mens, “Keep on moving! activity monitoring and stimulation using
wireless sensor networks,” in Smart Sensing and Context, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, P. Barnaghi, K. Moessner, M. Presser, and
S. Meissner, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 5741, pp.
11–23.
[25]
T. Baranowski and L. Frankel, “Let’s get technical! gaming and tech-
nology for weight control and health promotion in children,” Childhood
Obesity, vol. 8(1), 2012, pp. 34–37.
[26]
S. Deterding, “Gamiﬁcation: Designing for motivation,” Interactions,
vol.
19,
no.
4,
2012,
pp.
14–17.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2212877.2212883 [retrieved: Nov 30, 2014]
[27]
S.
Deterding,
D.
Dixon,
R.
Khaled,
and
L.
Nacke,
“From
game design elements to gamefulness: Deﬁning ‘gamiﬁcation’,” in
Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference:
Envisioning Future Media Environments, ser. MindTrek ’11.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2011,
pp.
9–15.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2181037.2181040 [retrieved: Nov 30, 2014]
[28]
W. Kamin and A. Kreplin, “Teaching the inhalation manoeuvre to
asthmatic children by means of visual feedback,” Pneumologie, vol.
61(3), 2007, pp. 150–156.
[29]
H. Kharrazi, A. Faiola, and J. Defazio, “Healthcare game design:
Behavioral modeling of serious gaming design for children with chronic
diseases,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Part IV: Interacting in Various Applica-
tion Domains. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 335–344.
[30]
P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, and W. Pratt, “How to evaluate technologies for
health behavior change in hci research,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 3063–3072.
[31]
S. Lanfrial, “From digital interventions to behavior change support
systems: Understanding persuasive systems development and evaluation
of process behavior change technologies,” in Proceedings of IRIS 2012,
2012, pp. 1–16.
[32]
J. Scholtz and S. Consolvo, “Toward a framework for evaluating
ubiquitous computing applications,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 3,
2004, pp. 82–88.
[33]
B. Fogg, “A behavior model for persuasive design,” in Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology, ser.
Persuasive ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 40:1–
40:7. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999
[retrieved: Nov 30, 2014]
[34]
R. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, T. Lavrysen, G. Geleijnse, A. van
Halteren,
H.
Schwietert,
and
M.
van
der
Hout,
“A
personal
context-aware multi-device coaching service that supports a healthy
lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human-
Computer
Interaction,
ser.
BCS-HCI
’11.
Swinton,
UK,
UK:
British Computer Society, 2011, pp. 443–448. [Online]. Available:
308
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2305316.2305397 [retrieved: Nov 30,
2014]
[35]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, M. H. A. Huis in ’t Veld,
V. M. Jones, D. H. W. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten, M. M. R.
Vollenbroek-Hutten, and H. J. Hermens, “Development and evaluation
of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and treatment of chronic
diseases - the continuous care & coaching platform,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and Technologies,
EHST 2012, Geneva, Switzerland.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27.
[36]
R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, and H. op den Akker, “Feedback
presentation for mobile personalised digital physical activity coaching
platforms,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, ser. PETRA
’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 64:1–64:8. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2504335.2504404 [retrieved: Nov
30, 2014]
[37]
R. Klaassen, J. Hendrix, D. Reidsma, R. op den Akker, B. Dijk, and
H. op den Akker, “Elckerlyc goes mobile-enabling natural interaction
in mobile user interfaces,” International journal on advances in telecom-
munications, vol. 6 (1-2), 2013, pp. 45–56.
[38]
H. Vilhjalmsson, N. Cantelmo, J. Cassell, N. E. Chafai, M. Kipp,
S. Kopp, M. Mancini, S. Marsella, A. N. Marshall, C. Pelachaud,
Z. Ruttkay, K. R. Thorisson, H. van Welbergen, and R. J. van der Werf,
“The behavior markup language: Recent developments and challenges,”
in Intelligent Virtual Agents, ser. LNCS, C. Pelachaud, J.-C. Martin,
E. Andre, G. Collet, K. Karpouzis, and D. Pele, Eds., vol. 4722. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 99–111.
[39]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems design: Key
issues, process model, and system features,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 24(28), 2009.
[40]
C. Lisetti, R. Amini, U. Yasavur, and N. Rishe, “I can help you change!
an empathic virtual agent delivers behavior change health interventions,”
ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 19:1–
19:28.
[41]
J. Freyne, I. Saunders, E. Brindal, S. Berkovsky, and G. S. 0003,
“Factors associated with persistent participation in an online diet
intervention.” in Extended Abstracts of the ACM Annual Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, J. A. Konstan, E. H.
Chi, and K. H¨o¨ok, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp. 2375–2380.
[42]
A. Barak, L. Hen, M. Boniel-Nissim, and N. Shapira, “A comprehen-
sive review and a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of internet-based
psychotherapeutic interventions,” Journal of Technology in Human
Services, vol. 26(2-4), 2008, pp. 109–160.
309
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

