143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The MedITNet Assessment Method – Development and Validation using Action 
Design Research 
Self Assessment against IEC 80001-1 
 
Silvana Togneri MacMahon, Fergal McCaffery, Frank Keenan 
Department of Computing & Mathematics 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Co. Louth, Ireland 
{e-mail: silvana.macmahon, fergal.mccaffery, frank.keenan}@dkit.ie
 
 
Abstract— The provision of care to patients has moved away 
from episodic acute care due to the increase in chronic 
diseases such as diabetes. This has changed the relationship 
between the patient and the care team. The management of 
chronic disease requires the use of information technology 
including networked medical devices to facilitate the 
establishment of an ongoing relationship between the patient 
and care team. The use of networked medical devices can 
provide benefits to patients such as reduced cost of care, 
reductions in adverse events and improved care through the 
provision of accurate and up-to-date information. However, 
the placement of a medical device onto an IT network can 
lead to risks to the device. These risks may lead to incorrect 
or degraded performance of the device impacting patient 
care and negating the potential benefits of using the device. 
While, IEC 80001-1 was developed to assist Healthcare 
Delivery Organisations  in addressing these risks, HDOs 
may struggle in implementing the requirements of the 
standard. This paper discusses the development of an 
Assessment Method that forms part of MedITNet, an 
assessment framework that can be used by Healthcare 
Delivery Organisationss to assist them in implementing the 
requirements of the standard by providing a flexible, 
consistent and repeatable approach to assessing the 
capability of their risk management processes relating to 
networked medical devices. The assessment highlights 
weaknesses in the process and can be used as a foundation to 
improve these processes. This paper also discusses the 
development and validation of the Assessment Method using 
Action Design Research. 
Keywords- Risk Management; Medical IT Networks; IEC 
80001-1; MedITNet; Assessment Framework; Assessment 
Method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper extends the discussion of the development 
of the MedITNet assessment method in [1] by extending 
the discussion of the pilot implementation of the 
assessment method and examining the recommendations 
that were implemented as a result of the implementation. 
This paper also discusses the expert review of the overall 
assessment framework. 
The recent downturn in the global economy has led to 
an increased focus on ensuring that a high standard of 
care is provided to the patient while reducing the cost of 
care. Interoperability of medical devices has been 
recognised for its potential to achieve this goal [2-4]. 
Such is the potential that governments have provided 
incentives to promote the meaningful use of interoperable 
medical devices and Health Information Technology 
(HIT), such as Electronic Health Records (EHRs) [5-7]. 
The use of interoperable medical devices has resulted 
from the increased prevalence of chronic conditions such 
as diabetes, which has resulted in a move away from 
acute episodic care. The management of chronic disease 
requires the establishment of an ongoing relationship 
between the patient and their care team facilitated by 
carefully designed care processes and requiring the 
support of information technology [8-11] As a result of 
this change, the number of networked medical devices in 
use continues to increase [12-14]. 
A number of benefits of the use of networked medical 
are recognised. These include reducing the instances of 
adverse events improving patient safety, reducing the time 
spent by clinicians manually entering information, 
reducing 
redundant 
testing 
due 
to 
inaccessible 
information, improving patient care, reducing healthcare 
costs 
and 
ensuring 
comprehensive 
and 
secure 
management of health information [15, 16]. These 
benefits have resulted in medical IT networks becoming a 
critical, integral component of the medical system [17]. 
However, as medical devices increasingly interface with 
other equipment and hospital information systems the 
integration complexity of the systems is increased and this 
presents additional operational risks [14, 18-20]. 
Proprietary networks were traditionally used when a 
device was placed onto a network. However, these are 
being used less with medical devices being designed to be 
placed onto the hospitals general IT network. This means 
that medical device manufacturers no longer exercise 
control over the configuration of the network [21]. This 
lack of control can lead to risks potentially resulting in 

144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
unintended consequences outside the control of the 
medical device manufacturer. The placement of the 
device onto the hospital network creates a new system in 
which the device has not been validated [22]. These risks 
can result in the incorrect and degraded performance of 
the medical device [23, 24] compromising patient safety, 
effectiveness and the security of the IT network [25-27]. 
IEC 80001-1: Application of risk management for IT-
networks incorporating medical devices [28] was 
published in 2010 to address the risks associated with the 
incorporation of a medical device into an IT network. 
However, Healthcare Delivery Organisations (HDOs) 
face challenges when implementing the requirements of 
this standard [29]. HDOs vary in size and in terms of the 
capability of their risk management processes [17, 30] 
and the regulatory requirements of the region in which 
they provide care differ meaning that the implementation 
of the requirements of the standard will vary depending 
on the relevant regulatory requirements. The effective 
performance of risk management activities requires 
interaction between different stakeholder groups. An 
understanding of the context of the HDO is also required 
in order to manage the identified risks [18, 31]. In 
addition, organisational changes are required to facilitate 
the necessary level of interaction among stakeholders and 
HDOs may be unprepared for this [14] due to the fact that 
departments within the HDO typically operate in silos [8]. 
These challenges make the requirements of the standard 
confusing and difficult to implement.  
These difficulties in implementing the requirements of 
the standard highlighted the need to provide HDOs with 
assistance. This research has focused on the development 
of an assessment framework which provides HDOs with 
a flexible approach to assessing the capability of their 
current risk management processes relating to medical IT 
networks. The use of the assessment framework enables 
communication among stakeholders groups allowing 
HDOs to implement the requirements of the standard.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II describes the development of the Assessment Method 
component of the MedITNet assessment framework while 
Section III described the stages of the Assessment while 
the validation of the resultant Assessment Method is 
discussed in Section IV. The conclusions are presented in 
Section V. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The Assessment Method described in this paper is one 
of three components that make up the MedITNet 
assessment framework [32, 33]. In addition to the 
Assessment Method, MedITNet contains a Process 
Reference Model (PRM) and Process Assessment Model 
(PAM). The PRM provides a description of 14 processes, 
which address the requirements of IEC 80001-1. The 
processes within the PRM are described in terms of the 
purpose of the process and the outcomes achieved as a 
result of performing the process. The PAM extends the 
description of the processes by including a description of 
the base practices or activities performed during the 
process and the work products used or produced as a 
result of performing the process. The PAM also 
introduces the concept of a measurement framework or 
scale on which the capability of the process can be 
measured. The presence of the PRM and PAM within the 
MedITNet framework mean that the framework can be 
used regardless of the context of the HDO, including the 
regulatory environment in which the HDO provides care. 
The Assessment Method provides a consistent 
approach to assessing the capability of the processes in 
the PAM using questions related to each of the base 
practices. The Assessment Method can be used as 
presented in the technical report or  can be tailored for use 
based on the context in which the HDO provides care. In 
order to tailor the Assessment Method, the HDO can 
rephrase the questions that are being asked in order to 
address specific aspects of the context in which they 
provide care. For example, there may be additional 
regulatory requirements for risk management that  apply 
to HDOs due to the geographical location in which they 
provide care. The HDO can either rephrase the questions 
to take into account the regulation or may choose to add 
additional questions during the performance of the 
assessment. Any alterations to questions or additional 
questions that are added, must be reviewed against the 
relevant base practices in the PAM. The HDO must 
ensure that the questions continue to address the 
assessment of the performance of these base practices 
before making any amendments or additions. This ability 
to tailor the Assessment Method addresses the issue of 
HDOs providing care within differeing regulatory 
environments. In addition, the ability to tailor the 
Assessment Method allows HDOs to take into account the 
size of the HDO and also the capability of the HDO in 
terms of the risk management of medical IT networks. For 
HDOs operating at a lower level of maturity, the PRM 
and PAM can be used to identify processes and practices 
that need to be implemented to achieve a higher level of 
maturity. These HDOs may wish to perform an initial 
assessment of the capability of risk management 
processes using the Assessment Method, which will 
highlight 
areas 
for 
improvement. 
Based 
on 
the 
assessment, the HDO can then refer to the PRM and PAM 
to assist in the definition and implementation of processes 
at a higher capability level. The HDO can then perform a 
follow-up assessment at a later date to ensure that the 
identified improvements have been implementated and 
that the target capability level has been achieved. 
A. Development Approach 
The approach to the development of the Assessment 
Method combines the learnings from a literature review 
with knowledge of risk management practices in a HDO. 

145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In order to understand the risk management practices 
within the HDO, focus groups sessions were conducted 
with risk management stakeholders within a HDO. These 
sessions were performed during the Practice-Inspired 
Research phase of the Action Design Research (ADR) 
process [34] used in the development of the Assessment 
Method and also in the development of the MedITNet 
Assessment framework. The focus of the Practice Inspired 
Research phase of the ADR process is to validate the 
findings of the literature review, which is this case 
focused on an examination of the risk management of 
medical IT networks and the challenges experienced by 
HDOs in the implementation of risk management 
processes, and confirm that these challenges are 
experienced in practice within HDOs. This phase of the 
research process is useful in ensuring that the solution, in 
this case the assessment framework, will be suited for use 
in the context in which it will be used. 
B. Literature Review 
The Assessment Method was developed following the 
development of the PRM and PAM components of the 
MedITNet 
Assessment 
Framework. 
During 
the 
development of the PRM and PAM, a literature review in 
the area of process assessment, focusing on process 
assessment standards was conducted. This literature 
review was extended in order to develop the Assessment 
Method. 
In order to inform the development of the Assessment 
Method, a review of Assessment Methods for similar 
standards was completed. This review focused on 
ISO/IEC 15504-3 [35] and Appraisal Requirements for 
CMMI [36] Domain specific including Rapid Assessment 
for Process Improvement in Software Development 
(RAPID) [37], Express process appraisal (EPA) [38], 
Adept [39], Med-Adept [40] and Tudor IT Service 
Management Process Assessment (TIPA) [41] were also 
reviewed. While this review informed the development of 
the Assessment Method, the results of the review were not 
sufficient in themselves to develop the Assessment 
Method. In order to develop the Assessment Method, the 
results of the literature review were combined with the 
knowledge gained during the Practice-Inspired Research 
conducted as part of this study. This approach allowed the 
researcher to take into account the concerns that HDOs 
express in relation to the implementation of the IEC 
80001-1 standard.  
The literature review provided an understanding of the 
challenges that HDOs encounter when incorporating a 
medical device into an IT network. Each of the identified 
challenges 
was 
considered 
when 
developing 
the 
requirements for the Assessment Method, using a similar 
approach to that used by Mc Caffery and Coleman [42] 
using criteria for Assessment Methods as outlined by 
Anacleto et al. [43]. The criteria were adapted to take into 
account the domain in which the Assessment Method will 
be used, that is, within the HDO rather than in the context 
of software development. The development of the 
requirements for the Assessment Method also took into 
account the challenges related to the management of risk 
associated with the incorporation of a medical device into 
an IT network which were highlighted as part of the 
Literature Review and Practice-Inspired Research. The 
requirements for the Assessment Method were defined as 
follows: 
 
Due to the constraints on resources within 
HDOs, the Assessment Method should be 
lightweight in its approach and facilitate self-
assessment; 
 
The Assessment Method should be based on the 
processes described in the MedITNet PAM; 
 
Guidance should be provided for tailoring the 
Assessment Method for use in various scales of 
HDOs and in different geographical contexts. 
The Assessment Method should also facilitate 
assessments based on conformance with the 
standard as well as those seeking to assess the 
capability level with which risk management 
processes are being performed; 
 
The Assessment Method should support the 
identification 
of 
risks 
and 
improvement 
opportunities; 
 
The Assessment Method should not assume any 
previous knowledge of process assessment on 
the part of those conducting the assessment; 
 
The Assessment Method should facilitate the 
development of tool support in the future; 
 
The Assessment Method should be publicly 
available; 
 
The Assessment Method should encourage a 
culture 
of 
communication 
among 
various 
multidisciplinary risk management stakeholders 
including those within and external to the HDO; 
 
The Assessment Method should be validated for 
use within the HDO context. 
In addition to the literature review and, to augment the 
Practice-Inspired Research, members of the Clinical 
Engineering team (CE) and the Clinical Informatics team 
in a HDO were consulted throughout the development of 
the questions for the Assessment Method. This was an 
iterative process, which is described in the following 
section. 
C. 
Question Development 
The 
involvement 
of 
HDO 
risk 
management 
stakeholders in the development of the Assessment 
Method was considered to be vital. HDOs may use the 
Assessment Method in its form within the technical report 
and without reference to the PRM and PAM. This  means 
that the process for conducting the assessment oulined in 
the Assessment Method and the questions that are used 

146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
during the assessment must be understandable to a range 
of risk management stakeholders.  
The Assessment Method assesses against ISO/IEC 
15504-2 compliant models, i.e., the MedITNet PRM and 
PAM. These models describe processes at the level of the 
process purpose, outcomes, practices and work products. 
This approach to the development of the Assessment 
Method ensures its applicability beyond the HDO 
assisting 
with 
its 
development, 
across 
varying 
geographical and regulatory contexts. The use of ADR 
also ensures that all components of the framework are 
developed initially based on a combination of the results 
of the literature review combined with Practice- Inspired 
Research. The resultant components are then validated by 
both practitioners in the field and end users. This ensures 
that the components are both suited to use in a particular 
context and suited for use across a range of contexts. The 
development of the assessment questions, which form part 
of the Assessment Method, was completed in two phases.  
a) 
Question Development – Phase 1 
During phase 1 of the question development process, a 
meeting was held in the HDO with the Principal Physicist 
and a Physicist/Clinical Engineer. Both had taken part in 
the initial phase of the Practice-Inspired Research and 
were already familiar with the provisions of the standard 
and the proposed MedITNet framework. 
During the previous discussions on the current risk 
management practices within the HDO, it was agreed that 
the Risk Analysis and Evaluation Process was the main 
process relating to the identification and classification of 
risks. It was noted during the previous focus groups 
session that discussion of the Risk Analysis and 
Evaluation process lead to discussion of other aspects of 
risk management outside the scope of that process. This 
was due to the fact that the discussion of the Risk 
Analysis and Evaluation process led to a discussion of the 
overall HDO risk management policy and also to a 
discussion on the evaluation and subsequent application 
of risk control measures. The discussion also revealed 
how risk was documented in the HDO. Therefore, it was 
decided that questions should be developed for this 
process first.  
The development of these questions would inform the 
development of the assessment questions for the 
remaining processes. In order to develop the questions for 
the Risk Analysis and Evaluation process, a number of 
steps were followed [44]. Firstly, each of the base 
practices was reviewed and the participants were asked to 
formulate a question that could be used to assess the base 
practice being described. The base practices in the PAM 
describe the activies that must be performed in order to 
bring about the process outcomes and achieve the overall 
purpose of the process. To facilitate gaining an 
understanding of each of the base practices, each base 
practice was discussed in the context of the standard with 
the relevant section of the standard being consulted and 
reviewed if required. This was useful for the participants 
as it provided an understanding of how the requirements 
of the standard were expressed in the PAM in terms of 
activities to be performed.  
Once all participants were clear on the meaning of the 
base practice, the participants from the clinical 
engineering team were encouraged to think of a “real” 
scenario where the relevant base practice had been 
implemented in the past. The discussion of the scenario 
would focus on how the base practice was implemented in 
the context and any constraints that may have affected the 
implementation of the base practice. This assisted the 
participants in identifying how the requirements of the 
standard were and could be implemented in the specific 
context of their HDO.  
Once the practice had been discussed in context, the 
participants were encouraged to formulate questions that 
could be used to assess the degree to which the base 
practice had been implemented during the proposed 
scenario. All questions that were formulated by the 
participants were recorded and the participants were 
encouraged to rephrase the questions in order to decrease 
the number of questions used to assess each base practice. 
This was an interative process and resulted in discussions 
around how the questions should be phrased. This 
discussion was useful as it allowed participants to 
examine and understand the terms used in the standard 
and ensure that a common understanding of the concepts 
related to risk management was established. The approach 
outlined in this section was also noted by participants as 
being a useful way in which to gain a better understanding 
of the standard and the context in which the HDO 
provides care. Participants also suggested that this 
approach would also be useful in the tailoring of 
questions to a specific context as the questions could be 
reviewed to see where amendments should be made to 
take into account the context of the HDO in which the 
assessment is being performed. 
The Risk Analysis and Evaluation Process contains 
five base practices against which 14 questions were 
eventually formulated. This draft of questions was used in 
the validation focus group within HDO A conducted as 
part of the ADR process. However, the set of questions 
(presented in Table I) does not represent the final set of 
questions which were developed to be used in the 
assessment of this process.  
b) 
Question Development – Phase 2 
During the second phase of the development of the 
questions, the questions for the remaining 13 processes 
were developed. These questions were developed with the 
assistance of the Clinical Informatics Manager (CIM) of 
the HDO. The CIM is a former nurse who oversees the 

147
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
systems administration tasks of the Clinical Information 
System within the Intensive Care Unit. The CIM was 
briefed on the research being carried out on the 
development of the Assessment Method and was given 
the PRM and PAM to review and was briefed on the 
requirements of the IEC 80001-1 standard. Following the 
development of the assessment questions for the 
remaining 13 processes, the CIM was also shown the 
questions developed during phase 1 for the Risk Analysis 
and Evaluation Process. The CIM was asked to review 
and reformulate the questions, as required, for this process 
based on their experience of development of the questions 
for the remaining processes. When reviewing the 
questions related to this process, the CIM and the 
researcher rephrased some of the questions to ensure that 
they were more closely based on the base practices of the 
process. The original set of questions was determined to 
be too specific to the context of the HDO in which the 
question development had taken place. In addition, some 
questions were, on review, considered to be unnecessary, 
again being too context specific and were removed 
accordingly.  
 
TABLE I. SAMPLE ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
Base Practice 
Summary: 
Question 
Number: 
Question: 
BP.1 - Identify 
likely hazards. 
BP.1 Q.1  
How do you identify likely safety 
hazards for individual devices? 
BP.1 Q.2 
How do you analyse the system as a 
whole to identify likely safety hazards? 
BP.1 Q.3 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device on the environment? 
BP.1 Q.4 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device in terms of effectiveness? 
BP.1 Q.5 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device in terms of data and system 
security? 
BP.2 - Estimate 
associated risks. 
BP.2 Q.1 
Do you have a procedure for estimating 
risk?  
BP.2 Q.2 
What approach do you use to estimate 
the risk associated with each source of 
harm? 
BP.2 Q.3 
What information sources do you use 
to estimate the risks associated with 
each source of harm? 
BP.2 Q.4 
Are risks reviewed throughout the life 
cycle? 
BP.3 - List 
possible 
consequences of 
harm. 
BP.3 Q.1 
How do you identify possible 
consequences of harm? 
BP.4 - Record 
results of Risk 
Analysis and 
Evaluation 
activities. 
BP.4 Q.1 
How are risk management activities 
recorded? 
BP.4 Q.2 
Are instances where risk estimate is so 
low that risk reduction is not required 
recorded? 
BP.5 - 
Implement Risk 
Control 
Measures. 
BP.5 Q.1 
How are risk control measures 
implemented? 
BP.5 Q.2 
Are risk control measures implemented 
in line with risk management policy? 
In general, one question was related to each of the 
base practices. However, the assessment of some base 
practices required more than one question. The CIM was 
asked to participate in the development of the questions in 
order to ensure that the questions were phrased in a way 
that could be understood by various risk management 
stakeholders within the HDO. The questions were 
developed using the same steps as those outlined in 
section C sub-section a). The questions were also 
developed based closely on the base practices defined 
within the PAM to ensure that the questions could be 
applied across multiple HDO contexts and were not 
specific to the HDO in which the research was being 
carried out. 
III. 
STAGES OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The stages of the assessment process are illustrated in 
Figure 1 and discussed in the remainder of this section. 
 
 
Stage 1 – Definition of Assessment 
Scope
Stage 2 – Conduct Initial Briefing
Stage 3 – Conduct Assessment 
Interviews
Stage 4 - Generation of Findings 
Report
Stage 5 - Presentation of Findings 
Report
Stage 6 - Implementation of 
Recommendations
Stage 7 - Reassessment (Optional)
 
Figure 1.  Stages of the Assessment Process 
Participants in the assessment process include the lead 
assessor, a risk management stakeholder from within the 
HDO, who will manage the assessment on behalf of the 
Top Management (TM) of the HDO. Focus group 
interviews are used during the assessment to ensure 
communication among risk management stakeholders. An 
additional Assessor (A) may be required to assist the LA. 
In addition to sponsoring the assessment, TM will ensure 
that Risk Management Stakeholders (RMS) are available 
to participate in the assessment. The RMS will be drawn 
from a multi-disciplinary team from within the HDO and 
will include members of the IT, CE and Clinical Teams 
and any other relevant RMS as required. The RMS may 
also include participants who are external to the HDO such 
as MDMs. The inclusion of participants external to the 
HDO is more typical during the procurement phase of a 
new system or devices. However, it should be noted that 
the IEC 80001-1 standard notes the importance of the 
participation of external risk management stakeholders 
throughout the life of the medical IT network.  The 
participation of relevant internal and risk management 

148
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
stakeholders is necessary to perform the successful risk 
management of the medical IT network.  
It should be noted that Stages 1 to 5 above complete 
the 
assessment 
activities. 
Stage 
6 
involves 
the 
implementation of recommendations made during the 
assessment. Where a follow-up assessment is required, 
stage 7 is performed. A reassessment can be used to 
confirm that the recommendations for improvements to the 
risk management process have improved risk management 
processes as envisaged. 
a) 
Stage 1 
The lead assessor meets with Top Management and 
the scope of the assessment is discussed. The system, 
which is to be the focus of the assessment, is defined and 
the context of the system is understood. At this time, the 
availability of relevant risk management stakeholders to 
participate in the assessment is confirmed. 
b) 
Stage 2 
The 
lead 
assessor 
meets 
with 
relevant 
risk 
management stakeholders who will be taking part in the 
assessment to explain the Assessment Method and give 
details of what their participation will involve. 
c) 
Stage 3 
The lead assessor conducts focus group interviews 
based on the scripted questions with the relevant risk 
management participants and evaluates the responses. The 
assessor makes notes on the interviews and additional 
questions are asked if clarification is required. The 
resonses to these questions will highlight areas of 
weakness in the risk management process. The 
identification of these weaknesses forms the basis for the 
findings report that will be generated during the the next 
stage of the assessment. Relevant work products are 
reviewed at this stage to highlight areas where risk 
management 
documentation 
may 
be 
missing 
or 
incomplete. 
d) 
Stage 4 
A findings report is prepared based on the data 
gathered and the weaknesses identified at stage 3. Each 
process is reviewed in turn and where relevant particular 
strengths and weaknesses are identified based on the 
evaluation 
and 
interview 
notes. 
Suggested 
recommendations are made for actions to address these 
issues and to facilitate process improvement are outlined 
and discussed. 
e) 
Stage 5 
The findings report is presented. The lead assessor 
presents the findings of the assessment. The finding will 
generally be reported to Top Management within the 
HDO and to relevant risk management stakeholders. It is 
important that the findings report is thoroughly reviewed 
and tha t recommendations are carefully considered. The 
findings report may be refered to during follow-up 
assessments and may also be used as a source of 
information for the identification of risks on future 
projects. 
f) 
Stage 6 
Having allowed time for the contents of the report to 
be considered, the findings are discussed and a plan for 
improvement of the processes with specific improvement 
objectives is agreed. At this stage participants may 
schedule a reassement to be conducted at a later date. 
g) 
Stage 7 
The 
HDO 
having 
implemented 
the 
agreed 
improvements have the 
option of performing a 
reassessment to ensure that improvements have been 
implemented and that risk management processes have 
improved accordingly. 
It should be noted that the interviews conducted 
during Stage 3 are conducted as focus group interviews. 
The focus group interviews are conducted with risk 
management stakeholders. Prior to the commencement of 
an assessment, HDOs should ensure that all relevant risk 
management stakeholders are identified and are available 
to participate in the focus group interviews. Participation 
of relevant risk management stakeholders in the focus 
group interviews ensures: that a shared understanding of 
the concepts related to the risk management of medical IT 
networks 
are 
understood; 
that 
risk 
management 
stakeholders, through the assessment process and 
discussion of risks, gain a greater understanding of the 
IEC 80001-1 standard, greater level of communication are 
established between risk management stakeholder groups 
as the assessment process requires that these groups 
operate outside of their “silos”.  
IV. 
VALIDATION OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The Assessment Method was validated from the 
perspective of its utility in a specific HDO context. The 
validation of the Assessment Method was performed in 
two stages. The first involved a pilot assessment 
performed in a HDO, while the second stage involved the 
validation of the assessment method by the standards 
community. Both of these stages of the validation of the 
Assessment Method, which were conducted using ADR, 
are discussed in this section. 
a) 
Stage 1- Validation – Pilot Assessment 
The first stage of validation consisted of performing 
an assessment of current risk management practices 
within a HDO context using the Assessment Method. This 
phase consisted of a pilot implementation of the 
Assessment Method by performing an assessment of the 
Risk Analysis and Evaluation process using the questions 
from the Assessment Method.  
A focus group session took place in the HDO with 
participants from various risk management stakeholder 

149
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
groups taking part. The assessment allowed for areas of 
weakness in the current risk management processes 
related to medical IT networks to be highlighted and 
addressed. A findings report was provided to the HDO 
and a summary of the recommendations is provided in 
Table II. This phase of the validation ensured that the 
developed questions could be understood by risk 
management stakeholders and were suited for use for the 
performance of an assessment in the specific HDO 
context.  
 
TABLE II. SAMPLE ASSESSMENT RESULTS SUMMARY 
BP.1 - Identify likely hazards 
Develop a standardised process for the identification of hazards, 
including the identification of hazards during the tendering process 
Maintain the same level of documentation in the recording of identified 
hazards, regardless of when in the lifecycle the hazard is identified 
Store information related to risk management in a manner which can be 
accessed as an information source for the estimation of future risks 
BP.2 - Estimate associated risks 
Establish a policy detailing risk acceptability criteria 
Formalize and document a procedure for the estimation of risk which 
stipulates which risk management stakeholders should be involved 
BP.3 - List possible consequences of harm 
Consider consequences of harm based on the risk acceptability criteria 
Consider consequences of harm based on the risk management policy 
BP.4 - Record the results of Risk Analysis and Evaluation activities 
Record Risk Analysis and evaluation activities in the risk management 
file 
Ensure accessibility of emails containing information on Risk Analysis 
and Evaluation activities 
BP.5 - Implement Risk Control Measures 
Establish a process for risk control 
Ensure that risk control measures are implemented in line with the risk 
control process 
Document risks which have been considered so low as not to require 
additional risk control measures 
A follow-up focus groups session took place nine 
months later to review which recommendations had been 
implemented. Not all of the recommendations made 
during the assessment were implemeted by the HDO [44]. 
However, the performance of the assessment resulted in 
improvement to not only the risk analysis and evaluation 
process within the HDO, but participants also reported 
improvements in the overall risk management of medical 
IT networks within the HDO. Participants also confirmed 
that the recommendations, which were made in the 
findings report, were considered to be appropriate. Where 
recommendations had not been implemented, this was due 
to the constraints on resources within the HDO. 
Recommendations which had not been implemented at 
the time of the follow-up focus group session were 
scheduled for implementation at a later date. Participants 
had 
also 
highlighted 
the 
importance 
of 
the 
implementation of the requirements of the IEC 80001-1 
standard in future medical IT network projects.  
At the time of the follow-up session, the CE team had 
secured agreement from Top Management that a Medical 
IT Network Risk Manager would be recruited for an 
upcoming 
medical 
IT 
network 
project. 
The 
responsibilities of the medical IT network risk manager 
role was to be defined based on those as outlined in IEC 
80001-1. The agreement to recruit for this position and to 
base the reponsibilities of the role on IEC 80001-1 
requirements was agreed with Top Management based on 
the results of the pilot assessment. The CE team identified 
this as a major improvement in risk management 
processes as prior to this they felt that the skills required 
to perform effective risk management of the network were 
not currently present in the HDO. The CE team noted that 
the performance of the assessment was instrumental in 
gaining Top Management engagement in the promotion 
and adoption of the standard. This sentiment was repeated 
during an expert review of the overall MedITNet 
framework where experts contended that without this type 
of assessment instrument, adoption of the standard may 
follow a shallow trajectory [44].  
The performance of this stage of the validation:  
 confirmed the utility of the Assessment Method 
in a specific HDO context 
 confirmed that the questions used in the 
assessment were understandable to various risk 
management stakeholders 
 confirmed that the Assessment Method could be 
tailored for use in various HDO contexts. 
 confirmed that the Assessment Method could be 
used to provide appropriate recommendations for 
the improvement of the risk management process 
 confirmed that the use of the Assessment Method 
improved 
communication 
among 
risk 
management stakeholders 
 confirmed that the use of the Assessment Method 
may be useful in promoting Top Management 
engagement with and promotion of the adoption 
of the standard 
This stage of the validation process was conducted as 
part of the ADR process as part of the “Build, Intervene 
and Evaluate” stage of the ADR process [34]. During this 
stage of the process “end-users” of the developed artifact, 
in this case the Assessment Method, trial the artifact in 
the context in which it will be used, in this case in a HDO 
setting. The focus of this phase is to ensure the utility of 
the developed artifact in a specific context. 
b) 
Stage 2 Validation – Standards Community 
In order to confirm the generalisability of the 
Assessment Method across a range of HDO contexts, the 
Assessment Method was also validated through expert 
review by members of the standards community from the  
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Sub-
Committee 62A and the International Organization for 

150
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 215 Joint 
Working Group 7 (JWG7). Members of this group are 
drawn from risk management stakeholders within HDOs, 
medical device manufacturers and providers of other IT 
technology. They are recognised as experts in their field 
and represent their country in this capacity. The focus of 
this stage of the validation is to ensure that the 
Assessment Method can be used across multiple HDO 
contexts, regardless of the regulatory environment in 
which the HDO operates. During this phase of the 
validation the Assessment Method was circulated to 
members of JWG7 for review. The Assessment Method 
was circulated with the MedITNet PRM and PAM and 
members were invited to make comments on any aspect 
of these components of MedITNet. The review by 
members of this group resulted in a number of changes to 
the Assessment Method including the provision of sample 
templates that could be used by HDOs during the 
performance of an assessment and in the preparation of 
the findings report for circulation to Top Management of 
the HDO.  
Table III presents the approach adopted for reviewing 
the comments. Each of the comments was assigned to one 
of the four categories listed in Table III and addressed 
accordingly. All comments were discussed during the 
comment resolution meetings and resolution was based on 
the expertise of the JWG7 group which included 
representatives 
from 
HDOs, 
medical 
device 
manufacturers and providers of other information 
technology. As the Assessment Method had been 
previously validated in a trial assessment, the comments 
received from JWG7 were largely editorial in nature and 
did not result in changes to the questions within the 
Assessment Method. In total, 298 comments were 
received related to the Assessment Method. A large 
number of duplicate comments were received. This was 
due to one reviewer who raised a comment for each 
instance of a particular issue, leading to a large number of 
comments being duplicated. 
During the comment resolution period, a total of 298 
comments related to the Assessment Method were 
received from members of JWG7. During an initial 
review of comments 202 comments were found to be 
duplicate comments and an additional four comments 
were deemed to be not applicable. Therefore, those 206 
comments required no changes to be made to the 
Assessment Method and have not been included in the 
following analysis of comments. An initial review of the 
remaining 92 comments was completed.  
While a large number of the comments received on the 
Assessment Method were small wording changes, some 
of the comments required changes to the overall structure 
of the technical report. These changes included the 
following:  
 
Assessment 
stages 
were 
listed 
before 
a 
description of each stage was provided  
 
Assessment questions were removed from the 
description of the stages of the Assessment 
Method and placed in the annex of the 
Assessment Method.  
 
Templates 
for 
conducting 
the 
assessment 
including a sample question template and a 
findings report template were also developed and 
placed in the annex.  
These changes were suggested to improve the 
usability of the Assessment Method and facilitate 
performance of both conformance and capability 
assessments and as such were made to the Assessment 
Method. The Assessment Method developed as part of 
this research along with the MedITNet PRM and PAM 
were published as ISO TR 80001-2-7, a Technical Report 
in the IEC 80001-1 family of standards [45]. 
TABLE III. COMMENT REVIEW APPROACH 
Comment  
Category:  
Review  
Approach: 
Duplicate 
Multiple comments received related to each instance of a 
specific issue.  
Comments are addressed based on the decision relating 
to first instance of the comment 
Editorial  
Comments 
Editorial comments are those that address the structure 
and flow of the technical report.  
Editorial comments are accommodated when they 
improve the structure, understanding and usability of the 
document and do not impact IEC 80001-1 requirements. 
Agreement is by consensus 
Wording  
Comments 
Wording comments relate to the wording or terms used 
within the technical report and include grammatical and 
typographical errors. 
Wording comments are accommodated when they 
improve the structure, understanding and usability of the 
document and do not impact IEC 80001-1 requirements. 
Agreement is by consensus 
Not  
Applicable 
Comments which are received that do not require any 
update to the Assessment Method. Examples of these 
comments include a statement of abstention or approval 
of the 
The performance of this stage of the validation:  
 confirmed the utility of the Assessment Method 
in a range off HDO contexts. This was possible 
due to the composition of JWG7 with members 
being drawn international experts representing a 
range of risk management stakeholders 
 confirmed that the questions used in the 
Assessment Method were understandable to 
various risk management stakeholders 
 confirmed that the structure of the Assessment 
Method was appropriate for use across a range of 
HDO contexts. 
 confirmed that the questions used in the 
Assessment Method are suited for use or can be 
tailored for use across a range of contexts. 

151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This stage of the validation process was conducted as 
part of the ADR process, again as part of the “Build, 
Intervene and Evaluate” stage of the ADR process [34]. 
During this stage of the process “pratitioners” in the field 
of the developed artifact, review the artifact in terms of its 
ability to be generalised and used across a range of 
contexts, in this within differing regultory environments 
in which the HDOs provide care. Practitioners from 
JWG7 reviewed the Assessment Method, as well as the 
PRM and PAM.The focus of this phase is to ensure the 
utility of the developed artifact(s) across a range of 
contexts. 
In addition to the review by members of JWG7, a 
focus group session was conducted with a selection of 
experts from the group. These experts were asked to 
comment on various aspects of the overall MedITNet 
framework. 
This 
again 
was 
conducted 
using 
a 
“Practitioner Review” approach as part of the ADR 
process [44]. The reviewers were asked to comment on: 
1. The utility of the assessment framework  
2. The usability of the assessment framework for 
self-assessment of risk management processes 
within a Healthcare Delivery Organisation  
3. The scalability and generalisability of the 
assessment framework  
4. The coverage of the requirements of IEC 80001-
1 by the MedITNet framework   
5. Suggestions for improvements to the assessment 
framework  
While the comments discussed the review focused on 
the overall MedITNet framework, a number of comments 
related to the Assessment Method specifically.  
During this session experts reported that the use of the 
Assessment Method and specifically the assessment 
questions resulted in risk management stakeholders 
having a greater understanding of the requirements of the 
IEC 80001-1 standard. The expert noted that being asked 
questions related to specific requirements of the standard 
gave participants in an assessment a greater understanding 
of the requirements than they would have gained by 
reading the standard alone [44]. It was also noted that, by 
having a means to assess the capability of the risk 
management processes, Top Management understood the 
weaknesses in the current processes and had a better 
understanding of why adoption of the standard was 
important.  
The performance of an assessment and the subsequent 
improvement of risk management processes also provides 
Top Management with a means to ensure that the benefits, 
which were intended to be provided to patients through 
the use of networked medical devices, were realised as 
expected. The experts also noted that the definition of the 
requirements of the standard at the level of processes in 
the PAM enabled the assessment questions to be tailored 
to take into account of the context in which the HDOs 
provide care. Experts further noted that the Assessment 
Method questions are beneficial as a starting point but 
noted that most HDOs would need to tailor the questions, 
not only based on the regulatory environment in which 
they provide care, but also based on the maturity level of 
the HDO in which the assessment is being performed. 
One expert taking part had been involved in a trial 
assessment in a different HDO to the one in which the 
trial assessment was performed. The expert noted that, 
while the questions in the Assessment Method are directly 
related to the base practice that is being assessed, these 
were rephrased during the assessment to use more open 
ended questions which were more appropriate to the 
context of the HDO being assessed. The rephrased 
questions did not focus as directly on assessing whether 
the base practices had been implemented but rather were 
phrased in a more open way that prompted a more general 
discussion of overall risk management processes before 
targeting the base practice in question. 
Experts also noted that the requirements of the IEC 
80001-1 standard had been covered in the MedITNet 
framework and also noted that the approach taken in the 
framework was consistent with the approach taken in IEC 
80001-1. The experts noted that an improvement may be 
made 
to 
the 
framework 
following 
more 
trial 
implementations. These implementations may be able to 
provide guidance on how the framework could be tailored 
based on the maturity of the HDO. Experts also suggested 
the inclusion of a document map within the framework 
and suggested that a mapping from the Assessment 
Method questions back to the requirements of the 
standard may be helpful. 
The performance of this stage of the validation:  
 confirmed 
the 
utility 
of 
the 
MediITnet 
Framework including the Assessment Method in 
a range off HDO contexts. This review served as 
a final “expert” and “enduser” review of the final 
version of the MedITNet Framework 
 confirmed that the usability of the framework 
across a range of HDO contexts and maturity 
levels 
 confirmed that therequirements of IEC 80001-1 
had been covered in the MedITNet framework 
 gathered suggestions from improvements to the 
MedITNet framework 
Each of these validation phases was performed 
iteratively as part of the ADR process and changes 
suggested by each phase of the validation were 
incorporated into the next version of the Assessment 
Method and the overall MedITNet framework.  

152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
While IEC 80001-1 takes steps to address the risks 
associated with the placement of a medical device onto an 
IT network, HDOs may face challenges in understanding 
and implementing the requirements of the standard. The 
MedITNet framework has been developed using Action 
Design Research in order to assist HDOs in addressing 
these challenges. The use of ADR ensures that the 
MedITNet 
Assessment 
Framework, 
including 
the 
Assessment Method, provides a consistent, repeatable and 
tailorable approach to the assessment of the capability of 
risk management processes related to the management of 
medical IT networks. An assessment of these processes 
can highlight weaknesses therein and can be used as a 
foundation for an improvement of risk management 
processes. The use of ADR ensures that the framework 
that was developed can be used in a specific context but is 
also suited for use across a range of HDO contexts. 
Effective risk management of medical IT networks ensures 
that the potential benefits of networked medical devices 
are realised while ensuring the safety of the patient is 
protected, the effectiveness of the device is assured and the 
security of the data and system are preserved. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Science Foundation 
Ireland Principal Investigator Programme, grant number 
08/IN.1/I2030 (the funding of this project was awarded by 
Science Foundation Ireland under a co-funding initiative 
by the Irish Government and European Regional 
Development Fund),and by Lero - the Irish Software 
Research Centre (http://www.lero.ie) grant 10/CE/I1855 & 
13/RC/20194. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. T. MacMahon, F. McCaffery, and F. Keenan, 
"Development of the MedITNet Assessment Method - 
Enabling Healthcare Delivery Organisation Self Assessment 
against IEC 80001-1," in First International Conference on 
Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration 
(FASSI 2015), Venice, Italy, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
[2] 
West Health Institute, "The Value of Medical Device 
Interoperability - Improving patient care with more than $30 
billion in annual health care savings," 2013. 
[3] 
A. Hamilton, R. Nau, R. Burke, S. Weinstein, C. K. B. Dlatt, 
S. Fiore, et al., "Summary of the August 2011 Symposium on 
the Role and Future of Health Information Technology in an 
Era of Health Care Transformation," The George Washington 
University, 2011. 
[4] 
I. Lee, G. J. Pappas, R. Cleaveland, J. Hatcliff, B. H. Krogh, 
P. Lee, et al., "High-confidence medical device software and 
systems," Computer, vol. 39, pp. 33-38, 2006. 
[5] 
N. Milenkovich. (March 15, 2013). OCR issues new HITECH 
regulations 
Available: 
http://drugtopics.modernmedicine.com/drug-
topics/news/drug-topics/health-system-news/ocr-issues-new-
hitech-regulations. [Accessed: 23-May - 2016] 
[6] 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, "42 CFR Parts 
412, 413, 422 et al. Medicare and Medicaid Programs; 
Electronic Health Record Incentive Program; Final Rule", 
Health and Human Services Ed., ed, 2010. 
[7] 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (10/04/2013). 
EHR Incentive Programs. Available: 
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html?red
irect=/ehrincentiveprograms. [Accessed: 23-May - 2016] 
[8] 
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A 
New Health System for the 21st Century. Available: 
https://download.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=10027 
[9] 
E. H. Wagner, "The role of patient care teams in chronic 
disease management," BMJ: British medical journal, vol. 
320, p. 569, 2000. 
[10] 
E. H. Wagner, B. T. Austin, C. Davis, M. Hindmarsh, J. 
Schaefer, and A. Bonomi, "Improving chronic illness care: 
translating evidence into action," Health affairs, vol. 20, pp. 
64-78, 2001. 
[11] 
C. Hoffman and D. Rice, "Chronic care in America: A 21st 
century challenge," Princeton, NJ: The Robert Wood 
Johnson Foundation, 1996. 
[12] 
J. Comstock. (2013, 23/01/2014). 14M networked medical 
devices 
to 
ship 
by 
2018. 
Available: 
http://mobihealthnews.com/28295/14m-networked-medical-
devices-to-ship-by-2018/. [Accessed: 23-May - 2016] 
[13] 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 
"Health IT for Improved Chronic Disease Management," 
Department of Health and Human Services, Ed., ed, 2013. 
[14] 
M. Castañeda, "Connecting devices and data on the 
healthcare 
network," 
Biomedical 
Instrumentation 
& 
Technology, vol. 44, pp. 18-25, 2010. 
[15] 
J. Goldman and S. Whitehead, "Advancing the Adoption of 
Medical Device "Plug-and-Play" Interoperability to Improve 
Patient Safety and Healthcare Efficiency," 2010. 
[16] 
K. K. Venkatasubramanian, S. K. S. Gupta, R. P. Jetley, and 
P. 
L. 
Jones, 
"Interoperable 
Medical 
Devices 
- 
Communication Security Issues," IEEE Pulse, vol. Sept/Oct, 
2010. 
[17] 
R. Hampton and R. Schrenker, "What Does IEC 80001-1 
Mean to You?," 24x7 - Technology and Service Solutions for 
Biomeds, 2011. 
[18] 
S. R. Rakitin, "Networked Medical Devices: Essential 
Collaboration for Improved Safety," AAMI.org, 2009. 
[19] 
S. Loughlin and J. S. Williams, "The top 10 medical device 
challenges," Biomedical Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 
45, pp. 98-104, 2011. 
[20] 
T. Mehta and C. Mah, "Auto-Provisioning of Biomedical 
Devices on a Converged IP Network," Biomedical 
Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 43, pp. 463-467, 2009. 
[21] 
T. Gee. (2008, 27/1/2012). Medical Device Networks Trouble 
Industry. Available: 
http://medicalconnectivity.com/2008/12/18/medical-device-
networks-trouble-industry/ [Accessed: 23-May - 2016] 
[22] 
S. Eagles, "An Introduction to IEC 80001: Aiming for Patient 
Safety in the Networked Healthcare Environment," IT 
Horizons, vol. 2008, 2008. 
[23] 
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration 
Center, "Attack Surface: Healthcare and Public Health 
Sector," ed, 2012. 
[24] 
D. Talbot. (2012, Computer Viruses Are "Rampant" on 
Medical Devices in Hospitals. MIT Technology Review. 
Available: 
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/429616/computer-
viruses-are-rampant-on-medical-devices-in-hospitals/. 
[Accessed: 23-May - 2016] 
[25] 
J. Graham and C. Dizikes, "Baby's death spotlights safety 
risks linked to computerized systems," in Chicago Tribune, 
ed, 2011. 
[26] 
J. Shuren, "Health Information Technology (HIT) Policy 
Committee Adoption/Certification Workgroup - Testimony 
of Jeffrey Shuren, Director of FDA's Centre for Devices and 
Radiological Health," ONC, Ed., ed, 2010. 
[27] 
S. Eagles, 2008. An Introduction to IEC 80001. IT Horizons, 
pp.15-19. 

153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[28] 
IEC, "IEC 80001-1 - Application of Risk Management for 
IT-Networks incorporating Medical  Devices - Part 1: Roles, 
responsibilities and activities," ed. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Electrotechnical Commission, 2010. 
[29] 
F. J. Hegarty, S. T. MacMahon, P. Byrne, and F. McCaffery, 
"Assessing 
a 
Hospital's 
Medical 
IT 
Network 
Risk 
Management 
Practice 
with 
80001-1," 
Biomedical 
Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 48, pp. 64-71, 2014. 
[30] 
T. Cooper and K. Fuchs, "The Wireless Challenge - 
Technology Risk Assessment In Healthcare Facilities," 
Biomedical Instruments and Technology, vol. May/June 
2013, 2013. 
[31] 
M. Janssen and R. Schrenker, "Guidelines From 80001: 
Maintaining 
a 
Medical 
IT 
Network," 
Biomedical 
Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 45, pp. 295-299, 
2011/07/01 2011. 
[32] 
S. T. MacMahon, F. McCaffery, S. Eagles, F. Keenan, M. 
Lepmets, and A. Renault, "Development of a Process 
Assessment Model for assessing Medical IT Networks 
against IEC 80001-1," presented at the Software Process 
Improvement and Capability Determination (SPICE) 2012, 
Mallorca, Spain, 2012. 
[33] 
S. T. MacMahon, F. McCaffery, and F. Keenan, 
"Transforming Requirements of IEC 80001-1 into an 
ISO/IEC 15504-2 Compliant Process Reference Model and 
Process Assessment Model," presented at the European 
Systems and Software Process Improvement and Innovation 
Conference, Dundalk, Co Louth, Ireland, 2013. 
[34] 
M. Sein, O. Henfridsson, S. Purao, M. Rossi, and R. 
Lindgren, "Action design research," 2011. 
[35] 
ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 15504-3:2004 Information technology -- 
Process assessment -- Part 3: Guidance on performing an 
assessment," ed. Geneva, Switzerland, 2004. 
[36] 
M. Busby, P. Buttles-Valdez, P. Byrnes, W. Hayes, R. 
Khetan, D. Kirkham, et al., "Appraisal Requirements for 
CMMI (Registered Trademark) Version 1.3 (ARC, V1. 3)," 
DTIC Document, 2011. 
[37] 
T. P. Rout, A. Tuffley, B. Cahill, and B. Hodgen, "The rapid 
assessment of software process capability," in First 
International Conference on Software Process Improvement 
and Capability Determination, 2000, pp. 47-56. 
[38] 
F. Wilkie, D. McFall, and F. Mc Caffery, "The Express 
Process Appraisal Method," 2005. 
[39] 
F. Mc Caffery, P. S. Taylor, and G. Coleman, "Adept: A 
unified assessment method for small software companies," 
Software, IEEE, vol. 24, pp. 24-31, 2007. 
[40] 
F. McCaffery and V. Casey, "Med-Adept: A Lightweight 
Assessment Method for the Irish Medical Device Software 
Industry," presented at the EuroSPI, Grenoble France, 2010. 
[41] 
B. Barafort, V. Betry, S. Cortina, M. Picard, M. St Jean, A. 
Renault, et al., ITSM Process Assessment Supporting ITIL : 
Using TIPA to Assess and Improve your Processes with ISO 
15504 and Prepare for ISO 20000 Certification vol. 217. 
Zaltbommel, Netherlands: Van Haren, 2009. 
[42] 
F. Mc Caffery and G. Coleman, "The development of a low-
overhead assessment method for Irish software SMEs," 
Journal of Information Technology Management (JITM), 
2007. 
[43] 
A. Anacleto, C. G. von Wangenheim, C. F. Salviano, and R. 
Savi, "Experiences gained from applying ISO/IEC 15504 to 
small software companies in Brazil," in 4th International 
SPICE Conference on Process Assessment and Improvement, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 2004, pp. 33-37. 
[44] 
S. T. MacMahon, F. Mc Caffery, and F. Keenan, 
"Development and Validation of the MedITNet Assessment 
Framework: Improving Risk Management of Medical IT 
Networks," presented at the International Conference on 
Software and System Process (ICSSP), Tallinn, Estonia, 
2015. 
[45] 
ISO, "ISO/TR 80001-2-7: 2015 Application of risk 
mangement for IT-networks incorporating medical devices -- 
Application guidance -- Part 2-7: Guidance for healthcare 
delivery organisations (HDOs) on how to self-assess their 
conformance with IEC 80001-1," ed. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Organisation for Standardisation, 2015. 
 
 

