164
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Mental Organization of Air Trafﬁc and its Implications to an Emotion Sensitive
Assistance System
Linda Pfeiffer, Georg Valtin, Nicholas Hugo M¨uller and Paul Rosenthal
Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz, Visual Computing Laboratory and Institute for Media Research
Chemnitz, Germany
Email: {georg.valtin, nicholas.mueller}@phil.tu-chemnitz.de,
{linda.pfeiffer, paul.rosenthal}@cs.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract—The StayCentered Project at Technische Universit¨at
Chemnitz aims for assisting air trafﬁc controllers in stressful
trafﬁc situations. Therefore, we are seeking to comprehend air
trafﬁc controllers’ principles of operation within the dyadic team
structure. First exploratory research revealed insights into air
trafﬁc controllers’ practices, their information processing (mental
models), potential stressors, and related emotional effects. This
paper discusses the results and the implications for air trafﬁc
controllers’ work in general and the StayCentered project in
particular.
Keywords–Air trafﬁc control; HCI; Decision Support; Mental
Models.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In our paper ”‘Aircraft in Your Head: How Air Trafﬁc Con-
trollers Mentally Organize Air Trafﬁc”’ [1] we presented ﬁrst
results on air trafﬁc controllers’ practices, their information
processing (mental models), potential stressors, and related
emotional effects. These were collected during semi-structured
interviews and observations at the facilities of the German
air trafﬁc service provider DFS in Munich and Langen. The
observations were limited to experiences with the P1/ATCAS
air trafﬁc management system. As there is a second air trafﬁc
management system (VAFORIT) in use at DFS Deutsche
Flugsicherung we decided to conduct further observations.
This article discusses the expanded results and their implica-
tions to the StayCentered project. In the ﬁrst sections we will
introduce the air trafﬁc controllers work, outline related work
in research, describe the interfaces currently in use at Deutsche
Flugsicherung and introduce the StayCentered project and
our goals. Section IV outlines the methods used to gain the
ﬁndings that will be discussed in Section V. The following
sections relate ﬁndings to the project context in terms of the
future mental and emotional model as well as future interfaces.
Section VIII summarizes and concludes the paper.
II.
THE WORK OF AN AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER DYAD
AS A POTENTIAL STRESSOR
German airspace is divided into sectors of differing size
and form. By traveling on an airway an aircraft passes several
sectors. In the state of normal operation, a dyad of two air
trafﬁc controllers is responsible for such a sector. Both have
access to task relevant information, such as radar data, weather
reports, and ﬂight schedules. Within the dyad, the air trafﬁc
controllers take different roles: one (executive) is responsible
for the communication with the pilots using spoken trafﬁc
commands over the radio, while the other one (planner) is
coordinating the acceptance or handover of ﬂights from or
to other sectors. This is necessary, since each sector has
its individual operation of ﬂight-levels and is generally only
accepting ﬂights within a certain ﬂight-level threshold in order
to keep a smooth vertical alignment between adjacent ﬂights.
While arranging the handovers, the planner is also responsible
to verify the communication between the executive and the
pilots and to intervene, if necessary. Therefore, the division
of responsibilities is not just depending on team coordination
regulations but on a good internal communication and a
transparent work situation. Expediting and maintaining orderly
trafﬁc ﬂows, without infringing separation minima, can be
characterized as the main goal of air trafﬁc controllers’ work.
However, the adherence to strict separation standards for safety
reasons sets nonnegotiable rules that act as constraints [2, p.
341]. The combination of these two characteristics results in a
demanding work, especially because air trafﬁc controllers have
to make most of their decisions in a narrow time frame [3] [4].
Due to the characteristics of their work and the general limi-
tations of the human ability to process information, air trafﬁc
controllers often experience time pressure [2, p. 339] that can
lead to a stress response. A stress response is the activation
of several physiological systems on the affective, cognitive,
neural, endocrinal, and muscular level [5] when individuals are
facing a stress inducing stimulus (stressor). However, stress
is not per se a negative state, since the evaluation of the
stressor depends on the interplay of the situational demands
and the abilities of the individual to cope with the situation [6].
Since time pressure is a situational characteristic in the daily
work of air trafﬁc controllers, the occurrence of negative stress
and its emotional and psychological consequences (short term:
anxiety, despondence, anger, cognitive impairments; long term:
fatigue, health issues, depression) is likely (see for instance
[7] [8]). Therefore, the reduction or rather avoidance of stress
inducing situations is an important goal in the daily work of
air trafﬁc controllers.
III.
STATE OF THE ART
Within this section we will have a brief look on related
research on modelling human emotions as well as on worload
and emotion sensitive user interfaces. We will consider the

165
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
state of the art in practice and, thus, describing the current
workspace of a German air trafﬁc controller.
A. Modeling Emotion
Albeit our own research within the domain of modeling
emotions via the simulation of the real world scenarios [9]
[10] [11] [12], there are numerous other attempts of calculat-
ing human emotions. The range of applications in this ﬁeld
varies greatly. For example, the correct pronunciation of text
to speech software depends on the software being able to
carry affective states [13], and the ability to correctly identify
human affective states might even increase social amicability in
human-robotic-co-existence [14]. In order to compute affective
states, emotions are viewed as values within the dimensions
of either valence, being positive (good emotions, e.g., joy) or
negative (bad emotions, e.g., fear, disgust) as well as the energy
provided to fuel an emotion by stating a factor for arousal
(high or low, the subject being either excited or calm) [15].
Analysis of emotional states in human subjects lead to the
conclusion that there is a correlation of self-reported arousal
and the activation of the sweat glands, leading to a higher
level of electronic conductance (galvanic skin response - GSR).
Since there is no correlation regarding the direction of the
valence, the GSR is a valid indication of the arousal level and
thus can be used as an objective measure [15] [16] [17]. The
objective measurement of a valence, however, is right now only
possible by implementing the Facial Action Coding System
as proposed by Ekman [18], since other measurements like
fMRI or fNIRS studies yielded varying results [19] [20]. Main
points of criticism about the modeling of human emotions,
however, are the missing experimental validation of models
and the sheer complexity of different psychophysiological pro-
cesses involved in establishing a certain emotional affect [21].
As Marinier and Laird point out, established computational
emotion models either rely on appraisal theories and the step-
by-step analysis and predictions of reacting to an event to
compute a corresponding emotion. Since these events can be
compared to self-reports and objective measurements like the
aforementioned skin conductance [22] they are exceptionally
well suited for a valid implementation. Neural Networks, on
the other hand, attempt to model brain activities related to
the emergence of emotional affections which can be linked
to actual observable processes as they happen inside the
brain [23] [24] and could be evaluated using brain imaging
techniques.
B. Emotion and Workload Sensitive User Interfaces
The detection and simulation of the humans emotional and
cognitive state is quiet useless without an adequate system
reaction. Emotion and workload sensitive user interfaces are
key issue of a whole research area (affective computing [25])
and are present in a multitude of areas of application. They are
widely considered within intelligent tutoring systems. Ranging
from piano teaching systems, increasing difﬁculty,when the
students workload is low, [26] to emotion sensitive systems
that support learning of the Japanese language by adapting the
difﬁculty of tasks to the emotional state of the student. The
effects of emotion and motivation on learning performance are
a well known relationship within educational research. [27]
So, within the last decade there was plenty of research done
on emotion sensitive tutoring systems. An overview can be
found in [28] and [29]. Even in application areas crucial to
safety there is a trend to affective system support: a minimal
invasive surgery robot controlled through a speech interface,
initializing safety feedback loops, when negative emotion is
detected in the surgeons command [30]; a mobile robot on
exploration tour with an astronaut, that reacts on the astronauts
anxiety level by assisting with hints or by triggering an alarm
and hurrying to the astronaut [31]; or a simple application that
redirects incoming calls to the mailbox, during high workload
in driving situations [32]. Emotion and workload sensitive
interfaces in air trafﬁc control are mainly part of the so called
adaptive automation research. Within adaptive automation the
tasks are dynamically allocated to the system and the human
controller. Thus, it is expected to counteract the out-of-the
loop performance problem and the loss of situational aware-
ness [33]. Parasuraman et. al compared a workload adaptive
Automation with an non-adaptive and a reverse workload
automation. They found an improved performance within the
workload adaptive situation [34]. According to Langan-Fox et.
al there is a huge corpus of research on measuring workload
and situational awareness in the area of air trafﬁc control [35].
In projects like NINA - Neurometrics Indicators for ATM
[36] workload measurement and the development of workload
adaptive interfaces are/were investigated. So far, emotions were
rarely considered for triggering adaption within the air trafﬁc
control context. We are seeking an adaptive user interface
sensitive to workload as well as to emotional and air trafﬁc
situation aspects.
C. The Layout of an Air Trafﬁc Controller’s Workspace
We had the chance to observe controllers at three control
centers of the German air trafﬁc service provider DFS. The
systems and the available visualizations and tools in use differ
between control centers. Working spaces in Langen and Mu-
nich (Fig. 1a) were comparable using the P1/ATCAS system,
whereas in Karlsruhe the VAFORIT system is used (Fig.
1b). This section outlines obvious similarities and differences
between the controllers workplaces.
What tools have these work spaces in common? Every
controller is working with a radar screen, that is showing
a top-down view on the sector. Each aircraft is shown as
a little icon (square) followed by some dots, indicating the
aircraft’s former positions. Each target is accompanied by a
label, showing the most important information (an example
is shown in Fig. 2). (Semi-)Static sector characteristics as
beacons, airways or restricted airspaces may be shown or
hidden. Tools for distance measurement on radar screen are
available and direction vectors of aircraft (a function of time
adopting constant ground speed and direction) are displayable.
Additional screens show on demand additional data, as aircraft
properties, meteorological data, or a status display. The status
display is a tool for communicating the own stress level to
other controllers and the supervisor. For further communication

166
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. The air trafﬁc controllers workspace at the air trafﬁc control centers in Munich (P1/ATCAS system) and Karlsruhe (VAFORIT system). The major
differences regard display polarity and the presence/absence of digital ﬂight progress strips. (Sources: DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH).
with other controllers and pilots each workplace includes a
phone and a radio communication equipment.
Figure 2. An aircraft target on a radar screen. The label shows callsign,
groundspeed, ﬂight level and rate of climb/descent. The history indicates the
speed and the aircraft’s tendency.
There obviously are differences in workplace design. The
radar display of the VAFORIT system has positive display
polarity. This means, in contrast to a negative display polarity,
that dark symbols are shown on a light background (Fig. 3).
With positive display polarity, there are less changes in pupil
dilatation, because the secondary screens have nevertheless
positive display polarity and surroundings are also rather light.
With a work place design, that needs less adaptions between
light an dark, there is less eyestrain [37]. Furthermore, a
positive display polarity provides better legibility of small
letters [38].
Figure 3. Example for negative (left) and positive display polarity (right).
The main difference between the systems is the use of ﬂight
progress strips for displaying ﬂight plan data. The advantages
of paper ﬂight progress strips, digital ﬂight progress strips and
systems without strips were discussed since the 1990s. Vortac
and Edwards et al. recommended, after analysis on ﬂight
progress strip activities, an automation of these, in order to
decrease controllers effort [39] [40]. Albright et al. investigated
the contollers operation methods, while paper ﬂight strips are
missed [41]. They found that there was a gain in time due to
the loss of strip marking, but that the presentation of ﬂight
plan data on every ﬂight at a time was perceived as more
informative. Scince then, systems with digital ﬂight progress
strips have been developed [42] [43] as well as systems without
any ﬂight progress strips. In contrast, MacKay advises against
replacing paper strips [44]. They take advantage of visual
and tactile memory, they are ﬂexible, reliable and support
cooperative work due to their physical presence and visual
forms of interaction. The advantages of automation bring the
necessity of electronic ﬂight strips about, while the reliability
and the whole functionality of paper ﬂight strips should be
kept [45]. A possible back door would be the use of augmented
ﬂight progress strips. Hurter et al. combined in their system
Strip’TIC the advantages of the digital and the physical world
[46] [47]. In Munich and Langen air trafﬁc controllers are
facing digital strips shown on a screen lying on the desk and
edited by a digitizer pen. (Fig. 4). The air trafﬁc controller
Figure 4. Digital ﬂight progress strips of the P1/ATCAS system at DFS
Deutsche Flugsicherung. Each aircraft is referenced by its callsign. Data as
ﬂight plan and cleared ﬂight level is provided by texts. The arrows at the
upper left corner indicate the overall direction of the aircraft’s route in 3
dimensions. (Source: DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH)

167
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in Karlsruhe has the possibility to access ﬂight plan data via
extended labels on the radar screen. Thus, making the use
of ﬂight progress strips (nearly) redundant. This difference
is resulting in slightly different routines in the air trafﬁc
controllers ways to reach their goals. Thus, making different
aspects of their work observable. There are further quite small
differences in interfaces, e.g., a different visualization of the
status display, but a complete analysis of them goes beyond
this section.
D. The StayCentered Project
Typically, the work of an air trafﬁc controller involves
managing various ﬂight routes, aircraft, and altitude as well
as air speed differences. Additionally, meteorological data,
technical maintenance activities or, in rare circumstances,
emergencies can occur at any given moment and require swift
and correct reactions by the controller. As air trafﬁc controllers
often work in dyads, in order to have an inherent corrective at
all time and to provide redundancies, the StayCentered project
at Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz aims for enhancing the
already high security standards of air trafﬁc controllers, and for
identifying as well as for offering assistance within cognitive
stressful ﬂight situations. Therefore, the dyadic team structure
has to be analyzed comprehensively: both their voiced inter-
actions between themselves and with the pilots within their
controlled airspace. The goal is to be able to identify human
error potential in voicing commands, interpreting visual data
representations and to identify limits in cognitive processing
capabilities. The resulting model of a working controller dyad
is then used to simulate the emotional and cognitive state of the
dyad in regards to upcoming air trafﬁc some hours in advance.
For example, planned but delayed ﬂights (e.g., a sandstorm
in Dubai and a thunderstorm in Moscow) will lead to an
increased number of aircraft in their destination sector. Flight
control management would then be able to split sectors and to
call in additional controllers in order to keep the workload
at a comfortable level. In addition, the controller stations
themselves already offer the possibility for the controllers to
signal an increased workload. However, the implementation of
the projects biophysiological measurements would allow for
an objective and immediate feedback to the controllers about
their current cognitive state and troubleshooting capabilities
[48], as well as for a workload regulation [49]. Therefore,
the galvanic skin response, facial action coding, body pos-
ture, vocal properties, eye movements and pupil dilation are
recorded and used to infer an emotion valence, arousal level,
and cognitive load [50]. The paper at hand presents a set of
initial exploratory studies. The identiﬁcation of parameters to
the emotional model as well as issues for an emotion sensitive
user interface in this context were possible.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
To assess whether or not an air trafﬁc controller experiences
stress and the associated negative emotions, it is necessary to
fully understand how the controller is receiving and processing
the crucial information and how this is converted into practical
actions. Since it is not possible to gain insight into the informa-
tion processing objectively from the outside, it is necessary that
the air trafﬁc controllers verbalize their cognitive processes.
For this purpose, we used semi-structured interviews outside
the work situation to gather general information about how air
trafﬁc controllers experience work-related stress and how they
cope with it. Among others, we let them describe exceptional
situations, which were especially demanding, how they solved
them, and how they felt afterwards. Furthermore, we used the
thinking-aloud approach in interviews to get a basic under-
standing on how air trafﬁc controllers process information.
We confronted them with a typical radar screen printout. The
sector and scenario were unknown to the participants. There
was a situation containing 8 aircraft described, a mid term
conﬂict of two aircraft with same heading and differing speed
and a lateral conﬂict of two aircraft with opposite heading,
but vertically divided. We asked them to evaluate the given
ﬂight situation regarding the salience of important information
as well as the order, in which critical data are perceived and
processed. Additionally, we observed the air trafﬁc controllers
during their work at the level of moderate participation,
allowing us to ask speciﬁc questions. Here, we also used the
thinking-aloud approach to get information and explanations
about certain actions and events. The observation under real
working conditions is especially important since cognitive and
emotional reactions are known to be a combination of person
and situation, and thus only the inclusion of the given situ-
ational characteristics allows for a meaningful interpretation
of the data gathered in the interviews. We decided to use
this combination of methods in an exploratory approach in
order to get the information of the air trafﬁc controllers as
authentic and natural as possible. Expressing thoughts, ideas
and considerations in their own words in an actual work
situation as well as in the reﬂecting, meta-cognitive form of an
interview appears to be the adequate methodical approach for
this kind of research problem. The data was collected between
February and April 2015 at the facilities of the German air
trafﬁc service provider DFS in Langen and Munich and in
August 2015 at the center in Karlsruhe. To assure a sufﬁcient
variability in the data, we interviewed and observed experi-
enced and novice air trafﬁc controllers likewise. Altogether,
we collected data of N=37 air trafﬁc controllers (age: 18 to
57). 21 of them are used to the ATCAS system and 16 to
the VAFORIT system. Since the evaluation of the air trafﬁc
controllers’ work requires a basic level of expertise regarding
the work station, work processes and air trafﬁc, all researchers
received an introduction to the air trafﬁc controller’s work by
an expert of the DFS before data collection. Since recording
audiovisual material is problematic due to security reasons,
all interviews and observations were recorded by pen and
paper. For the purpose of the analysis, all data was coded
and categorized. Due to the exploratory nature of the research,
we did not follow a standardized coding scheme. Instead, we
tried to identify all relevant factors regarding the cognitive
and emotional constitution and experiences of the air trafﬁc
controllers in relation so the given work situation.

168
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the air trafﬁc controllers mental situation
representation and its sources. Access to ﬂight plan data depends on
interface design.
V.
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
By fulﬁlling their daily tasks, air trafﬁc controllers face
highly demanding situations. They need to process plenty
pieces of information simultaneously that are arriving on
multimodal channels (primarily auditive and visual). Based on
this information, controllers have to make quick and reliable
decisions to ensure safety of the aircraft, and thus people,
under their control. We were able to identify procedural,
communicative and emotional aspects that form the controller’s
course of action.
A. Procedural Aspects
Procedural aspects deal with the mental organization of air
trafﬁc by a controller. This includes their work organization,
their information processing and their internal representation
of the ﬂight situation. In order to ensure save and ﬂuid trafﬁc
ﬂows the air trafﬁc controller has to have a good overview of
the air trafﬁc situation. Thus, he constructs and continuously
updates a mental representation that is mainly based on ﬂight
plan data, the controllers experiences and internalized knowl-
edge on sector characteristics. This representation includes
more than just the current situation but also a prediction future
air trafﬁc situations. The controllers stated that their prediction
reaches about 3 minutes into future in order to proactively
control the trafﬁc. The current situation, as shown by the
radar screen, is continuously cross-checked against the mental
representation (Fig. 5). In the whole process of building and
updating the internal representation and cross-checking the role
of the radar screen differs between systems. This depends on
the place where ﬂight plan data is presented. In a system
with digital or paper ﬂight progress strips the radar screen
is rather a secondary tool that is used for cross-checking. But
the inclusion of ﬂight plan data into radar screen makes it the
most important tool for the air trafﬁc controllers work. We also
asked the controllers to describe the structure of their mental
representation. While in literature mental representations of
air trafﬁc situations are often described as somewhat three
dimensional models [51] [52], our controllers explicitly stated
that they do not build up a three dimensional model of the
situation. They described it as two dimensional, similar to the
radar display that is expanded by a variable indicating vertical
layers. Other studies revealed that air trafﬁc controllers [53]
[54] and already controller students [55] do not necessarily
build up a three dimensional mental model. Each of them
develops an individual mental structure to represent the three
dimensional data over time. In situations where the controller
ﬁrst constructs his representation (e.g., during a handover)
he has to consider ﬂight plans as well as current positions.
The ﬁrst variable controllers focus on, while scanning the
radar display, is altitude information and whether an aircraft
is climbing or descending. After this, aicrafts heading and
position are considered and lastly, ground speed gives a hint on
the existence of a potential conﬂict. Likewise, Rantanen et al.
identiﬁed in their experiments [2] altitude as the information
that is processed ﬁrst for conﬂict detection. Mogford et al.
emphasized altitude and heading as the most important infor-
mation for air trafﬁc controllers situation awareness [51]. In
standard situations, when a ﬂight strip appears that represents
an airplane that is about entering the sector soon, the controller
is ﬁrst looking for the route the aircraft is tending to take and
at which ﬂight level. For ﬁrst conﬂict detection, the controller
is checking overﬂight times at the ﬁxes. If overﬂight times
are overlapping ten minutes to the ones of another ﬂight he
marks a potential conﬂict. When the involved aircraft appears
on the radar screen, the controller is checking a second time
for the conﬂict and then improving gradually the quality of
his prediction about a potential problem. First, he is estimating
vertical and horizontal separations according to his experience
(rule of thumb). He can use distance measuring tools provided
by the system on the radar screen, but he is also able to do
exact calculations using mental arithmetics, if necessary.
The observation of the air trafﬁc controllers working these
differing systems revealed some interesting aspects about the
controller routines. Although the VAFORIT system can be
operated without any ﬂight progress strips, there is still a
digital representation of them shown in an additional screen.
All controllers stated that they do not need these strips. Nev-
ertheless, they used them. The functionality of ﬂagging a strip
was still used as a reminder for oneself or the team partner.
By sorting the strips by the cleared ﬂight level the controllers
gained an overview of the vertical situation in airspace. This
fact shows the importance of the altitude information once
again. There are small arrows on the ﬂight progress strips
in Karlsruhe, that indicate from which roughly direction the
aircraft is arriving and where it is going (in 3 dimensions).
These are also used by the controllers for an overview of
movements. Furthermore, the number of ﬂight strips is also
an indicator for the amount of work coming up in the next 10
to 20 minutes. This is often inﬂuencing the controllers decision
on allowing directs or the like. At some point during the air
trafﬁc controllers work (e.g., while considering a request) it
is necessary to check the current position of an aircraft, that
isn’t visible in the current map excerpt, shown by the radar
screen. In Munich and Langen it was observed, that controllers
started zooming and moving the map while scanning the map
with the eyes for this aircraft. In Karlsruhe the controllers
used the functionality of showing the aircraft’s intended route
and thus, they found the target more rapidly. Controllers
also stated that there are situations where the information is

169
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
needed whether the handover to a following sector has passed
successfully. This is also an information that was accessed
through the ﬂight progress strips in both of the systems.
Another clearly observable point in between systems is the
importance of handwritten notes. While in the P1/ATCAS
system free strip marking can be used for communication with
the team partner, there is no corresponding functionality in the
VAFORIT system provided. But some controllers used pen and
paper for writing notes, as a reminder for themselves or their
team partner.
B. Communicative Aspects
The air trafﬁc controllers work is a highly cooperative
work. There is long term (e.g., with the team partner) as
well as short term (e.g., with pilots) cooperation necessary
to ensure save air trafﬁc. Our communicative ﬁndings take
the communication partners and the communication channels,
as well as the controllers perception of cooperative group-
ings, into account. In order to ﬁgure out with whom the air
trafﬁc controllers afﬁliate themselves we asked them for the
term ’team’. When we initially used the word team within
the context of air trafﬁc controllers, we had the air trafﬁc
controller dyad in mind. However, the air trafﬁc controllers
understanding of team covers more than initially assumed.
On the one hand, they used the term when speaking about
all the air trafﬁc controllers responsible for German airspace
and adjacent sectors. When recognizing a potential conﬂict
situation that would happen in the neighboring sector, but could
be prevented or already solved within their own sector, they
would do so. When recognizing a conﬂict situation within
an other sector, they would warn the responsible controller.
When recognizing that controllers responsible for an adjacent
sector have high trafﬁc load and they are stressed, they try
to keep further trafﬁc away from that sector or try to avoid
more stress for their colleagues by organizing the ﬂights in
their own sector in a way that makes them easy to handle in
the next one. This understanding of a team is also supported
by the fact that air trafﬁc controllers are on a ﬁrst-name basis
with each other. On the other hand, the term team was used
while talking about the air trafﬁc controllers organizational
entity. In German air trafﬁc control centers, there are groups
of air trafﬁc controllers that are responsible for several neigh-
boring sectors. These sectors share borders and in times of
low trafﬁc load they can be combined. Each controller out
of this group has the admission to work on every position
within these sectors. Thus, each of the controllers will at
any time constitute a dyad with any controller out of this
group. Beyond these afﬁliations there are further cooperation
necessary. We identiﬁed the following cooperation partners and
the communication channels in between. An overview is shown
in Figure 6. Short-term collaboration with pilots consists of
speech over radio using predeﬁned terms and routines in order
to minimize the number of misunderstandings. If suitable
equipped, there is also the possibility to send text messages
to the aircraft. This is not yet common, but controllers like
the decrease of misunderstandings in numbers about it. The
supervisor communicates to the controllers through the display
pilot
supervisor
air traffic controller team
another team
•
radio
•
text messages
•
phone
•
face-to-face
•
status display
•
text messages
•
duty roaster
•
phone
•
face-to-face
•
status display
•
speech
•
handwritten notes
•
marking flights
•
gestures
Figure 6. Overview of communication partners and channels. Beside
cooperation within the dyadic team, the executive gives instructions to pilots
and the planner coordinates handovers with the other sectors planners. The
supervisor is responsible for the duty roaster and sector splitting.
of a duty roster. Change requests, rapid updates, and the like
are communicated via telephone connection. But it has been
observed that both sides are often leaving their place, going
to and talking to the other one about these concerns. Most of
the communication is happening within the dyad responsible
for a sector. Both, the executive and the planner have to
build up a shared mental picture of the situation and keep
it updated. In order to do so and to solve potential conﬂicts,
they communicate using gestures (pointing gestures to guide
the others attention onto the screen, sometimes they are also
using the other ones mouse), the ﬂagging of ﬂight strips (to
highlight potential conﬂicts), and handwritten notes (either on
digital ﬂight strips or an extra sheet of paper), but speech
remains the dominant communication channel. Nevertheless,
both verbal and nonverbal communication within the dyadic
team are crucial to good cooperation. The importance of
nonverbal communication (strip marking and observation of
the partners actions) additional to speech was also highlighted
by Soraji et al. [56]. In times of high trafﬁc load, controllers are
sitting up straight, speaking concisely about trafﬁc concerns.
In times of low trafﬁc load they are more relaxed and they are
chatting with each other and the surrounding controllers. For
coordination in between sectors, the planner is talking to other
dyads via telephone, except for the ones sitting spatially near to
him, they are addressed directly. Similar to the communication
with pilots, this cooperation is guided by regulations and rou-
tines. Additionally, in Karlsruhe controllers have the possibility
to submit their requests via text messages. They like about it,
that they do not disturb the other controllers line of thought
at a speciﬁc moment. Another tool for controller to controller
communications is the status display also called Geneva trafﬁc
light. This display shows a color (green, yellow, red) for each
sector with green being the default color for normal trafﬁc
load. By setting this color, controllers can communicate their
current workload to other controllers and to the supervisor.

170
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The status display was introduced due to controllers wishes
to communicate their stress level. The visual presentation
differs between systems. However, the status display is rarely
used. Some controllers do not even recognize it as a tool for
communicating their stress level, but as a tool for getting an
overview of the sectors that are opened or combined. The status
display is experienced as neglected. Most air trafﬁc controllers
have no clue when to switch the color to yellow and if they do
they feel as if the other controllers ignore their stressed state.
However, in the case that they are really stressed then there
is often no time left for remembering to switch their status to
red.
C. Emotional Aspects
Regarding the emotional aspects of an air trafﬁc controller
and their impact on work results, there are numerous factors
involved. Since we want to assist the controllers in stressfull
situations in order to prevent negative emotional and psycho-
logical consequences, one focus was to identify the stressors
in the air trafﬁc controllers work. During interviews the air
trafﬁc controllers mentioned three main stressors:
High Trafﬁc Load
The crucial factor for trafﬁc load is the number of
aircraft under control. However, the resulting work-
load goes beyond the sheer number. The structure of
the airspace and standard routes as well as directions
of the aircraft have an impact on perceived complex-
ity. Plenty of vertical movements, as in approach
sectors and sectors in the lower airspace, and lots
of crossing trajectories increase the probability for
potential conﬂicts.
Unexpected Events in the Airspace
Since air trafﬁc controllers tend to have a detailed
picture of upcoming events, unconsidered events
may cause additional load, since they often re-
quire a swift reaction while simultaneously adding
a unknown variable to their calculations. Usually,
these are events that are neither listed in nor log-
ical consequences of ﬂight plan data. Initially, we
considered emergency ﬂights as unexpected things
causing stress because air trafﬁc controllers have
to clear the way for them. However, most of the
emergencies will already be marked in the actu-
alized ﬂight plan by the pilots. Thus, they can be
regarded as expected trafﬁc with a higher priority,
making them just another variable in the air trafﬁc
controller’s mental model. Even closures of single
airports are not surprising, because every ﬂight has
an alternative destination stated in its ﬂight plan.
However, an unplanned aircraft calling in or ﬂights
within their sector boundaries, which are not under
their control, are stress inducing factors. Hence, a
pilot who forgot next sectors frequency, just asking
for it once again, may cause more confusion than
emergencies, because the controller already deleted
the associated ﬂight strip and thus also removed the
ﬂight and callsign already from his mental model.
Malfunction of Equipment
Generally, the air trafﬁc controller is dependent on
his equipment. Without radar display the controller
has to rely on the pilots following his instructions
without any misapprehensions. Without ﬂight plan
data, the controller would loose the ability to proac-
tively regulate air trafﬁc. Still, air trafﬁc controllers
emphasized especially malfunction of the radio as
problematic. Without the ability to communicate
with the pilots the air trafﬁc controllers are com-
pletely incapable of action. They do not know about
pilots’ plans and are not able to forewarn them of
an upcoming danger. For these reasons there are for
each system independent fallback systems in use at
DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung.
Other Things Indirectly Being Relevant
For efﬁciently building their mental picture, air
trafﬁc controllers rely mostly on their experiences
and internalized information, such as standard routes
and sector borders. If controllers are returning after
a period of absence (e.g., illness or holidays), they
perceive their work as more demanding, due to
changes in standard routes, sector boundaries, or
agreements. Also, other impact factors like gen-
eral well-being, mood, private problems, etc. were
mentioned by air trafﬁc controllers to inﬂuence the
work performance. Therefore, personal factors often
change the perceived demands. According to the air
trafﬁc controllers’ experience, the same taskload can
be experienced differently.
These results on potential stressors align with the ﬁve most
stressful items found by Brink [57]. South African air trafﬁc
controllers rated the number of aircraft, extraneous trafﬁc,
unforeseeable events, peek hour trafﬁc and limitations, and
reliability of the equipment to be most stressful factors out of
a questionnaire with 20 items.
Emotional aspects within the air trafﬁc controller’s work
include awareness of own sentiments and awareness of the
emotional state of others. Generally, controllers stated that
there are no crucial emotional situations. Sometimes private
problems cause the controller to “concentrate a little more”
but usually they know how to act out of them. After a critical
situation at work they are in need of someone to talk to. Often
they prefer talking to their colleagues about it. Except for the
controllers wish to do so, they have to visit Critical Incident
Stress Management sessions by regulations. During follow-up
discussions some other situations were identiﬁed. Air trafﬁc
controllers said they are feeling proud, after managing a tricky
situation smoothly. They have a sense of delight, when pilots
thank them for satisfying their wishes (e.g., a direct). During
long periods of low trafﬁc the predominant sense is boredom.
The most important indicator for the others emotional state is
the sound of their voice and their choice of words, especially
during communication using telephone or radio. Succinct an-
swers indicate elevated concentration. During communication
with their spatial neighbors, gestures and poses can be accessed
additionally for emotional awareness.

171
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI.
IMPLICATIONS TO THE MODEL
From a psychological point of view, it is not surprising that
the mental and emotional states of air trafﬁc controllers are
inﬂuenced by personal as well as situational characteristics.
However, without a detailed analysis of the air controllers
work, it is impossible to specify the relevant variables and
their parameter values. Based on the collected data we are now
able to consider precise variables in our model. Regarding the
situational aspects, the number of aircraft as well as their ﬂight
characteristics are the main aspects for potential workload, and
of course the available time is also relevant. Further research is
necessary to identify the concrete relationship between those
variables. However, it is already clear that there is limit on
how many interactions can take place between the air trafﬁc
controller and pilots, because every interaction takes several
seconds. Considering the well-known relationship between
arousal and performance on difﬁcult tasks [58], such as the
work of an air trafﬁc controller, we assume that the optimal
efﬁciency lies far below the physical limit of interactions.
It has still to be determined how to express the comfort
zone of air controllers by an index. One potential solution
is the indication of interactions per minute with the option to
weight interactions depending on the situation’s complexity.
The model requires two kinds of critical values for the index
that signals a possible overload: One is relating to situational
peaks, which can be understood as episodes of high workload
in a rather short time frame. The other one is applying to longer
periods of time with an increased workload that is higher
than the optimum but lower than the situational peak. Both
kinds of overload can result in mistakes, incorrect decisions
or just slower reactions and must be prevented. Even though
German air trafﬁc controllers can be considered a homogenous
group of specialists who are able to work under pressure,
the critical values must be personalized due to differences in
personality related factors. Our data suggest that many typical
personality variables affect the work of air trafﬁc controllers,
such as mood, alertness, work experience, private problems,
absence due to vacation, or sickness, etc. The main problem
for the consideration of those variables is their problematic
measurement: Many of them are only available to the air
controllers themselves, and even they are not always able to
fully specify all factors that might inﬂuence their performance
or to quantify them. Furthermore, many of those variables
are changing on a daily basis, even though they should not
ﬂuctuate that much. Therefore, the personality factors can be
used to improve the index based on the situational variables.
Simply put: The critical values can be adjusted depending
on how an air trafﬁc controller feels - if this information is
available - or based on objective information like the absence
of a controller for several weeks, which lets him experience
the work as more demanding during the ﬁrst days of his
work. For a short-term evaluation of the air controllers state,
additional diagnostics will further improve the determination
of the personality variables inﬂuence. Additionally, a cross-
validation and combination, respectively, with psychophysio-
logical parameters, eye-tracking, voice characteristics, facial
emotion expression as well as poses and gestures will also
help to classify ﬂight situation regarding their complexity. For
instance, a more complex problem will result in longer times of
ﬁxation on the involved ﬂights, an increased skin conductance,
shorter voice-commands, a straighter body position and a stern
facial expression. Therefore, our model must take many vari-
ables into account, some global and some situational. Things
become even more complicated, since the air trafﬁc controllers
are usually working together as a dyad. The model has to
take into consideration not only the individual parameters, but
also the speciﬁcs of the team. The same ﬂight situation in
a sector might result in excessive demands for one dyad but
present an acceptable challenge to a team of veterans. This
additional set of team related variables complicated the model,
since questions about the structures and relationships between
all the variables contained in the model are not fully answered
yet.
VII.
IMPLICATIONS TO THE INTERFACES
One of the main goals of the StayCentered project is to
identify and to offer assistance within cognitive stressful air
trafﬁc situations. Current interfaces have to be rethought in
order to give access to the identiﬁed and simulated mental
and emotional states. The StayCentered interfaces will be
designed to give decision support to the supervisor, to facilitate
cooperation, and to adapt with respect to the controller’s
current state and overall supporting the controllers routines
and mental models.
At the moment the supervisor’s decision upon splitting up
a sector is done by consulting workload predictions, mainly
based on the expected number of aircraft, and on the air trafﬁc
controllers demands. The StayCentered supervisor interface
will present the simulation’s forecasts over time. Anticipated
stressful or tedious situations should be visible at a glance and
supporting decision making on resolving these situations.
As described, cooperation and communication are crucial
elements of the air trafﬁc controllers daily work. These com-
municative situations shall be supported by the interfaces. It is
still an open point why controllers tend to leave their place for
consulting their supervisor in situations of low trafﬁc. This is
a potential risky situation. There should be adequate ways of
communication. The controllers workspace should be designed
in such a way that the actions of one controller are clearly
visible to his partner in the dyad. Thus, we are expecting to
support the creation of a shared mental model and enhancing
communication. The most obvious advantage of the StayCen-
tered system is that the status display can change its color
automatically and providing an objective measurement on the
controllers stress level. However, also the displays presentation
could be enhanced. Currently, each sector is represented by a
colored button (green-yellow-red) on a secondary screen. This
part may also be hidden by some other information. Additional
short textual remarks for the sectors in stressful situations
are available. A permanent visible graphical presentation of
this information (possibly integrated into radar screen) would
make it accessible at a glance. Another important feature of
nowadays interfaces is the possibility to generate reminders,
either through ﬂagging of ﬂight strips or through handwritten

172
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
notes. This feature of communication shall be kept in some
way. Additionally, notes can also be used for personal work
organization and reminders.
The interface adaption with respect to the controller’s state
applies to the interfaces at the controllers workspace. The
information presentation is independent of the controllers emo-
tional and communicative state, his workload, and the com-
plexity of the actual ﬂight situation. However, the importance
of information objects differs from situation to situation. We
are currently conducting a survey to identify these differences.
A positive effect of an automation degree adapting on the air
trafﬁc controllers workload was already presented by related
work, e.g., [34] and [59]. Also, visual adaption of the interfaces
has been investigated [60]. But an adaption on emotional state
is still an open point.
StayCentered controller interfaces will consider the iden-
tiﬁed state of the controller as an indicator for the chosen
representation. We want to pay special attention to situations
of low trafﬁc load, because in these situations controllers
often feel bored. Since boredom has a negative impact on
their attention, we want to consider these situations within the
design of the adaptive interface as well. Good user interfaces
support the user’s mental models and their procedures. Recent
research on air trafﬁc controllers’ interfaces often considers
three-dimensional and even stereoscopic radar displays (e.g.,
[61] [62] [63] [64]). According to our data, the controller’s
mental model of a ﬂight situation is not necessarily three-
dimensional. Therefore, we would prefer a two-dimensional
representation with an implicit coding of altitude information.
The interface should allow for stepwise adaption of conﬂict
prediction to the required accuracy. Thus, it should also support
distance measurement methods at a different granularity. The
controllers need a good overview of vertical and horizontal
movements in their sector. Furthermore, they need quick access
to data about aircraft, not yet visible on their current radar
view. Allover the air trafﬁc controllers would be glad to have
access to their own workload predictions. In order to have a
more precise prediction that they can use for doing decisions
upon pilots wishes. Thus, this information should be included
into the controllers interfaces.
VIII.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Within this paper we described the StayCentered project at
Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz that aims for assisting air
trafﬁc controllers’ work by identifying and simulating the air
trafﬁc controller dyad’s mental and emotional states. Within
this context we presented the results of our preliminary study
and discussed its implications for the mental and emotional
models as well as for the user interfaces.
We identiﬁed high trafﬁc load with plenty of vertical move-
ments, unexpected events and a malfunction of the equipment
as the most relevant stressors in air trafﬁc control. Furthermore,
stress level is inﬂuenced by personal factors. The controllers
stated not to create a three-dimensional mental representation
of ﬂight situations. The information used to create the mental
representation consists of internal knowledge about the sectors
characteristics and standard routes, their experience and ﬂight
plan data. For checking the current situation, information
is processed in the following order: altitude, climb/descent,
horizontal position, heading, and speed on ground.
The order of information processing should be reﬂected
within the user interfaces, as well as the structure of the
air controllers mental model. Identiﬁed forms of communi-
cation should be supported, especially visibility of the part-
ners actions. Workarounds, which are currently used by the
controllers, should be included into future interfaces. The
automatic recognition of the air trafﬁc controller’s workload
and emotional state allows for further improvement in the
workﬂow.
Our ﬁndings suggest that sufﬁciently modeling the cognitive
and emotional states of air trafﬁc controllers requires the
inclusion of many variables regarding the individual controllers
as well as the dyad and the current workload. The next steps
in the process of model building are the identiﬁcation of other
relevant variables and generally their measurement and further
processing. Even though we already know that cognitive and
emotional states can be recognized using our multidimensional
approach, the relationships between the variables still needs
further research. Possible methodological approaches include
the recording of actual or simulated work sessions in com-
bination with post-hoc interviews in order to identify critical
or demanding situations. By comparing the measurement data
with the information given by the controller, we can identify
typical patterns that signal stressful episodes, which can be
used in our model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the Germany Federal
Ministry of Education and Research in the project StayCen-
tered - Methodenbasis eines Assistenzsystems f¨ur Centerlotsen
(MACeLot). Furthermore, we thank the German air navigation
service provider DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH for their
support.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Pfeiffer, G. Valtin, N. H. M¨uller, and P. Rosenthal, “Aircraft in
your head: How air trafﬁc controllers mentally organize air trafﬁc,”
in HUSO 2015 - The First International Conference on Human and
Social Analytics.
IARIA, October 2015, pp. 19 – 24.
[2]
E. M. Rantanen and A. Nunes, “Hierarchical conﬂict detection in air
trafﬁc control.” International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 15,
no. 4, 2005, pp. 339 – 362.
[3]
V. D. Hopkin, Human Factors in air trafﬁc control.
Taylor & Francis,
1995.
[4]
R. J. Roske-Hofstrand and E. D. Murphy, “Human information pro-
cessing in air trafﬁc control,” in Human Factors in Air Trafﬁc Control,
M. W. Smolensky and E. S. Stein, Eds.
Academic Press, 1998, ch.
Human information processing in air trafﬁc control, pp. 65–114.
[5]
J. Siegrist, “Stress am arbeitsplatz [stress at the workplace],” in Gesund-
heitspsychologie [Health Psychology], R. Schwarzer, Ed.
G¨ottingen:
Hogrefe, 2006, pp. 303–318.
[6]
R. S. Lazarus, Emotion and Adaptation.
Oxford University Press,
1991.
[7]
B. McEwen and J. Morrison, “The brain on stress: Vulnerability and
plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course,” Neuron, vol. 79,
no. 1, 2013, pp. 16 – 29.

173
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8]
D. N. Khansari, A. J. Murgo, and R. E. Faith, “Effects of stress on the
immune system,” Immunology Today, vol. 11, 1990, pp. 170 – 175.
[9]
L. Pfeiffer, N. H. M¨uller, G. Valtin, M. Truschzinski, P. Protzel,
P. Ohler, and P. Rosenthal, “Emotionsmodell fr zuknftige mensch-
technik-schnittstellen zur untersttzung von centerlotsen,” in Proceedings
der 57. Fachausschusssitzung Anthropotechnik der DGLR, M. Grandt
and S. Schmerwitz, Eds.
Bonn: Deutsche Gesellschaft fr Luft- und
Raumfahrt - Lilienthal-Oberth e.V., 2015, pp. 219–232.
[10]
N. H. M¨uller and M. Truschzinski, Human-Computer Interaction: De-
sign and Evaluation: 17th International Conference, HCI International
2015, Los Angeles, CA, USA, August 2-7, 2015, Proceedings, Part I.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015, ch. Analytical Steps for
the Calibration of an Emotional Framework, pp. 512–519.
[11]
M. Truschzinski, H. . Dinkelbach, N. Mller, P. Ohler, F. Hamke, and
P. Pretzel, “Deducing human emotions by robots: Computing basic non-
verbal expressions of performed actions during a work task,” in 2014
IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control (ISIC), Oct. 2014,
pp. 1342–1347.
[12]
N. H. M¨uller and M. Truschzinski, Human-Computer Interaction.
Advanced Interaction Modalities and Techniques: 16th International
Conference, HCI International 2014, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, June
22-27, 2014, Proceedings, Part II.
Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2014, ch. An Emotional Framework for a Real-Life Worker
Simulation, pp. 675–686.
[13]
Y. Gao and W. Zhu, “Detecting affective states from text based on
a multi-component emotion model,” Computer Speech & Language,
vol. 36, 2016, pp. 42 – 57.
[14]
A. M. Zanchettin, L. Bascetta, and P. Rocco, “Acceptability of robotic
manipulators in shared working environments through human-like re-
dundancy resolution,” Applied Ergonomics, vol. 44, no. 6, 2013, pp.
982 – 989.
[15]
P. J. Lang, M. K. Gereenwald, M. M. Bradley, and A. O. Hamm, “Look-
ing at pictures: Affective, facial, visceral, and behavioral reactions,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 30, no. 3, 1993, pp. 261–273.
[16]
M. M. Bradley, B. N. Cuthbert, and P. J. Lang, “Startle reﬂex modiﬁ-
cation: Emotion or attention?” Psychophysiology, vol. 27, no. 5, 1990,
pp. 513–522.
[17]
E. W. Cook, L. W. Hawk, T. L. Davis, and V. E. Stevenson, “Affective
individual differences and startle reﬂex modulation,” Journal of Abnor-
mal Psychology, vol. 100, no. 1, Feb. 1991, pp. 5–13.
[18]
P. Ekman, Ed., Emotion in the human face: Guidelines for research and
an integration of ﬁndings, 2nd ed.
New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1982.
[19]
P. Sarkheil, A. Zilverstand, N. Kilian-Htten, F. Schneider, R. Goebel,
and K. Mathiak, “fmri feedback enhances emotion regulation as evi-
denced by a reduced amygdala response,” Behavioural Brain Research,
vol. 281, 2015, pp. 326 – 332.
[20]
T. Watanuki, K. Matsuo, K. Egashira, M. Nakashima, K. Harada,
M. Nakano, T. Matsubara, K. Takahashi, and Y. Watanabe, “Precentral
and inferior prefrontal hypoactivation during facial emotion recognition
in patients with schizophrenia: A functional near-infrared spectroscopy
study,” Schizophrenia Research, vol. 170, no. 1, 2016, pp. 109 – 114.
[21]
R. W. Picard, Affective Computing.
MIT Press, 2000.
[22]
R. P. Marinier and J. E. Laird, Encyclopedia of the Mind.
SAGE
Publications Inc., 2013, ch. Computational Models of Emotion, pp. 166
– 167.
[23]
X.-F. Shi, Z.-L. Wang, A. Ping, and L.-K. Zhang, “Artiﬁcial emotion
model based on reinforcement learning mechanism of neural network,”
The Journal of China Universities of Posts and Telecommunications,
vol. 18, no. 3, 2011, pp. 105 – 109.
[24]
J. L. Salmeron, “Fuzzy cognitive maps for artiﬁcial emotions forecast-
ing,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 12, no. 12, 2012, pp. 3704 – 3710,
theoretical issues and advanced applications on Fuzzy Cognitive Maps.
[25]
R. W. Picard, Affective Computing.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997.
[26]
B. F. Yuksel, K. B. Oleson, L. Harrison, E. M. Peck, D. Afergan,
R. Chang, and R. J. Jacob, “Learn piano with bach: An adaptive learning
interface that adjusts task difﬁculty based on brain state,” in Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ser. CHI ’16.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 5372–5384.
[27]
P. A. Schutz and R. Pekrun, Eds., Emotion in education.
Elsevier
Academic Press, 2007.
[28]
M. Malekzadeh, M. B. Mustafa, and A. Lahsasna, “A review of emo-
tion regulation in intelligent tutoring systems.” Journal of Educational
Technology & Society, vol. 18, no. 4, 2015, pp. 435 – 445.
[29]
A. Mohanty, “Affective pedagogical agent in e-learning environment:
A reﬂective analysis,” Creative Education, vol. 7, 2016, pp. 586–595.
[30]
B. Schuller, G. Rigoll, S. Can, and H. Feussner, “Emotion sensitive
speech control for human-robot interaction in minimal invasive surgery,”
in RO-MAN 2008 - The 17th IEEE International Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication, Aug. 2008, pp. 453–458.
[31]
P. Rani and N. Sarkar, “Emotion-sensitive robots - a new paradigm for
human-robot interaction,” in Humanoid Robots, 2004 4th IEEE/RAS
International Conference on, vol. 1, Nov 2004, pp. 149–167.
[32]
W. Piechulla, C. Mayser, H. Gehrke, and W. Knig, “Reducing drivers
mental workload by means of an adaptive manmachine interface,”
Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour,
vol. 6, no. 4, 2003, pp. 233 – 248.
[33]
M. R. Endsley and E. O. Kiris, “The out-of-the-loop performance
problem and level of control in automation,” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 37, no. 2,
1995, pp. 381–394.
[34]
R. Parasuraman, M. Mouloua, and B. Hilburn, “Adaptive aiding and
adaptive task allocation enhance human-machine interaction,” Automa-
tion technology and human performance: Current research and trends,
1999, pp. 119–123.
[35]
J. Langan-Fox, M. J. Sankey, and J. M. Canty, “Human factors mea-
surement for future air trafﬁc control systems,” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 51, no. 5,
2009, pp. 595–637.
[36]
G. Borghini, P. Aric`o, F. Babiloni, G. Granger, J.-P. Imbert, R. Ben-
hacene, L. Napoletano, and S. Pozzi, “NINA : Neurometrics Indicators
for ATM,” SID 2013, SESAR Innovation Days, Nov 2013, sID 2013,
3rd SESAR Innovation Days, Stockholm, Su`ede.
[37]
D.
Z¨uhlke,
Nutzergerechte
Entwicklung
von
Mensch-Maschine-
Systemen: Useware-Engineering f¨ur technische Systeme.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, ch. Der Mensch und
seine F¨ahigkeiten, pp. 5–34.
[38]
C. Piepenbrock, S. Mayr, and A. Buchner, “Positive display polarity
is particularly advantageous for small character sizes: Implications for
display design,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, vol. 56, no. 5, 2014, pp. 942–951.
[39]
O. Vortac, M. B. Edwards, J. P. Jones, C. A. Manning, and A. J. Rotter,
“En route air trafﬁc controllers’ use of ﬂight progress strips: A graph-
theoretic analysis,” The International Journal of Aviation Psychology,
vol. 3, no. 4, 1993, pp. 327–343.
[40]
M. B. Edwards, D. K. Fuller, O. Vortac, and C. A. Manning, “The
role of ﬂight progress strips in en route air trafﬁc control: a time-series
analysis,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 43,
no. 1, 1995, pp. 1 – 13.
[41]
C. A. Albright, T. R. Truitt, A. B. Barile, O. Vortac, and C. A. Manning,
“How controllers compensate for the lack of ﬂight progress strips.”
FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute, University of Oklahoma Dept. of
Psychology, Tech. Rep., 1996.
[42]
S. Fukushima, “Electronic ﬂight progress strip prototype for en route
atc,” Aerospace and Electronic Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 38,
no. 1, Jan. 2002, pp. 119–127.
[43]
N. A. Doble and R. J. Hansman, “Experimental evaluation of portable
electronic ﬂight progress strips,” in Digital Avionics Systems Confer-
ence, 2004. DASC 04. The 23rd, vol. 1, Oct. 2004, pp. 51 – 11.
[44]
W. E. MacKay, “Is paper safer? the role of paper ﬂight strips in air trafﬁc

174
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
control,” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 6, no. 4, Dec. 1999,
pp. 311–340.
[45]
F. T. Durso and C. A. Manning, “Spinning paper into glass: transforming
ﬂight progress strips,” Human Factors and Aerospace Safety, vol. 2,
no. 1, 2002, pp. 1–31.
[46]
C. Hurter, R. Lesbordes, C. Letondal, J.-L. Vinot, and S. Conversy,
“Strip’tic: Exploring augmented paper strips for air trafﬁc controllers,”
in Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces, ser. AVI ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp.
225–232.
[47]
C. Letondal, C. Hurter, R. Lesbordes, J.-L. Vinot, and S. Conversy,
“Flights in my hands: Coherence concerns in designing strip’tic, a
tangible space for air trafﬁc controllers,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 2175–2184.
[48]
T. Van Gog, F. Paas, and J. J. G. Van Merri¨enboer, “Uncovering
expertise-related differences in troubleshooting performance: combining
eye movement and concurrent verbal protocol data,” Applied Cognitive
Psychology, vol. 19, no. 2, 2005, pp. 205–221.
[49]
S. Crevits, I.and Debernard and P. Denecker, “Model building for air-
trafﬁc controllers’ workload regulation,” European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, vol. 136, 2002, pp. 324–332.
[50]
H.-C. She and Y.-Z. Chen, “The impact of multimedia effect on science
learning: Evidence from eye movements,” Computers & Education,
vol. 53, no. 4, 2009, pp. 1297–1307.
[51]
R. H. Mogford, “Mental models and situation awareness in air trafﬁc
control,” The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 7, no. 4,
1997, pp. 331–341.
[52]
S. T. Shorrock and A. Isaac, “Mental imagery in air trafﬁc control.”
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 20, no. 4, 2010, pp.
309 – 324.
[53]
B. Kirwan, L. Donohoe, T. Atkinson, H. MacKendrick, T. Lamoureux,
and A. Phillips, “Getting the picture-investigating the mental picture
of the air trafﬁc controller,” in Contemporary ergonomics 1998, M. A.
Hanson, Ed.
TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, 1998, pp. 404–408.
[54]
C. Niessen and K. Eyferth, “A model of the air trafﬁc controller’s
picture,” Safety Science, vol. 37, no. 23, 2001, pp. 187 – 202.
[55]
M. Tavanti and M. Cooper, “Looking for the 3d picture: The spatio-
temporal realm of student controllers,” in Human Centered Design, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, M. Kurosu, Ed.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 5619, pp. 1070–1079.
[56]
Y. Soraji, K. Furuta, T. Kanno, H. Aoyama, S. Inoue, D. Karikawa, and
M. Takahashi, “Cognitive model of team cooperation in en-route air
trafﬁc control,” Cognition, Technology & Work, vol. 14, no. 2, 2010,
pp. 93–105.
[57]
E. Brink, “The relationship between occupational stress, emotional
intelligence and coping strategies in air trafﬁc controllers,” Master’s
thesis, University of Stellenbosch, 2009.
[58]
R. M. Yerkes and J. D. Dodson, “The relation of strength of stimulus
to rapidity of habit-formation,” Journal of Comparative Neurology and
Psychology, vol. 18, no. 5, 1908, pp. 459–482.
[59]
B. Schaab, “The inﬂuence of ascending and descending levels of
workload on performance,” Automation Technology and Human Per-
formance, 1999, pp. 218–220.
[60]
K. Harper, S. Guarino, and G. Zacharias, “Adaptive human/machine
interface for advanced air trafﬁc management,” in AIAA Guidance,
Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit.
American Institute
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2000.
[61]
M. S. Burnett and W. Barﬁeld, “Perspective versus plan view air trafﬁc
control displays: Survey and empirical results,” Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 35, no. 2,
1991, pp. 87–91.
[62]
M. Lange, T. Dang, and M. Cooper, “Interactive resolution of conﬂicts
in a 3d stereoscopic environment for air trafﬁc control,” in Research,
Innovation and Vision for the Future, 2006 International Conference on,
Feb. 2006, pp. 32–39.
[63]
S. Bagassi, F. De Crescenzio, and F. Persiani, “Design and evaluation
of a four-dimensional interface for air trafﬁc control,” Proceedings of
the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace
Engineering, vol. 224, no. 8, 2010, pp. 937–947.
[64]
D. J. Bergner and C. Schmand, “Fortschrittliche Visualisierungssysteme
f¨ur Fluglotsenarbeitspl¨atze,” TE im Fokus, 2012, pp. 7–13.

