23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
  Data Merging for the Study of Eye Diseases in Relation to Demographic and 
Weather Factors in Telangana State, India    
 
Amna Alalawi1, Les Sztandera2, Dr. Richard Derman3, Parth Lalakia4, Anthony Vipin Das5, Gumpili Sai Prashanthi6 
 
1DMgmt in Strategic Leadership Program, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Amna.Alalawi@Jefferson.edu 
 
2Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Les.Sztandera@Jefferson.edu 
 
3Global Health Research, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Richard.Derman@jefferson.edu 
 
4Global Affairs, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Parth.Lalakia@jefferson.edu 
 
5 Department of EyeSmart EMR & AEye, Indian Health Outcomes Public Health and Economics Research Centre (IHOPE), 
LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
Email: vipin@lvpei.org 
 
6 Department of EyeSmart EMR & AEye, Indian Health Outcomes Public Health and Economics Research Centre (IHOPE), 
LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
Email: saiprashanthi.g@lvpei.org 
 
 
Abstract – Big data is the new gold in today’s VUCA 
world. VUCA is a systems-derived acronym used to 
refer to a volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous 
system. Taking a holistic approach in studying and 
examining big data can yield new insights that can 
benefit healthcare practitioners and decision-makers in 
a VUCA system. This study explores advancing the 
method to collect and process Electronic Medical 
Records (EMR), to expand the interest in the use of big 
data in health care. The objective of this study was to 
determine whether the EMR record in LV Prasad Eye 
Institute (LVPEI) in India can contribute to the 
management of patient care, through studying how 
climatic and socio-demographic factors relate to eye 
disorders and visual impairment in the State of 
Telangana, using data merging as the main technique to 
study the data. Our findings highlighted the presence of 
cataract in rural areas and throughout the different 
weather seasons. Men tend to be the most, while home 
makers make the most visit to the hospital.  
 
Keywords –big data; ophthalmology; ocular diseases; artificial 
intelligence. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This extended research is based on the critical global 
healthcare issue of examining the demographic and weather 
factors that correlate to the development of eye diseases in 
Telangana, India. A brief presentation of the topic was 
addressed at the Ninth Data Analytics 2020 Conference in 
Nice, France [1]. Responding to the major interests from the 
discussions in Nice, this research includes more statistical 
analysis of the relationship, as well as a detailed explanation 
of the systems-approach method used to study the data. 
India is home to over 8.3 million people with Vision 
Impairment (VI), the highest in the world [4]. Even though, 
in 1976, India became the first country in the world to start a 
national program for control of blindness for the goal to 
reduce blindness prevalence to 0.3 percent by 2020, the 
prevalence of blindness still stands at 1.99 percent, 
according to the National Blindness and Visual Impairment 
Survey, released in October 2019 by the Union Ministry of 
Health and Family [2]. The prevalence of blindness and 
visual impairment is one of the highest in Telangana, a state 
in Southern India, as inferred from survey [2]. The 
significant reasons indicated in the survey were due to 
cataract and refractive error [3].  
All surveys in the country have shown that cataract is 
the most common cause of blindness and all prevention of 
blindness 
programs 
have 
been 
“cataract-oriented.” 

24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
However, it has recently been recognized that the visual 
outcome of the cataract surgeries, as well as the training of 
ophthalmologists has been less than ideal.  
This study uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning techniques to explore a dataset containing 
information on 873,448 patients who visited LV Prasad Eye 
Institute (LVPEI), a multi-tier ophthalmology hospital 
network, based in Hyderabad. The data was extracted from 
Eye Smart, the name given to the hospital’s Electronic 
Medical Record (EMR) and health management system. 
The EMR was then merged with climatic factors to test the 
correlation between climatic variables and ocular diseases 
presented by the patients [4]. Studying risk factors, 
primarily associated with climate and the environment can 
lead to a better understanding of the causes, diagnosis, and 
treatment of several eye diseases [6]. 
In healthcare, ophthalmology deals with the diagnosis 
and treatment of eye disorders. Some known diseases in 
ophthalmology are cataracts, retinal disorders, macular 
degeneration, and others. The relatively rapid and recent 
adoption of EMRs in ophthalmology has been associated 
with the promise that the accumulation of large volumes of 
clinical data would facilitate quality improvement and help 
answer a variety of research questions. Given that EMRs are 
relatively new in most practices and that clinical data are 
inherently more complex than other fields that have been 
altered by the digital revolution, these proposed benefits 
have yet to be realized [5]. 
With the rise of big data, it has now become easier to 
study how culture, race, climate, and other socio-
demographic factors correlate to the spread of ocular 
diseases. This has shed light on recent research in medicine 
and ophthalmology. An investigation has been conducted 
with an aim for the application of AI-based hierarchical 
clustering as a tool to optimize the in total excellence, 
values, and the security for the Adult Spinal Deformity 
Surgery (ADS) [17]. It has been observed that prior to this 
the ADS classification was based on certain radiographic 
parameters which have been correlated with the patient 
related outcomes. But the problems faced immensely by the 
researchers is to separate out the patients and the patterns 
manually that is in turn was based on hundreds of data 
parameters and the process was considered to be practically 
not feasible.  
Therefore, as a methodological approach for every 
probable cluster of patient (N) done on the basis of (M) 
surgery were normalized for two year enhancement and the 
massive rate of complication were computed. Thus, this 
particular 
study 
has 
therefore, 
highlighted 
that 
unsubstantiated hierarchical clustering of the patterns of 
findings that helps to initiate the prior operative judgment 
making by formulating a two-year risk benefit grid. In this 
way the novel AI-ASD pattern of classification and 
identification have helped to diminish the risk and overall 
improvement [17]. It should be mentioned that smaller cities 
face a lot of difficulties to maintain the sustainable welfare 
of countries in amalgamation with notable standards of 
living [18].  
In another investigation, the emergency bases of 
hospitalization along with the causes of mortality were 
utilized as the replacements of frailty. The researchers used 
to two different models to assign the deteriorating risk score 
to every subject of the elderly population residing within the 
Municipality of Bologna, Italy [18]. The study design was a 
cohort study with of 58 789 subjects as sample size for 
overall six years with a four-year monitoring period. The 
study findings reported excellent power of discrimination 
along with calibration that demonstrated an excellent 
anticipating ability of the models utilized [18].  
In this respect, another study could also be illustrated 
that had utilized the application of health administrative 
databases along with authenticated algorithms to show a 
correlation in between the residential proximity towards 
foremost roadways along with the prevalence of three major 
neurological diseases like dementia, multiple sclerosis, and 
Parkinson’s disease [19]. This particular study design was 
also a cohort study based on two different populations 
having the age group in the range of 20–50 years with 
sample size of 4.4 million suffering from multiple sclerosis 
and the matured adult groups having the age range of 55–85 
years with sample population size of 2·2 million suffering 
from dementia or other Parkinson’s disease. The researchers 
of the study estimated the associations among the following 
parameters such as the traffic proximity, incidence of 
dementia, Parkinson’s disease, and the multiple sclerosis 
using the model of Cox proportional hazards which would 
also take into consideration of certain individualistic 
contextual parameters such as any injury to brain, diabetes, 
and the local income [19].  
The study demonstrated the successful application of the 
health record databases along with the specialized analytical 
tool for the categorization of patterns of large or big data 
[19]. In today’s world, the relationship based on function in 
between the non-coding RNA (ncRNA) and the varied types 
of human diseases, is considered to be a central task within 
the field of modern research for the formulation of effective 
therapeutic approaches.  
 In Section 1, we discuss the methodology used in the 
study, breaking the sections down to explaining the 
systematic approach used as a framework for studying the 
date, and an explanation into the computer software used, 
Microsoft Power BI, to explain the data merging technique. 
In Section 2, we discuss the analysis and highlight the 
specific statistical tools and methods used to investigate the 
study of several demographic and climatic factors that 
impact upon the individuals in Telangana. Section 3 focuses 
on providing a thorough analysis of the data findings. 
Section 4 highlights key findings and trends, and Section 5 
includes the conclusion and recommendations pertaining to 
the use of big data and data merging in EMR to reveal new 
insights in the study of visual impairment and eye disorders 
in Telangana. 

25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
A. 
Systematic-Approach Using the DIKW Pyramid 
 
Data science, a discipline that has been emerging over 
the past few years, centers on analyzing data. Since there is 
no specific definition of data science, we relied on the 
explicit meaning of the term, and therefore decided to work 
on complex data sets and determine a way through which it 
can be evaluated. To make the process simpler, we decided 
to study the data from a holistic approach. Putting a 
framework in place, helped us in creating a plan for 
studying the data to achieve results that can be of use and 
that can identify and analyze patterns in the data sets, which 
can be used for future clinical practices.  
The following Data, Information, Knowledge, and 
Wisdom (DIKW) pyramid framework was chosen as the 
main framework that explains the reasons for transforming 
the data. By transforming the data into information, we 
gained certain knowledge about the topic which then was 
transformed into wisdom that helped us in not only 
conducting the investigation effectively, but also to gain 
effective understanding about the research topic. The 
readers can also rely on this wisdom to gain conceptual 
clarity and understanding of the subject matter.  
 
           The DIKW Pyramid 
 
Figure 1. DIKW Pyramid  
Figure 1 depicts the DIKW Pyramid. Dr. Russel Ackoff, 
wrote that "wisdom is located at the top of a hierarchy of 
types," suggesting that as the highest level of the hierarchy 
of types, wisdom is somehow superior to the types below it. 
Subsequent depictions of the knowledge hierarchy typically 
exclude the understanding level [22]. Ackoff's hierarchy 
does not require that data transform into information, 
information into knowledge, or knowledge into wisdom. 
Instead, he stated that each category is included in the next. 
For example, there can be no wisdom without understanding 
and no understanding without knowledge [22]. Big data 
analytical tools have a strong potential that allows 
healthcare professionals to gander upon the clinical data 
stored within repositories and assist in the process of 
informed making of decisions. Today, especially with the 
COVID-19 situation, the healthcare sector is making use of 
AI for a wide range of findings. 
Social researchers are now expected to possess various 
skills and abilities, in particular, the ability to apply 
qualitative methods. Such researchers are also expected that 
they acknowledge as well as explain their personal 
positioning. This is mainly due to ‘subjectivity’. Every 
person has their own thoughts and opinions; due to this 
reason, another researcher exploring the same topic might 
have a different perspective which will be seen through their 
investigation. Such differences in perceptions and ‘frames 
of mind’ influence the way the study is carried out and 
understood by the readers [24]. As Morison [24] has 
written: “Sociological research is a complex enterprise 
involving a dynamic interplay between personal values, 
theories and practical data gathering skills. Different 
sociologists, looking at the same community but not starting 
from the same theoretical viewpoint, may direct their 
attention to different aspects of the place they are studying 
and come up with extremely contrasting results.” 
B. Data-Merging Using Microsoft Power BI 
 
To gain insight into the climatic and socio-demographic 
factors that correlate to the risk of ocular diseases in the 
State of Telangana, we used multiple approaches utilizing 
AI and statistical software and programming languages, 
including Microsoft Power BI and Python to explore the 
dataset, which contained information on 873,448 patients 
complaining of eye disorder symptoms across multiple 
categories of ocular diseases. Publicly available climatic 
variables were obtained and aligned to the dataset through a 
process called column mutation, and then examined by 
Microsoft Power BI, which heavily relies on visual 
illustrations and statistical storytelling to present findings 
and new insights. It should be noted that Microsoft Power 
BI is considered an assortment of software or apps which all 
together works in amalgamation to transform the unrelated 
sources of data into a visually pattern oriented, continuous 
and dynamic insights. Column mutation, which is the 
merging of datasets, was done through Python, an 
interpreted, object-oriented programming, that codes the 
columns in a language called Syntax. It works out on the 
principle of logical and arithmetic computation. This tool 
has an advantage to handle large and complex datasets.  
The process was however timely given the large volume 
of patients. The process was repeated more than once to 
ensure minimal error in the merging process. Microsoft 
Power BI was then used to model the data in order to obtain 
the visualizations and insights. 
 

26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
III. ANALYSIS 
It has proven valuable to first observe which diseases are 
the most prevalent in the different areas of Telangana, and 
what age and gender are most affected to get a full 
understanding of the criticality of the eye disorder epidemic 
and to provide a baseline against which to compare the 
climate and patient demographic variables examined.  
The use of EMRs in generating new insights has been an 
increasing trend in the area of ophthalmology. Research in 
ophthalmology has benefited greatly from the use of EMRs 
in expanding the breadth of knowledge in areas such as 
disease surveillance, health services utilizations and 
outcomes. In addition, the quantity of data available has 
increased, that it is now highly recommended to work on 
data linkage systems in eye research, as such data can offer 
insights into advantages and limitations for future direction 
in eye research [6]. 
The timespan of this dataset is between 2011-2019, a 
total of 8 years. There has been consistency to already 
known information through the analysis, specifically on 
gender and age-related eye conditions. Creative featuring 
techniques have been used to shed the light on the most 
critical variables through trial and error of testing for 
relationship in accordance to eye disease. 
The master dataset or the big data, which was explored 
and analyzed, covered clinical visits are from the year 2011-
2019, and included demographic information of the patient, 
including age, gender, profession, data of visit, district of 
resident, and symptoms and diagnosis of the patient in 
relation to eye disease. To look further into this issue, we 
merged climate variables to the dataset to explore the 
relationship with eye disorders. The AI approach can be of 
varied 
types 
namely 
conventional symbolic 
AI, 
Computational intelligence, and statistical tools or the 
combination of all of the above. Here in the present 
assignment the Computational intelligence approach has 
been adopted for the analytical purpose [23].  
The climate variables we examined were average 
temperature, minimum temperature, maximum temperature, 
humidity, rainfall, and solar radiation. This data was 
retrieved from the Telangana State Development Planning 
Society in the state of Telangana. The findings that relate to 
temperature and its effect on Cataract in older age was 
consistent in high and low temperatures.  
IV. FINDINGS AND TRENDS 
This section highlights key findings of the study, as well 
as trends in relation to the subject matter as per the 
demographic and climatic variables tested. 
 
A. Gender and Eye Disorders 
 
First, we broke down the data to understand which 
gender in Telangana has a higher rate of risk in developing 
eye diseases. This break- down helped us to understand the 
cultural background of Indian culture among men verses 
women. 
         Gender and Eye Disorders 
 
Figure 2. Clinical Visits by Gender (2011-2019) 
        Figure 2 indicates that between the years 2011-2019, 
53% of the patients were male patients who were seen for 
eye disorders, and 47% were female patients. This finding is 
in line with the gender study that was conducted on 2.3 
million patients of all those who presented to LV Prasad 
Institute from the years 2011-2019 [4]. Globally, one of the 
social determinants of health that has been universally 
identified is gender. In India, health inequalities between 
men and women have played a pivotal role in disease 
development, including eye disorders. With respect to eye 
care, women have been generally cited to have higher rates 
of blindness in India and are less likely to access appropriate 
eye services [7][8]. However, as we can see from the study 
which was focused on Telangana, this is not the case, as 
male patients exceeded female patients, and this could be 
for the reason that Telangana has been ranked as one of the 
top ten innovative and developed states in India according to 
the India Innovation Index 2019 [15] where access to 
healthcare is available and appreciated by both male and 
female.  
India has been one of the countries where efforts to 
strengthen the evidence-base for blindness control has 
received significant attention from policy planners and 
program managers. Over the past four decades, a series of 
population-based blindness and visual impairment surveys 
have been undertaken in India, using different survey 
methods. This included detailed eye examination surveys, as 
well as rapid assessments [8].  
B. Occupation and Clinical Visits  
 
Second, to dig deeper into understanding the culture, we 
studied the occupation of the patients to determine what 
could be posing a high risk in terms of where someone 

27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
spends the day the most. The study showed that home 
makers, employees in the government and private sectors, 
and students make the top three categories who visited the 
clinic the most. 
 
 
Percentage of Clinical Visits by Occupation  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Clinical Visits by Profession (2011-2019) 
 
 
Figure 3 depicts this analysis and portrays the top six 
professions taken from the analysis. We can also see that 
workers in Agriculture and manual laborers tend to present 
themselves with eye disorders as well, and that could be to 
the nature of the job, in which they are exposed to certain 
chemicals, dust, and usually work in heated environments. 
Recent estimates from the World Health Organization 
indicate that 90 per cent of all those affected by visual 
impairment live in the poorest countries of the world [9]. 
India is home to one‐fifth of the world's visually impaired 
people and therefore, any strategies to combat avoidable 
blindness must take into account the socio‐economic 
conditions within which people live [9].  
Home makers could also translate to housewives, who 
are at higher-risk of visual disorders, and this is in line with 
a study that was conducted in 2009 on women in Indian 
culture, where it showed that housewives are more likely to 
suffer from heart diseases than working women, and that is 
due to lack of education, lifestyle that is based on 
obesityand cultural myths that do not focus on women’s 
health. Having a similar study related to eye disorders and 
visual impairment, as per the study based on the sample of 
the population from Telangana, the same pattern can be seen 
and it can potentially be from these similar reasons [10]. 
C. Location and Eye Disorders (Older Age 41-70) 
 
Third, we broke down the data to understand the 
location of the patient, and whether there are underlying 
reasons in a specific location for a higher rate of risk to 
developing eye diseases. The study was broken down into 
examining the location by different age groups. 
     Number of Visits by Location (Age 41-70) 
 
Location 
Number of Visits 
Paloncha 
5471 
kothagudam 
2930 
kothagudem bazar 
2684 
Manuguru 
2380 
Bhadrachalam 
2287 
Yellandu 
1867 
Adilabad 
1634 
Tekulapalli 
1432 
Burgampahad 
1309 
Madhapur 
1126 
 
Figure 4. Location and Eye Disorders in Older Age Population 
 
Figure 4 shows the locations that people with eye 
disorders come from and is focused on the older age 
population. Cataract seemed to be the most disease that has 
affected older age in Telangana, which is the clouding of the 
natural human lens. Cataract is a condition known to affect 
older age, and this study revalidates the information. 
 
D. Location and Eye Disorders (Younger Age 11-20) 
 
The second age group that was studied as per the 
relation to the location of the patient was the younger 
population, who we defined from the data as being between 
the ages 11-20. 
 
 
Number of Visits by Location (Age 11-20) 
 
Location 
Number of Visits 
Paloncha 
601 
Madhapur 
325 
Adilabad 
256 
Bhadrachalam 
226 
kothagudam 
177 
kothagudem bazar 
168 
Nagarkurnool  
132 
Manuguru 
128 
Gachiowll 
127 
Kondapur 
116 
Yellandu 
116 
 
Figure 5. Location and Eye Disorders in Younger Age Population 
 

28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
        Figure 5 shows the location that people with eye 
disorders come from and is focused on the younger age 
population. Astigmatism, which is an irregularity of the 
shape of the cornea was present in younger age population. 
Astigmatism has been linked to being a hereditary condition 
in ophthalmology. 
In both contexts, it appeared to be that eye disorders are 
mostly concentrated in residents from the district of 
Paloncha, and even though this district has a higher literacy 
rate than state average is 77%, 10% higher than that of the 
state average which is at 67%, it has been reported that it 
has been hit with pollution and contaminated water in 2015. 
The state-run thermal power plant installed in 2015 caused 
pollution and health disorders including eye disorders [11]. 
Residents complained of gray water, and doctors in 
Paloncha confirmed that the prolonged exposure to air and 
water pollution has led to higher incidences of respiratory 
diseases, tuberculosis, skin diseases, blurring of vision and 
irritation in the eyes, such as Cataract, Cornea, Anterior 
Segment, Retina, and Glaucoma [11].  
E. Consistent Prevalence of Cataract in Rainfall  
 
Fourth, we broke down the data to understand the 
correlation between the number of visits and rainfall. The 
sample data was huge, and therefore we limited the study to 
understand right-eye diseases, as the classifications in Eye 
Smart were according to right-eye diseases and left-eye 
diseases separately. 
 
 
Number of Visits for Right-Eye Diseases by Cumulative 
Rainfall 
 
Right eye Diseases 
Cumulative 
Rainfall 
Number of 
Visits 
Cataract 
2.11 
4126 
Myopia 
2.11 
8058 
Emmetropia 
2.10 
15253 
Pseudophakos 
2.12 
5837 
Presbyopia 
2.15 
5820 
Senile Cataract 
2.05 
8134 
Intraocular Lens 
2.03 
3146 
Hypermetropia 
2.13 
4164 
Simple Myopia 
2.12 
7686 
Astigmatism 
2.12 
4172 
 
Figure 6. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Rainfall 
 
Figure 6 shows the diseases that affect the right eye the 
most when tested alongside rainfall. Globally, cataract is the 
single most important cause of blindness, and the second 
most common cause of Moderate and Severe Vision 
Impairment (MSVI) according to the Global Burden of 
Disease, Injuries and Risk Factors Study, and it is most 
predominant in Southeast Asia. Cataract contributed to a 
worldwide 33.4% of all blindness and 18.4% of all MSVI. 
Translating the same into actual numbers, cataract caused 
blindness in 10.8 million of overall 32.4 million blind and 
visual impairment in 35.1 million of 191 million visually 
impaired individuals [13]. 
The close relationship between climate, environment and 
the development of Cataract is crucial to understand for 
future preventative measures. In Telangana, it shows that 
Cataract is the disease most prevalent in rainfall.  
F.  Consistent Prevalence of Pterygium in Relation to 
Global Radiation  
 
Fifth, we broke down the data to understand the 
correlation between right-eye diseases and global radiation. 
Similar to the previous study of number of visits and 
rainfall, the sample data was huge, and therefore we limited 
the study to understand right-eye diseases. 
 
 
Right-Eye Diseases as Influenced by Global Radiation 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Global Radiation 
 
   Figure 7 shows the diseases that affect the right eye the 
most when tested alongside global radiation. We analyzed 
patients who presented with degeneration symptoms, and 
correlated the diagnosis to climatic factors, such as 
humidity, rainfall, temperature and global radiation. The 
above analysis shows the top 5 most prevalent degeneration 
right-eye diseases as impacted by global radiation. 
Pterygium shows to be most prevalent at over 46% of the 
total global radiation value.  The analysis was done on a 

29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
patient basis and not a disease basis, as the data showed that 
one patient can develop more than one disease. 
G. Consistent Prevalence of Pterygium in Relation 
to Windspeed  
 
Finally, we broke down the data to understand the 
correlation between right-eye diseases and windspeed. 
Similarly again, the sample data was huge, and therefore we 
limited the study to understand right-eye diseases. 
 
 
Right-Eye Diseases as Influenced by Windspeed 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Windspeed 
 
Figure 8 shows the diseases that affect the right eye when 
tested alongside windspeed. The analysis above shows the 
top 5 most prevalent right-eye diseases with degeneration as 
a symptom and how the diseases are influenced by 
maximum windspeed. Presbyopia, Cataract, and Pterygium 
were the most present among patients and concentrated at 
average maximum windspeed of between 10.2 and 10.9. 
As concluded from the research, the healthcare EMR 
system is large and complex, one that does not naturally 
lend itself to easy analysis, design or even understanding. 
Therefore, the complexity and critical nature of the system 
beg for the development and use of good, representative 
models [25]. As per the case study of the research, to 
analyze the data in Eye Smart, an influence diagram was 
created to show the different co-factors that lead to cataract 
according to the findings generated. This was further 
analyzed using a systems- thinking approach, a method that 
allows consideration of the whole rather than individual 
elements of representation of the related co-factors. The 
influence diagram was useful to showcase the summary of 
the findings of the research, as it allows for us to see the 
connection of the variables in a picture format. This format 
of summary is useful for healthcare practitioners, and in the 
case of our study, for ophthalmologists, and decision-
makers, in the field of eye-care management.  
 
 
Influence Diagram - Taking Knowledge to 
Wisdom 
 
Figure 9. Influence Diagram of Cataract Patients and Co-Factors Affecting 
Cataract  
 
Figure 9 depicts the influence diagram of the main study. 
Influence diagrams are closely related to decision trees and 
often used in conjunction with them. An influence diagram 
displays a summary of the information contained in a 
decision tree. It involves four variable types for notation: a 
decision (a rectangle), chance (an oval), objective (a 
hexagon), and function (a rounded rectangle). Influence 
diagrams also use solid lines to denote influence. In the case 
of the influence diagram generated below, this has been 
equivalent to the definition of creating “wisdom” in the 
DIKW pyramid explained earlier in previous chapters. 
Looking at the data analysis holistically creates the ease to 
depict the main causes of the development of cataracts. 
Figure 9 is a drawing of the influence diagram that explains 
the connection of the weather factors in relation to the 
development of the most right-eye disease found in the 
sample population of the study, which is cataract. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This data analytics study provides an expanded 
exploration of how socio-demographic and climatic factors 
affect the prevalence of visual impairment and eye disorders 
in Telangana. Applying several statistical techniques, 
including pattern recognition, and generating other data 
visualizations, we were able to validate previously identified 
findings about gender’s relation to eye disorders in 
Telangana. We found the tools we used to be very useful for 
a discovery research to better understand the sample set of 
patients and to generate informative and understandable 
visuals.  
      Big data can serve to boost the applicability of clinical 
research studies into real-world scenarios, where population, 
race, and climate create a challenge. It equally provides the 

30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
opportunity to enable effective and precision medicine by 
performing patient stratification. This is indeed a key task 
toward personalized healthcare. A better use of medical 
resources by means of personalization can lead to well-
managed health services that can overcome the challenges 
of a diverse population where poverty is high. Thus, creative 
featuring and data merging for health management of EMRs 
can have an impact on future clinical research.  
      From a systems perspective, we observe that a patient is 
influenced by several co-factors that result in the 
development of eye disorders, and that is significant in 
studying patient care from a holistic standpoint. AI tools 
create the pathway to merging publicly available data and 
aligning multiple variables as part of the overall influence.  
This technique is widely applied in decision-making and 
outcome assessment for an enhanced healthcare experience, 
in which modeling knowledge and expert experience are 
studied more thoroughly for new pattern recognition. 
However, variables must be minimized in order to capture 
the underlying knowledge, or otherwise patterns will be 
harder to spot. Thus, we attempt to apply this in the future 
with less variables to overcome the challenges in the first 
phase or data merging.  
     We recommend that the authorities spend more time and 
funds on creating awareness to educate individuals and 
families about the visual impairment crisis in Telangana. 
Creation of awareness is one of the most comprehensive 
approaches to sensitize communities concerning the 
consequences of eye disorders, but also one of the avenues 
to equip individuals with knowledge, skills, and correct 
attitudes towards a healthier lifestyle. 
     Besides 
creation 
of 
awareness, 
this 
study 
also 
recommends ophthalmologists’ understanding of all factors 
that influence a disease other than medical history, and to 
look at each patient uniquely in terms of social income, 
cultural upbringing, and offer a more individualistic 
approach in educating a patient from the criticality of self-
care, to help patients deviate away from high risk situations 
that can cause eye disorders, and to find ways from an 
earlier age for more effective preventative results that can 
reduce the number of affected individuals with vision 
impairment in Telangana.  
     Visual 
impairment 
has 
continually 
exhibited 
an 
escalating trend in underdeveloped countries over the past 
years, and in India, the burden of visual impairment is high 
in urban and rural areas. Eye-care services should be 
accessible and affordable to individuals in need. Future 
work will be on discovery research on how socio-
demographic and climatic factors correlate to the 
development of other diseases. It is important to mention 
that hardly any investigation had been conducted with the 
application of AI tools to categorize huge data based on 
demographic and weather variables. Therefore, this study 
adds new insights to the field of ophthalmology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alalawi, A. Das, R. Derman, P. Gumpili, P. Lalakia, L. Sztandera, 
“A Data-Driven Approach for Eye Disease Classification in Relation 
to Demographic and Weather Factors Using Computational 
Intelligence Software,” The Ninth International Conference on Data 
Analytics, IARIA, Proceedings of 2020. pp. 21-27. 
[2] G. Rao, N. Khanna, and A. Payal, “The global burden of 
cataract,” Current Opinion in Ophthalmology, 22 no. 1, pp. 4-9, 2011. 
[3] A. Das, P. Kammari, and S. Ranganath Vadapalli, “Big data and the 
eyeSmart electronic medical record system-An 8-year experience 
from a three-tier eye care network in India,” Indian Journal of 
Ophthalmology, 68 no. 3, pp. 427, 2020. 
[4] S. Marmamula, R. Khanna, and G. Rao, “Unilateral visual 
impairment in rural south India–Andhra Pradesh Eye Disease Study 
(APEDS)”, International Journal of Ophthalmology, 9 no.5, pp.763, 
2016. 
[5] M. V. Boland, “Big data, big challenges,” Ophthalmology, 123 no.1, 
pp. 7-8, 2016. 
[6] A. Clark, J. Ng, N. Morlet, and J. Semmens, “Big data and 
ophthalmic research,” Survey of Ophthalmology, 61 no.4, pp. 443-
465, 2016. 
[7] E.M. Messmer, “The pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of 
dry eye disease,” Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 112 no.5, pp. 
71, 2015. 
[8] D. Matthews, “How gender influences health inequalities,” Nursing 
Times, 111 no.43, pp. 21-23, 2015. 
[9] N. Diaz-Granados, et al. “Monitoring gender equity in health using 
gender-sensitive indicators: a cross-national study,” Journal of 
Women's Health, 20 no.1 pp. 145-153, 2011. 
[10] G.V.S Murthy, S.K. Gupta, D. Bachani, R. Jose, and N. John, 
“Current estimates of blindness in India,” British Journal of 
Ophthalmology, 89 no.3, pp.257-260, 2005.  
[11] S.K Angra, G.V. Murthy, S.K. Gupta, and V. Angra, “Cataract related 
blindness in India and its social implications,” The Indian Journal of 
Medical Research, 106, pp. 312-324, 1997. 
[12] A. Janati, H. Matlabi, H. Allahverdipour, M. Gholizadeh, and L. 
Abdollahi, “Socioeconomic status and coronary heart disease,” 
Health Promotion Perspectives, 1 no.2, pp. 105, 2011. 
[13] S. Kumar, “National security environment,” India's National Security, 
pp. 25-236, Routledge India, 2016. 
[14] S.G. Honavar, “Eliminating cataract blindness: Are we on target?” 
Indian Journal of Ophthalmology, 65 no.12,  pp. 1271, 2017. 
[15] G. 
Bakshy 
https://www.jagranjosh.com/current-affairs/india-
innovation-index-2019-karnataka-tops-the-list-followed-by-tamil-
nadu-and-maharashtra-1571375106-1, 2019, [Online]. (Accessed on 
07.09.2020). 
[16] C.P. Ames, et al. “Artificial intelligence based hierarchical clustering 
of patient types and intervention categories in adult spinal deformity 
surgery: towards a new classification scheme that predicts quality and 
value,” Spine, 44 no.13,  pp. 915-926, 2019. 
[17] F. Bertini, G. Bergami, D. Montesi, G. Veronese, G. Marchesini, and 
P. Pandolfi, “Predicting frailty condition in elderly using 
multidimensional 
socioclinical 
databases,” Proceedings 
of 
the 
IEEE, 106(4), 723-737, 2018. 
[18] H. Chen, J. Kwong, R. Copes, P.J. Villeneuve, A.  Van Donkelaar, 
and A.S. Wilton, “Living near major roads and the incidence of 
dementia, Parkinson's disease, and multiple sclerosis: a population-
based cohort study,” The Lancet, 389(10070), pp. 718-726, 2017. 
[19] E.P. Barracchia, G. Pio, D. D’Elia, and M. Ceci, “Prediction of new 
associations between ncRNAs and diseases exploiting multi-type 
hierarchical clustering,” BMC bioinformatics, 21 no.1, pp. 1-24, 
2020. 
[20] B. Familiar and J. Barnes, “Data Visualizations, Alerts, and 
Notifications with Power BI. In Business in Real-Time Using Azure 
IoT and Cortana Intelligence Suite,” pp. 397-473, Apress, Berkeley, 
CA, 2017. 

31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[21] M. 
Lutz, 
“Programming 
Python: 
powerful 
object-oriented 
programming,” O’Reilly Media, 2010. 
[22] G. Marcus and E. Davis, “Rebooting AI: Building artificial 
intelligence we can trust,” Pantheon, 2019. 
[23] Russell L. Ackoff, “From data to wisdom,” Journal of applied 
systems analysis, 16.1. pp. 3-9, 1989. 
[24] A.P. Brown, “Qualitative method in applied research,” 10 (2), pp. 
229, 2010. 
[25] M. Longman, London, Methods in Sociology, 1986. 
[26] K. Patrick, and M. J. Schwandt. “Health systems: A dynamic system-
benefits from system dynamics,” Proceedings of the Winter 
Simulation Conference, 2005, IEEE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                         
 
.
 

