User Experiences with Mobile Supervision of School Attendance
Mari Ervasti
Context-awareness and Service
Interaction
VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland
Kaitoväylä 1, 90571 Oulu, Finland
mari.ervasti@vtt.fi
Marianne Kinnula
Dept. of Information Processing
Sciences
University of Oulu
90014 University of Oulu, Finland
marianne.kinnula@oulu.fi
Minna Isomursu
Context-awareness and Service
Interaction
VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland
Kaitoväylä 1, 90571 Oulu, Finland
minna.isomursu@vtt.fi
Abstract—This article presents a field study arranged at a
Finnish primary school where two classes and a total of 23
pupils between the ages of 6 and 8 trialed an attendance
supervision system supported by Near Field Communication
(NFC) technology. In the trial the pupils marked their arrival
at and departure from school by touching a reader device or a
NFC-enabled mobile phone with a contactless smart card.
Parents were able to get their children’s attendance details via
an online ‘citizen’s portal’ and through text-messages sent to
their mobile phones. The system was designed to simplify
attendance monitoring and to replace teachers’ manual roll
calls. Information about user experience was obtained by using
a variety of data collection methods. We evaluate how various
aspects identified in new technology adoption affect the design
processes of home-school interaction systems by examining the
findings from the viewpoint of three end-user groups (children,
parents and teachers).
Our
analysis also shows that
a
technology supported attendance supervision system can bring
value for all end-user groups but it seems that the system will
serve primarily the teachers and the parents.
Keywords-Near
Field
Communication;
attendance
supervision;
school;
children;
technology
adoption;
user
experience; value-based design
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper introduces a Near Field Communication
(NFC) supported school attendance supervision system for
school children. Traditionally, teachers conduct pupils’
attendance monitoring every morning with manual roll calls,
and mark absences and delays in the backend system. This
requires time and effort on every school day, which is taken
away from teaching. In addition, children beginning school
in Finland travel to school largely independently, either on
foot, by bicycle, or by bus. Therefore, parents of young
pupils regularly call to their child’s or teachers’ cell phones
to ensure that the child has made his/her way to school
safely. Answering parents’ calls takes up teachers’ time that
could be used for teaching. The NFC-enabled school
attendance supervision system has been designed to simplify
attendance monitoring. The system replaces manual roll calls
and gives parents information of their children’s attendance
in real-time.
Related work is described in the next section. Then the
research setting is outlined, describing the NFC technology
and the developed attendance supervision system. This is
followed by the procedures used in the system design
with
a
description
of research
objectives. The paper
continues
by
introducing
methodology
used
in
user
experience data collection, and represents and analyzes the
field study results. The paper finishes with a discussion and
conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
Developments in networked and mobile technologies
now provide us with more methods than ever for supporting
children in their transition between home and school [3]. For
example, locational systems can be used to make sure that
children are safe on their way to school [4]. Jernström [4]
introduces a solution called The Smart-its child Surveillance
System, SiSSy, that is an approach to tag children and
parents
with
Smart-Its
devices
which
can
sense
the
environment and determine whether a situation is dangerous
or if the child is engaged in something hazardous.
In a study by Fraser et al. [3], family members saw
journeys between home and school as an important transition
and a big issue for parents in managing their children’s time.
Information transfer between home and school was also
raised as an important matter. Families’ reactions to home-
school technologies were enthusiastic; they saw benefits in
the increased availability of information that can be gained
through these technologies. While parents were worried
about their children, they suggested that technologies that
monitored children’s activities, such as the mobile phone
tracker and sensors, moved from expressing concern to
expressing distrust as children aged. In consequence, Fraser
et al. identified as one core issue for future research the
discussion of children’s privacy in technological design. Not
only are there safety concerns about the protection of data
collected about children, but also ethical concerns about the
rights of children in gathering it. For example, how do we
justify increasing links between home and school, when
children are often active in resisting such information
transfer [5]?
Denmark is traditionally presented as a country where
children
are
able
to
freely
move
around
and
have
independent mobility to schools and leisure facilities [11],
and Finland can be considered similar to Denmark when it
comes to children’s mobility. Children beginning school in
Finland travel to school largely independently, either on foot,
by bicycle, or by bus. A Danish survey by Fotel and
29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thomsen [11] states that parents’ supervision of children’s
mobility is bound up with different aspects of their travel
conditions, such as the choice of mode of transport. Driving
a
child,
for
instance,
clearly
supports
the
physical
supervision of children’s mobility, whereas bicycling or
walking can be performed by the child on his/her own and
thus leaves room for unmonitored movement.
While statistics show a reduction in the number of road
accidents involving children during the past decades, Danish
parents report an increase in their concerns about their
children’s road safety [12]. On top of monitoring children’s
mobility through escorting them by car or other traffic
modes, some Danish parents also monitor their children’s
mobility from a distance [11]. New technology has made it
possible to monitor children by e.g., their cellular phones,
and some parents use that deliberately in situations where the
children are testing the boundaries of where they can go
independently. Monitoring children’s movements from a
distance seems to provide some parents with a feeling of
control and thus seems to ease their risk worries, even
though parents’ opportunities to save the child from any
danger are limited [11]. Fotel and Thomsen [11] state that
even though monitoring the mobility of children is often
done with a caring rationality, it can transform into a control,
which in some cases, the child does not benefit from.
In a small town in the United States a public school
children’s whereabouts on campus were monitored by a
system that used RFID (Radio Frequency Identification)
technology. Children wore badges around their necks that
contained a photo, grade level and name of the pupil. Within
the badge was a chip with an antenna attached. As the chip
passed underneath a reader mounted above the classroom
door, it transmitted a 15-digit number, which was then
translated into the pupil’s name by software contained in a
handheld device used by teachers to check attendance.
Several parents complained that their children’s privacy
rights were being violated; while the school board defended
the system by saying it would keep children in school, free
up more time for teachers to teach and increase security for
pupils and teachers. The proposal died after protests by
parents and privacy and civil-liberties advocates, including
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). [6]
Also a Rhode Island school district has announced a pilot
program to monitor pupil movements by means of RFID
chips implanted into the schoolbags of 80 children. Each
chip would be programmed with a pupil identification
number, and would be read by an external device installed in
two school buses. The buses would also be fitted with GPS
(Global Positioning System) devices. Parents or school
officials could log onto a school Web site to see whether and
when specific children had entered or exited which bus, and
to look up the bus’s current location as provided by the GPS
device. The RFID tag would contain only an ID number, not
a
name,
address,
or
other
personal
information,
so
unauthorized individuals are prevented from gaining an
access to pupils’ private information. The ACLU has
criticized the plan as an invasion of children’s privacy and a
potential risk to their safety. [7][8]
Qvortrup
[9]
and
Rasmussen
[10]
argue
that
the
increased protection of children by monitoring them is a
central characteristic of modern childhood and we do not yet
know all the consequences. According to Rasmussen [10],
the possibility of impersonal supervision performed from a
distance reduces children’s privacy even more, and while
some parents approve of it, the majority oppose its
prevalence. Williams et al. [13] have presented that society
could now perhaps openly question whether (urban) parents
are good parents if they don’t know where their children are
and what they are doing at all times and don’t have control
over them. Aitken [14] shows how some parents employ a
policy of constant supervision of children even up to early
teenage years while in any outdoor space. Furedi [15] and
Rayner [16] both point out the damage to children and
childhood this ‘paranoid parenting’ might be doing and call
for parents to allow children to take more risks.
III.
RESEARCH SETTING
The attendance supervision trial supported by Near Field
Communication (NFC) technology began in Oulu, Finland
on September 2008, continuing until December 2008. The
trialing phase lasted 14 weeks. The trial was conducted at a
local primary school, where two classes with a total of 23
pupils between the ages of 6 and 8 (the majority just starting
at school), participated in the trial. Parents’ permission for
their children to participate in the trial and to the adjacent
research had been asked in advance. One of the participating
classes represented a first grade class (16 children out of 19
participated in the trial; 9 girls and 7 boys) and the other one
was a special-needs class consisting of special-needs school
children (all 7 boys, 4 first-graders and 3 second-graders,
took part in the trial) who were diagnosed with minor
special-needs,
such
as
dyslexia,
difficulties
with
concentration or troubles with perceptive skills. At the same
time, a similar kind of study was done at a local secondary
school
with
more
advanced
technology
and
more
complicated application features.
Curtis et al. [28] have argued that disabled children,
children excluded from school, and children for whom the
discursive nature of conventional interview-based research is
less
accessible
have
been
less
well
represented
in
participatory research than children who are easier to
interview. For a range of methodological and practical
reasons, children who communicate well, or who are regular
school attendees, are more likely to be given a voice in the
research literature [28]. Therefore, the class with special-
needs children was chosen to participate in the trial along
with the ‘normal’ first grade class.
A.
NFC Technology
Touching with a mobile terminal has been found to be an
intuitive, natural and non-ambiguous interaction technique
that does not incur much cognitive load for users [17].
Välkkynen et al. [18] state that touching is an effortless way
to select objects in the environment and easy to learn and
use. Near Field
Communication (NFC) technology is
designed to make communication between two devices very
intuitive. NFC is a very short-range wireless technology that
30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

allows electronic devices to interact with other devices
simply by touch. The main advantages of NFC are the simple
and quick way of using it and the speed of connection
establishment
NFC is based on existing radio frequency communication
standards, so it is a special case of implementation of RFID
technology. The touch-paradigm prevents reading from a
distance because a short physical proximity (a couple of
centimeters) is needed to transfer information. Even though
NFC technology uses a touch-paradigm, it is technologically
possible to read information through NFC from a distance
with special powerful reader devices. However, in this paper,
we assume that NFC is used through a touch-based
interaction paradigm. In our attendance supervision field
study, we explore a usage scenario where NFC-enabled
mobile phones and smart reader devices located in the
classrooms are used to read information stored on pupils’
contactless smart cards.
B.
System Description
Designed to simplify attendance monitoring and replace
manual roll calls, the NFC attendance supervision system
does not require teachers to mark absences in the backend
system thus leaving more time for teaching. In Figure 1 an
overview of the attendance supervision system at school and
in extended day care programs is shown.
Figure 1.
Overview of the NFC school attendance supervision system.
In the attendance supervision trial pupils were given
contactless smart cards named “Robo” containing the pupil’s
ID. Upon arriving at school pupils in the first grade class
‘logged in’ by touching an NFC smart card to an active card
reader device and pupils in the special-needs class logged in
by touching an NFC-enabled mobile phone. The reader
devices recorded the card ID (the child’s name), the direction
(arrival at school) and a time stamp in the backend system.
The active reader device was chosen for the first grade class
because it works faster than an NFC-enabled mobile phone
for large groups. The application in both the reader device
and the mobile phone recorded the time of the login; it was
possible to choose the ‘direction’ of the pupil registration (in
or out) through both devices. At the end of the school day
pupils touched the reader devices again to mark their
departure.
The attendance supervision system (through NFC phone)
was also used in extended day care programs where some
children went after school. The day care is held in another
building outside the school, so with the help of the
supervision system parents were also able to follow how
much time it takes for their child to walk to the day care
from the school (the time between logging out at school and
logging in at day care) and to ensure that their child has
safely made his/her way from school to day care.
Figure 2
explains
the
functionality
of the
school
attendance supervision scenario.
Figure 2.
Functionality of the attendance supervision scenario.
The log of arrivals and departures was automatically
compiled by a backend system, and could be read by a
teacher in a classroom in real time. If a login did not occur,
the pupil was marked absent by default. If a pupil logged in
late, the backend system recorded the lateness. Parents were
able to get information of their children’s attendance details
via an online ‘citizen’s portal’ and through text-messages
sent to their mobile phones. The system prevented truancy
by informing tutors, administrators, and parents of absences
in real time, enabling instant intervention.
C.
Design Procedure and Research Goals
The attendance supervision concept was planned and
designed in close cooperation with teachers, service and
technology providers, and researchers. During the design
phase the ultimate goal of integrating the concept into
normal school practices was especially emphasized, so that
the trial would not be an extra effort related to the research
project. The aim was to create a viable concept that could
also be adopted in the school as a routine to be used after the
research trial. This required close involvement of teachers
and school administration in planning and implementing the
applications, and in organizing and supervising the trial. It
was also seen very important that children were given a
possibility to participate in the system design to empower
31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

them and get them committed to the use of the system. For
example, children participated in the visual design of the
system. Information security and privacy issues were also
considered in the system design, and precautions were taken
to minimize the associated risks. The contactless smart cards
only contained a pupil’s ID number, not any personal
information other that the printed name on the card surface.
In addition, in order to handle the pupils’ attendance data as
confidentially as possible, access to this data online was put
under password protection and text-messages about the
pupils’ attendance details were
sent only to parents’
authenticated mobile phone numbers. These measures were
taken to prevent unauthorized individuals from gaining
access to pupils’ private information.
During the trial, the researchers were only involved in the
data collection activities; teachers took full responsibility for
organizing and supervising the actual attendance supervision
trial. Participating teachers volunteered for the trial, and it
was their responsibility to adopt the attendance supervision
system for everyday use in their class. The teachers explored
new working practices introduced by the system and were
expected
to
report their experiences and
observations
regarding the system.
The goal of the concept was to (1) enhance and secure
children’s independent mobility in home-school transition
and (2) to increase the rationalization of home-school
communication. The objectives of the field study were to test
the attendance supervision system for school children and
their parents and teachers, and to examine the value the
attendance supervision concept brings to these stakeholders,
as well as the attitudes of each user group concerning the use
of the system (regarding e.g., privacy issues). The extent to
which the service supports the enhancement of school
routines and practices and improves information sharing
between school and home was also examined in the study.
IV.
USER EXPERIENCE DATA COLLECTION
Druin et al. [21] have argued that design work in a school
is subject to difficulty due to the school setting and the
embedded power relations between adults and children.
Children have so few experiences in their lives where they
can contribute their opinions and see that adults take them
seriously [21]. When respect is fostered, it changes how
children
see
themselves
[24].
Williams
et
al.
[22]
implemented an exploratory workshop with ten 11-12 year
old children for exploring and developing the interface
between children and new mobile ‘wearable’ ICTs, and
found that the children are valuable, adaptive and creative
users in the participative design of ubiquitous computing
experiences and devices that might enable them.
Druin [23] has developed a typology of roles that
children may have in the design of new technologies: a user,
a tester, an informant and a design partner. For each role she
also presents three underlying dimensions: the relationship to
adults, the relationship to the technology and the goals for
inquiry. The role we sought from the children was essentially
that of an informant. As the trial objective was concerned
with the potential of the attendance supervision system, the
actual usage of the technology was an essential prerequisite
to the children's articulation of potential use and for the
informant role as well. Therefore in the case of this trial the
children's role was both that of a user and an informant.
TABLE I.
SUMMARY OF DATA COLLECTION METHODS AND NUMBER
OF VALID CASES FOR EACH METHOD
Data collection method
Number of valid cases
First classroom observation and
interviews with first grade class
16 pupils
1 teacher
Second classroom observation and
interviews with first grade class
16 pupils
1 teacher
Classroom observation and interviews
with special-needs class
7 pupils
1 teacher
1 special needs
assistant
Phone interviews with the parents of
the special-needs class
6 parents
Paper questionnaires for 16 first-
graders’ parents whose children
participated in the trial
14 parents
Paper questionnaires for three first-
graders’ parents whose children did
not participate in the trial
3 parents
Given
difficulties
that
need
to
be
overcome
for
describing and understanding user experience, we decided to
collect data during the actual use of the system and to
combine a variety of complementary data collection methods
[19] in order to increase the reliability and validity of the
results [20]. The user experience data collection methods and
the number of stakeholders for each method are listed in
Table 1. In the next sections we will present the data
collection methods in greater detail.
A.
Classroom Observations
Classroom observations were made to collect information
about how the pupils learned to use NFC technology, what
kind of routines they had established after using the system
for some time, and what kind of spontaneous reactions and
discussion took place in using the attendance supervision
system. Children in the first grade class were observed twice
over the course of the research. The first visit happened in a
very early phase of the trial: the attendance supervision
system had been taken into use only a day before the visit. At
the time of the second observation the attendance supervision
system had been in use for two weeks. The special-needs
class was observed when they had used the attendance
supervision system for two weeks. Observations with both
classes were conducted during a normal school day by
attending the first lesson in the morning. The login process
was observed from the back of the classroom to minimize
the disturbance caused by the researchers’ presence. During
the observation the children’s behavior and actions were
videotaped and photographed. The children seemed not to be
disturbed or bothered about the researchers’ presence.
B.
Interviews with Children and Teachers
All the children participating in the trial as well as their
teachers were interviewed in order to investigate their
thoughts and experiences about the technology and service
concept under evaluation. The interviews took place on the
32
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

same days as the classroom observations. After login was
done and children started their school work, interviews were
conducted very informally by chatting with a few pupils at a
time either in the classroom or in a separate place. Children
in the first grade class were interviewed twice over the
course of the research. The teachers were interviewed
informally partly in the midst of teaching, partly during
breaks between classes.
The
following
aspects
related
to
the
attendance
supervision were discussed with the children and the
teachers:

Where the children keep their “Robo” cards

Do the children remember to bring the card with
them every morning to school

Have the children somehow personalized their cards

How the children understand the technical details
and functionality of the attendance supervision
system

How the children understand the reason behind the
use of the system: why do they need to log in and
out of the school

Do the children think that their privacy is violated;
that they are being stalked

Do the children remember to log in when arriving
to school and respectively log out when leaving
school: does the teacher need to remind them

How the children manage to use the smart card

What is the children’s general attitude towards the
service

Do the children know if their parents actively
follow their attendance information via the system
The children seemed to be proud and excited that adults
outside their school had come to their class just to chat with
them and ask about their thoughts. The children were very
happy with answering the questions and spoke freely and
frankly about their own thoughts and opinions.
C.
Phone Interviews with Parents
Since it is feasible to conduct one-to-one interviews with
a small user group, the parents of six (out of seven)
participating children (two fathers and four mothers) in the
special-needs class were chosen to be interviewed via
telephone. The parents of one child did not give their contact
information for the interview. Interviews lasted from fifteen
minutes to half an hour. In order to gain real hands-on
experiences by the parents, interviews were conducted one
and half months after the beginning of the field study when
the parents had had time to experiment for a longer period of
time with the attendance supervision system. The aim of the
phone interviews was to investigate parents’ thoughts on the
service concept, opinions about possible added value the
attendance supervision service brings to the families, and
whether the service could be developed further to have a
positive impact on their lives.
D.
Feedback Questionnaires for Parents
As the parents of the first grade class formed a bigger
user group and interviewing them via telephone would have
been more cumbersome, we decided to create two separate
short paper questionnaires, one for the first-graders’ parents
whose children participated in the trial and the other for the
parents who chose not to allow their children to participate in
the trial. Questionnaires were delivered to the parents one
and half months after the beginning of the trial in order to
assure that the parents had already gained real experiences
with the attendance supervision system. A total of 17 parents
(out of 19) answered the questionnaire. The same things
were explored in the questionnaires as in the phone
interviews (see Table 2).
TABLE II.
QUESTIONS ASKED IN PHONE INTERVIEWS AND FEEDBACK
QUESTIONNAIRES
Question
Phone interviews with
the parents of special-
needs class children
and questionnaires for
participating first-
graders’ parents
Have
you
experienced
the
attendance
supervision service as useful? What kind of
benefits have you derived from the service?
If in your opinion the service has not
benefited you enough or it would still need
more
improvement,
please
tell
us
your
suggestions for service development and
improvement.
Would you be ready to pay 30EUR a year for
the SMS service?
Have you experienced any problems with the
service? If you have, what kind of problems?
By your own estimate, how often have you
used the service, i.e. followed your child’s
logins? (daily, weekly, not so often)
Do you use the service in some specific
situations? If so, in what kind of situations?
In
your
opinion,
how
has
your
child
experienced the attendance supervision and
how has she/he remembered to carry the
'Robo' card with her/him?
In your opinion, has the supervision system
had any influence on your family’s daily
routines?
Other ideas and thoughts regarding the
service
Feedback
questionnaires for non-
participating first-
graders’ parents
Could you explain what factors had an
influence on deciding not to participate in the
attendance supervision experiment?
If in your opinion the service in its current
form would not benefit you enough or it
would still need more improvement, please
tell us your suggestions for the service
development and improvement.
Other ideas and thoughts regarding the
service.
V.
IMPACT FOR THE SYSTEM DESIGN PROCESS
We evaluated the obtained research data from the point
of view of how various aspects identified in relation to this
study affect the design processes of home-school interaction
systems. We present in the following sections experiences
and analysis from these findings. Some of these results have
been presented earlier in [1] and [2].
A.
Participation
Children, teachers and parents were able to participate in
the system design process as well as the adoption process,
33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and we analyzed our data from the viewpoint of each user
group:
1)
Participation
of
Children:
Three
kinds
of
participatory aspects were identified: (1) Children were able
to participate in the visual design of the smart card used for
attendance control, (2) children participated in daily use by
operating the reader devices and being responsible for
logging in and out of school, and (3) children were able to
express their opinions throughout the research process
through various data collection methods.
Before the beginning of the field trial, one of the pupils in
the special-needs class had invented the name “Robo” for the
contactless smart card. His idea was used in designing the
visual outlook of the card (see Figure 3). Receiving the card
had been especially important for the boy who came up with
the “Robo” name: the boy had been very pleased that his
own idea had been implemented. According to the teacher,
for the same boy the start of the school had been especially
difficult and for him the opportunity to influence the smart
card design had been a very important boost to his self-
esteem. Even though the children’s role in designing the card
was not very big, the other children clearly valued as well
that one of them was behind the idea for the smart card name
and appearance.
Figure 3.
The visual outlook of the “Robo” card and the reader device.
The teacher of the first grade class had shown and taught
two pupils how to operate the reader device and what to do
when the pupils needed to log out of school at the end of the
school day (how to turn the device on etc.) when the teacher
was not present. Every Wednesday, operating the reader
device was their responsibility. This was also valued by the
children, as they saw this as a sign of trust in their skills, and
a source of special pride for the whole class, not just for
those two children in question. Other children commented on
this by saying that, “…they were chosen because they use the
computer also for other things than just playing,” so the two
pupils were regarded to be knowledgeable and skilled in the
use of computers.
Interaction systems for children are usually designed by
adults who often have very little idea of children’s needs and
desires [29]. Several authors [24, 29] have identified that
involving children in product development is beneficial. Our
findings revealed that children valued that they were able to
participate and be active in the design, use and evaluation
processes. By participating, they could have their voices
heard and influence the decisions that affected their school
days. Also, our experiences indicate that by participating in
the design and use processes the children became aware and
internalized the functionalities and goals of the system,
which can lower the barriers for adoption and use.
2)
Participation of Teachers: Participation of teachers
was seen to be especially valuable in integrating the
application and processes into the daily routines of a school
day. The teachers took the responsibility of integrating and
supervising
the
adoption
of
the
new
practice.
Our
experiences indicate that this is essential for the success of
adoption.
The teachers were able to observe the use and the user
experiences evoked in the children daily. This knowledge
was very valuable for interpreting the data collected by
interviews and observations.
3)
Participation of Parents: Parents gave many ideas for
the system development and improvement in the phone
interviews and questionnaires, and they were identified as
important partners for the design and evaluation processes,
which is also supported by previous studies [3].
Parents reported that following the children’s logins and
logouts was not very practical and did not integrate well with
their daily routines. Parents needed to separately log in to an
online ‘citizen’s portal’ and that took way too much time
during a busy workday, in their opinion. The information of
children’s logins and logouts should be received on the
device that is nearly always at hand. Therefore, the text-
message service appeared to be a more usable solution in
monitoring children’s attendance: “We do not always have
an opportunity to be by the computer, so a message to a
mobile phone would bring lots of additional value.”
One parent stated that she would preferably receive the
attendance data in an email, while another parent did the
majority of his work on a PC so he was able to follow his
child’s attendance information regularly during his work
days. He found the text-message service more harmful than
useful because a parent could “be bombarded with text-
messages” during the work days, which could disturb and
interrupt working.
In the parents’ opinion it would be much better if the
children could log in to school immediately when they arrive
on the school grounds, for example at the school gate or by
the school’s front door, as opposed to the login done inside
the classroom. Then the parents could get the attendance
information as soon as the child arrives to the school area.
One parent reported that for their family it would be much
more useful to get a message indicating whether or not their
child has locked the front door when leaving for school. A
desire was expressed that it were possible to send a message
from home when the child leaves for school and the device
would then react if the child does not log in to school within
a time limitation. Also, a child’s timetable could be added in
the system and a message could be sent to parents if the child
did not arrive at school in time.
34
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Several parents mentioned that they hoped to see the
attendance supervision service developed further to include
more features. For example, in one parent’s opinion the
paper notebook for home-school communication was already
outdated and behind the times, so a web-based counterpart
would be much better. An idea was raised that more services
could be added to the card (the card functioning also as a
library card, for example) as well as important daily
information about school. That information could also be
checked from the web portal. Parents also stated that they
would like to be able to see longer-term statistics about their
child’s logins and logouts instead of only day-specific data.
B.
Adoption and Use
At the time of the first visit to the first grade class, a
routine for the login had not yet had time to develop and the
login had not yet been integrated into the children’s everyday
school routines. As the pupils arrived to the classroom, the
teacher had to remind most of them about the login. The
children had quite different ways of doing the login
procedure; some merely touched the reader device with their
card while some carefully placed the card on an exact
position on top of the device.
Using the system seemed to be easy according to the
children: “You just put the card there like this,” “You can
put it either way,” “You don’t need to wave it, just flash it
there quickly,” “When it [the device] says OK, login has
succeeded.” In Figure 4 there are pupils logging into the
school.
Figure 4.
Pupils log into the school by touching the reader device with
their contactless smart cards.
All the pupils had already allocated some specific place
for their card where they always put the card so that it
remained safe. Most of the pupils said they kept their cards
in their backpacks, and many even had one particular pocket
in the bag where they put their cards. Some pupils said that
they kept their card in a pen case.
The pupils seemed to remember well to carry the card
with them every day, with only a few exceptions. One child
said that her Mom took care that the card is with her by
putting it into her bag in the morning. On the first
observation day one boy had not brought the card with him
to school since, “the card is on the table at home, Mom did
not remember to put it with me.”
At the time of the second observation, the attendance
supervision system had been in use for two weeks and the
login had now become a natural part of the children’s school
routines. As the children arrived in a classroom, they
remembered without a separate notification to take their
cards from their backpacks and to log into school. According
to the teacher a small line usually emerged behind the reader
device and then the latest children remembered the login.
The teacher of the special-needs class said that before the
experiment had started pupils had eagerly been asking,
“When do we get the cards? When will the device arrive?”
Similar to the first grade class, the login process appeared to
have integrated well in to the school routines after only two
weeks use. The teacher did not need to separately remind the
children to log in as the children remembered it themselves.
The login happened by touching the card with the NFC
phone.
In the special-needs class the login seemed to happen
quite smoothly, only with some slight bustling and elbowing:
“It’s my turn now!” “Wait for your turn!” Similar to the
first-graders, all the pupils said they kept their cards in their
backpacks, and most had one specific pocket in their bag in
which they always put their card after login.
The classroom observations revealed that the login with
the smart card reader device was faster when compared to
the NFC phone as children did not need to queue for the
reader device. In addition, with the reader device, the
children practically did not need the teacher at all for the
login. They were able to handle it independently instead,
contrary to the login done with the NFC phone. According to
the first-graders, login with the reader device at the
classroom was easier than login with NFC phone in the day
care: “The cell phone needs to be moved back and forth in a
way,” “It takes more time.” the children explained. Also the
teacher of the first grade class said: “It worked like an
assembly line,” with the reader device.
The teachers said that the children had been extremely
excited when they had heard they could participate in the
experiment. The pupils had waited intently to receive their
own cards, and after a few weeks’ use had only positive
thoughts about the attendance supervision: “This is easy to
use, login has worked well.” Teachers reported that the
children had easily learned how to use the card, and the login
had soon become an integral part of their school day.
C.
Children’s Understanding of the Whys and Wherefores
The first-graders’ seemed to understand pretty well why
they had received their “Robo” cards and what the purpose
behind the use of the attendance supervision system was,
which is shown in the following excerpts gained from first-
graders’ interviews: “Mom and Dad will know that I have
arrived at school and at home.” “The reason for doing the
login in the morning is that the thing starts to transmit
information to somewhere, and in the afternoon when
leaving school you need to log out so that the thing won’t
35
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

send any more information and so that the information
would not proceed anymore.”
The first-graders also had noticed some benefits the
attendance supervision system had brought to their lives:
“It's also nice that you don't need to phone when you have
arrived at school.” “Once when I came to school by bike
and Mom tried to call me, my Mom had put my phone in that
kind of place in my backpack where I couldn't find it. At that
time we did not have this card thing yet, but it’s good that we
have it now.”
Children in the special-needs class understood also the
reason behind the use of the system, and seemed to
understand how the system created value for parents and
school. However, it is possible that the children’s answers
partly repeated the same words the teacher and their parents
had told them about the attendance monitoring: “Mom and
Dad know at what time you have arrived at school and left
home, and if you have stayed in detention.” “You need this
at your new school, so that they know whether you are late
or not.” “You do the login because you need to touch the
phone.” “Parents check at their work place that you have
arrived at school.”
When the children were asked whether they knew if their
parents had been checking their attendance information,
about half of the pupils were aware that their parents had
been monitoring their attendance information: “My parent
watches the logins through the Internet.” “Mom said that
she hasn’t checked yet.” “Mom sometimes looks, but not
every day.” “Mom does not check the logins until at home in
the evening.”
D.
Children’s Understanding of the Technology
Children of the first grade class did not really understand
the technical details behind the system, and they did not
seem to have thought about it that much. When we asked
them what they thought about how the system worked they
were rather baffled at first and then some of them were able
to give us answers: “It puts the information on the
computer.”, ”There is some little thing in the cell phone, a
kind of strange looking tiny card inside the phone, a plastic
one with nothing inside, which takes the information.”, “I
wonder what does my Mom see? Does some explanation
mark like appear, that your son has left home from the day
care, that it is a safe journey?” “The cell phone is a bit like
a living thing, it reads that information and then it happens.”
Specifics of the technical details and operation of the
system were not very clear for the special-needs class
children
either,
even
though
they
had
a
reasonable
understanding about how the technical components involved
together and some basic conception of how the system
functions: “It writes names on the Internet, are you at school
or where?” “It sends an e-mail or a message and Dad opens
his phone and sees a text message.” “A message leaves when
the card and the phone touch.” “A light appears in the
machine telling that you are late. Green flashes when you
have arrived at the right time.”
E.
Attitudes towards Privacy
When planning and designing the system for children’s
attendance supervision we were aware of the potential of
such technology to increase the debate on the issue of
surveillance and privacy invasion. Concerns were expressed
even before the actual system was taken into use when the
Finnish media published the plans for implementing and
testing the NFC-enabled school attendance supervision
concept in the city of Oulu. On the web site of the local
newspaper many readers expressed their biases and opinions
about the system. The following excerpts are from the
discussion on the web site (translated from Finnish): “For
real, big brother will also monitor in this case [27].”
“Personally, I would certainly not accept stalking through
access control at our school, the old, traditional control of
non-attendance made by the teacher is enough…we need to
really take care that the high technology of the future will be
used to help people, not to stalk them [27].” “The next phase
is a microchip planted on the back of the hand, the mark of
the beast from the Apocalypse of John…[26]”
However, during the study itself the privacy concerns and
negative aspects of surveillance did not play a big role,
contrary to the previous studies [3, 5, 10]. The benefits of
monitoring were seen as greater than the costs by all the
interest groups. For example, one parent stated in the phone
interview that in her opinion it is good that you can monitor
your children, since, ”…life is changing all the time, it is
becoming more fierce.” One family reported that because of
the attendance supervision system, they did not need to
provide their child with a mobile phone which they would
have otherwise done to monitor how the child travels
between home and school.
In their interviews, children themselves did not bring up
any comments regarding stalking, losing their privacy or
being under surveillance. Quite to the contrary, and also
according to the parents, the children regarded the attendance
supervision as a natural part of the school routines, and did
not wonder why they were given the cards and why they had
to do the login every day, because, as one of the parents said:
“For a child it is just part of his life.”
NFC technology is a very short-distance technology
requiring a close touch to activate reading. Based on our
observations, we expect that this increases the feeling of
control, and does not trigger the feeling of being under
surveillance. Other types of RFID technologies that can be
read automatically from a distance without any explicit
action from the user side can create a stronger feeling of
being under surveillance by “an invisible eye”, therefore
triggering negative experiences towards the loss of privacy
and being monitored. This has become very apparent in
earlier
surveillance
initiatives
conducted
in
school
environments [6, 7, 8].
The contactless smart cards used in our study contained
only an ID number, not any personal information (other than
the printed name on the card surface), pupils’ online
attendance data was put under password protection and text-
messages were sent only to authenticated mobile phone
36
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

numbers, and so unauthorized individuals were prevented
from gaining access to pupils’ private information.
F.
Trust and Respect
The parents reported that the contactless smart cards and
the attendance supervision concept had been received very
well by the children. Parents said that their children felt the
supervision was important and took a big responsibility for
keeping the card safe and carrying it to school every day.
One of the parents commented, “A proud and eager pupil
has remembered it well.” For example, one child had gotten
really excited when he received the card that was similar to
the card his father used at work. The parents said that the
children had taken care that they always had their cards with
them, and for some of them it seemed to be very important
that they had their cards with them all the time. Figure 5
shows some pupils logging into school.
Figure 5.
Pupils log in by touching the teacher’s NFC-enabled mobile
phone with their “Robo” cards.
For many children the possibility to participate in this
trial seemed to be a boost for their self-esteem, which is also
consistent with previous research [25]. The children were
very proud and excited that they were shown trust by giving
them their very own contactless smart cards that were their
own responsibility, and that adults trusted the children to
take care of the cards and the login. This is well illustrated in
the following teacher’s comment: “For the children this has
been an important and big thing, since not all the classes
have these cards in use, so in that way children now have a
chance to stand out and they have something that others do
not have.”
We had expected that the children would have taken
some actions to personalize their cards but the interviews and
observations revealed that children had not modified their
cards’ outlooks in any ways. It seemed that the children
placed a high value on the card and showed respect by not
modifying the card. The children seemed to appreciate their
cards so much that they did not even think of the possibility
of e.g. adding any stickers or drawing on them. One girl
commented that, “I wouldn’t dare to put a sticker on without
asking.” The children also seemed to have developed some
misconceptions about the system, which can be partly
interpreted as an outcome of the fact that they had not
internalized the technical details and functionality of the
system: “When there is a sticker on the card and you log in,
the cell phone accidentally takes the sticker and some picture
of Winnie the Pooh or something appears there,” one child
said.
However, many of the pupils knew that secondary school
students had received NFC mobile phones for attendance
supervision and the pupils seemed to be a bit jealous about it.
One of the children said, “Smart cards could have been
given to the secondary school students and we could have
had the touch mobile phones.” Clearly, mobile phones were
valued as devices and status symbols more than smart cards.
The children evidently valued the trust they were given,
but they also used this new power to mutiny against teachers
and parents. One child had thrown his card away in a burst of
anger towards his parents. In general, however, children
accepted parents’ and teachers’ authority in protecting them
[30] through attendance control without question. The
children could have chosen not to mark their arrival to and/or
departure from school as a sign of rebellion, or could have
given their card to a classmate to handle the login and logout
on their behalf. However, this type of behavior to manipulate
the system did not come out in our trial group. We assume
that this might be different with older children and teenagers.
G.
Adults’ World
On the web site of the local newspaper many readers
commented on the attendance supervision system also in the
following way (translated from Finnish): “A child is not
allowed to grow up at her own pace anymore; she will be
raised in a real ‘Orwellian’ spirit [27],” “Here the
monitoring, caring and presence of a grown-up is trying to
be replaced with a ridiculous mobile phone [27].”
The children themselves did not wonder why they had to
do the login and did not resist new practices; they simply
regarded it as a natural part of school routines. This is well
illustrated in the following excerpt from one of the teachers:
“Nowadays children have seen so many kinds of things that
they don’t marvel at things like this.” The children had only
positive thoughts about the attendance supervision, it had
been “nice” and “easy,” even “awfully nice, giant-sized!”
and “really great!”
However,
those
parents,
whose
children
did
not
participate in the field study, explained that they had
considered that, “The safety of the child is created through
the genuine presence of an adult and not through a
supervision
system.” These parents thought
that
what
children really need is the time of trusted adults, and also
considered the trial to be a technology-led project “Where
the effect of the project on a child’s everyday life had hardly
been thoroughly considered,” which is also argued in
previous research [9, 10]. Parents stated: “Children of this
age should not need to be rushed into the world of cards and
codes. They can do that later. The amount of new things in
the first-graders’ world is already large enough.”
H.
Responsibilities
The teachers said that the parents had expressed their
interest towards the system for practical reasons; to be able
37
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to know where their children were. It often happened that a
child had forgotten to phone Mom or Dad, and consequently
the parent made a ‘check call’ to the teacher in order to make
sure that the child had safely made his/her way to school. For
example, one child had once promised to call his father as
soon as he arrives at school but the batteries had died out
from his cell phone so he was not able to make the promised
call. So, the attendance supervision system facilitated the
teacher’s work by eliminating the need for a teacher to
answer parents’ calls during the school day.
However, some parents chose not to participate in the
trial, as they thought that the teacher should have full
responsibility over the whereabouts of the children, and felt
that a computerized system would remove this responsibility
from the teachers. One of the parents said, “If parents cannot
trust that the teacher knows where the children are (ill, at
school, on vacation etc.) something is really wrong.” One
parent argued that in the case that a child does not arrive at
school and there has not been any notice about the absence, it
is teacher’s duty to contact the parents, so, “What kind of
additional value does the service bring to parents?”
In addition, the parents commented that the system can
sometimes cause extra worry, as the child might lose the card
or forget to log in upon arrival: “The login is based on
memory, so parents cannot be sure that the child is at school
if the child has forgotten to log in or if the child has lost his
card.”
In one parent’s opinion all the resources should be
directed to preventive work in regard to safety, such as
traffic, school environment and social support: “What does it
help to get the information that something has happened, if
something could have been done to prevent that from
happening!”
I.
Added Value
About half of the parents who participated in the trial
answered in phone interviews and feedback questionnaires
that they were satisfied with the system and thought that the
system adds value for them. The system was seen as
especially useful when both the parents are working and are
able to follow through the system that their child has arrived
at school and check at what time the child has left for home.
The system was also found valuable in that it would notify
the parents immediately in situations where the child for
some reason does not arrive at school or in day care.
However, the interviews and questionnaires revealed a
fact that for some families the attendance supervision system
did not bring real added value. In these families one of the
parents was always at home when the child left for and
arrived from school, enabling the parent to follow the child’s
comings and goings, or a family lived so near the school that
the child had only a short way to school.
Some parents also thought that the service only brings the
same feeling of safety as calling with a cell phone when
ensuring the child’s arrival at school, so the system does not
bring real value when compared to an already established
practice. In one parent’s opinion the attendance supervision
for older pupils would bring more benefits, since she
considered that a small pupil is already quite well controlled
by the school and day care.
One interesting finding was related to situations where
the parents were separated. The system could provide a
parent not living with the child (at the moment) with a way
to know more about the daily activities of the child. This
could provide a better feeling of involvement in the life of a
child. In our trial, one father not living with her daughter
would have liked her to participate in the trial so that he
could get more information about his child, but the mother
who lived with the child refused the child’s participation.
J.
Downsides
Most parents wondered why their child’s login always
happened so late in the morning, for example the child might
have left home to go to school at 7:30 am, but the login
however, did not happen until around 8:30 am. As the
parents knew that the journey to school should not take this
long, it easily caused concern and worry. The delay was
caused because the reader devices were located in the
classrooms, and some mornings it took some time before the
children got inside or remembered to log in. In the parents’
opinion it would be much better if the children could log into
school immediately when they arrive on the school grounds,
for example at the school gate or by the school’s front door,
as opposed to the login done inside the classroom. Then the
parents could get the attendance information as soon as the
child arrives on school grounds.
A few parents also expressed concerns about increasing
the amount of information they needed to follow: “In this
insecure world it is good to know where the child is, but the
information flood and reading of messages is already now
fully employing the parents and therefore it feels that the
‘traditional’ way should be enough. But naturally, if there is
a fear that the child is skipping classes or thinks of leaving
on his/her own way from school, the attendance supervision
service is good.”
In the first grade class three children did not participate in
the trial. The parents of those children justified their decision
by saying that the attendance supervision system could cause
parents extra worry instead of increasing the feeling of safety
and peace of mind, as the child might lose the card or forget
to log into or log out of school.
K.
Economic Feasibility
The administrative units of the city of Oulu estimated
that if the system with the SMS notification service were
adopted at schools for permanent use, it would cost each
family using the system approximately 30 EUR per year.
Parents’ willingness to pay the suggested amount of money
for the service was inquired in the phone interviews and
feedback questionnaires.
Altogether 11 parents who participated in the trial stated
in phone interviews and feedback questionnaires that they
would be ready to pay the suggested amount of 30 EUR per
year for the SMS service: “I could also pay for security.”
Five parents said that they were not willing to pay for the
service, one parent wasn’t sure, and three did not give their
answer to the question.
38
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The expenses of the system would include at least
hardware and software costs for the backend system and the
hardware units (smart card reader devices and NFC-enabled
mobile phones) needed in schools, data transfer costs
between the backend system and the reader devices,
contactless smart cards for the pupils, the price of sending
SMSs to parents, deployment costs, and the maintenance
costs of the system. However, teachers would need less time
for administrative work and could use that time for teaching
instead. Parents would also save time since they would not
need to make check calls to their children. In this context the
time savings is difficult to convert into direct financial
savings. Rather, here the time savings means for the teachers
the prospect of increasing the quality of education and for the
parents the possibility to concentrate better on their work
when they do not need to worry for their children’s safety.
However, there is a possibility that this kind of fee-based
attendance supervision service creates inequality among the
pupils, as not all the parents would be willing to pay for the
service. The quite low percentage of parents ready to pay for
the service (55%) in this study might be partly explained by
the fact that Finnish people are accustomed to thinking that
school attendance is free and therefore they do not easily,
maybe just out of principle, accept the idea that a purely
school-related service would be subject to a charge. Also, in
a situation where only some of the families were using the
attendance supervision service provided by the authorities
the teachers would in any case need to also do the manual
roll calls thus reducing the time savings for teachers and
possibly even causing extra work for them.
In Finland the school system is based on public schools,
and basic education is free for citizens. Therefore, public
authorities
play
an
important
role
in
adopting
new
technologies in the school environment. This means that
investments are covered with public funding and decisions
for adopting new technologies are done through public
decision making processes. In the case of public services,
goals and criteria for adopting may differ significantly from
the private business environment, where the goals usually
deal with maximizing profits and can be justified with
economic reasons. With public services it can be difficult or
meaningless to
show the created value only through
economic measures.
Evaluating the value of adopting new technology in an
environment that is fully financed by public authorities and
serves
various
user
groups
with
different
needs
is
challenging. It would be possible to calculate the actual costs
of
deployment
and
continual
use
of
the
attendance
supervision system in order to make an educated decision on
whether or not it is economically feasible to take the system
into use. However, the schools do not operate in a business
environment, trying to generate revenues and operate at
minimum cost level. Instead, schools create value for the
society and the families using their services. Benefits of
adopting new technology in such a setting must include other
value parameters in addition to traditional cost or time
savings.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In our trial, information about user experience was
obtained by combining different data collection methods.
The findings were analyzed from the viewpoint of three end-
user groups, namely, children, parents and teachers.
The
attendance
supervision
system
can
reduce
unnecessary doubt by allowing parents to receive real-time
information on non-attendance or if a pupil is late from
school. The main benefits for the home are that parents can
follow their children’s attendance status in school and day
care in real time, thus eliminating the need for calling the
child or the teacher to inquire about the child’s whereabouts.
The service also facilitates teachers’ work by offering
technology and a system for gathering the information about
children’s attendance and keeping a log about their possible
tardiness at school.
The importance of the role of children in the research
process was emphasized throughout the research project to
overcome the problems associated with children as research
subjects [21]. The children were respected as users of new
technology and their contributions and ideas were sought out
and valued. All communication was planned to convey a
message that the children could trust that adults will listen to
their thoughts and ideas, and respectively the adults aspired
to learn to elaborate on the children’s ideas, rather than
merely listen passively or not listen at all [24].
For many children the possibility to participate in this
trial was a boost to their self-esteem. The children were very
proud and excited that they were shown trust by the adults by
giving them their very own contactless smart cards that were
their own responsibility and that adults trusted them to take
care of. Also, the children valued the responsibility they
were given for logging in and out of school and even
operating the reader devices by themselves. Similar results
have also been discovered in research by Attewell [25].
User research revealed that for the children at this age as
well as for their parents, the concept of being monitored by
the technology is not something they reject, but possibly
welcome. Interviews and questionnaires with parents and
children revealed that mobile phone ownership among this
age group is closely tied to parental purchases, and motivated
by parental and child desires for parents to be able to contact
their children when they have to go to school alone. With
this new attendance supervision system children would be
able to go to school alone even if they did not have their own
mobile phone, since the attendance monitoring would enable
parents to check that their children had arrived at school
safely, thus making check calls between parents and their
children (or between parents and teachers) unnecessary.
Main concerns with the attendance supervision system
relate to privacy and security issues concerning the collection
of pupils’ real-time attendance details and the possibility that
unauthorized individuals could gain access to children’s
movements and location and personal data. In this study
privacy concerns were not raised, which seems unique when
compared to previous research [3, 5, 10]. We expect that one
reason for this is the nature of the NFC technology, which
enables reading the ID only upon touch.
39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

It also needs to be noted that security at school is
improved via an attendance supervision system: it is easy to
see which pupils are in which classrooms. Real-time
attendance logs are also important for a pupil and for his or
her legal protection.
A.
Implications for practice
This study has some concrete implications for practice
and research related to technology adoption in a school
setting. First, our findings revealed that children valued that
they were able to participate and be active in the design, use
and evaluation processes. By participating, they could have
their voices heard and influence the decisions that affected
their school days. Also, our experiences indicate that by
participating in the design and use processes the children
became aware and internalized the functionalities and goals
of the system, which can lower the barriers for adoption and
use. In addition, the fact that the teachers took the
responsibility of integrating and supervising the adoption of
the new practice appears to be essential to the success of
adoption.
Also, the children, as well as their teachers, became
familiar with the login process very quickly, and the
attendance
supervision
was
soon
integrated
into
their
everyday school routines, mainly due to the intuitiveness and
effortlessness of the NFC touch-based interaction technique
[17][18]. However, the interviews showed that the children
did not fully understand the technical details or functionality
of the attendance supervision system even though they
seemed to have a good comprehension of the reasons behind
the use of the system, and they knew how the system created
value for their parents. For the children to get full value of
the technology it is important to
give them enough
information about the system and how it works.
Comments by the parents clearly showed that when a
new technology is brought into a school environment, it
needs to be clear for everyone how the adoption of the
system affects the responsibilities of school personnel,
parents and children. In this case, the responsibilities of the
teacher remained the same, and the technology was used
only to support and enhance communication. However,
many parents felt that the technology would remove
responsibilities from the teachers.
If this kind of system were taken into wider use
economic feasibility of the system needs to be considered.
55% of the participating parents in this study were willing to
pay a small amount of money per year for the use of the
system. It is likely that not all the expenses would be covered
by the money received from the parents, which means that
the rest of the expenses need to be paid using tax money. A
fee-based attendance supervision service might also create
inequality among the families, as not all the parents would be
willing to pay for the service. We think that this is part of the
bigger discussion of using tax money to pay for some
services versus citizens paying for the services partly
themselves in addition to paying taxes.
Even though the children themselves did not get direct
benefit from using the system, they valued the fact that they
could actively help teachers and parents by creating useful
and valuable information. Perhaps surprisingly, the children
seemed to be the group most pleased with the system. When
describing their experiences with the system, the children’s
descriptions were positive and enthusiastic. Our analysis
shows that a technology supported attendance supervision
system can bring value for all end-user groups but it seems
that the system will, however, primarily serve the teachers
and the parents.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the pupils and teachers of the
participating
school.
We
are
also
grateful
to
the
administrative units of the city of Oulu for being actively
involved in this attendance supervision pilot scheme. This
work was done in the SmartTouch project (ITEA 05024)
which
was
a
three-year
project
(2006-2008)
within
Information Technology for European Advancement (ITEA
2), a EUREKA strategic cluster program. The SmartTouch
project (www.smarttouch.org) has been partly funded by
Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and
Innovation. In addition, financial support from the Nokia
Foundation and the Emil Aaltonen Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Ervasti, M. Isomursu, and M. Kinnula, “Experiences from NFC
supported School Attendance Supervision for Children,” Proc. of the
Third International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing,
Systems, Services, and Technologies (UBICOMM 2009), IEEE,
Slierna, Malta, 11-16 October 2009, pp. 22–30.
[2]
M. Ervasti, M. Isomursu, and M. Kinnula, ”Bringing Technology into
School – NFC-enabled School Attendance Supervision,” Proc. of the
8th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia
(MUM 2009), ACM Press, Cambridge, UK, 22-25 November 2009,
pp. 36-45, doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1658550.1658554.
[3]
K. Fraser, T. Rodden, and C. O’Malley, “Home-school Technologies:
Considering the Family,” Proc. of Interaction Design and Children
(IDC
’06),
ACM
Press,
June
2006,
pp.
153-156,
doi:
10.1145/1139073.1139111.
[4]
H. Jernström, “SiSSy – Smart-its child Surveillance System,” Proc.
the
4th
International
Conference
on
Ubiquitous
Computing
(UbiComp
’02),
Springer,
Sep.
2002,
pp.
37-38,
doi:
10.1145/1139073.1139111.
[5]
R. Edwards and M. David, Children’s understanding of parental
involvement in education. Final Report: ESRC Research Grant,
Award no. L129251012, 1999.
[6]
San Francisco Chronicle: Students kept under supervision at school –
Some parents angry over radio device. <http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-
bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2005/02/10/BADGES.TMP&type=printable>
13.07.2009.
[7]
eSchoolNews:
ACLU
rips
district’s
student-tracking
pilot.
<http://www.eschoolnews.com/news/top-news/index.cfm?i=51555>
13.07.2009.
[8]
Illuminati News: U.S. School District to Begin Microchipping
Students.
<http://www.illuminati-news.com/articles2/00231.html>
13.07.2009.
[9]
J. Qvortrup, Children half price. Nordic childhood in a social
perspective (Børn halv pris. Nordisk barndom i samfundsperspektiv).
Espjerg, Denmark: Sydjysk Universitetsforlag, 1994.
[10] K.
Rasmussen,
Surveillance
by
webcams
in
day
nurseries?
(Kameraovervågning – i børns daginstitution?). Denmark: Institut for
Uddannelsesforskning, Roskilde Universitetscenter, 2003.
40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[11] T. Fotel, and T.U. Thomsen, “The Surveillance of Children’s
Mobility,” Supervision & Society, vol. 1, no. 4, Surveillance Studies
Network, 2004, pp. 535-554.
[12] S.U. Jensen, and C.H. Hummer, Safe routes to school: an analysis of
child road safety and travel (Sikre Skoleveje: en undersøgelse af
børns
trafiksikkerhed
og
transportvaner).
Denmark:
Danmarks
Transportforskning, 2002.
[13] M. Williams, O. Jones, C. Fleuriot, and L. Wood, “Children and
Emerging Wireless Technologies: Investigating the Potential for
Spatial Practice,” Proc. Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’05), ACM Press, April 2005, pp. 819-828, doi:
10.1145/1054972.1055088.
[14] S. Aitken, The Geographies of Young People: The Morally Contested
Spaces of Identity. London, UK: Routledge, 2001.
[15] F. Furedi, Paranoid Parenting. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books
Ltd., 2001.
[16] Guardian (Rayner, J.): Why this NSPCC advert is harmful to
children.
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/Archive/Article/0,4273,3890641,00.html
> 13.07.2009.
[17] E. Rukzio, K. Leichtenstern, V. Callaghan, A. Schmidt, P. Holleis,
and J. Chin, “An experimental comparison of physical mobile
interaction techniques: Touching, pointing and scanning,” Proc. the
8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp
’06), Springer, Sep. 2006, pp. 87-104, doi: 10.1007/11853565_6.
[18] P. Välkkynen, M. Niemelä, and T. Tuomisto, “Evaluating touching
and pointing with a mobile terminal for physical browsing,” Proc. the
4th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI
’06),
ACM
Press,
Oct.
2006,
pp.
28-37,
doi:
10.1145/1182475.1182479.
[19] R.K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods. London, UK:
Sage Publications, 2003.
[20] M. Isomursu, M. Tähti, S. Väinämö, and K. Kuutti, “Experimental
evaluation of five methods for collecting emotions in field settings
with mobile applications,” International Journal of Human Computer
Studies, Academic Press, Inc., vol. 65, no. 4, April 2007, pp. 404-418,
doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.11.007.
[21] A. Druin, B. Bederson, J.P. Hourcade, L. Sherman, G. Revelle, M.
Platner, and S. Weng, “Designing a Digital Library for Young
Children: An Intergenerational Approach,” Proc. of ACM/IEEE Joint
Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL ’01), ACM Press, June 2001,
pp. 398-405, doi: 10.1145/379437.379735.
[22] M. Williams, O. Jones, and C. Fleuriot, “Wearable Computing And
The Geographies Of Urban Childhood – Working With Children To
Explore The Potential Of New Technology,” Proc. Interaction Design
and Children (IDC ’03), ACM Press, July 2003, pp. 111-118, doi:
10.1145/953536.953552.
[23] A. Druin, “The role of children in the design of new technology,”
Behaviour and Information Technology, vol. 21, no. 1, Taylor and
Francis Ltd., Jan. 2002, pp. 1-25, doi: 10.1145/1039539.1039567.
[24] H. Alborzi, A. Druin, J. Montemayor, L. Sherman, G. Taxén, J. Best,
J. Hammer, A. Kruskal, A. Lal, S.T. Plaisant, L. Sumida, R. Wagner,
and J. Hendler, “Designing StoryRooms: Interactive Storytelling
Spaces for Children,” Proc. Symposium on Designing Interactive
Systems (DIS’00), ACM Press, Aug. 2000, pp. 95-104, doi:
10.1145/347642.347673.
[25] J. Attewell, Mobile technologies and learning – A technology update
and m-learning project summary. Technology Enhanced Learning
Research Centre, London: Learning and Skills Development Agency,
2005.
[26] Kaleva.plus: Cell phone to help schoolgoing (Kännykkä avuksi
koulunkäyntiin).
<http://www.kaleva.fi/plus/index.cfm?j=747905>
13.07.2009.
[27] Kaleva.plus: Schoolchildren’s attendance is being followed with cell
phones
(Koululaisten
läsnäoloa
seurataan
puhelimilla).
<http://www.kaleva.fi/plus/index.cfm?j=723318> 13.07.2009.
[28] K. Curtis, H. Roberts, J. Copperman, A. Downie, and K. Liabo,
“’How come I don’t get asked no questions?’ Researching ‘hard to
reach’ children and teenagers,” Child and Family Social Work, vol. 9,
no. 2, May 2004, Blackwell Publishing Ltd., pp. 167-175. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2206.2004.00304.x.
[29] S.R. Kelly, E. Mazzone, M. Horton and J.C. Read, “Bluebells: A
Design Method for Child-Centred Product Development,” Proc. of
the
4th
Nordic
Conference
on
Human-Computer
Interaction
(NordiCHI’06), Oct. 2006. ACM Press, New York, NY, 361-368.
doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1182475.1182513.
[30] M. Borland, A. Laybourn, M. Hill, and J. Brown, Middle Childhood:
The Perspectives of Children and Parents. London, UK: Jessica
Kingsley Publishers, 1998.
41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

