Enforcing Genetic Consent and Restrictions through a Privacy-Focused Ontology 
 
Michael Reep, Bo Yu, Duminda Wijesekera, 
Department of Computer Science 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
e-mail: mreep@gmu.edu, byu3@gmu.edu, 
dwijesek@gmu.edu 
Paulo Costa 
Dept. of Systems Engineering and Operations Research 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
e-mail: pcosta@gmu.edu
 
 
Abstract— The use of genetic information has greatly expanded 
from the original focus of providing actionable data to health 
care providers and researchers for diagnostic and research 
purposes.  Potential uses of this information encompass the 
insurance industry, employment, and law enforcement plus the 
more recent development of Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) tests 
for genealogical research. Federal and State Laws have been 
developed in the United States to improve privacy protections 
and prevent the misuse of genetic data. However, there is a wide 
variety of laws, regulations and restrictions governing the 
release criteria, level of protection required, and specificity in 
permitted use. The attribute-focused component of these laws 
matches 
information 
regarding 
the 
requester, 
genetic 
contributor with the purpose and data being released to come 
up with an access decision. While the attribute-based portion is 
easily implemented, there are numerous aspects in the laws and 
regulations that require more complex decision making, dictate 
further post-release restrictions, and specific directives for 
consents. A rule-base specification of these complexities can be 
used as a policy language to enforce data releases from 
electronic health records and gene pools. Our previous work 
developed the attribute focused aspect of the ontology along 
with a workflow-based prototype.  The final refinements to the 
ontology address the more complex requirements for consent, 
situational validations that must be confirmed, restrictions that 
must be enforced after data release, actions for data protection, 
retention and destruction by the recipient, and informing the 
genetic data recipients of potential penalties for violating these 
restrictions. Overall this framework provides the foundation for 
bolstering privacy protections, enforcing the laws and 
regulations, and preventing the unlawful disclosures of genetic 
information. 
Keywords- Genetic Privacy; Electronic Medical Records; 
Ontology; Health Care; Genomic Medicine, Informed Consent. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Numerous issues must be considered when providing 
comprehensive protections for genetic information. Our on-
going efforts focus on providing a comprehensive framework 
for consistently and vigorously enforcing the laws, policies 
and regulations related to protecting this vital information and 
implementing appropriate patient consents [1]. Patients are 
less likely to share medical data if there is a concern about 
privacy, so consents are necessary to help allay these concerns 
[2]. Privacy concerns have been heightened as Electronic 
Health Records (EHRs) have become widespread and 
therefore most of the information are on line, so can be 
accessed either legally or by other means – and consequently, 
ensuring privacy has increased in importance [3], [4]. There 
are demonstrable benefits to using genetic information as 
genetic studies map genotypic and phenotypic data directly to 
diseases, allowing for preventive and early interventional care 
to reduce morbidity, quality of life and treatment costs [5], [6]. 
In addition, studies in pharmacogenomics work to use genetic 
information in improving the effectiveness of drugs and 
reduce toxicity [7]. These benefits have to be balanced against 
inherent unusual characteristics of genetic information that 
can identify a patient and his/her genetic relatives, therefore 
placing any of them at risk of negative consequences, such as 
discrimination [8], [9]. Patient concerns extend beyond the 
inappropriate release for insurance and law enforcement to 
include access within the healthcare community [10]. 
Consequently, laws impose penalties if genetic data is 
inappropriately released. Studies have also shown that de-
identification of genetic material may be insufficient to protect 
patient privacy [11], [12].  
In the United States, overall health privacy was addressed 
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) of 1996, which was implemented to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the US healthcare system. 
HIPAA was followed by the Privacy Rule in 2000 to address 
three covered entities:  health plans, health care 
clearinghouses, and certain health care providers [13]. The 
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) 
was passed to protect individuals from discrimination in 
employment and insurance based on genetic information [14]. 
Furthermore, almost every state and the District of Columbia 
have laws that specifically address genetic protections to some 
degree. However, even when patients are specifically 
provided information on GINA as part of pharmacogenomic 
testing, the subjects still report having little understanding of 
the act or privacy protections [15]. Health Information 
Exchanges and direct sharing between health care providers 
are still subject to the applicable state laws even for interstate 
data transfers [16]. This paper further develops an ontology 
that provides the syntactical elements (i.e., entities and their 
relationships) sufficient to specify applicable legislation and 
regulations in the forms of a machine enforceable structured 
rule-base.   
In our previous work, we developed a prototype that uses 
a medical workflow system for an EHR to enforce Federal and 
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

State laws in addition to organizational policies [17], [18]. 
Workflows provided the mechanism to gather the necessary 
information within the context of request to share genetic 
information in an EHR.  We prepared an initial genetic 
privacy ontology and sample rules to enforce laws in selected 
states to validate our approach. We then extended the genetic 
privacy ontology, based directly on relevant Federal and state 
laws, to focus on the attribute-focused components that 
generate the initial access decision [18]. This paper provides 
further expansion and refinement of the more complex legal 
requirements for ensuring the appropriate consent is obtained 
prior to information release, validating pre-conditions for 
release have been addressed, and establishing the post-release 
protection mechanisms.  
Our next step is developing this comprehensive genetic 
privacy ontology based directly on relevant Federal and State 
laws. Following this Introduction, Section II addresses related 
work; Section III provides an overview of the genetic privacy 
ontology; Section IV refines the aspects of the ontology 
related to consent and restriction enforcement; Section V 
specifies the rule base using a predicate-based authorization 
framework, Section VI develops an implementation example 
with rule definitions and an example focused on obligations, 
and, finally, Section VII presents conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There are existing standards and frameworks with 
methods to implement various aspects of genetic privacy 
protections. Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) 
standards profiling organization has developed frameworks, 
use cases, and specifications for managing the sharing of 
documents 
between 
organizations 
[19]. 
The 
inter-
organizational policies must be completed prior to the use of 
this standard for implementing the consent agreements. There 
is some but not all the required capability to address 
components of genetic privacy related to acknowledging 
consents. For example, the use case of individuals specifying 
that other specific individuals do, or do not, have access to 
their data is listed as a scenario that is explicitly not supported 
[20]. Many state laws call for this type of consent 
specifications as a prerequisite for permissible access to data. 
Concepts like Dynamic Consent in biobanks provide 
opportunities to address the complex requirements inherent in 
genetic privacy [21]. Dynamic Consent engages the research 
participant in a real-time personalized process to obtain and 
update consent as needed. Dynamic Consent is also 
incorporated into the Bilateral Consent Framework (BCF) 
which use other techniques and entities such as a trusted 
mediator to operate the system, auditing, a code of conducts 
and reputation system to improve and enhance the consent 
process [22]. However, both Dynamic Consent and BCF have 
components that would require changes to state laws which 
often specify how and when consent must be obtained.  
The restrictions placed by regulatory environments on 
information sharing has been identified as an issue that 
requires coordination across system silos [23]. The Global 
Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) provides a 
framework for sharing genome data with privacy and security 
policies, 
technology 
recommendations, 
guidance 
and 
architecture to allow interactions between organizations [24], 
[25]. The basis of data sharing in GA4GH is that the donors 
or their representatives have provided consent in accordance 
with organizational policies and the applicable laws [26]. The 
work to date provides comprehensive policies but does not 
have a functional mechanism for implementing sharing data 
or addressing the restrictions placed by donors in systems that 
hold and use such data. The National Institute of Health (NIH) 
Office of Science Policy (OSP) collaborated with GA4GH to 
develop a set of consents to improve consistent identification 
of how genomic data is used [27]. Further work was 
performed to reclassify these codes into a set of Categories 
(Primary and Secondary) and Requirements (additional 
agreements needed for re-use) [28]. The consent code base is 
focused on research with some additional restrictions than 
found in State Laws which could be incorporated into the 
ontology. These codes and NIH processes should be cross-
referenced with other standards such as HL7 to provide a more 
complete representation.  
Other health-care privacy ontologies have some overlap 
with genetic privacy concepts based on laws. However, these 
ontologies have gaps in numerous areas when compared to 
implementation requirements of state laws. The HL7 Security 
and Privacy Ontology has a class PurposeOfUseOntology 
with a purpose code and description [29]. Because the focus 
is on health care organizations, the main categories in this 
ontology are for health care marketing, operations, payment, 
research, public health and treatment with options for patient 
requested inquiries including family, power of attorney and 
support network. This list does not include key purposes 
regulated by law, such as Law Enforcement, Homeland 
Security and Insurance access.  Other matching HL7 
ontologies have some overlap (such as Organization, 
ObligationPolicy, Refrain, and Role) but not a complete set of 
genetic information related categories.  The Sensitivity class 
contains a genetic disease information sensitivity but this 
needs to be set based on the state law attributes of the 
ontology.  Many of the state laws have conditions that must 
be met prior to releasing genetic information in addition to 
imposing specific obligations to be adhered to after the 
release. The Consent component is addressed on a limited 
scale with options for delegation but not addressing aspects 
such as capacity. The ontology also has a smaller set of 
obligations and “refrains” to address some restrictions.  A 
future research option is to develop a mapping and extension 
between our genetic focused ontology and the HL7 
framework as a basis for an implementation.   
Genetic privacy protections issues are expanding with the 
introduction of big data repositories and Direct-to-Consumer 
(DTC) DNA testing [30]. Adoption of the latter has 
skyrocketed with its lower prices and wide-spread advertising. 
DTC DNA testing-related sites encourage sharing of genetic 
data, including through the use of social media. Naveed et al. 
provide a Genomic Data Handling Framework to track the 
protections required from initial collection through to storage 
and use. The framework groups the uses into the general 
categories of Healthcare, Research, Legal and Forensics, and 
DTC along with divisions for the implementation of technical 
and legal protections. Legal requirements and use cases in 
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

state laws extend the potential areas of use into employment 
and insurance with legal protections needed throughout the 
process. In addition, the use lifecycle encompasses the 
retention and destruction aspects of storage beyond the 
presented framework.  
Another pertinent issue is that consumers often do not 
have an understanding of the consequences of these DTC 
services [31]. In general, even when presented with consent 
agreements, consumers, patients and research participants 
have a wide variety of reasons for permitting access to their 
data, do not always fully understand the extent and 
implications of these agreements, and underestimate the 
ability for de-identification [7], [32], [33]. 
Rahmouni et al. developed an ontology of European 
privacy requirements for sharing patient data between 
countries [34], [35]. It focused on the implementation of data 
access between countries with respect to privacy status, 
consent requirements, recipients, level of detail, purpose, 
secondary purpose, and access by legal representatives. The 
consent requirements reflect many of the similar aspects in the 
US with respect to general areas such as when consent must 
be obtained, amount of details, written mode, and 
competency. These are divided up into four classes for 
necessity, specificity, explicitness, and format. There are no 
structures for the supplemental requirements prevalent in US 
laws outside various options for consent agreements and 
anonymization. 
Other healthcare security focused ontologies lack the 
focus on purpose-driven access found in US laws. Blobel’s 
pHealth has a policy structure that can implement many of the 
legal requirements and implements patient consent using 
policies [36]. The patient and internal organizational focus on 
access policies limits the opportunities to address the wide 
variety of scenarios prevalent with external access to patient 
data.  
Most privacy models also use Role-Based Access Control 
(RBAC) to data inquiries and implementing enforcement 
policies. The use of RBAC has been identified as one of the 
candidates for implementing privacy access controls in the 
EHR domain [37], where rights can be assigned based on 
organizational policies in a hierarchical manner that is 
modified based on the user’s role and then adjusted by the 
patient as desired.  Healthcare privacy extensions, such as 
those proposed by Hung, provide the structure for adding 
concepts for areas including purpose, obligations, and 
retention [38]. The nature of genetic access restrictions and 
criteria requires a specific framework to accommodate the 
variations in state laws.  
III. 
GENETIC PRIVACY ENFORCEMENT ONTOLOGY  
A. Ontology Overview 
The primary components of the genetic privacy ontology 
based upon Federal and State laws are the Requester, the 
Request and the Response as seen in Figure 1.  
 
 
 
• 
Requester addresses the person asking for access to 
the information and associated information such as their role 
and organization 
• 
Request focuses on the purpose the Requester needs 
the information, the subject of the request (e.g., patient), what 
specific information is being sought (target), and what action 
will be performed with the information (e.g., read, retain, 
update).  
• 
Response returns the answer to whether access is 
permitted or denied along with supplemental requirements for 
the release including if a consent form is required. The 
response includes reference material on the potential 
outcomes regarding a violation where the genetic information 
is incorrectly handled.  
The first two (Requester and Request) are attribute based 
classes that can be used to generate an access decision (Permit 
or Deny) based on the Purpose-focused rules. For example, 
access to genetic information for medical purposes has a 
different set of permissions and requirements than those for 
law enforcement. These classes and associated rule base were 
previously addressed in detail and further information can be 
found in [18]. 
Once the access decision is made, then there are 
potentially a set of other requirements that are not attribute 
based but still need to be addressed. A Consent Form signed 
by the subject or their designated representative is often 
required and is usually generated for each specific request.  
There are also directives regarding a number of factors 
included in the state laws to address a large number of areas 
such as retention, use, supplemental disclosures, and de-
identification. These directives may need to be addressed 
before release as a pre-condition, after release as a restriction 
on the use of the information, or obligations that the requester 
must perform after receipt. If the requester fails to adhere to 
these directives or the consent form directions, then the 
violation information provides insight into the penalties that 
can be assessed. The Consent, Directives and Violation 
classes are the focus of this paper.   
B. Ontology Refinement 
In our previous works, the ontology has been refined to 
reflect the increasing level of insights gathered. The first  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Genetic Privacy Ontology 
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ontology was developed based on related works review, other 
existing structures and ontologies, previous research in 
medical privacy, and the implementation of the laws for 
several initially selected sample states. The second published 
version of the ontology reflected adjustments to meet the 
requirements as more complex state laws were evaluated and 
compared against the work to date.  As described in the 
methodology section, the efforts then moved to focus entirely 
on the ontology in order to fully address the state and federal 
laws specifically related to genetic medical privacy. The third 
published version reflected these efforts in the areas of 
Requester and Request classes.  
This iteration addresses the criteria and actions to be taken 
to fulfill the request in accordance with the required 
conditions and constraints from the applicable Federal and 
State laws.  The previous paper classified these actions into 
the following groupings: 
• 
Validations: Pre-release activities (assuming all 
other permission criteria have been met) with two subclasses  
• 
Consent: Agreement from the subject or the 
appropriate representative to release the information along 
with specific clauses or text that must be included 
• 
Pre-conditions: 
Requirements 
that 
must 
be 
addressed, completed or agreed to by the information provider 
or recipient such as ensuring the requester has a need to know 
• 
Constraints: 
Post-release 
activities 
that 
the 
information recipient must agree to address  
• 
Restrictions: Limits of the use, distribution or 
actions that can be taken with the information such as limiting 
re-disclosure based on the original purpose 
• 
Obligations: Actions the recipient must take after 
receiving the information such as retention and destruction 
• 
Penalty: Potential consequences for violating the 
validations or constraints associated with a specific rule. 
This version of the ontology focusses on completing the 
analysis and classification of these components. The 
challenge and a major contribution have been the separation 
of pre-conditions and obligations. There are numerous 
instances where requirements are potentially applicable as 
both a pre-condition and obligation. For example, a “need to 
know” definitely implies that the current requester must fulfill 
the requirement as seen in the statement from Illinois Section 
30, Disclosure of person tested and test results: Disclosure 
shall be limited to those who have a need to know the 
information, and no additional disclosures may be made. 
However, once the information is provided to the requester, it 
is a reasonable assumption (and may be required) that the 
requirement must also be applicable to re-disclosures.  
Therefore, Obligations and Pre-Conditions have been 
consolidated into a “Directives” class with attributes for Pre-
Condition, Obligation and Restriction to provide additional 
flexibility during rule development. This change is reflected 
in the Figure 1.  
Consent is a stand-alone class that reflect the specific 
characteristics of this requirement. While consent is typically 
thought of as a pre-release requirement, the analysis identified 
situations where this may occur post-release as well. For 
example, some states have a requirement that any re-
disclosure or use for a different purpose requires additional 
consents.  This condition must be enforced by the initial 
recipient.  As seen in the sections below, notices that must be 
provided to the subject (or authorized signatory) with the 
consent are captured as a subclass to Consent. Since there are 
situations where notices are required based on the results of 
an information release, such as notices to parents about the 
results of neo-natal tests, these notices are captured within the 
Directives class structure.  
Finally, some state laws directly state potential penalties 
associated with inappropriate genetic information release or 
use in the laws related to this subject. Therefore, a Violation 
class has been included to provide this information to the 
requester and reinforce the seriousness of complying with the 
relevant laws.  There are a number of components, such as the 
violator’s intent) to a violation in addition to the assessment 
of a specific penalty (such as a fine). Therefore, the class label 
was widened from Penalty to Violation to reflect these other 
subclasses.  
C. Consent Super-Class 
The Consent super-class shown in Figure 2 is more 
complex than simply providing a form for signature. In the 
analysis process, over 175 statements were extracted from 
laws regarding consents. State laws dictate a variety of 
specifications for signatories, format, text, informational 
notices, supplemental releases, record keeping and when 
consent is not required. The classes directly associated with 
the Consent super-class are:  
• 
Consent Form represents the actual consent 
agreement and the associated requirements, directives, classes 
and notices to be provided. This Consent Form class is 
decomposed further below to provide information on various 
aspects.  
• 
Releases addresses situations where additional 
consent may be required prior to the release of information 
regarding a specific individual or an institution. In the case 
where the request Purpose was Treatments, attributes flag 
when a physician must be the consent requester and the need 
 
Figure 2. Consent Super-Class. 
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to document the refusal of a party to sign a consent statement. 
A requirement for insurance disclosures is to notify all the 
parties (or their guardian) in a group insurance of the 
conditions related to requesting genetic information. 
• 
Post-Signing directs that the signed consent form 
must be included in the permanent record and/or a copy 
provided to the individual.  
• 
Disclosure 
Without 
Authorizations 
outlines 
specific situations where genetic information may be eligible 
for release without the consent of the individual (or their 
representative). The three general conditions relate to a 
deceased individual while the other provide for release for 
medical treatment, specific types of research and legal 
conditions. 
The Consent Form class in Figure 3 includes a number of 
attributes that reflect the conditions and requirements for the 
form itself. Because the focus here is genetic consent 
agreements, the Consent Form class also has an attribute to 
reflect the directions from some states that a general 
information release is not sufficient as seen in Georgia Statue 
18.13.010: A general authorization for the release of medical 
records or medical information may not be construed as the 
informed and written consent required by this section. In these 
cases, another consent form that has specific criteria for 
genetic information must be signed even if there is a general 
release form on file. The classes associated with Consent 
Form are as follows:  
 • 
Signatory addresses who can sign the consent form. 
The individual can sign if they have the capacity (mental or 
age based). In Texas, a pregnant subject has additional consent 
requirements for any tests performed on a child in utero (as an 
implementation detail, these attributes would be reflected in 
the overall Subject class.) Authorized Representative may 
sign for individual and this representative may have been 
designated by the individual to sign on their behalf, may be 
the parent or guardian, a next of kin if the subject is deceased 
or set by some other criteria in the law.  
• 
Requirements reflects specific statements in the 
laws regarding the consent form and overall process.  
• 
Clauses provides the sections of text that must be 
included in the consent agreement being signed. Some states 
require that specific text or forms are used so this option is 
reflected as additional subclasses.  
• 
Notices lists information that must be provided with 
the consent form. These disclosures provide additional 
information related to areas such as information use, rights of 
the subject, potential future use or disposition and 
participation in specific programs. 
D. Directices Super-Class 
Once the purpose-based rules are applied for a Requester 
to gain access based on the Request attributes, the Directives 
seen in Figure 4 dictate the pre-condition requirements for the 
release of information (in addition to consents), restrictions 
that are applied once the information is released, and 
obligations with specific actions that must be taken after the 
release.  For example, a physician may be allowed to gain 
access to genetic information based on their role and their 
participation in a subject’s treatment regimen. However, 
additional requirements might need to be addressed such as 
whether the physician has a need to know genetic information 
to provide care in the current use case. An Emergency Room 
doctor trying to access genetic information while treating a 
laceration might have to assert their Need to Know prior to 
gaining access. (Inappropriately asserting the need then 
becomes an external audit function and subject to the 
potentially involves the Penalty class.) These directives may 
not be retro-active so the date genetic information was 
obtained may be applicable in some states and use cases. 
These restrictions have been grouped into the following 
classes: 
• 
Disclosure generally constrains the use of genetic 
information once permission rules are validated.  (Releasing 
sub-sets of genetic information is addressed in the Limited 
class.) While some states may prevent additional disclosure 
under this request, other states provide specific criteria where 
re-disclosure is permitted which are addressed in a subclass. 
• 
Limited provides criteria where disclosure of 
specific genetic information may be appropriate. AS opposed 
to Disclosure class, the Limited class addresses the ability for 
 
Figure 3. Consent Form Class. 
 
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Disclosure to be for only a portion on the overall genetic 
information. Specific subclasses deal with situations that are 
only relevant to Treatment, Insurance or Legal based on the 
wording in the associated laws.  
• 
Allowed Release addresses use cases where the law 
specifically states that information can be released. If Consent 
is required for an Allowed Release use case, the combination 
of Consent and Allowed Releases instances would be 
articulated in the relationships with the Release super-class.  
• 
Consent Based reflects obligations and directives 
that must be enforced based on clauses and directives in the 
consent form. 
• 
Retention 
specifies 
how 
long 
the 
genetic 
information may be retained either as specific time periods or 
general guidance. As an example of relationships between 
classes, Retention can be set by an individual with Authorize 
Retention as an option under Consent class.  
• 
Destruction provides further direction on what to do 
when the retention period expires or upon a specific trigger. 
Test Labs have additional directions to follow practices 
determined by their accreditation requirements or lab 
guidelines. If a subject withdraws from a research project, 
destruction may be required depending on the state  
• 
Compliance articulates state guidance to comply 
with certain laws, regulations or rules along with requiring 
policies and rules to be set related to the release of genetic 
information. In order to demonstrate compliance, some states 
provide specific guidance on recording access and disclosing 
audit records. 
E. Violation Super-Class 
As stated above, the Violation super-class shown in Figure 
5 involves several aspects of addressing inappropriate release 
of genetic information as specific by Federal and State Laws. 
The following classes are under this category: 
• 
Intent provides information on why the violator 
released the information. While the release may be 
Inadvertent, the penalties may be reduced as compared to a 
willful release. 
• 
Basis describes the reasons or methods for the 
violation. These range from some type of gain (personal, 
corporate or otherwise) to wanting to inflect harm on 
someone. 
• 
Offense separates out the criminal from non-
criminal violations.  
• 
Actions indicates how the violation will be 
addressed primarily for non-criminal offenses. (Criminal 
 
Figure 4. Directive Super-Class. 
 
90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

offenses may also trigger these actions but are not the primary 
focus in state laws.) 
• 
Penalty indicates what the potential outcomes can be 
if a criminal offense is confirmed. The Penalty may be 
Monetary, Imprisonment, or a combination and there may be 
a penalty assessed for each violation. 
• 
Monetary has a number of attributes that may be 
associated with the assessed amount. In some 
cases, the amount may be set depending on a 
specific Basis.  There are some penalties 
associated with Employment and the use of wages 
as a computational component. The Payee may be 
the Subject or some other party if not reimbursed 
back to the Government. 
• 
Imprisonment is usually set as a specific period 
to be served (in months or years) or a maximum 
amount. The location may be designated as a 
County or State facility. 
F. Logical Definition Formulation 
We provide a logical formulation to articulate the 
complexities of the genetic privacy protections in 
consideration of the wide variety of attributes and 
formulations that need to be specified in a hierarchical manner 
[39]. 
The core of the framework is a 5-tuple Data System (OTH, 
UGH, RH, A, Rel) where the elements are: 
• 
OTH is an object-type hierarchy which in this case is 
an Electronic Health Record 
• 
UGH is a user group hierarchy representing the 
system membership in the EHR 
• 
RH is a role hierarchy for the role-based access 
permissions prevalent in the genetic information access 
requirements. For example, the HealthCare Provider role has 
subordinate roles such as the Physician and Nurse roles. 
 
Figure 5.Violation Super-Class. 
 
91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
A is the authorization nodes or Actions that can be 
performed on objects and is represented in the ontology as the 
Action super-class 
• 
Rel is the set of relationships that links together 
element using unary, binary or n-ary tuples. For example, a 
medical record created by a physician is represented using a 
DidCreate(record, user) and thus will be provided additional 
access rights under the authorization component. 
 
Within FAF, an authorization rule is in the form 
head(o, s, ⟨sign⟩a) ← L1& · · ·& Ln. 
 
where o is an object, s is a subject performing the actions, a is 
an action with the sign (+ or -) indicating permission or denial, 
and L1, . . . , Ln are done, hie-, or rel-literals. done is a predicate 
stored in the history table, hie-literals are hierarchy predicates 
and rel-literals are application specific predicates.  The rel-
predicates provide the vehicle to address the majority of 
specifications found in the rule base.  
However, within the context of accessing genetic 
information in an EHR, the cando tuple needs to be expanded 
to address the complexities found in a real-world situation. 
Therefore, cando is updated into shareable() to include the 
individual (i) patient’s capacity to consent, the request (r) 
being made to obtain the purpose and state for the physical 
location, and the consent form (c) to determine if the 
individual has provided access. The revised formulation is 
shareable(o,s,i,r, ⟨sign⟩a) ← L1& · · ·& Ln. 
The set of rel-predicates includes: 
 
• 
AllowedRole(r, s) 
• 
AllowedOrg (r, s) 
• 
PurposeAccess (o, a, r) 
• 
needConsent(r,i) 
• 
haveConsent (r,i) 
• 
hasDirective (r, s) 
• 
hasObligation (r, s) 
• 
Precondition (r, s) 
• 
WrittenForm (r) 
 
If NeedConsent evaluates to true, then the haveConsent 
predicate is evaluated based on the following:  
 
haveConsent()←giveConsent(r,i), ConsentOnFile(r,i) 
noConsent() ←¬giveConsent(r,i), ¬ConsentOnFile(r,i) 
 
The final decision is evaluated as follows to address any 
conflicts: 
finalConsentDecision()← haveConsent(), ¬ noConsent() 
 
In addition, the negation of a predicate indicates that some 
aspect is not needed within this context. For example, if 
consent is not required (as is common for law enforcement 
requests), then ¬NeedConsent(r,i) indicates that the 
individual’s consent is not required for this request.   
In a similar manner to cando in FAF, dercando is updated 
to dershareable to implement two areas where authorization is 
derived from inferences. giveConsent can potentially be a 
hierarchical situation where multiple consents may be present 
that must be evaluated.  
For example, in some cases a minor child can give 
permission without their parent’s approval. Alternatively, 
there are other scenarios where the parents can provide 
consent that overrides the minor’s directives. In addition, 
permissions granted to one part of a medical record will be 
inherited by related or “lower” aspects of the record. The 
person who requested a genetic test is often provided access 
to the test results by inheritance. If consent is provided to all 
genetic information within the record to the physician, it is 
obvious this permission is inherited by all genetic-related 
information. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Our previous work included a prototype that uses a 
workflow engine to gather the required attributes, display the 
results and confirm the implementation of the directives [17], 
[18]. These papers include additional information on the 
specific steps in the workflow and the overall development 
process along with screen shots and the rules algorithm.   
The workflow engine, Yet Another Workflow Language 
(YAWL), is compatible with Electronic Health Record 
(EMR) systems such as OpenMRS [40]. This integration will 
allow many of the attributes about the request and requester to 
be directly extracted from the record repository.  In addition, 
the prototype will force a consent to be obtained in case of 
need. As seen in Figure 6, these attributes are then extracted 
by the Consent Service and the Protégé ontology populated 
for the execution of the rules. The results are processed by the 
Rules Hierarchy Algorithm, and Consent Service to develop 
the Final Access Results. The results also include any 
associated pre-conditions, obligations, restrictions and 
violations that are part of the enforcement component. These 
results are returned to the workflow for display of the access 
decision along with a confirmation that the consent has been 
completed along with agreement the directives have been 
evaluated and addressed. 
The workflow process is shown in Figure 7. Section 1 of 
the workflow gathers the required attributes and generates the 
 
 
Figure 6. Prototype Architecture. 
92
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

access decision. Section 2 displays the complete set of results 
and requests a confirmation. The next set of steps generates 
the consent agreement and requests an electronic signature. 
Once the consent agreement is signed, the directives identified 
as pre-conditions are displayed and the requester validates that 
the conditions have been met. Once the pre-conditions are 
met, the restrictions and obligations are provided to be 
enforced as part of the release process. Failing to complete any 
of the steps or provide the necessary signatures/agreements in 
Sections 2 and 3 will result in the access decision converting 
to a Deny. 
A. SWRL Rule Structure  
This section specifies the rule structure for all access 
inquiry rules and the associated release conditions in the 
Protégé prototype [16], [17]. The workflow captures the 
required data elements and the Consent Service populates the 
Protégé ontology instances with the submitted data. The 
workflow has three steps to collect the access inquiry 
information on the request, requester and subject as described 
in our previous papers. The SWRL rule structure defines how 
the ontology-based rules are built in order to provide an access 
decision along with any applicable response details for 
consent, directives and violations. (The structure is provided 
in Figure 1.) 
Basic Structure 
At a minimum, each rule must have a request, requester 
and response. In addition, any required response condition 
instances (consent, directives and violations) are retrieved in 
the precedent for use in the antecedent. 
• 
g(inquiry), f(request), f(requester), g(response), 
g(conditions) -> s(response), s(conditions) 
The g() predicates get the instances from the ontology for 
evaluation or use in the response. The f() predicates then 
evaluate the instances to determine if the rule is applicable for 
this access request. The s() functions in the antecedent sets the 
response instance attributes and associates the retrieved 
conditions with the response.  
g(inquiry) retrieves the required instances present in all 
rules for both the request and requester instances with one 
statement. 
• 
makesRequest(?r, ?req) which provides the linked 
request and requester instances.  
f(request) and f(requester) provide the predicates for 
evaluating if the rule is applicable to the access inquiry.  Since 
these two functions encompass the entire rule base, selected 
functions are provided to illustrate their operation.  
One example is to restrict the rule enforcement to a 
specific state. The following predicate operates on an attribute 
in the request instance.  
• 
inState(?req, abbr) where abbr is the two letter state 
abbreviation such as “DE” for Delaware. 
If the rule is enforcing a constraint in a subclass to the 
requester (role or organization) or request (subject, purpose, 
action or target), the function first retrieves the associated 
instance and then performs the evaluation.  
• 
forResource(?req,?resource), 
isGeneticResult(?resource, true) which is used to determine 
the specific part of the medical record that is being accessed 
(forResource) and if the record component contains genetic 
information based on a resource attribute (isGeneticResult).  
• 
forPurpose(?req, ?pur), isTreatment (?pur, true) 
where 
an 
Purpose 
instance 
(forPurpose) 
attribute 
(isTreatment) is evaluated to determine if the purpose is in a 
specific grouping. In this example, all medically oriented 
treatment purposes are grouped in the isTreatment property on 
the Purpose.   
g(response) is comprised of two SWRL statements 
because there are three separate response objects that can be 
associated with each access inquiry for the Federal, State and 
Organization levels. The objects are respectively ?res, ?resst 
and ?resorg to match the three levels. Each rule only contains 
one response instance and the correct response level is 
obtained using one of these combinations: 
• 
hasResponse(?req, ?res), responseLevel(?res, 
"Federal") 
 
 
Section 1: Generate Access Decision     Section 2: Sign Consent/Confirm Pre-Conditions Section 3: Enforce Obligations 
 
Figure 7. Prototype Workflow. 
93
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
hasResponse(?req, ?resst), responseLevel(?resst, 
"State") 
• 
hasResponse(?req, ?resorg), 
responseLevel(?resorg, "Org") 
g(condition) gets the instances that will be used in the 
antecedent to establish the conditions associated with the 
information release. The instances are obtained from the 
Consent, Directive and Violation super-classes and all 
subclasses that reflect the release requirements. For example, 
one requirement often imposed by states is that the requester 
must have a “need to know” in order to be permitted access to 
the genetic information. In the first step, the “Need to know” 
instance is retrieved in the following rule snippet. Under 
s(condition) the instance is associated with the state response.  
• 
oblName(?pre, "NeedToKnow") is used to 
retrieve the Directive instance with the name “NeedToKnow” 
and then associate this instance with ?pre. ?pre is used in 
s(response) to enforce the requirement.   
Multiple conditions are associated with one rule by 
creating unique instances to replace ?pre in the formula. For 
example, ten consent clauses can be associated with one rule 
by replacing ?pre with ?clause1…?clause10.  
s(response) sets the response instance attributes to reflect 
if access is permitted and provide supporting information on 
the basis of the access decision. The assignment statements 
are: 
• 
isAllowed(?resst, boolean) to set the access 
decision to permit (true) or deny (false) 
• 
canOverride(?resst, boolean) to communicate if 
“lower” level rules can override this rule. For example, if the 
State law permits access, an override of false means the 
organization can’t deny access.  
• 
decisionSource(?resst, 
text) 
to 
provide 
the 
reference information for the rule from the applicable law, 
regulation or policy. 
• 
hasRule(?resst, integer) is an implementation 
specific construct to simplify debugging and gives each rule a 
unique ID 
s(condition) uses relationship statements to associate the 
previously retrieved conditions with the response instance.  
• 
hasPreCondition(?resst, ?pre) takes the ?pre 
instance retrieved for the NeedToKnow example and uses 
hasPreCondition to associate the condition with the ?resst 
release instance obtained under g(release). 
Simple Rule Example 
In this SWRL rule, a person is allowed access to their own 
medical records for information regarding genetic test results. 
This rule implements a portion of a Georgia State Law: 
Information derived from genetic testing shall be confidential 
and privileged and may be released only to the individual 
tested. 
makesRequest(?r, ?req), isSelf(?r, true), inState(?req, 
""GA""), 
forResource(?req, 
?resource), 
isGeneticResult(?resource, true), forPurpose(?req, ?pur), 
purposeDesc(?pur, 
""SelfRequest""), 
hasResponse(?req, 
?resst), responseLevel(?resst, ""State"") -> isAllowed(?resst, 
true), canOverride(?resst, false), decisionSource(?resst, 
""GA LAW 33-54-3""), hasRule(?resst, 10)" 
 
g(inquiry):  makesRequest(?r, ?req) 
f(request): 
 inState(?req, ""GA""),  
forResource(?req, ?resource), 
isGeneticResult(?resource, true), 
forPurpose(?req, ?pur), purposeDesc(?pur,  
 
""SelfRequest""),  
f(requester):  isSelf(?r, true),   
g(response):  hasResponse(?req, ?resst), 
responseLevel(?resst, ""State""), 
s(response):  isAllowed(?resst, true),  
canOverride(?resst, false),  
decisionSource(?resst, ""GA LAW 33-54- 
 
3""),  
hasRule(?resst, 10)" 
Note there are no conditions associated with this rule since 
the law does not impose any restrictions. 
V. 
RESPONSE EXAMPLE  
The following snippets from Delaware State Law Chapter 
12, Informed Consent and Confidentiality, provides an 
example that would be applicable to a request for medical 
treatment: 
(a)No person shall obtain genetic information 
about an individual without first obtaining informed 
consent from the individual. 
(4) Informed consent'' 
a. For the purpose of obtaining genetic 
information, means the signing of a consent form 
which includes a description of the genetic test or tests 
to be performed, its purpose or purposes, potential 
uses, and limitations and the meaning of its results, 
and that the individual will receive the results unless 
the individual directs otherwise; 
(a) Regardless of the manner of receipt or the 
source of genetic information, including information 
received from an individual, a person shall not 
disclose or be compelled, by subpoena or any other 
means, to disclose the identity of an individual upon 
whom a genetic test has been performed or to disclose 
genetic information about the individual in a manner 
that permits identification of the individual, unless…: 
(b) Any person who willfully obtains or discloses 
genetic information in violation of this subchapter 
shall be punished by a fine not less than $5,000 not 
more than $50,000. 
A. SWRL Rule 
A sample SWRL rule that would be invoked for this 
scenario is as follows: 
makesRequest(?r, ?req), inState(?req, "DE"), 
forResource(?req, ?resource), isGenetic(?resource, 
true), forPurpose(?req, ?pur), isTherapeutic(?pur, true), 
hasResponse(?req, ?resst), responseLevel(?resst, 
"State"), oblName(?consent, "ConsentRequired"), 
oblName(?dir, “MayNotCompelIdentity”), 
vioName(?vio, “Willfull”)  -> isAllowed(?resst, true), 
canOverride(?resst, false), hasConsent(?resst, ?consent), 
isSigned(?consent, true), isDescription (?consent, true), 
isPurpose(?consent, true), ?isUse(?consent, true), 
94
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

?isPositiveTestResults(?consent, true), 
isSubjectReceivesResults(?consent, true), hasDirective 
(?resst, ?dir), forViolation(?resst, ?vio), isMin(?vio, 
5000), isMax(?vio, 50000),  decisionSource(?resst, "DE 
LAW 12"), hasRule(?resst, 1200) 
 
In this rule,  
• 
?r is for the Requester of the Request 
• 
?req is for the Request that links the various 
components, such as Subject, Purpose and Resource 
• 
?pur is the Therapeutic Purpose that is associated 
with the Request 
• 
?resource is for the “GeneticTestResults” part of the 
medical record  
• 
?consent is for the Consent Required clause 
• 
?dir is the Directive that the recipient may not be 
compelled to reveal the subject’s identity. 
• 
?vio is the Willful Violation object 
• 
?resst is the State Response object that is associated 
with the Request. 
These SWRL statements are explained in Table I. 
TABLE I. SAMPLE RESPONSE STATEMENT RULE  
SWRL Statement 
Explanation 
makesRequest(?r, ?req)  
Links Requester for the 
Request 
inState(?req, "DE")  
Request is for Delaware 
forResource(?req, 
?resource)  
Links Request with the 
Resource 
isGenetic(?resource, true 
Restricts the rule to a 
Resource that is 
identified as a genetic 
information  
forPurpose(?req, ?pur) 
Links Request with 
Purpose 
isTherapeutic(?pur, true) 
Restricts the rule to a 
Treatment Purpose 
hasResponse(?req, ?resst)  
Links the Request with a 
Response to store 
answer 
responseLevel(?resst, 
"State") 
Gets the Response for 
State level to store 
answers 
oblName(?consent, 
"ConsentRequired") 
Gets the Consent 
Required Object 
oblName(?dir, 
“MayNotCompelIdentity”) 
Gets the appropriate 
Directive object  
vioName(?vio, “Willfull”) 
Gets the appropriate 
Violation object 
-> isAllowed(?resst, true)  
Sets the State response 
to access is allowed 
canOverride(?resst, false)  
Sets the state Response 
to not allow override by 
organization 
SWRL Statement 
Explanation 
hasConsent(?resst, 
?consent) 
Sets the State response 
to include the Consent 
Required condition 
isSigned(?consent, true), 
isDescription (?consent, 
true), isPurpose(?consent, 
true), ?isUse(?consent, 
true), 
?isPositiveTestResults(?co
nsent, true), 
isSubjectReceivesResults(?
consent, true) 
Sets the attributes on the 
Consent object to 
require a signed form 
that includes the 
description, purpose, 
use, test results meaning 
and subject receiving 
results 
hasDirective (?resst, ?dir) 
Sets the State response 
to include the 
MayNotCompelIdentity 
obligation 
forViolation(?resst, ?vio)  
Sets the State response 
to include the Wilful 
Violation 
isMin(?vio, 5000), 
isMax(?vio, 50000)   
Sets the Minimum and 
Maximum Fine amounts 
for the Violation 
decisionSource(?resst, 
"DE LAW 12") 
Sets the State response 
to reflect the decision 
source as state law 
hasRule(?resst, 1200)  
Sets the rule number to 
1200 for reference 
 
B. Obligation Enforcement 
Once the genetic information has been released, 
obligations then require additional interactions in order to 
enforce the applicable laws, regulations and consent 
directives. A YAWL workflow is presented in Figure 8 to 
address the required process. A trigger in the underlying EHR 
invokes the workflow and creates a workflow item for 
evaluation. A workflow path then is selected from the 
following list to execute the associated rules: 
• 
Re-disclosure Request determines if further 
dissemination is permitted based on the original request. 
There are three identified conditions where additional consent 
may be required, the re-disclosure can be performed if the 
purpose is the same as the original request, and only if the 
original restrictions are agreed upon for the release.  
• 
Test Results Received from a genetic test request is 
evaluated for specific conditions associated with the original 
request and consent form. Subject notification may be 
required that the results were received. As a separate 
workflow, the subject may be entitled to additional 
information if the test is positive for the condition.  
• 
Retention Expired begins the review process to 
determine if the genetic information/sample can be retained 
longer. If the criteria are met, then the retention period can be 
extended. Otherwise the information and/or sample is subject 
to destruction. For samples, the destruction may be subject to 
95
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

specific requirements or, if stated in the consent agreement 
stated, the sample must be returned to the subject. 
• 
Destroy Period Ended indicates the time has 
expired and the sample must be destroyed in accordance with 
any specified processes.  
• 
Subject Withdrew from a research project may 
impact the sample and trigger a destruction action.  
C. Obligation Example  
The following snippets from Nevada State Law Chapter 
629.161, Retention of genetic information that identifies 
person without consent unlawful; exceptions; destruction of 
genetic information, provides an example that would be 
applicable to destruction for a subject withdrawing from a 
research study: 
3. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 4 or 
by federal law or regulation, a person who obtains the 
genetic information of a person for use in a study shall 
destroy that information upon: 
      (a) The completion of the study; or 
      (b) The withdrawal of the person from the 
 study, whichever occurs first. 
4. A person whose genetic information is used in a 
study may authorize the person who conducts the study 
to retain that genetic information after the study is 
completed or upon his or her withdrawal from the 
study. 
The following snippets from Nevada State Law Chapter 
629.191, Penalty, indicates the outcome for a failure to 
comply with the previous clause: 
A person who violates any of the provisions of NRS 
629.151, 629.161 or 629.171 is guilty of a 
misdemeanor. 
A sample SWRL rule that would be invoked for a subject 
that has not agreed to have the information retained upon 
withdrawal from a research study is as follows: 
madeRequest(?r, ?req), inState(?req, "NV"), 
forResource(?req, ?resource), isGenetic(?resource, 
true), forPurpose(?req, ?pur), isResearch(?pur, true), 
isResearch(?resource, true), forSubject(?sub, ?req), 
hasAction(?sub, “WithDrew”), hasConsent(?sub, 
?consent), hasRetainWithdraw (?consent, ?clause), 
isRetainAllowed(?clause, false), responseLevel(?resst, 
"State"), oblName(?obl, "DestroyInfo"), 
degreeName(?degree, “Misdemeanor”)  -> 
hasObligation (?resst, ?obl), forViolation(?resst, 
?degree) ,  decisionSource(?resst, "NV LAW 629.161"), 
hasRule(?resst, 1201) 
In this rule, the following instances are added from the 
previous example: 
• 
?sub is for the Subject of the Request 
• 
?consent represents the Consent Agreement with the 
Subject 
• 
?clause are the clauses in the Consent Agreement  
 
 
Figure 8. Obligation Workflow. 
96
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
?obl is the obligation that the organization must 
fulfill 
• 
?degree provides the class/degree associated with 
this criminal offense if the information is not destroyed 
These SWRL statements are explained in Table II. 
TABLE II. SAMPLE OBLIGATION RULE  
SWRL Statement 
Explanation 
madeRequest(?r, ?req)  
Links Requester for 
the original Request 
inState(?req, "NV")  
Request is for Nevada 
forResource(?req, 
?resource)  
Links Request with 
the Resource 
isGenetic(?resource, true 
Restricts the rule to a 
Resource that is 
identified as a genetic 
information  
forPurpose(?req, ?pur) 
Links Request with 
Purpose 
isResearch(?pur, true) 
Restricts the rule to 
the Research Purpose 
forSubject(?sub, ?req) 
Obtains the Subject 
associated with the 
Request 
hasAction(?sub, 
“WithDrew”) 
Indicates the Subject 
has the Action for 
Withdrew 
hasConsent(?sub, ?consent) 
Obtains the Consent 
Agreement for this 
Subject 
hasRetainWithdraw 
(?consent, ?clause) 
Restricts the Rule to 
the Subject having the 
Clause to Retain 
Information upon 
Withdrawal 
isRetainAllowed(?clause, 
false) 
Determines that the 
Retention is set to 
false 
hasResponse(?req, ?resst)  
Links the Request 
with a Response to 
store answer 
responseLevel(?resst, 
"State") 
Gets the Response for 
State level to store 
answers 
oblName(?obl, 
"DestroyInfo") 
Gets the Obligation to 
Destroy Info  
degreeName(?degree, 
“Misdemeanor”) 
Gets the appropriate 
degree object 
->hasObligation(?resst, 
?consent) 
Sets the State 
response to Destroy 
Info  
forViolation(?resst, ?degree) 
Sets the State 
response as the 
Misdemeanour 
Violation 
SWRL Statement 
Explanation 
decisionSource(?resst, "NV 
LAW 629.161") 
Sets the State 
response to reflect the 
decision source as 
state law 
hasRule(?resst,1201)  
Sets the rule number 
to 1201 for reference 
 
Upon receiving this result, the workflow would advance 
to the destruction path to implement the clauses in the 
subject’s consent agreement. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our genetic privacy ontology was built directly from the 
applicable Federal and State laws without any pre-conceived 
boundaries or required elements. The work demonstrates the 
importance of a purpose-focused structure to appropriately 
link the various data elements necessary to permit or deny 
access to the genetic medical information. The ontology and 
previous prototype work allows the data collection to be 
directly integrated into EHRs. The next step will be validating 
an integrated EHR, ontology and prototype using operational 
data and genetic data requests to demonstrate the appropriate 
data protections are enforced. This comprehensive integration 
reduces the provider’s effort and provides access decisions in 
accordance with relevant laws, policies and regulations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Reep, B. Yu, D. Wijesekera, and P. Costa, “An Ontology 
for 
Specifying 
Regulation-Compliant 
Genetic 
Privacy 
Policies,” in eTELEMED 2018, The Tenth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
2018, pp. 66–74. 
[2] K. Wuyts, R. Scandariato, G. Verhenneman, and W. Joosen, 
“Integrating Patient Consent in e-Health Access Control,” Int. 
J. Secure Softw. Eng., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–24, 32 2011. 
[3] J. Pritts, “The Importance and Value of Protecting the Privacy 
of Health Information: The Roles of the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
and the Common Rule in Health Research.” Institute of 
Medicine, 2008. 
[4] M. H. Ullman-Cullere and J. P. Mathew, “Emerging landscape 
of genomics in the electronic health record for personalized 
medicine,” Hum. Mutat., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 512–516, May 
2011. 
[5] M. D. Ritchie, E. R. Holzinger, R. Li, S. A. Pendergrass, and 
D. Kim, “Methods of integrating data to uncover genotype-
phenotype interactions,” Nat. Rev. Genet., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 
85–97, Feb. 2015. 
[6] C. Pihoker et al., “Prevalence, Characteristics and Clinical 
Diagnosis of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young Due to 
Mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, and Glucokinase: Results from 
the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth,” J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab., vol. 98, no. 10, pp. 4055–4062, Oct. 2013. 
[7] Y. M. Lee, R. P. McKillip, B. A. Borden, C. E. Klammer, M. 
J. Ratain, and P. H. O’Donnell, “Assessment of patient 
perceptions of genomic testing to inform pharmacogenomic 
implementation,” Pharmacogenet. Genomics, vol. 27, no. 5, 
pp. 179–189, May 2017. 
97
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] B. M. Knoppers, “Genetic information and the family: are we 
our brother’s keeper?,” Trends Biotechnol., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 
85–86, Feb. 2002. 
[9] S. Dheensa, A. Fenwick, S. Shkedi-Rafid, G. Crawford, and A. 
Lucassen, “Health-care professionals’ responsibility to 
patients’ relatives in genetic medicine: a systematic review and 
synthesis of empirical research,” Genet. Med., vol. 18, no. 4, 
pp. 290–301, Apr. 2016. 
[10] S. B. Trinidad, T. B. Coffin, S. M. Fullerton, J. Ralston, G. P. 
Jarvik, and E. B. Larson, “‘Getting off the Bus Closer to Your 
Destination’: 
Patients’ 
Views 
about 
Pharmacogenetic 
Testing,” Perm. J., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 21–27, 2015. 
[11] W. W. Lowrance, “Privacy, Confidentiality, and Identifiability 
in Genomic Research.” Discussion document for workshop 
convened by the National Human Genome Research Institute, 
Bethesda, Oct-2006. 
[12] M. Gymrek, A. L. McGuire, D. Golan, E. Halperin, and Y. 
Erlich, 
“Identifying 
Personal 
Genomes 
by 
Surname 
Inference,” Science, vol. 339, no. 6117, pp. 321–324, Jan. 
2013. 
[13] O. for C. Rights (OCR), “Privacy Rule General Overview,” 
HHS.gov, 
05-Nov-2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-
professionals/privacy/guidance/general-overview/index.html. 
[Accessed: 01-Jun-2019]. 
[14] O. for C. Rights (OCR), “Genetic Information,” HHS.gov, 07-
May-2008. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/special-
topics/genetic-information/index.html. [Accessed: 01-Jun-
2019]. 
[15] A. A. Lemke et al., “Patient perspectives following 
pharmacogenomics results disclosure in an integrated health 
system,” Pharmacogenomics, Feb. 2018. 
[16] “State and Federal Consent Laws Affecting Interstate Health 
Information 
Exchange.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://classic.nga.org/cms/home/nga-center-for-best-
practices/center-divisions/center-issues/page-health-
issues/data-and-analytics/col2-content/list--
right/resources/content-reference@/state-and-federal-consent-
laws-a.default.html. [Accessed: 01-Jun-2019]. 
[17] M. Reep, B. Yu, D. Wijesekera, and P. Costa, “Sharing Data 
under Genetic Privacy Laws,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh 
Conference on Semantic Technology for Intelligence, Defense, 
and Security, Fairfax VA, USA, 2016, pp. 46–54. 
[18] M. Reep, B. Yu, D. Wijesekera, and P. Costa, “Sharing 
Genetic Data under US Privacy Laws,” in 11th International 
Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and 
Technologies, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, 2018, vol. 5: 
HEALTHINF, pp. 349–360. 
[19] “Enabling Document Sharing Using IHE Profiles - IHE Wiki.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://wiki.ihe.net/index.php/Enabling_Document_Sharing_U
sing_IHE_Profiles. [Accessed: 01-Jun-2019]. 
[20] “Basic Patient Privacy Consents - IHE Wiki.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://wiki.ihe.net/index.php?title=Basic_Patient_Privacy_Co
nsents. [Accessed: 01-Jun-2019]. 
[21] J. Kaye, E. A. Whitley, D. Lund, M. Morrison, H. Teare, and 
K. Melham, “Dynamic consent: a patient interface for twenty-
first century research networks,” Eur. J. Hum. Genet., vol. 23, 
no. 2, pp. 141–146, Feb. 2015. 
[22] Y. Erlich et al., “Redefining Genomic Privacy: Trust and 
Empowerment,” PLOS Biol., vol. 12, no. 11, p. e1001983, 
Nov. 2014. 
[23] T. G. A. for G. and Health*, “A federated ecosystem for 
sharing genomic, clinical data,” Science, vol. 352, no. 6291, 
pp. 1278–1280, Jun. 2016. 
[24] “Global Alliance for Genomics and Health: Privacy and 
Security Policy.” Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, 
26-May-2015. 
[25] “Standards and implementation practices for protecting the 
privacy and security of shared genomic and clinical data.” 
Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, 09-Aug-2016. 
[26] B. M. Knoppers, “Framework for responsible sharing of 
genomic and health-related data,” HUGO J., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 3, 
Dec. 2014. 
[27] admin, “Protecting Data, Promoting Access: Improving Our 
Toolbox,” Office of Science Policy, 02-May-2016.  
[28] S. O. M. Dyke et al., “Consent Codes: Upholding Standard 
Data Use Conditions,” PLoS Genet., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2016. 
[29] “HL7 Version 3 Standard: Security and Privacy Ontology, 
Release 1.” Health Level Seven International, May-2014. 
[30] M. Naveed et al., “Privacy in the Genomic Era,” ACM Comput 
Surv, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 6:1–6:44, Aug. 2015. 
[31] H. Shen and J. Ma, “Privacy Challenges of Genomic Big 
Data,” in Healthcare and Big Data Management, Springer, 
Singapore, 2017, pp. 139–148. 
[32] J. M. Oliver, M. J. Slashinski, T. Wang, P. A. Kelly, S. G. 
Hilsenbeck, and A. L. McGuire, “Balancing the Risks and 
Benefits of Genomic Data Sharing: Genome Research 
Participants’ Perspectives,” Public Health Genomics, vol. 15, 
no. 2, pp. 106–114, 2012. 
[33] T. Haeusermann, B. Greshake, A. Blasimme, D. Irdam, M. 
Richards, and E. Vayena, “Open sharing of genomic data: Who 
does it and why?,” PLoS ONE, vol. 12, no. 5, p. e0177158, 
May 2017. 
[34] H. B. Rahmouni, T. Solomonides, M. C. Mont, S. Shiu, and M. 
Rahmouni, “A Model-driven Privacy Compliance Decision 
Support for Medical Data Sharing in Europe,” Methods Inf. 
Med., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 326–336, 2011. 
[35] H. B. Rahmouni, T. Solomonides, M. C. Mont, and S. Shiu, 
“Privacy 
compliance 
and 
enforcement 
on 
European 
healthgrids: an approach through ontology,” Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc. Lond. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 368, no. 1926, pp. 4057–
4072, Sep. 2010. 
[36] B. Blobel, “Ontology driven health information systems 
architectures enable pHealth for empowered patients,” Int. J. 
Med. Inf., vol. 80, no. 2, pp. e17–e25, Feb. 2011. 
[37] F. Falcao-Reis, A. Costa-Pereira, and M. Correia, “Access and 
privacy rights using web security standards to increase patient 
empowerment,” in Medical and Care Compunetics 5, vol. 137, 
IOS Press, 2008, pp. 275–285. 
[38] P. Hung and Y. Zheng, “Privacy Access Control Model for 
Aggregated e-Health Services,” EDOC Conf. Workshop 2007 
EDOC 07 Elev. Int. IEEE, no. 15-16 Oct. 2007, pp. 12–19, Jul. 
2008. 
[39] S. Jajodia and D. Wijesekera, “A Flexible Authorization 
Framework for E-Commerce,” in Distributed Computing and 
Internet Technology, 2004, pp. 336–345. 
[40] W. M. P. van der Aalst and A. H. M. ter Hofstede, “YAWL: 
yet another workflow language,” Inf. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 
245–275, Jun. 2005. 
 
98
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

