79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Communication Support System Between Persons with Dementia and Family 
based on Memory Recollection and Life Story 
Kazuhiro Yamasaki 
Graduate School of Information 
Science and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
is043081@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Tomoko Izumi 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
izumi-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Yoshio Nakatani 
College of Information Science 
and Engineering 
Ritsumeikan University 
Shiga, Japan 
nakatani@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract— Family caregivers who support persons with 
dementia are deeply stressful because they do not have 
sufficient knowledge of dementia and give care to them by 
trial and error. Memory recollection 
and 
memory 
communication are found to be effective for intelligence and 
emotion of persons with dementia. We aim to support 
persons with dementia recall memory by talking about their 
memories together, place them in their life history, and 
communicate with their caregivers. The proposed system 
uses photographs as triggers for memory recollection. The 
demonstration verified that recollection support of memory 
using photographs is promising as triggers for conversation 
and organization of memory. In this evaluation, it is shown 
that the life story has a high possibility to promote 
communication with person with dementia and the family. 
Thus, we also propose a communication support system 
which focuses on the life story. This system supports the 
communication by comparing the life stories of family, and 
supports the memory recollection of the person with 
dementia by using “family life story.”  
Keywords-Persons 
with 
dementia; 
caregivers; 
memory 
recollection; photograph; communication; sharing of life 
story. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, Japan has progressed into an aging society. 
Figure 1 indicates the population aging rate of 5 countries 
and shows that Japan has the highest rate of aging 
population. This situation causes an increase of persons 
with dementia because an elderly person has high 
incidence of dementia [2] [3]. Figure 2 shows the 
incidence rate of person with dementia for each 
generation in Japan. Over 85 years old, incidence of 
dementia reaches more than 25.0%, that is, one of four 
people will develop dementia over 85 years old.  
The symptoms of dementia change depending on the 
type of disease, the main symptoms can be divided into  
core symptoms and BPSD (Behavioral and Psychological 
Symptoms of Dementia). The core symptoms are the 
decline of aspects of intelligence function, such as defects 
wandering and hallucinations, which become a heavy 
burden for care workers. For the family members and 
other relatives it seems that persons with dementia cannot 
understand anything. A decline in emotional function, 
however, does not always accompany the decline in 
intelligence function. Therefore, sufficient consideration 
is needed when caring for dementia patients. 
In Japan, family caregivers often support persons with 
dementia in addition to using day-care facilities, but their 
circumstances are deeply stressful, because they often do 
not have sufficient knowledge of dementia and so give 
care to them by trial and error, and they cannot take their 
eyes off their patient. It is also often hard to obtain 
cooperation with surrounding communities, due to the 
negative image of dementia and low social recognition. 
In this study, we aim to support the recall of memories 
of a patient and his or her family, the most familiar 
presence for persons with dementia. Family caregivers 
talk together about their memory. This is not an act of the 
caregiver taking care of the patient alone, but one which 
creates a good environment in order to help each other. 
Also, if neither the person with dementia nor the family 
can recall the memories, we provide a trigger for 
recollection by presenting social events and information 
similar to the lost memory. As a result, persons with 
dementia can recall memories about their family, and 
family caregivers are able to actively communicate with 
other members including the person with dementia. 
The evaluation results show that our system is 
effective for the memory recollection, and that it promotes 
the communication with person with dementia and the 
family caregivers. In the evaluation, it is shown that the 
life story is a good content for the memory recollection 
and communication. Thus, we also propose an extended 
system which focuses on the life story. In this system, by 
comparing the life stories of all the family, they can talk 
about them. In addition, based on the registered life 
stories, the system proposes the expected life story of a 
person with dementia. By using the proposed life story, 
the family talks about them with person with dementia, 
and create true life story by modifying it. 
A brief outline of this paper follows. Section II 
describes the significance and role of memory, which is 
lost by dementia. Section III describes research trends of 
persons with dementia and caregivers. Section IV and V 
describe system proposal and system functions, which is 
based on the consideration in Section III. Section VI 
describes evaluation of the system. Finally, Section VII 
and Section VIII describe development study and future 
works. 

80
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1. The population aging rate of some countries. 
 
 
Figure 2. Incidence of Dementia in Japan. 
 
II. 
FUNCTION OF MEMORY 
This section describes the significance and role of 
memory, which is lost by dementia.  
Memories are our own private episodes, formed from an 
individual person’s experiences in the past. Even if people 
experienced the same episode, how they feel about it may 
differ from person to person [4]. Moreover, our present 
“egos” has been formed by the accumulation of our own 
episodes. Memories are fully private unless we talk to 
someone about them. Thus, memory has the role of 
reminding us of our consciousness of self. 
Viewed from another side, people talk about their 
memories to prompt mutual understanding. Talking 
together on the pasts means exposing and exchanging a 
part of their egos. As a result, people are able to prompt 
mutual understanding. Thus, memory has a role of 
building and maintaining human relationships. 
However, people forget memories as time goes on. 
People find it hard to recall memories which they have not 
recalled for a long time, and thus triggers are required to 
recall them. Examples of triggers include seeing a 
photograph, reading a diary, talking with family and 
friends, hearing a long-forgotten tune, and smelling an old 
familiar perfume. In particular, photographs hold variety 
of types of information. They are associated with a 
specific annotation, such as date and time, place, and 
events. A photograph helps people indulge in reminiscence 
alone and share their memories with others, led by various 
annotations involved in it. 
 
A. Memory Communication 
Memory has two roles: first one is to remind us of our 
past experiences, and second is to build and maintain 
human relationships, as stated above. In addition, having a 
conversation with others promotes memory sharing and 
increasing our memories. Normal actions such as talking 
with family and friends are communication carried out 
unconsciously; but can be characterized as memory 
exchanging or ‘Memory Communication’ [5]. 
Memory Communication requires the following three 
elements. 
a) 
The communication methods and partner(s). 
b) 
The memory and a related episode. 
c) 
Something that acts as the trigger to recall the 
memory. 
Many elderly persons talk with family and friends on a 
regular basis. Talking about memories is an effective way 
to communicate with a stranger in nursing care homes or 
hospitals. Communication methods are to meet and talk in 
person, and bring photographs. Further, recently cell 
phones and the Internet have been developed, allowing 
people to communicate with others even if they are far 
away. It can be predicted that triggers will be different for 
each elderly person, but looking at photographs of past 
eras and listening to old popular songs certainly promote 
remembering. 
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
1970
1995
2010
2020
2055
Population aging rate 
Year 
Population aging rate of some countries 
Japan
Italy
Germany
France
America
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
65-69
70-74
75-79
80-84
85-
Incidence of Dementia 
Age 
Incidence of Dementia  

81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The significance and role of memory have been 
described in this section. Memory belongs to each 
individual person and is an important element for 
expressing one’s personality. However, persons with 
dementia gradually lose their memory, thus losing proof of 
their existences. 
III. 
RESEARCH TRENDS 
A. Support Systems for Persons with Dementia 
Recently, widespread use of cell phones and the 
Internet is progressing. As a result, support systems which 
utilize such equipment have been rapidly increasing, such 
as, a movement navigation system using photographs [6], 
and a remote interactive support system [7].  
 
a) 
Movement navigation system using photographs. 
Traditional map-based movement support systems are 
not effective for persons with dementia because it is 
difficult for them to learn the route and recognize 
landmarks. Consider this problem and developed a system 
which encourages understanding of the route by using 
photographs and animations on a cell phone. It shows a 
direction to turn at a junction and indicates important signs 
which show the correct route to a destination, as shown in 
Figure 3. 
 
b) 
Remote interactive support system. 
This system uses a videophone, and is able to show 
photographs and videos about memorable episodes even 
from a distance (Figure 4). Persons with dementia and 
their caregivers can reminisce and share memories at home, 
looking at the same photographs and videos, without going 
to a public institution. As a result, persons with dementia 
can obtain some stabilization of their mental state, and this 
system can reduce the burden on the caregiver. 
B. Organization Support for Caregivers 
There have been only a few attempts to support in-home 
care. Examples of support services for caregivers include 
the use of nursing home care and care helpers. However, 
these services cannot sufficiently reduce the burdens on 
family caregivers, because the use of nursing home care is 
expensive and the utility time is limited. 
Under this situation, there have been some movements 
in which caregivers have taken the initiative to confront 
the difficulties of care. For example, the Male Caregiver 
Network is an organization of which the members 
comprise of male caregivers [8]. The activities of the 
organization include holding exchange parties and lectures 
for male caregivers. Many of the participants include both 
veteran caregivers and beginners. These events are a great 
reassurance to beginners because they can consult with 
caregivers in similar circumstances. Conversely, veteran 
caregivers can reflect on their care history through 
communication with the participants. The members can 
generate motivation to continue care. In this way, the 
organization aims to provide a place to talk about and 
share the worries of care between caregivers. 
 
Figure 3. Movement navigation system. 
 
Figure 4. Remote interactive support system. 
C. Consideration 
Researches which use information technology to 
support persons with dementia share the aim to enable 
them to live an independent life. If they can lead their lives 
as independent as possible in their home, this will reduce 
the burden of caregivers. Most researches do not aim to 
target caregivers directly.  
However, providing support for caregivers, not only for 
persons with dementia, is necessary because if persons 
with dementia live in their own homes, they need help 
from their family caregivers. They need plenty of nursing 
care time, and as a result, the burden on caregivers 
increases and they become exhausted. An environment 
which supports the caregiver and listens to their troubles is 
required. Caregivers are taking initiatives themselves such 
as in the ‘Caregivers Male Network’, but not every 
caregiver can participate in these activities. Furthermore, 
previous research focuses on only negative aspects of 
home care [9]. The burden of care of persons with 
dementia has been found to be greater than care of persons 
without dementia. Recent studies have identified a need to 
approach the positive aspects of home care [10]. Although 
caring for family members is recognized as a road which 
everyone must eventually take, on the other hand, it is 
difficult to continue due to the heavy burden. Therefore it 
is necessary to develop a support system for in-home care 
as part of the social system. 

82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The research trends have been described in this section. 
Not only focus on persons with dementia, need to consider 
how support for their caregivers. 
IV. SYSTEM PROPOSAL 
A. System Summary 
The focus of this study is on the recollection of 
memory of person with dementia. By communicating 
with person with dementia and his families about their 
memory, it is expected that the person with dementia 
recall his memory and, moreover, that the communication 
between them is activated. Such active communication 
will lead to reduction of burden of caregivers.  
The system aims to support persons with dementia 
recall memory. Photographs are used as a trigger to recall 
memory. People can extract rich information from 
photographs because they contain variety of visual cues 
about their contents. People have a tendency to promote 
their bonding by confirming the shared experiences and 
photographs 
provide 
an 
opportunity 
to 
start 
a 
conversation about shared memories of the family. 
Furthermore, most families have kept photographs in the 
family album for many generations.  
Rich information of photographs can be classified as 
follows: 
a) 
Date and time, location when the photograph was 
taken. 
b) 
Reason why the photograph was taken at that place 
c) 
Relationships with person(s) in the photograph. 
d) 
Feelings about the scenery and objects in the 
photograph. 
Thus, the information obtained from one single 
photograph can be abundant. The system registers the 
event, location, and date and time as information about 
each photograph. As many photographs simply show 
daily life spent with family, these photographs are useful 
for recalling memories of happy past days and promoting 
bonding of family through communication of shared 
happiness. 
 
B. Proposed Method 
Users (persons with dementia, family, and family 
caregivers) register annotation of each photograph - event, 
location, and date - as a set into the photograph 
information database. When a photograph is selected, the 
system displays the event, the location, and the day, in 
that order. This is because the event, which we place first, 
is considered as an experienced and repeated memory. 
Experienced and repeated memory is comparatively well 
retained. 
However, it is difficult for persons with dementia to 
recall the details of memory just by looking the registered 
information of the photograph. Furthermore, the family 
caregiver may not always remember the event shown in 
the photograph. Therefore, the system shows another 
photograph registered with similar information or 
associated social events, as information to aid memory 
recollection. The content in the social events database 
stores effective information for recollection, such as 
social events which occurred during the same period or 
information associated with the dementia patient’s hobby.  
In addition, by registering and displaying the life story 
of the person with dementia that are recalled, they are 
able to look back on their own history and place each 
episode in order on the timeline. 
The following steps indicate how to use the system and 
Figure 5 shows a graphical representation of the system 
process. 
a) 
Users register the annotations of photographs: the 
location, the date, and the event. 
b) 
When a photograph is selected, the system shows 
the annotation. If the annotations are not enough 
to trigger recollection, show another photograph 
with similar annotation.  
c) 
If both the dementia patient and the family 
caregiver do not remember the photograph, and 
effective content which is judged to help 
recollection exists in the social events database, 
the system refers to the social events database. 
d) 
The system shows the result of the inquiry. 
e) 
The family members share the recalled memories 
through conversation about the period, the 
location, or the event of the photograph. Then, if a 
new memory is recalled, the content is added to 
the photograph database. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The system process. 
 

83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. SYSTEM FUNCTIONS 
A. Registration Function 
Using the registration function, the system registers a 
photograph, the photograph annotation, social events 
information, and life story information. Photographs are 
stored one by one in a special folder, and photograph 
annotation, social events information, and life story 
information are stored in a corresponding database 
respectively. 
a) 
Registration Function of Photograph Annotation 
Figure 6 shows an example of the photograph 
annotation registration screen. When a registrant presses 
“Register” button after selecting a photograph, this 
registration screen is displayed. In this page, the registrant 
inputs the episode, place, time of the selected photograph. 
The photograph name is set to the photograph’s date and 
time of registration to aid smooth use of the system. The 
reason why the system uses the date and time of 
registration as the photograph name is that it would be 
difficult for persons with dementia to decide and input 
names for photographs. In addition, the reason why the 
system registers the photographs one by one is that users 
are expected to recall some related memories by looking at 
each photograph.  
b) 
Registration Function of Social Events Information 
  Figure 7 shows an example of registration screen of the 
social events information. For an event which the user 
wants to register, the user inputs the content and year of 
the event. When the user wants to confirm the registered 
information, press the “Show all registered information”  
 
Figure 6. Example of photograph annotation registration screen. 
 
Figure 7. Example of social events information registration screen 
 
button. Then the registered information is displayed in 
ascending order by years. 
c) 
Registration Function of Life Story Information 
Figure 8 shows an example of the life story information 
registration screen. Input the content of life story, years 
and age at that time. Like above b), the registered 
information is displayed in ascending order by years. 
 
 
Figure 8. Example of life story information registration screen 

84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Recollection Support Function 
The 
registered 
photographs 
are 
displayed 
in 
chronological order. When a photograph is selected, its 
annotation is shown. When the system shows the selected 
photograph’s annotation, it displays the event, the location, 
and the date in that order, as stated above.  
Afterwards, to support the recollection of the user, the 
system shows some additional information for the selected 
photograph. The additional information shown in the 
system is described below. 
a) 
Another registered photograph taken during the 
same period and its photograph annotation (Figure 
9),  
b) 
The social events of a similar time, taken from the 
social database (Figure 10), and 
c) 
The dementia patient’s life story (Figure 11). 
The reason why the system shows photograph 
annotation taken during the same period is that 
photographs of the same period are assumed to have 
some kind of relationship with the selected photograph, 
and users may recall the memory even if they do not 
remember the details of the photograph. In this system, 
“same period” is defined as when the registration year is 
the same. In addition, the system shows the life story of 
the person with dementia in order to support recollection. 
The life story information is not always shown, however. 
Users can show or hide the life story information 
optionally. The system supports recollection by using life 
story, enabling dementia patients to look back on their 
lives. 
 
 
Figure 9. Example of a photograph taken at a similar time
 
Figure 10. Example of photograph of events of a similar time 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Example of dementia patient’s life story 
 

85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. EVALUATION 
A. Evaluation Summary 
An evaluation experiment was conducted with the 
cooperation of four participants, A and B were family 
caregivers, C and D were veteran caregivers. The 
evaluation method was to ask them to use the system and 
discuss on the information of each registration, then 
afterwards, to answer a questionnaire on a 4-point scale (1: 
Strongly disagree, 2: Disagree, 3: Agree, 4: Strongly 
agree). In addition to the questionnaire, we asked them to 
write free comments about the system. 
B. Evaluation Results 
Table I shows the questionnaire items, and Table II 
shows the evaluation results. In Table II, 1-point means 
that it is difficult and there are many works, and 4-point 
means that it is appropriate. 
 
a) Easiness to use the system 
As is evident from the results in Table II, there was 
variation in the answers about inputting the information 
into each database. This was largely dependent on the 
user’s experience level of personal computers. In fact, one 
of the evaluation participants had never used a personal 
computer before, and answered that it was hard to input 
the information into each database. Therefore it is 
necessary to develop the man-machine interface to 
improve ease of input for people who have never used a 
personal computer. 
Regarding the registration works for three databases in 
this system, we obtained feedback that “there are many 
works overall.” Because registration works are carried out 
by hand and each registration content (photograph, events 
and life story) are input one by one. As mentioned above, 
extended activity will become heavy burden for persons 
with dementia and a person who had never used a personal 
computer before. Although the registration works are hard, 
it provides opportunities to communicate with persons 
with dementia during the registration process and recall 
various episodes which anyone does not know. Especially, 
when the users register about life story, they have 
possibilities to recall the memory of his or her childhood 
which family had never heard. 
 
b) Efficiency of using memories 
Regarding the efficiency of using memories, we 
obtained positive opinion that “memories are useful for 
supporting elderly persons, because they often talk about 
old times.”  
Some participants pointed out a very interesting 
possibility that the recollection stories might be different 
depending on the user’s gender. For example, in the man's 
case, he would talk about his acts of heroism and events of 
the days of working. But in the woman’s case, she would 
talk about child-rearing. This kind of difference may 
generate different attention according to gender of 
caregivers. In this experiment, all participants were men, 
and this possibility was not confirmed. 
There was the negative opinion that the system will be 
difficult for persons with dementia to use, because 
usefulness of the system will be influenced by their mental 
state at the time of use. If their state is unbalanced, they 
will be unable to use the system.  
Another negative feedback indicated that the system 
may not be useful for all persons with dementia, because 
there may be memories that they do not want to recall. 
Such situations should be considered in using this system 
for persons with dementia. 
Regarding the recollection support function, the opinion 
was obtained that the system encouraged recollection of 
memory that preserves the user’s uniqueness. The 
information which is registered in each database depends 
on the individual. Furthermore, the life story is useful for 
the recollection of old memories, because it represents 
one’s own history. Talking about old memories and one’s 
life story is effective communication. However, the life 
story function is still poor in this system. The life story 
function needs to be improved to efficiently aid memory 
recollection and sharing. 
The responses to Questions 9 and 10 suggest that this 
system has the ability to aid recollection of memory and 
better communication with others. If a new memory is 
recalled, it becomes a common memory, and the users can 
talk about it and communicate with each other. 
TABLE I.  QUESTIONNAIRE CONTENT  
Q1 
Photograph information DB: 
Can you input smoothly?  
Q2 
Photograph information DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q3 
Social events DB: 
Can you input smoothly? 
Q4 
Social events DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q5 
Life story information DB: 
Can you input smoothly? 
Q6 
Life story information DB: 
Does it take a lot of work to use? 
Q7 
Life story: 
Do you feel the life story is useful for recall? 
Q8 
Life story: 
Were you able to visualize or recall that time?  
Q9 
Effectiveness: 
Did you recall anything other than the 
information which was displayed by the system? 
Q10 
Effectiveness: 
Could you communicate with your partner well? 
 
TABLE II.  EVALUATION RESULTS 
 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
5 
Q
6 
Q
7 
Q
8 
Q
9 
Q
10 
A 
3 
2 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
B 
1 
3 
1 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
3 
4 
C 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
D 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
4 

86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII.  DEVELOPMENT STUDY 
  From the evaluation results, it is shown that using 
photograph and its information is useful to recall memory 
and promote communication with the person with 
dementia and family. In addition, it is found that life story 
is effective content as the recollection support function. 
However, there is still room for improvement of the 
function of the life story in this system. In this system, all 
the family including a person with dementia must input 
their life stories to the system. This task may be hard for 
the person with dementia. In addition, each life story is 
shown independently while the life stories of family are 
related to each other. Thus, in this section, we focus on the 
life story and propose the extended system.  
In this system, all the family inputs their life story as 
they know. Based on the registered stories, the system 
shows the related life stories to the users. By comparing 
the life stories, they can take a communication through the 
found of the difference of experiences at the same age and 
the experiences before he or she met with spouse. In 
addition, by using the life stories of family, the system 
creates the life story of person with dementia because the 
person may not be able to recall his or her life story. Thus 
we propose the system that provides a place where each 
family sympathized with persons with dementia’s 
memory. 
A. Life Story 
This section describes that why we focus on life story. 
Life story is formed by accumulated life log and life 
history. Diaries and albums are used to keep a record of 
personal life logs. However, these items may be lost due to 
disasters and accidents. And so recently, “digitalization of 
information,” in which the data of diary and album are 
stored in computers, is progressing. In addition, by 
development of the Internet, a life log also has attracted 
attention as a communication tool, like Weblog and SNS 
(Social Networking Service). On Weblog and SNS, a user 
often writes a comment to registered photographs and then 
uses them to communication. 
Life story of a person is a collection of significant 
events for the person, which may be not important for 
others. However, talking about a life story of a person with 
his/her family or friends becomes a tool of communication 
with others and understanding of difference perspectives. 
Through such communication about life story, a person 
can give meaning to its own life. Recently, talking about 
life story has attracted attention for integration of egos [11]. 
In this research, talking about life stories is used in group 
work. As studies which focus on the efforts for the 
individual, in [12], the personal narrative is pointed out to 
be necessary, and in [13], Blankenburg argued that if a log 
of life story does not specialize on individual then it may 
not attract others’ notice. Personally characterized 
episodes are an important element of communication. 
The human life generally will be long period until old 
ages from childhood, and so, elderly persons have various 
episodes in their life story. Elderly persons can talk about 
their rich experiences and find meaning of their life 
through the talking. Young persons who talk with elderly 
persons about their life stories compare themselves with 
the elderly ones, and consider their own lives. Thus, 
talking about the life story can be a communication tool 
for generations. In [14], it is shown that talking about life 
story is one of methods to understand the past well and it 
can apply own experience to the future.  
From the result of section VI, it is known that elderly 
persons want to talk about their experiences, regardless of 
sex. Therefore, the extended system uses the life story to 
communication tools with persons with dementia and 
caregivers.  
B. Research Trends 
As a study using the life story, there is a system, called 
“yourStory” [15]. In this system, a user summarizes its 
own life story to recollect memory. This system focused 
on a “community” which users have been belonged in 
their lives. In this system, a community is defined as 
elementary school, junior high school, extracurricular 
activities and company etc., which are considered as 
organizations to which the most people have belonged. 
Many people belong to some communities, and people in a 
community have a common purpose and place. By 
summarizing events of a life story according to each 
community, the registered events may become a trigger of 
memory recollection of another event. 
Figure 12 shows an example screen shot of this system. 
In this system, the horizontal axis is the time and the 
vertical axis is the communities which the user have been 
belonged. When the user click an area, the photograph and 
some episodes are displayed.  
C. System Proposal 
In development study, we propose a communication 
system with person with dementia and family caregivers 
by using their life stories. The system supports not only the 
registration of each life story, but also the share of life 
story and the comparison with other life stories, which is a 
trigger of communication and memory recollection. Then, 
the event of life story is classified to one in a period of a 
life, such as childhood, elementary school, junior high 
school, and so on. The user can compare some life stories 
in the same period, and find the differences of experiences 
at the same age. The life stories ordered in time is also 
shown.  
In addition, based on the life stories of each member of 
a family, “family life story” can be created. Family life 
story consists of common and impressive events with 
family.  
 

87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table III. Example of Community 
Community 
Example 
Category 
Schools 
Education 
Nursery school 
Elementary school 
University etc. 
Public 
Hobby 
Activity 
Lesson, Club activity 
Volunteer body etc. 
Private 
Family life 
Family home 
Apartment etc. 
Family 
 
In what follows, the details of the extended system are 
explained. Figure 13 shows the system image of our 
extended system. For each event of life story, its episode, 
photograph, location, community, time, and keywords are 
registered. The community is defined by the same way as 
the previous study introduced in Section VII-B. 
Communities are categories according to the Table III.  
Next, how to use this system is shown. 
a) 
If there is the same community and keyword in the 
other users’ life stories, all information about such 
stories are shown in the near area. Then the user can 
compare these life stories and associate with each 
 
Figure 12. Example screen of your Story 
 
 
Figure 13. System image of the extended system 

88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
episode. Regardless of the similarity and differences 
of the episodes, talking about the memory and 
episode promotes communication.  
b) 
If there is the same community, but there is no 
common keyword in the other users’ life stories, only 
the keywords and photographs of these stories are 
shown in the near area. That is, the details of 
episodes are hidden from the users. By hiding the 
episodes, the communication is done guessing the 
episode.  
c) 
If there is an impressive event in a life story for all 
the family, the user can create “family life story” by 
adding this event to family life story. The users can 
know the history of the family visually by filling in a 
blank of the family life story. 
d) 
If the person with dementia and his family caregivers 
cannot recall his memory, the system proposes his life 
story by guessing from the episodes of life stories of 
the family and the family life story. Through the 
communication based on this temporary life story, 
they can recall the true memory and modify it. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In order to realize the promotion of communication 
with persons with dementia and family caregivers, a new 
system is proposed that supports memory recollection by 
using photographs and associated information. The 
system supports the recollection of memory via 
information about a selected photograph and the related 
social events. By talking about them, the activation of 
family communication is aimed to be intensified. In this 
study, it is known that the life story of the person with 
dementia will be a good trigger of communication and 
memory recollection. Then, we also proposed the life 
story sharing support system to promote a communication 
with person with dementia and the family. 
The next step of this study is to implement the extended 
system, and to evaluate the system with the help of 
persons with dementia. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to express their sincere thanks 
to Professor Masatoshi Tsudome of College of Social 
Science, Ritsumeikan University for his discussion of 
supporting family caregivers for people with dementia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Yamasaki, T. Izumi, Y. Nakatani, “Communication 
Support System Between Persons with Dementia and 
Family Caregivers using Memories”, The 5th International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Human-oriented 
and 
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services 
(CENTRIC 2012), 2012, pp.62-67. 
[2] Cabinet Office, “White Paper on Aging Society”, 2010, 
pp.2-3 (in Japanese). 
[3] H.Shimokata, “Epidemiological Statistics in Japan”, 
Special Edition of Japan Clinical, 4th-Ed, Vol.62, 2010, 
pp.121-126 (in Japanese). 
[4] R.C.Shank, “Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning in 
Computers and People”, New York Cambridge University 
Press, 1982. 
[5] K. Yamasita and H. Nojima, “Portable Personal Memory 
for Communication”, HCI2001: Symposium on Human 
Interface, 2001, pp.503-506. 
[6] H. Kaminoyama, T. Matsuo, F. Hattori, K. Susami, N. 
Kuwabara, and Shinji Abe, “Walk Navigation System 
Using Photographs for People with Dementia”, HCI2007: 
Symposium on Human Interface, 2007, pp.1039-1049. 
[7] N. Kuwabara, S. Abe, K. Yasuda, and K. Kuwabara, 
“Networked Reminiscence Therapy for Individuals with 
Dementia by using Photograph and Video Sharing”, 
ASSETS 06: The 8th International ACM SIGACCESS 
Conference on Computers and Accessibility, 2006, 
pp.125-132. 
[8] M. Saito, “Fragile love? male caregivers in Japan”, The 
18th Annual Conference on Men and Masculinities, 2010. 
[9] K. Sugiura, M. Ito, and H. Mikami, “Family caregiver 
burden caused by behavioral and psychological symptoms 
of dementia: Measurement with a new original scale”, 
Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. Japanese Journal of 
Geriatrics, Vol. 44, 2007, pp.717–725 (in Japanese). 
[10] E. Saito, T. Kunisaki, and Y. Kanegawa, “Study on the 
positive intention and continuity aspects of care for family 
caregivers”, Japanese Society of Public Health, 3rd-Ed, Vol. 
48, 2001, pp.180–188 (in Japanese). 
[11] Butler RN, “The life review; An interpretation of 
reminiscence in the aged”, Psychiatry, 26, 1963,  
pp.65-75. 
[12] Ray RE, “Introduction: Critical perspective on the life 
story”, Jounal of Aging Studies, 12(2), 1998, pp.101-106. 
[13] Blunkenburg W, “Loss of obviousness”, 1978. 
[14] Atkinson R, “The Life Story Interview”, Sage, Thousand 
Oaks, 1998. 
[15] K.Hashimoto, Y.Nakatani, “Evaluation of your Story: view 
and build memory system”, Information Processing Society 
of Japan, 2007. 
 

