145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Gaining User Experience Patterns by Drawing from Science and Industry 
A Combinatory Pattern Approach 
 
Alexander G. Mirnig, Alexander Meschtscherjakov, Nicole Perterer, Alina Krischkowsky, 
Daniela Wurhofer, Elke Beck, Arno Laminger, Manfred Tscheligi 
Christian Doppler Laboratory for “Contextual Interfaces” 
Center for Human-Computer Interaction, University of Salzburg 
Salzburg, Austria 
{firstname.lastname}@sbg.ac.at
 
 
Abstract— Findings from scientific disciplines with close ties to 
the industry – such as Human-Computer Interaction – can be 
useful for advancing both the scientific discipline itself as well 
as the associated industry. It is, therefore, an additional 
challenge to consolidate and convert the scientific knowledge 
gained into a format of which is applicable and understandable 
in practice in order to provide meaningful and usable tools for 
practitioners in their daily work routines. We used patterns to 
combine research results and industry know-how into solutions 
for distraction-related design problems in the automotive 
domain. In this paper, we present our pattern generation 
process that resulted in the creation of 16 patterns with input 
from scientists, as well as industrial stakeholders, in several 
key phases. Thereby, we discuss the advantages of patterns as 
a means to put scientific knowledge into practice. The 
contribution of this paper is a pattern generation and 
validation process, together with an accompanying pattern 
structure tailored towards combining scientific results and 
industry knowledge that resulted from this process. 
Kewords-basics on patterns; design patterns; pattern 
identification and extraction; validate patterns. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extension of a full paper presented at 
PATTERNS 2015 [1]. Patterns are a method to capture 
proven design solutions to reoccurring problems. They are a 
structured description of best practices and, as such, highly 
problem-oriented and reusable [2]. The use of patterns in 
design can improve the design process (regarding both time 
and effort spent) to a considerable degree [3][4][5]. Patterns 
are also a recognized way of facilitating communication 
between different stakeholders. Since scientific research in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction 
(HCI) 
is 
closely 
interconnected with the industry, patterns could serve as a 
tool to communicate scientifically proven solutions to 
industry stakeholders. In our work, we aimed at generating 
patterns for HCI researchers and industry stakeholders based 
on scientific findings and transform them – by directly 
involving industry practitioners – into solutions that are 
relevant for and usable by these stakeholders. The underlying 
research questions are (1) how scientific findings may be 
translated into design patterns usable for practitioners in their 
daily routines, and (2) how such patterns may be generated 
by including scientific and industry stakeholders. 
The outcome of our efforts was a pattern structure that 
incorporates scientific results and fits industry stakeholder 
needs, as well as a first set of 16 automotive User Experience 
(UX) design patterns. We refer to UX design patterns as 
patterns that tackle User Experience issues in their core.  
In this paper, we present the final pattern structure, as 
well as the phases of the pattern generation process involving 
both scientists and industry stakeholders (We use the term 
‘generation’ to delineate our approach from pattern finding 
methods, 
which 
usually 
focus 
only 
on 
actual 
implementations, and not theoretical or scientific works).  
Furthermore, we critically reflect upon issues and problems 
that emerged throughout our proposed pattern generation 
process itself, but also about the cooperative process on 
generating the patterns between scientific and industry 
stakeholders. In this paper, we begin with an overview of 
current pattern literature in Section II. In Section III, we 
describe our pattern finding process via the concrete pattern 
structure example and its development. In Section IV, we 
provide a summary of the overall process, together with a 
brief discussion on the limitations and potentials of our 
approach. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In order to provide best practices and specific knowledge, 
the patterns approach has been well established in the 
domain of HCI [1]. Recently, specific domains in HCI, such 
as UX research, also deployed patterns to collect and 
structure their knowledge [4][5].  
Köhne [7] (based on Quibeldey-Cirkel [8]) outlines 
specific steps for generating patterns. The process starts with 
discovering patterns, so-called pattern mining, by identifying 
whether a solution is valuable to solve a problem. The next 
step consists of pattern writing, where the problem solution 
is described in a defined structure. This is followed by 
shepherding, in which an expert provides support in 
improving the patterns content. Thereafter, a writers 
workshop is conducted. In such a workshop, a group of 
pattern authors discuss a pattern. Based on the feedback from 
the writers’ workshop, the pattern author revises the pattern 
(author review). In a next step, the patterns are made public 
in a pattern repository, which is open to anonymous peer 
review. Finally, the pattern collection is published in a 

146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pattern book making the final patterns available for a wide 
readership. 
Similarly, Biel et al. [9] split the process of defining trust 
patterns for interaction design into four subtasks. The first 
task is identifying a pattern by analyzing the solutions used 
by designers. Second, the pattern gets categorized in order to 
make it reusable and accessible for designers. Third, the 
pattern is described following a specific structure. The 
fourth task is evaluating the pattern to prove its quality 
before it is introduced to a pattern library. 
Aside from starting the pattern mining from designers’ 
practical knowledge, patterns can also be harvested from 
scientific research findings. Martin et al. [10] use patterns to 
describe findings from ethnographies. For creating their 
patterns, they started by looking for specific examples in a 
particular domain in ethnographic studies and then tried to 
expand the observed phenomena to other domains (similar 
but different examples). Krischkowsky et al. [11] introduce a 
step-by-step guidance for HCI researchers for generating 
patterns from HCI study insights. According to them, the 
first step is giving novice and expert HCI researchers a brief 
overview on the concept of patterns and, more specifically, 
Contextual User Experience (CUX) patterns [5] (i.e., patterns 
to enhance user experience in a particular context). After 
this, the next step of the guidance concerns the reflection and 
selection of relevant UX related results from empirical 
studies conducted by the researchers. In a third step, HCI 
researchers develop their own CUX patterns, which are then 
internally evaluated by researchers following a checklist. In 
the last step, the researchers give feedback on the pattern 
generation process. 
Following a user centered patterns generation approach, 
we aimed at including industry designers within a specific 
domain (in our case automotive user interface design) in the 
patterns generation process. This was done in order to bring 
the target group into the loop as early as possible and to 
avoid the error of not including industry stakeholders in the 
pattern finding process. In the following section, we outline 
and reflect on our pattern generation method. Further, we 
describe a seven-step approach that describes how we 
generated an initial set of automotive UX patterns from a 
scientific knowledge transfer workshop (step 1) to final 
pattern iteration (step 7). Based on a reflection of our work, 
we conclude with a novel patterns generation approach 
consisting of five phases. In addition, this paper presents an 
according pattern structure for distraction-related design 
problems in the automotive domain. Both, the patterns 
generation approach as well as the pattern structure for 
automotive UX patterns, are the main contributions of this 
paper.  
III. 
THE PATTERN GENERATION PROCESS 
Within our research activities, the need for pattern 
guidance occurred within a national project focusing on 
contextual interface research in the automotive domain. In 
particular, the following section outlines the process of how 
we developed a pattern structure that provides insights, 
information, and guidance on how to design for a positive 
User Experience (UX) for the driver. This general aim was 
divided into several more specific goals related to distinct 
UX factors (e.g., workload, fun, or trust). As the focus of our 
work was on the pattern generation process and the pattern 
structure, we decided to select one specific UX factor and 
improve the process and the structure by developing patterns 
for this factor. We chose to generate patterns for reducing 
workload that is caused by distraction, as this constitutes one 
of the most prevailing and severe problems in the automotive 
domain. In the next paragraphs, we outline each phase in the 
generation process in detail, reflecting on each step 
individually. 
A. Starting from scientific knowledge 
In this first phase, we started from pure scientific 
knowledge about distraction-related design problems in the 
automotive domain to create an initial draft set of patterns. 
This seemed like a logical first step, since we wanted to go 
from the science to the practice. As we would learn later on, 
however, a slightly different approach would have been even 
better. This will be reflected in the discussion section. The 
first phase can be segmented into four sub-steps, outlined in 
the following sections.  
B. Scientific knowledge transfer workshop 
Within the first step, a knowledge transfer workshop, 
organized by pattern experts and HCI researchers in the 
automotive domain, was conducted. Hereby, the main goal 
was to give experts in the automotive domain know-how on 
pattern generation. This know-how was provided by HCI 
pattern experts, in order to facilitate the development of an 
initial draft of patterns. The workshop lasted approximately 
four hours. Overall, six HCI researchers, all closely familiar 
with the automotive context, and two HCI pattern experts, 
who led the workshop, participated in this workshop.  
In this initial knowledge transfer session, participants 
were introduced to patterns in general and the role of patterns 
in HCI in particular. We used the pattern definition of 
Cooper et al. [12]. In their definition, the authors define 
patterns as ‘(Design) patterns capture useful design solutions 
and generalize these solutions to address similar problems. 
We also included aspects such as the usefulness of patterns 
as a tool for documentation, collection, communication, and 
representing knowledge [1]. The participants were also 
introduced into the differences between patterns and 
guidelines. It was important for us that the participants 
understood the particular differences to guidelines, which are 
in contrast very short and concise, whereas patterns are 
supposed to be structured, have a well-defined context, and 
often provide several solutions to one problem. 
After that, example patterns from other domains were 
presented (e.g., [13], [14], [15]). Subsequently, participants 
where shown the main goals for the development of patterns 
in the automotive domain (e.g., collect a number of UX 
related patterns, structured guidance on how to design for a 
good UX regarding advanced in-car systems). Thereafter, a 
presentation of the initial pattern structure was given, based 
on the CUX patterns approach [5]. This approach has already 
proven its value for collecting and structuring knowledge on 
UX [4]. The CUX pattern approach was chosen, as it 

147
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
explicitly considers the relation of UX and contextual 
aspects. In order to provide a better understanding of the 
CUX pattern approach, an exemplary CUX pattern reflecting 
on increased workload by font size was shown to the 
participants. At the end of the workshop, participants were 
introduced to the entire, initially defined, pattern structure for 
UX patterns in the automotive domain (see Table I, not-
underlined parts).  
C. An initial set of patterns 
After the workshop, the HCI researchers (and pattern 
experts) received the task to create two patterns each within 
the following 10 days based on literature, e.g., state of the art 
knowledge, desktop research of empirical studies, existing 
structured knowledge (guidelines, norms, heuristics), and/or 
their own research activities. They received a template with 
the pattern structure as a guideline for creating a first set of 
patterns related to a car driver’s workload caused by 
distraction. Furthermore, the HCI researchers were also 
encouraged to give individual feedback to the pattern experts 
about issues and problems concerning the generation 
process, as well as the suggested structure (i.e., CUX pattern 
structure template). More details about the identified issues 
and problems are outlined in the next section.  
Within this first generation phase, 16 patterns focusing 
on workload caused by distraction were developed (i.e., two 
patterns per person). All patterns were derived on the basis 
of scientific literature (e.g., research articles or book chapters 
referenced in the pattern). Also, two pattern experts were 
involved in this process and generated two patterns each. The 
generated patterns (an example is shown in Figure 1) were 
each about one page long and exclusively dealt with design 
solutions (e.g., voice interaction, interface multimodality, 
gesture input, or information presentations) addressing the 
problem of increased workload due to distraction. At this 
point, they were still lacking in detail, especially regarding 
solutions and examples. 
D. First iteration based on participants feedback: and a 
refined pattern structure 
The first round of pattern generation led to the 
identification of several issues with the initial pattern 
structure. During creating their patterns, the HCI researchers 
listed and forwarded encountered problems to the pattern 
experts. In a second workshop, the HCI researchers 
discussed their experiences with the provided pattern 
structure and the pattern creation process (i.e., reflect the 
different ways to generate patterns) with the pattern experts 
and collected further problematic issues. The pattern experts 
then used the feedback for improving the pattern section 
structure and the related instruction for how to generate 
patterns based on the provided structure. 
The refined pattern structure, as the outcome of the third 
step, is presented in Table I. Changes to the section name 
and instruction are marked with an underline; parts not 
underlined are those from steps 1 and 2. The proposed 
pattern structure consists of nine parts: name (a description 
of the solution of the pattern), UX factor (the addressed 
automotive user experience factor), problem statement (a 
very short description of the problem that should be solved 
by the pattern), forces (a more detailed explanation of the 
problem), context (the application context of the pattern), 
solution (the proposed solution of the particular pattern), 
examples (concrete examples of best practices), keywords 
(phrases related to the pattern),  and sources (origin of the 
pattern). 
Most of the issues brought forward were concerned with 
what makes the pattern a high-quality pattern and what 
supports the comprehensibility of the pattern. More 
specifically, the HCI researchers had difficulties with 
achieving the aim of a pattern to provide best practices. The 
HCI researchers experienced it as challenging to judge 
whether the provided solutions are the “gold standard”. They 
also felt uneasy about whether “old” literature can serve as 
basis for pattern creation. Thus, it would be more realistic to 
speak of providing existing knowledge to the best of one’s 
judgment, i.e., preferably using the newest knowledge for 
underpinning a specific pattern and using as many potential 
evidences (studies, norms, etc.) as possible. Our patterns 
suggest solutions for specific UX demands in the car area 
based on existing knowledge (e.g., studies, best practices). 
TABLE I.  
INITIAL AND REFINED PATTERN STRUCTURE (ITERATION 
CHANGES UNDERLINED) 
Instructions on Each Pattern Section 
# 
Section 
Name 
 
Instruction on Each Section 
1 
Name 
The name of the pattern should shortly describe the 
solution suggested by the pattern (2-3 words would 
be best). 
2 
UX  
Factor 
List the UX factor(s) addressed by the pattern 
(underpinned with a definition) 
3 
Problem  
Statement 
As short as possible - the best would be to describe 
the problem in one sentence. 
4 
Forces 
Should be a detailed description and further 
explanation of the problem. 
5 
Context 
In general, our patterns should focus on the driver. 
Describe the detailed context in which the pattern 
can be applied in this section. 
 
6 
Solution 
1) 
Can range from rather general suggestions to 
very concrete suggestions for a specific 
application area (e.g., “ Presenting High-
Priority Warnings“). 
2) 
A successful solution is based on existing 
knowledge (e.g., state of the art solutions, 
empirical studies, guidelines, etc.).  
3) 
More than one solution is no problem but even 
better than only one. 
4) 
There can also be a general solution and more 
specific “sub-solutions”. 
7 
Examples 
Concrete examples underpinned by pictures, 
standard values (e.g., angle, size) etc. Examples 
should not provide a solution (this is done in the 
solution part) but rather underpin and visualize the 
solution presented above. 
8 
Keywords 
Describe main topics addressed by the pattern in 
order to enable structured search. 
9 
Sources 
Origin of the pattern (cf. the different ways to 
generate patterns) 

148
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Another difficulty is related to deciding on the 
abstraction level of a pattern. The HCI researchers were 
unsure whether they should create very general patterns 
(global patterns) versus very specific patterns (sub-patterns, 
local patterns). They finally agreed on providing patterns that 
are abstract enough to make generalizations, while providing 
practical solutions at the same time, i.e., focus on the lower 
level with potential for higher level expansion. Thus, both 
elements (i.e., generalization as well as a concrete example) 
should be provided. 
Identifying the stakeholders of the patterns was also an 
issue. Initially, it was unclear to the HCI researchers whom 
Figure 1. Example of an early pattern 

149
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
they should address with the patterns; whether the future 
users of the created patterns are designers (expert or novice), 
domain-specific users (e.g., industrial manufacturers), 
researchers, or developers. 
The HCI researchers also experienced difficulties in 
creating a pattern name; should the pattern name be 
formulated as a solution or as a problem? It was eventually 
decided to opt for a solution orientation of the pattern name 
and modified the pattern instruction accordingly. Moreover, 
using technical terms in the pattern name sometimes lead to 
comprehensibility problems among the HCI researchers. A 
pattern needs to be easy to understand and quickly assessed. 
Consequently, very specific technical terms should not be 
used in the pattern name and, if they occur in the description 
of the pattern, they need to be explained. 
Furthermore, the first round of pattern generation 
revealed that the HCI researchers deployed different ways to 
generate their patterns, which are based on existing state of 
the art knowledge/experience in the field, on own empirical 
studies, on literature (desktop research of empirical studies), 
as well as on existing structured knowledge. For ease of use 
and consistency, the patterns should be as homogenous in 
style and structure as possible. Different methods of initial 
pattern mining might, in some cases, cause differences in the 
final patterns. In order to reflect this, the section on sources 
(#9) was expanded to also include ways to generate patterns, 
where appropriate.  
E. Participants iterate patterns based on refined structure 
Finally, the HCI researchers’ task was to iterate their 
initially created patterns based on the refined pattern 
structure. Each researcher received the detailed report from 
the previous workshop along with an action point list 
containing the necessary components (and level of detail) for 
the iterated patterns. Then, they converted the existing 
pattern they originally wrote into the new pattern structure. 
Parts were reformulated, where necessary, and other parts 
were added. After this iteration round, all patterns were 
reviewed by another HCI researcher for completeness and 
consistency. Where necessary, patterns were returned to the 
original authors with further instructions for revision. This 
process continued until the patterns were deemed complete 
and complying with the iterated structure by the reviewer. 
F. Industry stakeholder workshop on pattern structure 
evaluation 
Since the iteration and review process after the previous 
workshop had not involved any industry stakeholders, we 
felt the need for additional assessment by practitioners and 
industry stakeholders in order to further iterate and finalize 
the pattern structure. We involved the industry stakeholders 
in a workshop with the aim of evaluating the current pattern 
structure on the basis of two representative patterns. 
1) 
Setup: The workshop was conducted at our facility 
with five participants (one female and four male) of our 
industrial partner from the automotive domain. The 
participants’ age ranged from 20 to 45 years, job experience 
from 7 months to 20 years. Their professional background 
was software developers, engineers, and designers. After a 
10-minute general introduction to patterns and our pattern 
structure, participants received printouts of one of our 
automotive UX patterns with the instruction to read through 
it attentively (duration: 10 minutes). After that, they had to 
fill 
in 
a 
questionnaire 
regarding 
the 
quality 
and 
understandability of the pattern (as seen in Figure 2). The 
questionnaire’s general purpose was to assess how 
understandable, meaningful, and/or helpful the participants 
perceived the patterns presented to them. Items were 
measured on a 5-point Likert Scale; meaning 5 ‘do not agree 
at all’ and 1 ‘absolutely agree’. 
 
 
Figure 2. Page 1 of the modified questionnaire (i.e., socio-demographic 
data, c1, and two items of c2) 
The first part of the questionnaire collected general 
information about the workshop participants, such as age, 
gender, job/occupation description, length of professional 
experience, and roles and responsibilities at work. The 
second part focused on the pattern quality criteria 
framework, which we clustered into four main criteria c1, c2, 
c3, and c4. The first quality criterion (c1) is an overall 
criterion that states that all parts of a pattern description 
should make sense to the pattern users. This implies they 
should have a meaningful name, a clear formulated problem 

150
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
statement, enough background information for the provided 
scenario, concrete solutions, and plausible examples. The 
second quality criterion (c2) goes into more detail and 
addresses five aspects: (1) completeness, i.e., necessary 
information is given in the pattern; (2) clarity of the 
language, i.e., the style of the pattern is well-readable; (3) 
problem-centricity, i.e., the scenario, solutions, and examples 
are coherent and clearly related to the problem description; 
(4) good balance between concreteness and abstractness; and 
(5) helpfulness, i.e., the presented patterns support 
stakeholders to develop better interactive systems. The third 
criterion (c3) requested a subjective overall assessment of the 
patterns regarding their applicability and usefulness. The 
fourth criterion (c4) applies, as opposed to c1 to c3, to the 
whole pattern collection and not to each individual pattern. It 
states that the whole collection of patterns captures relevant 
knowledge about User Experience and provides a suitable 
common basis for designers, developers, and researchers. 
Since the participants did not receive (and would not have 
had enough time anyway) the whole pattern collection, they 
were asked to imagine a collection of patterns qualitatively 
similar to the ones they were presented with and then 
provide their ratings. 
Participants then received another pattern printout and 
were again given 10 minutes to read it thoroughly. This was 
done to ensure that the participants had a means of 
comparison and also to reduce bias regarding the quality (or 
the lack thereof) of the pattern structure based on only one 
pattern. After these preparations a discussion session (total 
duration: 1.5 hours), began. This moderated discussion was 
audio recorded and later transcribed for further analysis. 
During the course of the discussion, participants could voice 
concerns they had encountered when reading the individual 
patterns, together with suggestions for improvements to the 
pattern structure, as well as the existing automotive UX 
patterns in particular. 
2) 
Results: We will now outline the most important 
outcomes of the workshop, in reference to the iterated 
structure shown in Table I.  
The results of the quality criterion (c1), rated on a scale 
from 1 (absolutely agree) to 5 (do not agree at all), show that 
the patterns had clear problem statements (M=4.00, 
SD=0.45) and provided concrete solutions (M=3.60, 
SD=0.55). Lowest mean values were identified in the quality 
criteria c1 until c4: i.e., for meaningfulness of the pattern 
name (c1:M=2.8, SD=0.45), clarity of the context (c1: 
M=3.00, SD=0.00); clarity of the language used in the 
patterns (c2: M=2.80, SD=0.45), and suitability of the pattern 
as a communication tool (c4: M=2.80, SD=1.10).  
As our data revealed from the discussion, participants 
were confused by the separation of problem and forces, 
stating that they did not understand why those were two 
separate categories and that they found the term ‘forces’ 
itself difficult to understand. Additionally, the participants 
were not entirely sure about the context and its relation to the 
rest of the pattern either. Especially in one pattern, they 
identified a rather confusing overall structure, in which the 
context referred to the forces, but the solution to the problem, 
which also tied into their confusion regarding forces. 
One of the biggest complaints was that participants 
found that they had to read quite far into the patterns before 
they knew what the patterns were exactly about. The most 
prevalent criticism was the explanation of the UX-Factor 
(i.e., a definition), which was deemed as unnecessarily long 
and should have appeared at a later stage. According to the 
participants, such (for them) auxiliary information should 
not be excluded from the pattern, but appear at a less 
prominent position and in far less detail (one or two lines, 
the rest as a reference). 
Generally, the participants desired an “abstract” for each 
pattern, containing scope, context, and possibly an outlook 
on the solution in a very compact format. To achieve this 
with the current pattern structure, the participants suggested 
more descriptive pattern names (e.g., in the case of pattern 
1: mentioning the concrete modalities as well as ADAS in 
the pattern name itself) as well as an expanded and weighted 
keyword system, with anti-keywords (i.e., keywords the 
pattern is not related to) and reference-keywords (i.e., main 
keywords of related patterns). The patterns should also be 
re-structured, so that the most important information (at the 
very least: name, keywords, and problem) is at the very 
beginning of the pattern. Or, as one participant put it, “If 
using a pattern collection is more cumbersome than using 
Google and produces lesser results, then there is little 
reason to use that pattern collection.” 
Another interesting point that was raised during the 
discussion concerned examples and their visualizations: The 
participants considered images of actual devices as 
unsuitable and thought them to resemble an advertisement 
more than a mere illustration (“Use this device and all your 
problems will be solved!”). It is important to capture the 
essence of a pattern without too much distracting details. 
For pattern 2, that essence was not considered to be the 
actual steering wheel, but the viewing angle. An illustration 
of said viewing angle (side view of the driver with lines 
indicating viewing angle) might therefore have been 
appropriate in this case. The participants did not reach a 
consensus on whether depicting an actual implementation 
could be acceptable in some cases, but they expressed a 
general preference for graphs, schematic illustrations, and 
similar visualizations. 
The writing style and vocabulary used in both patterns 
was perceived as very unusual by the participants and more 
“scientific” than what they were used to. More specifically, 
they were not used to citing sources for every claim and the 
rather high number of technical terms used in each pattern. 
While they found the scientific writing style to be an overall 
pleasing quality that should be kept, they suggested a 
minimal citation style (numbers only, full references only at 
the very end of the pattern collection). The issues identified 
in the workshop were then further discussed and transformed 
into concrete instructions for another pattern structure 
overhaul.  

151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Assuming that patterns evolve and grow more numerous 
over time, the participants also considered it necessary to 
know, when patterns become obsolete or what to do if there 
were several patterns giving conflicting solutions for the 
same problem. According to the participants, each pattern 
should have a time stamp, which shows when the pattern was 
created. Since that information alone is not enough to know, 
whether a pattern has actually been superseded by another or 
is simply a very old pattern, an additional label for obsolete 
patterns should be contained somewhere in the pattern. To 
help users decide on which pattern might be more 
appropriate for their problem, a rating system for each 
pattern could be implemented. However, the participants 
were skeptical of employing a simple rating system (e.g., 1 
to 5 stars), since the meaning of a certain rating would be left 
ambiguous (Is the pattern simply well-written? Does the 
solution work well?). Full comments might be more useful, 
but supplementing ratings with user comments users could 
also require administration and editing of said comments – 
resources that might not be available in many cases.  
3) 
Summary: It can be summarized that the pattern 
workshop showed some very interesting discrepancies 
between the general intentions of the CUX pattern structure 
and practitioners’ needs and preferences. The participants 
expressed a need for more brevity, which would be more 
fitting for traditional guidelines, while at the same time 
desiring an example- and solution-oriented pattern structure 
and approach. The patterns generated a rather positive 
resonance overall and were generally seen as a valuable 
supplement to existing work practices. We were able to 
collect a good number of valuable suggestions for 
improvement as mentioned before, which would help to 
increase the quality of the existing pattern set and any future 
patterns generated within the project. 
G. Final pattern structure iteration 
Based on the feedback gained from this workshop, the 
pattern structure underwent a final iteration, which would 
then become the basis for all further patterns (see Table II). 
Similar to the pattern structure shown in Table I, the final 
pattern structure consists of nine elements. Like before, the 
name of the pattern should focus on the provided solution. 
The intent should include the main category of the pattern, a 
short problem statement, and briefly outline the context in 
which the pattern should be used. It replaces the problem 
statement (3) and the context (6) of the initial structure 
presented in Table I. The new element topics is a structured 
list of keywords describing the problem scope. The element 
problem replaced the forces (4) section. The new element 
scenario gives a detailed description of the problem in a 
scenario like style. The solution section describes the 
solution to the problem. Within the final structure, we 
provide a structured approach for how to present the 
solution. Examples, as before, should show best practices of 
the pattern. Keywords, again, should aid with finding related 
patterns. Finally, sources link to the origin of the pattern. 
The element “UX factor” (2) from the initial pattern 
structure was omitted at all. The new structure focuses on 
informing the reader as concisely as possible about whether 
the pattern is relevant for them. Name, intent, and topics are 
standardized and kept brief so that only a minimal amount 
of time is needed to read and process them. Context and 
forces are combined into the new Scenario-category, since 
the stakeholders had a hard time differentiating between 
them and found the distinction to be inconsequential in 
practice. 
TABLE II.  
FINAL PATTERN STRUCTURE 
Instructions on Each Pattern Section 
# 
Section 
Name 
 
Instruction on Each Section 
1 
Name 
The name of the pattern should shortly describe the 
solution suggested by the pattern (2-3 words would 
be best). 
2 
Intent 
Short statement in three parts: 
a) 
Main category of pattern (e.g., visual 
information presentation) 
b) 
Short issue/problem statement (e.g., 
effective display position) 
c) 
Short context preview (e.g., while 
driving) 
3 
Topics 
Max. 8 Keywords describing problem scope: 1) 
who is affected (driver, co-driver, etc); 2) which 
modalities are addressed (visual, haptic, acoustic) 
4 
Problem 
Should be a detailed description and further 
explanation of the problem. 
5 
Scenario 
Provide a detailed example of a case, in which the 
problem occurs 
6 
Solution 
• 
First, provide a general (either high level or 
one that is applicable in the most cases) 
solution. 
• 
Then provide alternative solutions, together 
with delineating criteria to determine, when 
such alternative solutions apply. 
• 
Whenever possible, reuse (modified) figures, 
illustrations, etc. from other patterns, for a 
more consistent style and easier 
combination of pattern solutions. 
• 
A successful solution is based on existing 
knowledge (e.g., state of the art solutions, 
empirical studies, guidelines, etc).  
• 
More than one solution is no problem but 
even better than only one. 
7 
Examples 
Concrete examples underpinned by pictures, 
standard values (e.g., angle, size) etc. Examples 
should not provide a solution (this is done in the 
solution part) but rather underpin and visualize the 
solution presented above. 
8 
Keywords 
Describe main topics addressed by the pattern and 
related patterns in order to enable structured 
search. 
9 
Sources 
Origin of the pattern, related literature, related 
patterns (if they are not part of the same pattern 
collection), norms and guidelines, other references. 
Citations format: Numbers and endnotes, to 
distract the reader as little as possible. 

152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. Example of an iterated pattern, page 1 of 2 
Img. 2: Display Control 
Img. 1: Controller and PTT Button 

153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
H. Final pattern iteration 
 The entire set of 16 patterns was then revised, based on 
the above-mentioned structure (see Table II for the revised 
structure and Figures 3 and 4 for a pattern example). Some 
example details were removed and/or reduced in order to 
reduce the overall image size and not bloat the paper 
unnecessarily. 
The iteration procedure was the same as the one 
described in Section E and was overseen by a team of two 
HCI researchers. Based on the results from the workshop, 
Scenario, Solution and Examples were focused on in 
particular and were adapted according to the stakeholders’ 
requirements. If possible, solutions were also represented 
graphically or illustrations from cited publications were 
added. Concrete examples (state of the art) from recent 
production vehicles illustrated, if appropriate, the examples 
section. In general, care was taken to present the 
information in every pattern in a compact form, easily 
comprehensible and practicable. They were kept as short as 
possible to conform with the stakeholders’ requirements. 
I. Validating the patterns 
For the final validation of the iterated pattern set, we 
conducted a second workshop at our facility with seven 
participants (4 employees from our industrial partner and 3 
researchers; 6 male and 1 female). Age ranged from 21 to 48 
years, job experience from one month to eight years. 
Regarding their professional background, they were software 
developers, engineers, designers, and HCI experts. Some of 
the participants from the first workshop also participated in 
the second one. To have a good mix of informed and fresh 
views, we involved two stakeholders who had already 
participated in the previous workshop, and two who were 
completely new to the topic. The overall goal of the second 
workshop was to assess the quality of the first UX pattern 
set, as well as to iterate the pattern set based on the industry 
stakeholders’ feedback. Since the initial 16 patterns are only 
one part of a larger planned pattern collection, we also 
wanted to collect input on problems for the remaining two 
planned CUX-Factors (i.e., Perceived Safety and Joy of Use) 
to facilitate the generation of these pattern sets and ensure 
that the problems that will be tackled in the future are actual 
problems relevant to the industry. 
In this workshop, the full iterated pattern set was 
presented to the participants and evaluated on a peer 
judgement basis. After a 10-minute general introduction to 
patterns and explanations of the iterated UX pattern structure 
from the first workshop, a researcher explained the purpose 
and the agenda of the one-day workshop to the participants. 
After that, the rating categories (c1 to c4) were shown and 
Figure 4. Example of an iterated pattern, page 2 of 2 

154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
explained to the participants. They were informed that they 
would later have to rate each pattern according to these 
criteria.  
Then, each participant received one pattern to read 
through thoroughly. Each of the 16 existing patterns was 
rated by each participant individually. To avoid serial 
positions effects and similar forms of bias, the patterns were 
presented to participants in different orders. Based on the 
various length of the pattern, we classified the patterns into 
short and long ones, which led to two separate rating 
sessions.  
In the first pattern rating session, each participant was 
given a set of 6 patterns (printouts). They were then asked to 
read and rate them sequentially. Additionally, they were also 
asked to note any issues they find particularly note-worthy. 
Furthermore, they were briefed to keep all printouts for the 
discussion session in the end.  
In the second pattern rating session, the participants were 
asked to read and rate the additional 10 patterns with the 
same instructions as mentioned before. The rating was done 
via the previously employed questionnaire (see Figure 2), in 
which the participants had to rate each pattern with regards 
to four quality criteria (c1, c2, c3, c4). The only change to the 
rating system was a slight modification to c4: This criterion 
was intended to measure the overall quality of the pattern 
collection. We initially included this as a questionnaire item 
since we only had two patterns during the first workshop.  
Thus, a rating of a potential pattern collection was 
sensible and could even have further highlighted quality 
differences in the patterns themselves (if differences in rating 
had been observed), but a discussion would not have been 
very useful since a representative pattern collection simply 
had not existed at that point. Since the participants now had a 
larger number of patterns to look at, it made more sense to 
exclude c4 from the questionnaire and, instead, discuss it in 
plenum at the end of the workshop for a qualitative, overall 
assessment of the pattern set quality and applicability. This 
helped decrease workload and fatigue for the participants 
while still providing the necessary results (Ratings for c1 to 
c3 gave a good numerical indicator of the pattern quality, 
whereas c4 would be better suited as qualitative consensus 
with consolidation of further potentials for refinement). 
After the rating of the patterns had concluded, the 
moderated discussion session took place, which was divided 
into two parts. The first part was the aforementioned 
discussion of c4. During this first session, participants could 
voice all concerns they had encountered when reading the 16 
existing patterns, together with suggestions for future 
improvements to the existing UX patterns. In order to trigger 
the discussion, two questions of criterion (c4) from the 
quality framework were asked to the participants; these were: 
“Do you think that the presented patterns support the 
communication of designers, developers and researches by 
providing common basis?” Do you think the presented 
patterns capture relevant knowledge about user experience?” 
In a second discussion session, a researcher explained CUX-
Factors 2 and 3 (Perceived Safety and Joy of Use) to the 
participants. The session was conducted as a brainstorming, 
in which the participants were asked to come up with any 
 Figure 5. One participant is filling out the questionnaire during the rating 
process  
problems they had encountered (regularly or semi-regularly) 
and which they would desire solutions for. During the 
brainstorming, the problems were collected and compiled in 
a preformatted list, which would then be used to rate the 
problems with regard to importance and relevance. Each 
participant received a printout of the list and was then asked 
to rate each problem with regard to relevance on a scale of 
very relevant – relevant – not very relevant. 
The two discussion sessions were audio-recorded and 
later on transcribed for further analysis. Due to the low 
number of participants, the questionnaire results were 
analyzed in descriptive form. 
The results of the first quality criterion (c1), rated on a 
scale from 1 (absolutely agree) to 5 (do not agree at all), 
show that the pattern set had a meaningful name (M=1.86, 
SD=1.08), a clear stated problem (M=1.48, SD=0.80), and 
enough background information of the stated scenario 
(M=2.03, SD=1.02). The two last categories of c1, i.e., the 
solution (M=2.69, SD= 1.15) and the examples (M=2.60, 
SD=1.16), were rated as neutral. 
The questionnaire responses of the second quality 
criterion (c2) indicated a very positive overall picture with 
mean values all in a positive spectrum (lowest was 1.55) and 
the most negative responses being neutral ones (2.78). The 
responses were also rated on a scale from 1 (absolutely 
agree) to 5 (do not agree at all). Lowest mean values were 
identified clarity of the language used in the pattern (M= 
1.55, SD=0.73) and the problem-centricity (M=2.16, 
SD=0.88).  
Regarding the third criterion (c3), the participants 
perceived only one pattern as implausible. Regarding c4, the 
overall consensus was that the presented patterns support the 
communication of designers, developers and researchers, 
provide a common basis, and capture relevant knowledge 
about user experience. 
The participants generally preferred to have various 
approaches to a solution that are underpinned with concrete 
examples to make a pattern more useful. Interestingly, 
however, they also made the suggestion to not only integrate 

155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
state of the art solutions but also examples with “exotic” or 
creative designs. Unfortunately, we did not have enough 
time during the discussion to dive deeper into the 
motivations behind and feasibility of such pattern solutions, 
but the fact that this was explicitly desired by the 
participants, who were all industry practitioners, was very 
interesting nonetheless and worth mentioning. 
The participants also missed a guidance that would help 
software developers, engineers, or designers work with the 
provided knowledge of a pattern – a sort of guideline to use 
patterns at the beginning of the pattern collection. As 
paradoxical as it might sound, this appears to be an 
interesting side effect of the decision to keep the patterns as 
short and to the point as possible (which happened based on 
feedback by the practitioners themselves). Since the 
participants often had different priorities and did not always 
encounter the same problems in their work, they also wanted 
to have the opportunity to rank the patterns. This means that 
the participants suggested providing a ranking system, which 
would allow them to rank each pattern regarding its 
importance for future reference 
One recurring problem, which had sporadically been 
voiced during the previous workshop as well, was the (lack 
of) relevance of the problem statements in the discussion. 
The participants felt that the problems stated in some 
patterns were only partly relevant for them and while they 
appreciated the solutions, they would often have desired to 
be involved when identifying the problem statements 
beforehand. Our decision to identify potential problems 
together with the workshop participants during the validation 
workshop was, therefore, perceived as a very welcome 
change. This led us to modify our overall pattern generation 
approach to involve the industry stakeholders already during 
the very first step in the pattern generation process. This 
might seem obvious in hindsight, but we consider it a 
nonetheless interesting result of our focus on literature before 
practice in the initial pattern finding process. 
The list of design problems that patterns are then 
generated for should, together with a rating regarding 
relevance and importance, come from the industry 
stakeholders themselves. Ideally, this should happen with 
guidance and assistance from researchers. Contextual 
inquiries or brainstorming with subsequent problem rating 
sessions with the industry stakeholders are both suitable 
methods to achieve this.  
As for the pattern collection itself and the UX factors, 
Perceived 
Safety 
and 
Joy 
of 
Use, 
the 
following 
problems/topics were estimated as very relevant and suitable 
bases for future patterns: 
Perceived Safety  
• 
When should the information be presented to the 
driver?  
• 
Where should the information be presented to the 
driver? 
• 
What information should appear in the cockpit? 
• 
How should the system status be displayed?  
• 
When should warnings be displayed? 
• 
What kind of modalities should be used to give 
warnings? 
Joy of Use 
• 
How much feedback does a button need? 
• 
How long can you press a button until a reaction 
occurs? 
• 
How useful is a double-assigned button?  
• 
How long should a short or long button press be?  
• 
How big should a touch display be? 
• 
How many menus are useful? 
• 
What kind of depth should a menu have? 
• 
How can we use or design the front-seat passenger’s 
place for work tasks? 
Overall, the pattern validation workshop showed that the 
existing pattern set supports the communication between 
designers, developers and researchers by providing a 
common basis. The existing pattern set 1 generated a positive 
overall resonance and was generally seen as a valuable 
supplement to existing work practices. 
The feedback from the two discussion sessions was 
particularly fruitful and will help us to increase the quality of 
existing patterns on Mental Workload Caused by Distraction 
and any future pattern sets (regarding the other UX factors 
Perceived Safety and Joy of Use) generated within the 
project. Strong focus will have to be put on two aspects: 
Does it make sense to rank the patterns? If so, who shall rank 
them and how can this issue be implemented in database and 
paper based solutions? 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we have described a seven-step approach to 
generate (automotive) UX patterns. It started with a scientific 
knowledge transfer workshop (step 1), which led to an initial 
set of patterns (step 2). A first iteration based on participants’ 
feedback and the identification of problems in the generation 
process resulted in a refined pattern structure (step 3). An 
iteration of the patterns led to a refined pattern structure (step 
4), with which we conducted a pattern structure evaluation 
workshop with industry stakeholders (step 5). Another 
pattern structure iteration (step 6) led to a final pattern 
iteration (step 7). 
The industry practitioners were involved in most parts of 
these steps, but as mentioned earlier, it might have been 
beneficial to include the industry stakeholders before the first 
generation phase of the patterns. We came to understand that 
not all of the patterns that were initially developed were 
actually urgent problems for the practitioners from industry. 
By involving the industry practitioners in subsequent steps in 
the pattern generation process, we were able to better 
understand the practitioners’ perspectives and the respective 
evaluation of identified problems derived from research. This 
different angle of how problems are perceived, allowed us to 
translate scientifically proven results into proven solutions 
for industry stakeholders.  
The valuable cooperation between research and industry 
brought up implications for how to improve the pattern 
generation process according to the respective stakeholders’ 
needs.  From the industry perspective, they would have 

156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
appreciated an approach by which they could identify 
problems of high priority right from the beginning (i.e., 
before the first generation phase of the patterns) of the 
development process to better identify problems to be dealt 
with in subsequent steps. From the researchers perspective, 
we focused on the pattern generation process and the pattern 
structure and less on the decision for and criticality of 
particular problems, to be selected for subsequent steps. We 
decided right at the beginning to develop patterns just for one 
specific UX factor in order to improve the process and the 
structure of the patterns. For us this was a logical step, as we 
wanted to go from science to practice. However, throughout 
this entire cooperation we came to understand that it is very 
critical to decide when to actually involve your industry 
partners also as active decision makers, to maybe also allow 
for bidirectional exchange of knowledge already in very 
early stages.  
Nonetheless, the insights we gained have resulted in a 
pattern structure suitable for industry stakeholders’ needs in 
the automotive domain. The structure focuses on clarity and 
brevity and should, with slight modifications, be adaptable 
for other industry domains as well. Furthermore, we have 
documented our pattern generation process, together with 
both scientists and industry stakeholders. A high level 
overview of the process can be seen in Figure 6. We broke 
down our seven steps into five main phases: The first phase 
is industry focused, in which industry problems are 
identified, and where patterns might be a beneficial way of 
helping to solve these problems. In phase 2, we suggest 
generating an initial set of patterns. Phase 3 includes 
evaluation and iteration through a scientific lens. Phase 4 
includes evaluation and iteration with a focus from industry. 
In phase 5, the patterns are validated. 
Apart from the patterns generation process, this paper 
presents a structure for automotive user experience patterns. 
It consists of nine elements (name, intent, topics, problem, 
scenario, solution, examples, keywords, and sources), which 
     Figure 6. The five phases of the pattern generation process 
proved to be a useful way to structure UX patterns in the 
automotive domain. 
The focus on brevity and quick solutions that resulted 
from iterations based on the industry stakeholders’ needs 
presents an interesting perspective on the differentiation 
between guidelines vs. patterns. 
In contrast to well-known strategies of how to capture 
patterns, i.e., where a pattern emerges from at least three 
uses of the same solution for a given problem (Gamma et. 
al), this paper presented a new and different approach to 
generate patterns. On the one hand, our approach draws 
from the large amount of already existing research 
knowledge (i.e., scientific literature) within specific 
domains 
(e.g., 
automotive), 
thereby 
complementing 
traditional observation-based approaches with scientifically 
proven results and knowledge. On the other hand, our 
approach furthermore allowed us to go beyond traditional 
observational strategies and research knowledge towards the 
involvement of practitioners’ expert knowledge in the 
development process of the patterns as being part of truly 
inclusive cooperation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The approach described in this paper is a departure from 
the common practice of documenting already working 
solutions, to a way to convert (proven) scientific results to 
working problem solutions. It is an extension of our efforts 
to apply the pattern approach to a wide variety of disciplines 
and areas [17], fostering knowledge preservation and 
exchange both within and among said disciplines and areas. 
The approach described in this paper focused on fusing 
scientific and industry expertise, more specifically scientific 
UX and industrial driver space design know-how. 
Branching out into other disciplines, even ones entirely 
unrelated to HCI, is planned in the future. Areas currently 
under consideration are knowledge transfer for study setups 
in Biological Neuroscience to reduce beginner’s mistakes, 
as well as argument analysis patterns for Analytic 
Philosophy. These further expansions of the patterns scope 
are still situated well in the future, however, they are 
dependent on the success of – and iterations based on – the 
current, intermediary approach. 
The evaluation of the approach described in this paper 
was based mainly on feedback of practitioners from the HCI 
car domain. We did not compare the quality of our patterns’ 
problem solutions to those of other HCI patterns in our 
research. While the positive assessment of the overall 
process and its results (the patterns) provides a positive 
outlook, further evaluations (and possible iterations) are 
certainly needed to fully validate it as a reusable standard 
procedure in the community. 
Overall, the pattern generation process and structure we 
gained will be used for generating additional UX patterns for 
the automotive domain. More specifically, we intend to also 
cover the factors perceived safety and joy of use and generate 
patterns for these. We have already begun the generation 
Phase 1: Problem identification (industry focus) 
Phase 2: Generation of initial patterns (science focus) 
 
Initial pattern set 
 
Phase 3: First evaluation and iteration of patterns  
(science focus) 
 
Refined pattern set 
 
Phase 4: Second evaluation and iteration of patterns  
(industry focus) 
 
Final pattern set 
 
Phase 5: Final pattern validation (industry focus) 

157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
process by identifying common design problems related to 
these factors in a workshop together with the industry 
stakeholders. In the future, we intend to implement the full 
pattern collection as an online database based on the pattern 
framework proposed in [17]. We will continue using our 
inclusive pattern generation process to translate scientifically 
proven results into proven solutions for industry stakeholders 
and encourage others to employ and further refine our 
proposed method. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of 
Science, Research and Economy and the National 
Foundation for Research, Technology and Development and 
AUDIO 
MOBIL 
Elektronik 
GmbH 
is 
gratefully 
acknowledged 
(Christian 
Doppler 
Laboratory 
for 
''Contextual Interfaces''). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. 
Mirnig 
A. 
Meschtscherjakov, 
N. 
Perterer, 
A. 
Kischkowsky, D. Wurhofer, E. Beck., A. Laminger, and M. 
Tscheligi, “User Experience Patterns from Scientific and 
Industry Knowledge: An Inclusive Pattern Approach,” The 
Seventh International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and 
Applications (PATTERNS 2015) IARIA, Nice, France, 
March 2015, pp. 38-44, retrieved: August 2015. 
[2] C. Alexander, “The Timeless Way of Building,” New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979.  
[3] A. Dearden and J. Finlay, “Pattern Languages in HCI: A 
Critical Review,” HCI, Volume 21, 2006, pp. 49-102. 
[4] M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E.Beck, A. Karahasanovic, and M. 
Tscheligi, “User Experience (UX) Patterns for Audio-Visual 
Networked Applications: Inspirations for Design,” Proc. 
Nordic 
Conference 
on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction 
(NordiCHI 2010), Reykjavik, Iceland, 2010, pp. 343-352. 
[5] M. Obrist, D. Wurhofer, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “CUX 
Patterns Approach: Towards Contextual User Experience 
Patterns,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Second 
International 
Conferences 
on 
Pervasive 
Patterns 
and 
Applications 
(PATTERNS 2010), Lisbon, Portugal, 2010, pp. 60-65, 
retrieved: January 2015. 
[6] T. Erickson, “Lingua francas for design: sacred places and 
pattern languages,” Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
Designing interactive systems (DIS ’00), ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 2000, pp. 357-368. 
[7] S. Köhne, “A Didactical Aproach towards Blended Learning: 
Conception and Application of Educational Patterns“, 
Dissertation, Universty of Hohenheim, Hohenheim, Germany, 
2005 [Orig. title: Didaktischer Ansatz für das Blended 
Learning: Konzeption und Anwendung von Educational 
Patterns]. 
[8] K. Quibeldey-Cirkel. Design Patterns in Object Oriented 
Software 
Engineering. 
Springer, 
1999 
[Orig. 
title: 
Entwurfsmuster: Design Patterns in der objektorientierten 
Softwaretechnik]. 
[9] B. Biel, T. Grill, and V. Gruhn, “Patterns of trust in 
ubiquitous environments,” Proc. 6th International Conference 
on Advances in Mobile Computing and Multimedia (MoMM 
2008), Gabriele Kotsis, David Taniar, Eric Pardede, and 
Ismail Khalil (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 
391-396. DOI=10.1145/1497185.1497269, retrieved: January 
2015. 
[10] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Rouncefield, I.Sommerville, and S. 
Viller, “Finding Patterns in the Fieldwork,” Proceedings of 
the Seventh European Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work, Bonn, Germany, 2001, pp. 39-58. 
[11] A. Krischkowsky, D. Wurhofer, N. Perterer, and M. 
Tscheligi, “Developing Patterns Step-by-Step: A Pattern 
Generation Guidance for HCI Researchers,” The Fifth 
International 
Conferences 
on 
Pervasive 
Patterns 
and 
Applications (PATTERNS 2013) IARIA, Valencia, Spain, 
2013, pp. 66-72, retrieved: January 2015. 
[12] A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin, “About Face 3: The 
Essentials of Interaction Design,” Indianapolis: Wiley, 2007. 
[13] M. van Welie and B. Klaassen, “Evaluation Museum 
Websites using Design Patterns” Internal Report, IR-IMSE-
001, Faculty of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2004. 
[14] J. Borchers, “A pattern approach to interaction design”, Wiley 
series in software design patterns, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 
USA, 2001. 
[15] J. Tidwell, “Common Ground: A Pattern Language for 
Human-Computer 
Interface 
Design,” 
1999, 
http://www.mit.edu/~jtidwell/interaction_patterns.html, 
retrieved: January, 2015. 
[16] D. Wurhofer, M. Obrist, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “A 
Quality 
Criteria 
Framework 
for 
Pattern 
Validation,” 
International Journal On Advances in Software, Volume 3, 
Issue 1-2, 2010, pp. 252-264. 
[17] A. Mirnig and M. Tscheligi, “Building a General Pattern 
Framework via Set Theory: Towards a Universal Pattern 
Approach,” The Sixth International Conference on Pervasive 
Patterns and Applications (PATTERNS 2014) IARIA, 
Venice, Italy, May 2014, pp. 8-11, retrieved: January 2015. 
 

