103
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Inference of Gene Regulatory Networks to Detect Toxicity-Specific Effects in 
Human Embryonic Stem Cells 
 
Sachiyo Aburatani 
Computational Biology Research Center 
National Institute of AIST 
Tokyo, Japan 
s.aburatani@aist.go.jp 
 
 
Reiko Nagano, Hideko Sone 
Research Center for Environmental Risk 
 National Institute for Environmental Studies 
Tsukuba, Japan 
nagano.reiko@gmail.com 
hsone@nies.go.jp 
 
Wataru Fujibuchi, Junko Yamane 
Center for iPS Research and Application 
Kyoto University 
Kyoto, Japan 
w.fujibuchi@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
yamane-j@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
 
Satoshi Imanishi, Seiichiroh Ohsako 
Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, 
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 
Tokyo, Japan 
imanishi@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
ohsako@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—Environmental chemicals are known to cause serious 
developmental problems in embryos. To prevent injurious 
chemical 
effects, 
knowledge 
of 
the 
chemical 
toxicity 
mechanisms in human embryos is important. To reveal the 
functional mechanisms in living cells, inferring a gene 
regulatory network is a useful approach. We applied our 
developed statistical methods based on Structural Equation 
Modeling to infer the gene regulatory networks in human 
embryonic stem cells. In this study, we improved the SEM 
approach and applied this enhanced version to expression 
profiles in human embryonic stem cells exposed to various 
chemicals. For almost all of the tested chemicals, the cell 
differentiation-related genes and the neuron development-
related genes were intermixed in the inferred networks. Since 
the chemicals' networks displayed diffusion type shapes, the 
effects of chemical toxicity are considered to affect a few target 
genes at first, and then ultimately many genes via regulatory 
mechanisms. Furthermore, the genes that were finally affected 
were conserved among chemicals with the same toxicity: Tuj1 
in Neurotoxic chemicals, Oct3/4 and Pax6 in Genotoxic 
chemicals, and Oct3/4 in Carcinogenic chemicals. These finally 
affected genes are considered to be the results of toxicity-
specific effects in ES cells, and they reflected the features of the 
toxicity. We also found that some chemicals shared the same 
regulatory mechanism. The detected toxicity-specific effects 
are valuable for developing methods to prevent chemicals from 
disturbing normal development. 
Keywords-Structural Equation Modeling; Gene Regulatory 
Network; Embryonic Stem Cell; Environmental Chemicals  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We are exposed to many chemicals, which are produced 
by our usual life activities. Since the toxicity of 
environmental chemicals is known as one of the typical 
factors causing developmental toxicity, we investigate the 
specific effects of chemical toxicity [1]. Developmental 
toxicity is either a structural or functional alteration, and 
these alterations interfere with the normal developmental 
programming in early embryos. These interferences can 
cause abnormal development and diseases [2][3]. For 
example, Methylmercury is known as a developmental toxin 
that affects fetal development [4][5]. Furthermore, certain 
chemicals can cause serious developmental problems and 
abnormal cell differentiation in embryos [6][7][8].  
To prevent the harmful effects of chemicals, elucidation 
of the toxic stress response in embryonic cells is crucial 
[9][10]. A gene regulatory network is a useful approach to 
reveal the regulatory mechanisms in living cells. Using the 
gene expression information, the regulatory networks among 
the genes can be inferred. Various algorithms, including 
Boolean and Bayesian networks, have been developed to 
infer complex functional gene networks [11][12]. In our 
previous investigation, we developed an approach based on 
graphical Gaussian modeling (GGM). The GGM approach is 
combined with hierarchical clustering for calculations with 
massive amounts of gene expression data, and we can infer 
the huge network among all of the genes by this approach 
[13][14]. However, GGM infers only the undirected graph, 
whereas the Boolean and Bayesian models infer the directed 
graph, which shows causality. Although all of these 
approaches are suitable for establishing the relationships 
among the genes, they cannot reveal the relationships 
between un-observed factors and genes, due to insufficient 
information in the gene expression profiles. To clarify the 
mechanisms of biological processes in living cells, un-
observed factors that affect the target gene's expression 
should also be considered. Thus, an alternative approach that 
includes un-observed factors should be applied. 
Recently, we developed a new statistical approach, based 
on Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) in combination with 
factor analysis and a four-step procedure [15][16]. This 
approach allowed us to reconstruct a model of transcriptional 
regulation that involves protein-DNA interactions from only 
the gene expression data, in the absence of protein 

104
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
information [15]. The significant features of SEM are the 
inclusion of latent variables within the constructed model 
and the ability to infer the network, including its cyclic 
structure. Furthermore, the SEM approach allows us to 
strictly evaluate the inferred model by using fitting scores. 
The SEM approach is useful for detecting the causality 
among selected genes, as the linear relationships between 
genes are assumed to minimize the difference between the 
model's covariance matrix and the calculated sample 
covariance matrix [17][18][19]. Some fitting indices are 
defined for evaluating the model adaptability, and thus the 
most suitable model can be selected by SEM [1][19]. 
Here, we applied the SEM approach to infer the 
regulatory network among 9 development-related genes. The 
mRNA levels of these 9 genes were measured in human 
embryonic stem cells exposed to 15 environmental chemicals. 
The chemicals were considered to have developmental 
toxicities that adversely affect the developmental process in 
human embryos. Thus, inferring the gene regulatory network 
among development-related genes will help us to elucidate 
the toxic stress response in the human embryo. Furthermore, 
we improved our SEM approach for constructing preliminary 
initial models from the time-series data, in the absence of 
known regulatory interactions among the genes. We applied 
this improved SEM approach to infer the chemical-specific 
regulatory network among the development-related genes. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Expression data 
We utilized expression data that were measured to clarify 
the effects of chemical toxicity on neuronal differentiation 
[7][20]. In these expression data, nine genes considered to be 
affected by chemicals were measured in human embryonic 
stem cells: GATA2, Nanog, Oct3/4, Nodal, Lmx1A, MAP2, 
Nestin, Pax6, and Tuj1 [7][20]. Among the 9 genes, GATA2, 
Nanog, Oct3/4, and Nodal are mainly related to cell 
differentiation, and the other genes are related to neuron 
development. As an internal control, the expression of beta-
actin was also measured. The expression data of these 10 
genes were obtained from human embryonic stem cells 
exposed to 15 chemicals: Methylmercury (MeHg), 2-
Nitropropane (2-NP), Acrylamide (ACA), p-Nitroaniline (p-
NA), 4-hydroxy PCB107 (PCB), Benzo[a] pyrene (BZP), 
Diethylnitrosamine (DENA), Diethylaminofluorene (DEAF), 
Phenobarbital (PB), Tamoxifen (TMX), Diethylstilbestrol 
(DES), TCDD (TCDD), Thalidomide (THAL), Bisphenol-A 
(BPA), and Permethrin (PER) [7][20]. The toxicity of each 
chemical was classified into one of four types: Neurotoxic 
(MeHg, 2-NP, ACA, p-NA, and PCB), Genotoxic (BZP, 
DENA, and DEAF), Carcinogenic (PB, TMX, DES, and 
TCDD), and others (THAL, BPA, and PER). The human 
embryonic cells were exposed to each chemical for several 
time periods: 24 hours, 48 hours, 72 hours, and 96 hours. 
Each chemical was also tested at 5 concentrations: very low, 
low, middle, high, and very high. The expression of the 
genes was measured twice under each condition by RT-PCR, 
and thus 600 (15 chemicals x 4 time periods x 5 
concentration types x 2 repeats) expression patterns per gene 
were measured [20]. 
First, the expression level of each gene was normalized 
to the internal beta-actin control and averaged, as follows: 
∑
=






=
N
i
i
bActin
i
g
g
e
e
N
E
1
log2
1
  
             (1) 
Here, N is the number of repeated experiments, eg
i is the 
measured expression level of gene g under one set of 
conditions, and ebActin
i is the beta-actin expression level 
measured under the same conditions. The expression level of 
each gene was divided by that of beta-actin, for intracellular 
normalization. To minimize the experimental error, the 
logarithms of the normalized expression data were obtained 
and averaged. 
B. Multi-factor analysis of variance 
In this study, the data contained three factors that affect 
gene 
expression: 
chemicals, 
exposure 
times, 
and 
concentrations. To detect the significant factors for 
differences in gene expression, we applied the analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) for multiple factors [21]. Although the 
multi-factor ANOVA model includes each factor's effect and 
all combinations of interactions between the factors, the 
triple interactions among the factors were confounded with 
error terms, because the data lacked repetition [21]. 
Therefore, we used the linear effects model for analysis: 
Eijk=µ+αi+βj+γk+(αβ)ij+(αγ)ik+(βγ)jk+εijk            (2) 
where Eijk is the expression level of each gene under one 
condition, µ is the averaged value of all measured data, αi is 
the effect of factor A, βj is the effect of factor B, γk is the 
effect of factor C, (αβ)ij is the interaction between factors A 
and B, and εijk is the error term.  
Depending on the linear effects model, the total some of 
squares, STotal could be decomposed into the following 
components: 
STotal=SA+SB+SC+SAB+SAC+SBC+Se               (3) 
where SA, SB, and SC mean the sum of the squared differences 
between each factor’s marginal mean and the overall mean; 
SAB, SAC, and SBC mean the sum of the squared differences for 
particular corresponding data means, marginal means, and 
overall mean; and Se measures the difference between STotal  
and the total sum of squares of all effects. The degree of 
freedom for STotal was the number of all observed data minus 
one, and the degrees of freedom for SA, SB, and SC were the 
number of levels for the factor minus one. The mean square 
values for SA, SB, and SC were the sums of the squares divided 
by the numbers of degrees of freedom. In Se, the degree of 
freedom was the total degrees of freedom minus the sum of 
the factor degrees of freedom. The mean square of Se was the 
sum of the squares divided by the number of degrees of 
freedom. In the analysis of variance, STotal accounted for the 

105
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
factor effects (SA, SB, SC, SAB, SAC, SBC) and the contribution 
of Se.  
To compare the factor effects, the statistical F-test was 
used. The F statistic is the mean square for the factor divided 
by the mean square of the error terms. This F statistic is 
known to follow an F distribution with degrees of freedom 
for each factor effect and degrees of freedom for the error 
terms. Thus, we could calculate the probabilities of the factor 
effects from the F statistics. 
C. Extraction of causalities from expression data  
In an SEM analysis, an initial model should be assumed, 
but no regulations were defined among the selected genes in 
this study. Thus, we had to construct an initial model among 
the 9 genes for each chemical. To detect the regulatory 
relationships between the gene pairs from the measured time 
series expression data, we applied cross correlation 
coefficients to the expression profiles measured for each 
chemical and each concentration. 
Cross correlation is utilized as a measure of similarity 
between two waves in signal processing by a time-lag 
application, and it is also applicable to pattern recognition 
[22]. The cross correlation values ranged between −1 and +1. 
In a time series analysis, the cross correlation between two 
time series describes the normalized cross covariance 
function. Let Xt = { x1,…, xN }, Yt = { y1,…, yN } represent two 
time series data including N time points. The cross 
correlation is then given by 
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
∑
=
+
=
=
+
−
−
−
−
=
N
t
d
i
N
t
i
N
t
i d
i
xy
y
y
x
x
y
x y
x
r
1
2
1
2
1
                  (4)  
where d is the time-lag between variables x and y. In this 
case, the expression profiles were measured at four time 
points, and thus three cross correlations of each gene pair 
were calculated with d = −1, 0, +1.  
D. Construction of the initial model 
In this study, we inferred the chemical-specific 
regulatory network, and thus the differences between times 
and concentrations could be merged for the construction of 
the initial model. Fig. 1 shows the new method developed for 
constructing an initial model of each chemical, with the 
merging of several conditions. First, we constructed lag 
matrices to merge the time difference. The time difference 
was summarized by the time lag values in the cross 
correlations among genes. Since the time lags indicated the 
order of the expression pattern among the gene pairs, the 
rough causality between all gene pairs could be extracted. In 
this study, three cross correlations were calculated with three 
lags, −1, 0, and +1, and the three absolute values of the cross 
correlations were compared. The value d with the highest 
absolute value was selected as the causal information 
between the gene pairs, and the selected lag value d 
wasarranged as a matrix element in a lag matrix.  
 
Figure 1.  Procedure for initial model construction: (a) Time-lag matrices 
for each chemical. Five time-lag matrices were obtained for each chemical. 
(b) Binomial relationships. (c) Frequency matrix of causal relationships 
between all gene pairs. (d) Selection of possible causal relationships from 
the frequency matrix. (e) Construction of an initial model with selected 
causal relationships. 
Lag Matrices were constructed for each concentration of a 
chemical. Thus, five time lag matrices were constructed for 
each chemical (Fig. 1a). 
We subsequently merged the concentration difference of 
each chemical. For each chemical, there are five lag matrices 
according to the chemical concentrations, and we considered 
that the chemical-specific relationships among the genes 
would be conserved in several lag matrices. To obtain the 
chemical-specific relationships among the genes, we 
extracted the binary relationships between gene pairs from 
the five lag matrices for each chemical. If the same 
relationships existed in several lag matrices, then the 
binomial relationships were duplicated (Fig. 1b). 
In the next step, we constructed one frequency matrix for 
each chemical. From the binary relationships, we counted the 
frequencies of all gene regulatory pairs, and each frequency 
number was arranged as an element of a frequency matrix 
(Fig. 1c). In this step, the concentration difference could be 
merged, since the elements of the frequency matrix indicate 
the information for the different concentrations. We 
subsequently selected the gene pairs with frequency matrix 
values greater than or equal to two, as the chemical-specific 
regulation (Fig. 1d). At the final step, we constructed an 
initial model for each chemical from the extracted 
relationships between the genes (Fig. 1e). These initial 
models included the time series information as the directions 
of edges, and the different concentrations of each chemical 
were summarized as the existence of edges in the model. By 
using this approach, an initial model can include cyclic 
structures. 
E. Structural Equation Modeling without Latent Variables 
(SEM without LV) 
After the construction of an initial model for each 
chemical, we applied the SEM calculation to infer the 
network model that fit the measured expression data. In 
general, SEM is a comprehensive statistical model that 
includes two types of variables: observed and latent. These 

106
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
variables constitute the structural models that consider the 
relationships 
between 
the 
latent 
variables 
and 
the 
measurement models that consider the relationships between 
the observed variables and the latent variables. These 
relationships can be presented both algebraically, as a system 
of equations, and graphically, as path diagrams. 
In this study, the 9 genes (GATA2, Nanog, Oct3/4, Nodal, 
Lmx1A, MAP2, Nestin, Pax6, and Tuj1) were defined as the 
observed variables. Meanwhile, none were defined as latent 
variables, since considerations about the common regulator 
of several genes are dispensable for this study. The un-
observed factor, which affected each gene's expression, was 
calculated as an error. All observed variables were 
categorized into one of two types of variables, exogenous 
and endogenous, according to their interactions with other 
variables. Exogenous variables are those that are not 
regulated by the other variables, and endogenous variables 
are regulated by the others. In the initial model, the starting 
genes are defined as exogenous variables, while all other 
genes are defined as endogenous variables. Regulatory 
relationships exist between the observed variables in the 
network models. The model is defined as follows: 
y=Λy+e  
                  (5) 
Here, y is a vector of p observed variables (measured gene 
expression patterns), and Λ is a p x p matrix representing the 
regulatory relationships between the observed variables. 
Errors that affect the observed endogenous variables are 
denoted by e.  
The SEM software package SPSS AMOS 17.0 (IBM, 
USA) was used to fit the model to the data. The quality of 
the fit was estimated by the Chi-square statistic (CMIN), the 
goodness-of-fit index (GFI), which measures the relative 
discrepancy between the empirical data and the inferred 
model, and the adjusted GFI (AGFI), which is the GFI 
modified according to the degrees of freedom. Furthermore, 
we used CFI and RMSEA as fitting scores, to evaluate the 
model fitting. Since these indices have threshold values, as 
criteria to decide whether the model is suitable to obtain data 
independent of a huge sample number, they were considered 
to be useful to clarify the degree of model fitting in this study. 
F. Parameter estimation  
Parameter estimation was performed by comparing the 
actual covariance matrix, calculated from the measured data, 
with the estimated covariance matrices of the constructed 
model. Maximum likelihood is commonly used as a fitting 
function to estimate SEM parameters: 
FML(S, Σ(θ))=log|Σ(θ)|−log|S|+tr(Σ(θ)-1S)−p          (6) 
Here, Σ(θ) is the estimated covariance matrix, S is the sample 
covariance matrix, |Σ| is the determinant of matrix Σ, tr(Σ) is 
the trace of matrix Σ, and p is the number of observed 
variables. The principal objective of SEM is to minimize 
FML(S, Σ(θ)), which is the objective function and is used to 
obtain the maximum likelihood. Generally, FML(S, Σ(θ)) is a 
nonlinear function. Therefore, iterative optimization is 
required to minimize FML(S, Σ(θ)) and to find the solutions 
[23]. 
G. Iteration for the optimal model  
The regulatory network analysis by SEM consists of two 
parts: parameter fitting and structure fitting. After the 
parameters of the constructed model are estimated by 
maximum likelihood, the network structures are evaluated 
according to the goodness of fit between the constructed 
model and the measured data. Through acceptance or 
rejection of the models, the optimal model that describes the 
measured data can be selected.  
In the network model, the covariance matrix between 
variables is calculated by the estimated parameters. The 
similarity between the constructed model and the actual 
relationships is predicted by comparing the matrix calculated 
from the network model to the matrix calculated from the 
actual data. To detect the quantitative similarity between a 
constructed model and an actual relationship, fitting scores 
are usually utilized. In this study, the quality of the fit was 
predicted by four different fitting scores: CMIN(Prob), GFI, 
AGFI, CFI, and RMSEA. The value of CMIN(Prob) is 
calculated by the Chi-square statistic divided by the degrees 
of freedom, and a CMIN(Prob) value higher than 0.05 is 
considered as a good model fit. Values of GFI, AGFI, and 
CFI above 0.90 are required for a good model fit. RMSEA is 
one of the most popular parsimony indexes displayed in the 
table, and RMSEA values below 0.05 represent a good 
model fit [24]. Furthermore, RMSEA values of 0.10 or more 
are considered to indicate that the constructed model is far 
from the actual data. 
To optimize the model, an iteration algorithm was 
developed, as follows:  
Step 1: Deletion of a non-significant edge from the model. 
Use 0.05 as the significance level for the determination of 
the significant regulation among the variables. After the 
parameters are estimated, the inverse matrix of the Fisher 
information matrix of parameters is calculated. The inverse 
matrix of Fisher information represents the asymptotic 
parameters' covariance matrix. The probability of each 
parameter is calculated by using this asymptotic parameters' 
matrix, since all of the parameters are usually normally 
distributed. 
Step 2: Reconstruction of the network model. The 
structure of the network model without the non-significant 
edge is different from that of the former model. Thus, all 
parameters should be re-calculated from the reconstructed 
model, and the similarity of the network structure is also re-
calculated.  
Step 3: Iteration of Steps 1 and 2 until all edges become 
significant. Since the probabilities of all of the edges in the 
reconstructed models have also changed, the deletion of the 
non-significant edges is executed step-by-step. 
Step 4: Addition of a possible causal edge to the 
reconstructed model. According to the Modification Index 
(MI), we add a new causal edge between the observed 
variables. The MI measures how much the chi-square 
statistic is expected to decrease if a particular parameter 
setting is constrained [24]. The MI value indicates the 

107
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
possibility of new causality between the variables, and thus 
we add a new edge according to the highest MI score. 
Step 5: Iteration from Steps 1 to 3. The addition of a new 
edge to a constructed model changes the structure of the 
network model. In other words, all parameters, including the 
probabilities of all edges, have also changed again. Thus, we 
execute the iteration from Step 1 to Step 3 again. 
Step 6: Determination of significant relationships among 
error terms. After all of the edges are significant and all of 
the MI scores are lower than 10.0 in the constructed model, 
significant relationships between error terms are estimated 
by the MI scores. The relationships among the error terms 
have no direction, and thus they are a correlation between 
error terms. These relationships were used for the 
calculations, but were not incorporated within the network. 
H. Extraction of association rules by affinity analysis  
We applied affinity analysis to discover the similar 
regulatory mechanism models among the 15 chemicals' 
networks. To detect the relative chemical pairs as association 
rules, we created a binary dataset with conserved regulations 
among different chemicals. According to the original 
definition of association rule mining [25], we defined the 
problem of association rule mining as follows: Let I = { i1,…, 
in } be a set of n binary attributes called items. Let T = { t1,…, 
tm } be a set of database transactions. Each transaction tk is 
represented by the binary vector tk = ( tk
1, tk
2, …, tk
n ), which 
includes n elements. The value of tk
l indicates the appearance 
of transaction tk in item il. In this study, the 15 chemicals 
were defined as a set of items, and each conserved gene 
regulation between the different chemicals was considered as 
one transaction. Thus, the value of 1 indicated the 
appearance of the conserved gene regulation in the 
chemical's network, while the value of 0 indicated its 
absence. 
An association rule is defined as the implication of the 
form Ia => Ib, where Ia and Ib are sets of some items in I, but 
some of the same items are not present in Ia and Ib. To detect 
the association rules, we used some constraints: support, 
confidence and lift. Support is defined as the proportion of 
transactions that contain the item set to all transactions. Thus, 
support(Ia,Ib)=prob(Ia,Ib) was calculated as the joint 
probability of Ia and Ib. The confidence constraint is 
displayed as conf(Ia =>Ib), and it is defined as the conditional 
probability prob(Ia|Ib). Thus, we calculated conf(Ia=>Ib) from 
the proportion of transactions with the item set Ib to the 
transactions with the item set Ia. The lift constraint is defined 
as: 
lift(Ia=>Ib) = conf(Ia=>Ib)/prob(Ib)                     (7) 
Lift is a measure of the performance of an association rule 
with respect to the population as a whole, against the random 
choice. Thus, lift was obtained by calculating the ratio of the 
target response to the average response. In general, a lift 
value over 1 is suitable for association rules. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Chemical concentrations had no effect 
In this study, gene expression was measured in the 
presence of different concentrations of various chemicals, 
with several exposure times. To reveal the most effective 
factor for gene expression, multi-factor ANOVA was applied 
to the measured data. In statistics, ANOVA is utilized to 
detect differences between groups in terms of some variables. 
Usually, the chance of committing a type I error will increase 
by performing multiple two-sample t-tests, and a statistical 
test is needed to determine whether or not the means of more 
than two groups should be applied, such as Tukey's HSD test 
and so on. Although these post-hoc tests are useful for 
detecting the factor pairs with significant differences 
between them, the factor pairs are not important in this study. 
Instead, we wanted to determine factors, which caused gene 
expression differences, and thus we compared three factors: 
chemicals, time differences, and concentrations.  
The 15 chemicals were divided into 3 categories by their 
toxicities: Neurotoxic chemicals, Genotoxic chemicals, 
Carcinogenic chemicals, and other type chemicals. We 
compared the gene expression differences between these 
toxicity types. We calculated a p-value from the F statistic 
for each gene. The p-value is the probability that the 
variation between conditions may have occurred by chance, 
so genes with smaller p-values vary more significantly. Thus, 
the gene’s variation is less likely to have occurred by chance, 
and is conversely more likely to be connected to the 
difference in conditions.  The probabilities of expression 
differences for each gene, grouped by each factor, are shown 
in Table I. Interestingly, the expression of all of the genes 
was significantly different among the chemicals and the time 
differences. However, the chemical concentrations showed 
almost no significant differences in terms of the expression 
of the genes. Thus, the concentrations of the chemicals had 
no effect on the expression of the tested genes in the ES cells. 
 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF MULTI-FACTOR ANOVA 
. 
a. Probabilities were calculated from the F statistics and the degrees of freedom.  
b. Significant probabilities are displayed as "<0.01" in this table. 
 
 

108
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. The complexities of the initial models are related to the 
chemical toxicity 
We utilized our newly developed method to construct the 
initial gene regulatory network models under the conditions 
with 15 chemicals. One of the distinguishing features of our 
new method is its ability to include a cyclic structure in the 
network model. Cyclic regulation, such as feedback 
regulation, is considered to be important for cells to control 
normal gene expression, and the new method is useful to 
detect cyclic regulation from the gene expression data. Fig. 2 
shows the constructed initial network models.  
In Fig. 2, the components of the constructed models 
were: 9 genes with 22 relationships in MeHg, 9 genes with 
23 relationships in 2-NP, 9 genes with 19 relationships in 
ACA, 9 genes with 23 relationships in p-NA, 9 genes with17 
relationships in PCB, 9 genes with 9 relationships in BZP, 8 
genes with 14 relationships in DENA, 8 genes with 10 
relationships in DEAF, 8 genes with 19 relationships in PB, 
9 genes with 23 relationships in TMX, 7 genes with 9 
relationships in DES, 9 genes with 23 relationships in TCDD, 
8 genes with 10 relationships in THAL, 6 genes with 9 
relationships in BPA, and 8 genes with 10 relationships in 
PER. The distribution of the number of relationships 
according to the toxicity type is displayed in Fig. 3. In Figs. 
2 and 3, the numbers of edges were obviously different, 
according to the chemicals' toxicity. Neurotoxic and 
Carcinogenic chemicals contained more relationships than 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Initial network models: (a) MeHg, (b) 2-Np, (c) ACA, (d) p-NA, (e) PCB, (f) BZP, (g) DENA, (h) DEAF, (i) PB, (j) TMX, (k) DES, (l) TCDD, 
(m) THAL, (n) BPA, (o) PER. The networks with the same toxicity are arranged on the same line.

109
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Box plot of edge numbers: Distribution of the number of edges 
in each initial model. 
Genotoxic and other chemicals. Furthermore, only one or 
two genes were arranged as the last endogenous genes in the 
initial models with Neurotoxic and Carcinogenic chemicals, 
as opposed to two or more genes in the initial models of 
Genotoxic and other chemicals. Thus, the effects of the 
Neurotoxic or Carcinogenic chemicals were complicated, but 
could be summarized into only one or two target genes. In 
contrast, the expressions of many genes were finally affected 
by Genotoxic and other chemicals, via simple regulatory 
networks. These differences between chemical toxicity types 
summarized the distinctive gene expression profiles for each 
chemical. 
All of the initial models included some duplicated gene 
interactions, such as a direct interaction between two genes 
and an indirect interaction between them. Before the SEM 
calculation, we simplified all of the initial models. To 
simplify these duplicated interactions, we only retained the 
longest path between two genes. In the initial model, the 
edges do not represent the direct regulation, but the time 
provenience information. In other words, the difference 
between direct and indirect interactions in the initial model is 
not very important. Thus, the regulation displayed by a direct 
path could be replaced by indirect paths in the model. By 
retaining the longest paths, all of the preceding information 
was included, as the simplest diagram. 
C. Structures of inferred networks 
The final inferred networks for each chemical are 
depicted in Fig. 4, and the goodness of fit scores are 
displayed in Table II.  From Table II, almost all of the 
models were considered to fit well with the measured data by 
some fitting scores, CMIN(Prob), CFI, and RMSEA, except 
for the DES network. In the DES network, all of the fitting 
scores indicated that the inferred network could not be 
judged as a well-fitted model. Since the obtained fitting 
scores were the best scores in this analysis, we considered 
the network inference for DES to need more expression data. 
The inferred networks of chemicals revealed distinct 
structures. The cell differentiation-related genes and the 
neuron development-related genes were intermixed in almost 
all of the inferred networks, except for MeHg and BPA. In 
the inferred network of MeHg, the regulations among cell 
differentiation-related genes and the regulation among 
neuron development-related genes were separated to the 
right and left. This specific shape means that the effects of 
MeHg appeared differently between neuronal and other 
development. This difference may be related to the two 
different effects of MeHg: developmental deficits in children 
[26], and risk of cardiovascular disease in adults [27]. On the 
other hand, cell differentiation-related genes and neuron 
development-related genes were separated at the top and 
bottom in the BPA network. In the BPA network, neuron 
development-related genes were only disturbed by cell 
differentiation-related genes. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
FITTING SCORES OF INFERRED NETWORKS 
a. Five fitting scores were utilized for measuring the fitness level between the constructed model and the measured data.  
b. The well-fitted threshold of each score is:  CMIN(Prob) is P>0.05, GFI > 0.90, AGFI> 0.90, CFI>0.90, RMSEA< 0.05.  
 

110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 4.  Inferred chemical networks: A positive relationship between genes is displayed with a solid arrow. A negative relationship between genes is 
displayed with a dashed arrow. Gene names with blue characters indicate "neuron development-related genes", and genes with red characters indicate "cell 
differentiation-related genes". (a) MeHg, (b) 2-Np, (c) ACA, (d) p-NA, (e) PCB, (f) BZP, (g) DENA, (h) DEAF, (i) PB, (j) TMX, (k) DES, (l) TCDD, (m) 
THAL, (n) BPA, (o) PER. The networks with the same toxicity are arranged on the same line. 
 
Concerning the shapes of the inferred networks, we 
defined the network shape by comparing the numbers of 
genes at the top phase (N(top)) and the final phase 
(N(bottom)) within each chemical network. One of the 
specific shapes was a centralized model, which was defined 
as N(top)-N(bottom)≥2. In this model, many genes were 
arranged at the top phase, and only a few genes were 
arranged at the final phase in the network structure. The 
ACA network was the only network with a centralized model. 
The other specific shape was a diffusion model. The shape of 
a diffusion model is defined as N(bottom)-N(top)≥2. Among 
the well-fitted models, four networks were classified into 
diffusion models: BZP, DEAF, PB, and PER. The shape of 
the BPA network was different from those of the other 
networks, and resembled a bow-tie like model.  
Fundamentally, the genes were hierarchically controlled 
in the inferred networks, but there were a few recursive 
relationships. Interestingly, the values of the regression 
weights of the recursive regulations among all of the inferred 
networks were negative: regulation from Oct3/4 to Nestin in 
the p-Na network, regulation from GATA2 to Nanog in 
TCDD, and regulation from Nanog to Lmx1A in PER. These 
recursive regulations indicated that feedback regulation 
exists in ES cells.  
D. Detection of Toxicity-Specific Effects 
To detect the specific features that were dependent on the 
toxicity type, we monitored the position of each gene in the 
inferred networks. Table III displays the number and 
probability of incoming edges and those of outgoing edges 
for each gene. Among the Neurotoxic chemicals' networks, 
Tuj1 has significantly few incoming edges and significantly 
many outgoing edges. Actually, Tuj1 was arranged as a 
result of network regulation in almost all of the Neurotoxic 
networks.  
 

111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III.  
INTERACTING EDGES OF EACH GENE 
 
    a. The significant values (P<0.05) are highlighted with *.                         
This means that the toxicities of Neurotoxic chemicals are 
considered to finally affect Tuj1, which is known to 
contribute to microtubule stability in neuronal cells [28]. 
Although the expression levels of 5 genes were measured as 
neuron development-related genes, Tuj1 was detected as the 
final target of Neurotoxicity. 
Among the Genotoxic chemicals’ networks, Oct3/4 
exhibited a significant number of incoming edges. 
Furthermore, both Pax6 and Oct3/4 were arranged at the 
lower phase in all Genotoxic networks. Oct3/4 is one of the 
key regulators of pluripotency [29], and Pax6 is known as a 
key transcription factor for the development of the cerebral 
cortex and other sensory organs [30]. Considering the 
features of both Pax6 and Oct3/4, developmental processes, 
such as normal cell differentiation, were disturbed by 
Genotoxic chemicals.  
In the Carcinogenic networks, both the incoming and 
outgoing edges of Oct3/4 were significant, and Oct3/4 was 
arranged as a result in almost all of the Carcinogenic 
networks. The chemicals that were classified as either 
Genotoxic or Carcinogenic are known as carcinogens 
[31][32]. Thus, the Genotoxic and Carcinogenic features 
indicated that the chemical disturbance of Oct3/4 is related to 
cancer. The other feature of the Carcinogenic networks, 
regulation from Nanog to Nodal, was conserved among all of 
the Carcinogenic networks. Both Nanog and Nodal are 
important for normal early embryonic development. Nanog 
is a key factor for maintaining pluripotency in embryonic 
stem cells [33][34]. Nodal is related to the development of 
the left-right axial structure [35][36], and its signaling 
pathway is known to be important very early in development, 
for cell fate determination and many other developmental 
processes [36]. Although the Carcinogenic chemicals do not 
affect genetic structures, the regulatory mechanisms of these 
carcinogenic chemicals may be similar. 
To compare the conserved gene relationships among 
chemicals with the same toxicity, we extracted the conserved 
gene regulations from the chemicals' networks. The numbers 
of conserved regulations were: 13 within Neurotoxic 
chemicals, 2 within Genotoxic chemicals, and 11 within 
Carcinogenic chemicals. Even though the average numbers 
of edges in the inferred models were similar among the three 
toxicity types (10.6 in Neurotoxic, 10.1 in Genotoxic, and 
12.5 in Carcinogenic), the numbers of conserved regulations 
were different. From this feature, it is considered that a 
similar regulatory mechanism controlled the Neurotoxic 
chemicals’ effects and the Carcinogenic chemicals’ effects in 
ES cells, but the gene regulation by each Genotoxic chemical 
was independent of the toxicity type. 
E. Similar mechanisms between chemicals 
By utilizing the data mining method, we identified the 
chemicals with similar regulation. First, we constructed a 
transaction Table about the conserved regulation for each 
chemical, as shown in Table IV. Each row of data indicates 
the conserved regulation between genes, and each column 
indicates one chemical. In this transaction table, the value of 
1 means that the corresponding regulation appeared with the 
chemical, whereas the value of 0 means that the regulation 
did not exist in the chemical’s network.  
In the affinity analysis, we set the thresholds as: Support 
> 0.5, Confidence > 0.5, and lift > 1. According to these 
restrictions, 2 rules were extracted. One is BPA => DEAF, 
and the other is DEAF => PCB. These results reflected the 
finding that the regulations in the BPA network were also 
conserved in the DEAF network. Furthermore, the 
regulations in the DEAF network were conserved in the PCB 
network. Although these three chemicals were categorized 
into different types of toxicities, they may share the same 
regulatory 
mechanisms 
to 
affect 
the 
ES 
cells.  

112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
We applied an improved SEM approach to reconstruct a 
gene regulatory model from gene expression data in human 
embryonic stem cells. Our results confirmed that SEM is a 
powerful approach to estimate the gene regulation caused by 
chemical toxicity. The shapes of the inferred network models 
for the various chemicals were different, but the inferred 
networks had a tendency to finally affect the same gene by 
their toxicity type. One of the neuron development-related 
genes, Tuj1, was arranged as the result of almost all of the 
Neurotoxic toxicity networks. Furthermore, Oct3/4 was 
important for both the Genotoxic and Carcinogenic networks. 
Since the Genotoxic chemicals are also carcinogenic, Oct3/4 
is considered to be carcinogenic in ES cells.  We detected 
some specific features for each toxicity type, and thus the 
inferred network among genes can be utilized for the 
estimation of a chemical’s effects, from experimentally 
obtained expression profiles. The ability to identify 
expression profiles and the corresponding biological 
functions is expected to provide further possibilities for SEM 
in the inference of regulatory mechanisms by chemical 
toxicity. 
TABLE IV.  
TRANSACTION TABLE OF CONSERVED REGULATIONS
a. The first column indicates the starting gene of one edge, and the second column indicates the end gene of the same edge.                      
b. The value of 1 means that the corresponding regulation appeared with the chemical, whereas the value of 0 means that the regulation did not exist in the chemical’s network.                     

113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported in part by the Grant in Aid for 
Scientific Research from the Ministry of the Health and 
Labor (to S. O.), Japan. The authors gratefully acknowledge 
the technical support of Miss Masami Yokoyama for her 
technical assistance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Aburatani and W. Fujibuchi, “Application of Structural 
Equation 
Modeling 
for 
Inferring 
Toxicity-Dependent  
Regulation in Human Embryonic Stem Cells,” GLOBAL 
HEALTH 2012 paper, pp.27-32, Oct. 2012. 
[2] A. Baccarelli and V. Bollati, “Epigenetics and environmental 
chemicals,” Curr. Opin. Pediatr. vol. 21(2), Apr. 2009, pp. 
243-251, doi:10.1097/MOP.0b013e32832925cc. 
[3] L. Hou, X. Zhang, D. Wang, and A. Baccarelli, 
“Environmental chemical exposures and human epigenetics,” 
Int. J. Epidemiol., vol. 41(1), Feb. 2012, pp. 79–105, 
doi:10.1093/ije/dyr154. 
[4] Y. Yuan, “Methylmercury: a potential environmental risk 
factor contributing to epileptogenesis,”  Neurotoxicology, vol. 
33(1), Jan. 2012,  pp. 119–126, doi:10.1016/j.neuro. 2011.12. 
014. 
[5] N. Tatsuta, et al., “Prenatal exposures to environmental 
chemicals and birth order as risk factors for child behavior 
problems,” Environ. Res., vol. 114, Apr. 2012, pp. 47–52, 
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2012.02.001. 
[6] D. A. Rappolee, Y. Xie, J. A. Slater, S. Zhou, and E. E. 
Puscheck, “Toxic stress prioritizes and imbalances stem cell 
differentiation: implications for new biomarkers and in vitro 
toxicology tests,” Syst. Biol. Reprod. Med., vol. 58(1), Feb. 
2012, pp. 33–40, doi:10.3109/19396368.2011.647381. 
[7] X. He, et al., “Effects of methylmercury exposure on 
neuronal differentiation of mouse and human embryonic stem 
cells,” Toxicol. Lett., vol. 212(1), Apr. 2012, pp. 1–10, doi: 
10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.011. 
[8] J. A. Harrill, B. L. Robinette, and W. R. Mundy, “Use of high 
content image analysis to detect chemical-induced changes in 
synaptogenesis in vitro,” Toxicol. In Vitro, vol. 25(1), Feb. 
2011, pp. 368–387, doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2010.10.011. 
[9] U. Gündel, D. Benndorf, M. von Bergen, R. Altenburger, and 
E. Küster, “Vitellogenin cleavage products as indicators for 
toxic stress in zebra fish embryos: A proteomic approach,” 
Proteomics, vol. 7(24), Dec. 2007, pp. 4541–4554, doi: 
10.1002/pmic.200700381 
[10] J. Thompson and J. Bannigan, “Cadmium: toxic effects on 
the reproductive system and the embryo,” Reprod. Toxicol., 
vol. 
25(3), 
Apr. 
2008, 
pp. 
304–315, 
 
doi: 
10.1016/j.reprotox.2008.02.001. 
[11] T. Akutsu, S. Miyano, and S. Kuhara, “Algorithms for 
identifying Boolean networks and related biological networks 
based on matrix multiplication and fingerprint function,” J. 
Comput. Biol., vol. 7, Aug. 2000, pp. 331-343, doi:10.1089/ 
106652700750050817. 
[12] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, “Using 
Bayesian networks to analyze expression data,” J. Comput. 
Biol., vol. 7, Jul. 2000, pp. 601–620, doi:10.1089/ 
106652700750050961. 
[13] S. Aburatani, S. Kuhara, H. Toh, and K. Horimoto, 
“Deduction of a gene regulatory relationship framework from 
gene expression data by the application of graphical Gaussian 
modeling,” Signal Processing, vol. 83, Apr. 2003, pp. 777–
788, doi:10.1016/S0165-1684(02)00476-0. 
[14] S. Aburatani, “Development of network inference among 
LexA/RecA-dependent manner genes in the SOS response,” J. 
of Nucleic Acids Investigation, vol. 1, Oct. 2010, pp. e13–
e17, doi:10.4081/jnai.2010.e13. 
[15] S. Aburatani, “Application of structure equation modeling for 
inferring a serial transcriptional regulation in yeast,” Gene. 
Regul. Syst. Bio., vol. 5, Nov. 2011, pp. 75–88, doi:10.4137/ 
GRSB.S7569. 
[16] S. Aburatani, “Network Inference of pal-1 Lineage-Specific 
Regulation in the C. elegans Embryo by Structural Equation 
Modeling,” Bioinformation, vol. 8(14), Aug. 2011, pp. 652–
657, doi:10.6026/97320630008652.  
[17] K. A. Bollen, Structural Equations with Latent Variables, 
New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1989. 
[18] O. D. Duncan, Introduction to Structural Equation Models, 
New York: Academic Press, 1975. 
[19] J. Pearl, Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, 2nd 
ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
[20] W. Fujibuchi, et al., “Prediction of Chemical Toxicity by 
Network-based SVM on ES-cell Validation System,” Proc. of 
the 2011 Joint Conference of CBI-Society and JSBi, pp.47, 
Nov. 2011. 
[21] J. Neter, M. Kutner, W. Wasserman, and C. Nachtsheim, 
Applied Linear Statistical Models, 5th ed., Chicago: Irwin, 
2006. 
[22] L. Li and G. E. Caldwell, “Coefﬁcient of cross correlation 
and 
the 
time 
domain 
correspondence,” 
Journal 
of 
Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 9, Dec. 1999, pp. 
385–389, doi:10.1016/S1050-6411(99)00012-7. 
[23] K. G. Joreskog and D. Sorbom, LISREL-VI: Analysis of 
Linear Structural Relationships By the Method of Maximum 
Likelihood, Redondo Beach: Doss-Haus Books, 1984. 
[24] P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines, Causation, 
Prediction, and Search, 2nd ed., Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
2001. 
[25] R. Agrawal, T. Imieliński, A. Swami, “Mining association 
rules between sets of items in large databases,”  Proc. of 
SIGMOD'93, May 1993, pp. 207–216, doi:10.1145/170035. 
170072. 
[26] D. C. Rice, R. Schoeny, K. Mahaffey, “Methods and 
rationale 
for 
derivation 
of 
a 
reference 
dose 
for 
methylmercury by the U.S. EPA,” Risk analysis: an official 
publication of the Society for Risk Analysis, vol. 23(1), Feb. 
2003, pp. 107–115, doi:10.1111/1539-6924.00294. 
[27] A. L. Choi, et al., “Methylmercury Exposure and Adverse 
Cardiovascular 
Effects 
in 
Faroese 
Whaling 
Men,” 
Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 117(3), 2009, pp. 
367–372, doi:10.1289/ehp.11608. 
[28] J. M. Rosenstein, N. Mani, A. Khaibullina, and J. M. Krum, 
“Neurotrophic effects of vascular endothelial growth factor 
on organotypic cortical explants and primary cortical 
neurons,” J. Neurosci., vol. 23(35), pp. 11036–11044, Dec. 
2003. 
[29] L. H. Looijenga, et al., “POU5F1 (OCT3/4) identifies cells 
with pluripotent potential in human germ cell tumors," 
Cancer Res., vol. 63(9), pp. 2244–2250, May 2003. 
[30] Y. Arai, et al., “Role of Fabp7, a Downstream Gene of Pax6, 
in the Maintenance of Neuroepithelial Cells during Early 
Embryonic Development of the Rat Cortex,” J. Neurosci., vol. 
25(42),  pp. 9752–9761,  Oct.  2005. 
[31] N. Ito, et al., “Pathological markers for non-genotoxic agent-
associated carcinogenesis,”  Toxicol. Lett., Vol. 64–65, Dec. 
1992, pp. 613-620, doi:10.1016/0378-4274(92)90239-G. 
[32] M. J. Iatropoulos, C. X. Wang, K. E. von Keutz, and G. M. 
Williams, 
“Assessment 
of 
chronic 
toxicity 
and 
carcinogenicity in an accelerated cancer bioassay in rats of 
Nifurtimox, an antitrypanosomiasis drug,” Exp. Toxicol. 
Pathol., vol. 57(5-6), Jul. 2006, pp. 397–404, doi:10.1016/ 
j.etp.2006.01.005. 

114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[33] K. Mitsui, “The homeoprotein Nanog is required for 
maintenance of pluripotency in mouse epiblast and ES cells,” 
Cell, vol. 113(5), May 2003, pp. 631–642, doi:10.1016/ 
S0092-8674(03)00393-3. 
[34] I. Chambers, et al., “Functional expression cloning of Nanog, 
a pluripotency sustaining factor in embryonic stem cells,” 
Cell, vol. 113(5), May 2003, pp. 643–655, doi:10.1016/ 
S0092 -8674(03)00392-1. 
[35] H. Hamada, C. Meno, D. Watanabe, and Y. Saijoh, 
“Establishment of vertebrate left-right asymmetry,” Nat. Rev. 
Genet., vol. 3(2), Feb. 2002,  pp. 103–113, doi:10.1038/nrg 
732. 
[36] C. Grandel and N. H. Patel, “Nodal signaling is involved in 
left-right asymmetry in snails,” Nature, vol. 457(7232), Feb. 
2009,  pp. 1007–1011, doi:10.1038/nature07603. 

