87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Video-recorded Observations of Surgical Telementoring 
Approaching collaboration among laparoscopic surgeons using videoconference  
 
Line Lundvoll Warth*, Hitendra RH Patel‡, Etai M Bogen°, Petter Fosse Gjessing°, Knut Magne Augestad*, 
Todd Ponsky•, and Rolv-Ole Lindsetmo°  
 
*Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
‡Department of Urology &  
Norwegian Centre for Pelvic Dysfunction 
University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway 
 
°Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
•Division of Pediatric Surgery  
Akron Children's Hospital  
One Perkins Square Akron, OH 44308, USA 
 
 
line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no, hitendra.patel@unn.no, etai.bogen@unn.no, petter.fosse.gjessing@unn.no, 
knut.magne.augestad@telemed.no, todd.ponsky@gmail.com, rolv-ole.lindsetmo@unn.no 
 
 
Abstract — In northern Norway, laparoscopic surgeons under 
training use videoconferencing to access expert surgeons. 
Videoconferencing as a tool for collaboration and knowledge 
sharing overcomes the distance between expert mentors and 
mentees and might improve surgical training. Understanding 
of videoconferencing in surgical practice is limited, and the 
educational and clinical benefits of telementoring should be 
explored. Over a three-year period, from 2015 to 2017, we will 
undertake an qualitative, explorative study using video-
recorded observations of interactions. Our objective is to 
examine collaboration in surgical training, seeking an in-depth 
understanding of the non-technical aspects or social processes 
of collaboration in surgical training. Here we discuss how 
video-recorded studies may contribute to the understanding of 
the interactions between mentors and mentees and how to use 
video for approaching this practice. We discuss the use of 
video-recorded observations and present a fixed and a flexible 
design for collecting video recordings. Experiences from 8 real-
time cases and one simulation of collaboration using 
videoconferencing in the operating theatre reflect the 
optimality of the flexible design, which allows following the 
dynamic of the surgical team. The results reveal a number of 
resources that are important both for interactions during 
surgical (tele)mentoring and for the camera position.  
Keywords - collaboration; surgical training; telementoring; 
videoconference; interaction; video-recorded observations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Approaching surgeons to explore the social processes of 
collaboration during training in the operation theater has 
several obstacles. When gaining access to the operation, the 
researcher needs to be prepared for the spoken and visual 
aspects and even the smell of the operating theater. Masks 
cover the surgeons’ faces, the sounds of the machines make 
it difficult to hear spoken words, and the sterile zone creates 
a boundary, limiting how closely the researcher can 
approach the surgical activity. When observing daily 
activity, it is easy to take actions for granted or focus too 
narrowly. Video recordings allow us to capture, play back, 
and re-frame the activity. This paper is an extended version 
of a paper for the conference eTelemed in which, we 
outlined the objectives of the Collaboration in Surgical 
Training (CoaST) study and the qualitative design. We 
conclude by presenting a design for collecting video 
recordings to explore surgical training [1]. Here, we extend 
previous work with experiences from real-time cases and a 
simulation that reflects the use of video for approaching 
surgical practice. 
In general, surgeons must have six years of education, 
training, and clinical practice. The clinical practice involves 
hands-on training, during which, the training surgeons 
(mentees) are instructed by expert surgeons (mentors). 

88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Access to mentors for the purpose of education presents a 
problem to many hospitals. Improving access to mentors in 
surgical training could be accomplished by implementing 
videoconferencing (VC) telementoring as a tool for 
knowledge sharing. VC has the ability to overcome the 
geographic distance between mentors and mentees and 
allow for organization and full concentration on training 
locally and at a distance. 
In surgical practice, procedures are often challenging. 
Unexpected issues arise and can lead to a point of no return, 
where decisions must be made in the moment [2]. The skills 
of the surgeon and the collaborating operating team are a 
prerequisite for a good surgical outcome [3][4]. Thus, 
collaboration and training in team performance are important 
in surgical practice. Optimal teamwork is essential whether 
mentors and mentees are located in the same room or they 
are located at a distance. VC for telementoring is well suited 
for collaborating and overcoming issues related to distance 
[5]. However, a recent review of surgical telementoring 
reported the limited understanding of VC in surgical 
practice. The review concluded that while focus has been 
given to piloting the technology, little attention has been paid 
to the educational and clinical benefits of telementoring [6]. 
Studies report that surgical mentoring through VC provides 
opportunities to alter surgical practice and offers patients the 
best expertise in surgical treatment without geographic 
limitations [7]. However, little in-depth understanding of the 
non-technical aspects or social processes of collaboration in 
surgical training exists.  
During the CoaST project, we will examine the current 
organization of surgical training and the use of VC as well as 
how knowledge is shared and constructed to complete 
surgical procedures; the organization of training procedure 
and practice, that is, the team that participates, the 
knowledge shared, the knowledge needed, and the use of 
resources to solve the problem. Together, this will provide 
insight into team performance and the way in which, non-
technical aspects or social processes of collaboration 
influence the way surgeons are mentored. To approach the 
collaboration during surgical telementoring, we employ 
video-recorded observations. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the framework for the field and the need for 
knowledge about collaboration and teamwork in surgical 
training. Section III describes the empirical context for 
exploring collaboration among 
laparoscopic surgeons 
interacting via VC. Section IV addresses the qualitative 
design, including both the design for this explorative study, 
and more specifically, the video recordings. Section V 
provides the results and presents an approach to surgical 
practice when making video recordings. In Section VI, we 
discuss video-recorded observations for interaction analysis 
and show how they can contribute to the understanding of 
interactions between mentor and mentees, and we discuss the 
role of the researcher. Section VII is the conclusion. 
 
II. 
FRAMEWORK 
Research regarding the educational aspects of VC in 
surgery stresses the educational benefits [8] and refers to 
telementoring as effective for the development of surgical 
skills [9], allowing young surgeons to be educated through 
distance learning by an expert surgeon [10]. Past research 
has suggested that VC provides access to the best 
educational resources and experience without the limitations 
of distance and time; thus, VC facilitates learning [8]. For 
example, community surgeons with no formal advanced 
laparoscopic training benefit from expert advice during 
procedures [11]. Students reported that the experience 
utilizing VC was better than conventional procedures 
because of the enhanced learning, better visibility, and verbal 
accuracy in describing the procedures due to the fact that the 
instructor was not standing in the way [12]. These studies 
illustrate the outcomes possible with VC technology, but no 
studies have explored the social processes of collaboration 
and the knowledge necessary to complete surgeries (i.e., 
guidance, problem solving, and interaction). Neither did 
these studies explore how learning might be an outcome of 
this collaboration. 
Knowledge of the effects of VC on surgical practice is 
limited [6]. A special focus is needed to gain a better 
understanding of the factors that influence surgical 
outcomes, that is, communication and team performance 
[13]. The CoaST project expands upon previous work by 
investigating knowledge sharing between surgeons and the 
way in which, their use of resources affects treatment 
outcomes. It aims to investigate the current organization of 
surgical training, the use of VC, collaboration in practice, 
and the problem-solving process. Here, video recordings are 
a well-suited tool. 
When observing daily activity, we often take actions for 
granted. Surgeons accomplish daily activities through 
interactions with others. These activities are the product of a 
variety of resources, i.e., spoken, bodily, and technological 
resources. Video recordings of an activity enable us to 
capture the activity. They also make it possible for those 
participating in the operating theater to share and discuss 
information with others outside the operating theater. In this 
paper, we discuss how video-recorded studies may provide a 
contribution to understanding the interaction between 
mentors and mentees and present designs for approaching the 
practice. 
III. 
EMPIRICAL CONTEXT 
This study investigates collaboration among laparoscopic 
surgeons in northern Norway interacting via VC. The 
empirical context includes collaboration between the mentors 
and mentees during surgical training, where VC is utilized to 
overcome the distance between the mentor and mentees.  
Laparoscopic surgery uses several small abdominal 
incisions. At each abdominal incision (i.e., port), an 
instrument is inserted. Telementoring happens by connecting 
the laparoscopic surgery, the surgeon (mentee), the expert 
(mentor), and the technological artifacts, that is, robots, 
monitors, and a mobile touch screen device. The 

89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
laparoscopic procedure, which is visual, is transmitted to a 
monitor in the operating theater. The expert can view the 
procedure on the monitor or at a touch screen device in the 
operating theater or at a distance. All procedures are 
transmitted to the monitor. In some cases, mobile touch 
screen devices may be used. Freehand markups are drawn 
over the video (telestration) so that the visuals can 
supplement the verbal instructions. 
Telementoring over distance is possible using VC [14]. 
VC is defined as the sharing of sound and pictures through 
two- or multi-channel communication. By connecting the 
monitor or the mobile touch device to an external computer 
(PC) and using microphones locally to transmit audio to an 
external computer, the local mentee in the operating theater 
and the remote mentor are able to collaborate. The surgical 
operation is viewable on the monitor, which is transferred to 
the expert mentor’s device. The mentor can be mobile, in the 
operating theater, or at distance while providing full attention 
and offering required training and instruction to the mentee. 
The visual representation on the monitor, the instructions 
being given, and the mentor’s telestration drawings on the 
device supplement the collaborative work during surgical 
training. 
The study follows the traditional education program to 
explore this practice. The observations will continue until 
there is a thematic saturation or until the use of VC for 
mentoring is phased out. The participants will be recruited 
according to their use of VC for mentoring. When VC is 
used, it will include the interactions that occur during the 
training until methodological saturation is achieved. The 
periods and the length of observation will be determined 
based on the total activity during the education program. A 
lower frequency of training using VC will require longer 
periods of data collection. Periods are defined in regard to 
the education program and are referred to as the periods of 
training. 
For this paper, the empirical context comprises video 
observations of the first telementoring procedure held within 
the CoaST project period. At this stage, we needed to reveal 
challenges of using video for social research to inform 
further research. Approaching the practice, experiences from 
8 real-time cases, and one simulation of collaboration using 
VC in the operating theatre illustrate how the design needs to 
be organized. 
 
IV. 
VIDEO OBSERVATIONS OF SURGICAL PRACTICE 
Exploring collaborative processes requires empirical data 
and analysis of the social processes and interactions of those 
who participate. These data and analyses make it possible to 
explore knowledge sharing among surgeons, mentors, and 
mentees who collaborate and use VC in surgical training 
and practice. However, the field lacks an in-depth 
understanding of the social processes of interaction under 
training. Thus, an expansion of traditional research methods 
(i.e., randomized control trials) in this field will enrich the 
knowledge base. Ethnomethodology analytics and talk-in-
interaction, 
supported 
through 
qualitative 
video 
observations, offer great potential. 
The way in which, telementoring is accomplished is a 
part of the social organization of surgical work—and a part 
of everyday clinical practice. Thus, the research on the 
collaboration in the operation theater with real patients is a 
workplace study. Workplace studies examine the detailed 
co-ordination of verbal, visual, and material conduct 
through which, technology is used [15] and seek to 
understand how such tools affect organizational practice. 
Video-based studies of interactions amongst surgeons are 
in demand [13]. Heath, Luff, and Svensson [16] have been 
studying surgical teams and how video provides access to 
complex forms of interaction. Though, they have completed 
detailed workplace studies regarding the use of tools, 
telementoring has not been a part of their studies. As part of 
a work practice, image-guided surgery produces video 
recordings of procedures, which are transmitted to a lecture 
room to improve communication [17], but not for 
researching 
the 
communication 
itself. 
Focusing 
on 
telementoring, miscommunication between mentors and 
mentees has been videotaped as a trial [18], disconnected 
from real-time work practice. 
Despite a growing amount of video-based studies, there 
are few guidelines on how to undertake video-based 
research [15]. Though we do not aim to provide a guideline, 
we will reflect on video recordings and provide a 
contribution to designs for approaching practice. The CoaST 
project will use qualitative methods. It is designed as an 
explorative study of the practices of interaction. The 
knowledge shared and constructed will be explored as 
surgeons with different types and levels of experience and 
expertise interact and perform surgeries over periods of 
time. In this paper, we prepared and explored the design 
through discussions with technicians and a surgeon, who 
also participated in the 8 real-time cases. Observations will 
constitute the main source of data. The second source of 
data will be qualitative interviews. 
 
A. Observations 
The observations are built on interaction analyses—the 
empirical investigation of talk and the use of resources [19]. 
The observations will be made as surgeons collaborate in 
surgical training and practice, guiding and discussing 
treatment using tools such as VC. Observations are well 
suited to exploring team interactions because reconstructing 
the medical language and using artifacts is not possible. To 
intercept the social aspects in the collaborative work 
between the mentors and mentees, the interaction will be 
video-recorded using three sources: (1) output from a 
laparoscopic camera/monitor, (2) connecting the mobile 
touch screen device to a recording unit, and (3) a camera 
recording an overview of the operating room.  
The use of video recordings during the observation 
provides access to complex forms of interaction and to 

90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
collaboration in the visual and spoken data [20][16][22]. By 
following the language and the use of resources (i.e., talk, 
gestures, mobile touch screen, and surgical equipment such 
as knives, scissors and needles), it is possible to see how the 
mentor and mentees organize the instruction and practice, 
how problems and routine practices occur, and how the 
surgery (the medical problem) is solved. 
 
B. Interviews 
To complement the observations, the participating 
surgeons will be interviewed. The purpose of the interviews 
is to enrich the context by giving the participants the 
opportunity to express themselves in regard to the surgical 
training and the use of VC in training, instruction, and 
collaboration. It is also essential to discuss themes based on 
the observations. The interviews will be semi-structured 
[22][23]. They will involve dialogue resulting from a 
mixture of structured questions (from an interview guide) 
and the themes that emerge in the dialogue. Interviews will 
provide insight into mentor and mentee experiences. The 
interviews will be used to validate the interaction analysis.  
 
C. Ethical Considerations 
During surgery, the identification/visibility of the patient 
in the video recordings is not possible. The patient is 
covered by sheets, and only the part of the body undergoing 
the operation will be visible. The videotapes will be 
collected and handled according to the guidelines 
established by the Regional Committee for Medical and 
Health Research Ethics (REK). The interviews will be 
recorded, transcribed, and handled according to the REK’s 
code of ethics. 
 
V. 
RESULTS: CAPTURING SURGICAL PRACTICE 
Here, we present results from the preparation and the first 
procedure within the CoaST project period. To prepare for 
the main collection of audio and visual data, we began with 
a simulation of a surgery in the operation theater. When the 
first mentoring case appeared, we used experiences from the 
simulation to prepare for the eight planned real-time 
mentoring cases. 
 
A. Simulation of a fixed design 
In order to decide where to place the camera and 
microphone for the best picture and sound, and to capture 
the most relevant activities, we simulated a fixed design. We 
have a special interest in the naturally occurring talk and 
tools that surgeons use when collaborating. Approaching the 
telementoring team includes giving attention to the mentor, 
mentees, and the tools they use (i.e., the monitors and the 
mobile touch device). The monitor shows the picture inside 
the abdomen, which is the same picture the surgeon sees. 
The mobile touch device displays the same picture as the 
monitor and can be drawn on. Both the monitor and the 
mobile touch device can record within the unit in addition to 
recording the technical aspects of the surgical performance. 
These recording units represent the traditional way of 
exploring surgical performance. To capture the social 
processes of collaboration, an external camera needed to be 
located in the room. When we simulated the design, we 
planned according to the team, the resources they use, and 
our single camera.  
Figure 1 illustrates the fixed design of how the surgical 
team, monitors, mobile touch device, and camera were 
placed during the simulation. The arrows in Figure 1 show 
the three sources recording the surgical practice. The circles 
in Figure 1 point out the resources that will be focused on 
for gaining an in-depth understanding of the collaborative 
work. The green circle illustrates how the social processes 
of collaboration are an overall understanding of the whole 
process of surgical practice: the mentor(s), mentee(s), and 
their interactions with each other, the monitor, and the 
mobile touch device as they perform surgery. When 
connecting via VC, the PC is also included in this 
interaction. The surgical team can see the expert mentor in 
real time on the computer. Connecting with VC, the expert 
sees only what happens on the mobile touch device. Figure 
1 illustrates the design, after the simulation, of the setup and 
the team. The external camera was placed in a position that 
could capture an overview of the collaboration. The external 
microphone was placed on top of the camera so as not to 
disturb the surgeons (e.g., by cables twining about their 
legs). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Simulation of the organization of the surgical team, their 
resources, and the recording units. 
By focusing on what happens in the interaction between 
all elements during surgical training (the green circle), we 

91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
aimed to expand the traditional method focusing on 
technical aspects and capture the social processes of 
collaboration between mentors and mentees in surgical 
training. 
 
B. Real-time flexible design 
We planned to use the fixed design when starting to 
video-record. However, upon entering the operating theater 
we realized that the fixed design was not suitable in this 
workplace setting. Contrary to what we had assumed, the 
mentee preferred to stand at the opposite side of the patient, 
and the tools were adjusted to fit this team. The team and 
the tools they use are organized differently between 
procedures and mentors/mentees. Without foreknowledge of 
the team, the researcher needs to be flexible in the video 
recordings. We had to adjust the planned setup as we 
entered the operating theater. 
In the first three cases, the expert surgeon mentored on-
site. The mentor moved around in the operating theater 
(illustrated by a faded-out figure), depending on how 
actively he was mentoring. During difficult parts, the 
mentor stepped forward, and during more low-risk parts he 
stepped backward. The mentor has the opportunity to use 
the mobile touch device, both when he is located in the 
operating theater and when he is at a distance. His 
opportunity to use the mobile touch device is illustrated with 
a blue arrow in Figure 2. His activity is included in the 
green circle, illustrating that he is a part of the social 
processes of collaboration. 
Figure 2 illustrates the activity among the surgical team 
when the mentor moved around the operation theater. It 
includes the monitor, which represents the picture of the 
patient and the surgery inside the abdomen. As the mentor 
was on-site, the VC was not connected. The PC did not have 
a function other than to record the same picture as on the 
monitor.  
We started video-recording in camera position B. As the 
PC was not included as a working tool, we moved to camera 
position C to include the view of the mentor and the monitor 
showing the abdomen. Since the monitor located on the foot 
side of the patient shows the picture inside the abdomen, the 
surgeons orient their faces towards this monitor during the 
procedure. In position C, we were not able to see the 
mentees’ faces or which, direction they were oriented to at 
each point during the procedure. Standing behind them also 
made it difficult to intercept their talk. Since the naturally 
occurring talk during the procedure is important for our 
study, we could not choose this position. As the talk was 
most often directed between the mentees and mentors on 
each side of the patient’s bed and towards the monitor, we 
placed the external microphone on top of the monitor. This 
was the best position for capturing the voices.  
Moving to the planned position A (Figures 1 and 2), we 
got a nice overview of the work with the patient: the 
mentees hands and the tools they used. The video recordings 
captured the patient’s body and a close-up impression of the 
movement of the tools. However, some equipment on the 
monitor to the right made distracting sounds, making it 
difficult to hear the talk. The mentees had their faces 
oriented towards the monitor in front of them, which made 
both the physical and verbal communication between them 
hard to intercept. Camera position D did not fit into the 
physical organization of the team, standing in the middle of 
the mentor working space where the rest of the team (i.e., 
nurses) worked. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Real-time flexible design of the organization of the on-site 
surgical team, their resources, and the recording units. 
As the mentees became more experienced with the 
procedure, the mentor started to use VC, providing the 
opportunity to instruct at distance. To allow the mentor who 
was not on-site to be seen, another monitor was included. 
The PC was used to connect the mentor, the mobile touch 
device, and his PC remotely. In this way, the mentees were 
mentored using VC, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Real-time flexible design of the organization of the surgical 
team, their resources, and the telementoring. 

92
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
When using VC, the PC showed the same picture that 
the surgical team saw on the monitor. This included the 
picture of the abdomen (which is the same picture the 
mentor sees and the important working tool when 
performing laparoscopic surgery), the picture of the mentor 
at a distance, and the use of the mobile touch device. The 
mobile touch device supplements verbal explanations with 
the opportunity to draw while explaining. Using the view of 
the PC as a way to gather all resources in one picture was an 
excellent way to video-record all activity. In camera 
position B, we captured both the communication tools that 
were important for the local team and the picture on which, 
the remote mentor was dependent. At the same time, we 
were able to record the local team, with their faces oriented 
towards the remote mentor on the monitor. The microphone, 
connected to the camera, was also nearby, so we did not 
have worries about long cables crossing the floor. 
 
VI. 
VIDEO-RECORDED OBSERVATIONS FOR INTERACTION 
ANALYSIS 
Experiences from eight real-time cases and one 
simulation of collaboration in the operating theater reflect 
video-recorded observations of surgical telementoring. The 
results explore both a fixed and a flexible design for video-
observations when capturing collaboration between mentors 
and mentees. 
As a work procedure, the technical performance of the 
surgery in the operating theater is analyzed by recordings 
from the monitor unit. This unit records a stationary picture 
of what happens inside the abdomen. These recordings are 
used to evaluate the mentees’ technical skills after surgery. 
Hence, surgeons are used to produce video recordings of 
their actions but not of their interactions. 
Exploring the interactions between mentors and mentees 
in the time leading to the surgery provides a broader picture. 
Using video recordings to analyze the interaction between 
the mentor and mentees is more complex. When 
professionals accomplish everyday work activities through 
interactions with others, they utilize a variety of resources 
(spoken, bodily, and material) as objects and tools. The 
individuals interact with each other, and are influenced by 
actions in the operating theater. During the simulation and 
eight mentored sessions, a number of resources were 
identified that are important both for the interaction during 
surgical (tele)mentoring and for determining the camera 
position. 
Collecting video-recorded observations for approaching 
the practice presents several issues and queries. Establishing 
a fixed frame prepared us for entering the setting, even 
though we could not carry out the recordings in this way. 
The team is not stationary; that is, the mentee who has the 
central role decides whether to stand on the left or right side 
of the patient, and the assistant mentee moves accordingly. 
The tools the team uses are organized in the room according 
to the position of the team and the procedure to be 
accomplished. Hence, the position for telementoring is 
influenced on-site. For new procedures, on-site mentoring is 
a first part of the instruction process. When the mentee has 
obtained a certain skill level, VC can be used for mentoring. 
Telementoring adds tools to the activity and affects the 
situation—whether used in the operating theater or at a 
distance. 
It is a methodological debate whether to follow the 
action with a camera or to maintain one perspective. Here, 
we have tried several camera positions to determine one 
viewpoint where we are able to follow the activity. The ‘best 
design’ is principally dependent on the focus of the study. 
The results of this study show that the best viewpoint for 
video-recorded 
observations 
of 
telementoring 
allows 
observation of the team as it orients itself towards the 
monitor showing the picture of the patient (inside the 
abdomen) and the mentor with the mobile touch device. At 
the same time, it is important to see the faces of the 
surgeons and meet the direction of their voices (as talk is a 
part of the focus in the study). In camera position B, it was 
possible to use the picture on the PC (showing the same 
picture as the monitor) while recording the team from a 
satisfactory angle. 
According to the CoaST study, capturing the activity 
from a ‘flexible position B’ is not just a practical 
methodological issue for video recording; it is also 
characterized by the work practice. The ‘flexible position B’ 
is oriented towards the knowledge and tools that are 
important for the mentor and mentees to complete the 
laparoscopic procedure. 
The flexible design requires the researchers to have dual 
roles as cameramen and observers. As qualitative 
researchers, we often observe from a corner in the room, 
taking field notes. As the activity happens centered towards 
‘the patient in the middle’, we are standing half way behind 
what is happening. The sound is disrupted by noisy 
instruments, and the mentor and mentees are covered by 
gauze masks, making it harder to hear them talking. Around 
them, there is a sterile zone, which makes it impossible to be 
close. Thus, we want to maximize the quality of the 
recordings and capture the activity where it happens. At the 
same time, we must not disrupt the activity.  
In addition to the movement of the team and the tools 
they use, the shape of the operating theater affects the 
researchers’ role. In large operating theaters, a tripod can be 
used, and when the camera is placed in a satisfactory 
position on a tripod, the researcher can leave or change 
position within the operating theater. In small operating 
theaters, however, the camera must be handheld to get a 
satisfactory angle of the team. Handheld cameras make it 
possible to move closer to a corner than the tripod allows. In 
such a position, the researcher has to concentrate on being a 
cameraman and focus on the interaction when watching the 
recordings afterwards. 
In this study, we present designs for video recordings of 
interactions with telementoring. Revealing the complexity 

93
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of making these recordings also explores the interactions of 
the mentor and the mentees. The spoken, bodily, and 
material objects and tools that are part of the surgical 
practice make the CoaST study intriguing. Here, the results 
show that performing a procedure requires more than 
successful technical performance. Social and organizational 
factors regarding clinical practice affect the outcome. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper describes a work in progress, a project 
studying collaboration among laparoscopic surgeons who are 
instructed during education (CoaST). Currently, there is a 
limited understanding of VC in surgical practice and a lack 
of in-depth understanding of the non-technical aspects and 
social processes involved. The project strives to capture the 
interactions that occur within a surgical team and their use of 
resources when mentoring surgeons. Knowledge of the social 
processes could be used to improve surgical education and 
enhance surgical team performance in everyday practice. 
This is not a traditionally study of VC setup in surgery, 
drawing 
on 
previous 
successes 
and 
failures 
with 
implementing VC. Here we explore the method of video- 
recorded observations studying interaction in surgical teams, 
which are in demand [13]. Capturing several sources of 
action is challenging. Interactions within the team happen 
between members, around the patient, on the monitors that 
depict the patient’s body, and on the mobile touch device. 
We tried to meet this challenge by simulating a fixed design 
for video recordings. Afterwards, we tested the fixed design 
during eight real-time cases. We tried several camera 
positions, one of which was suitable for this specific 
laparoscopic procedure. At this point in the study, the design 
for video recordings needs to be flexible with an active 
researcher. 
As researchers, we need to define our own role. Being in 
the operating theater to perform video observations has an 
impact on the activity, the setting, and the relationships of 
the participants. We made a decision to use a single camera 
source. This was necessary to minimize the workload as 
multiple cameras might lead to difficulties in analyzing the 
material [24]. The number of cameras, the strategy for 
recording sounds, and the way the action is followed (i.e., 
fixed or dynamic frame) impact the data that is collected and 
the analysis that is possible. 
The experience gained from these cases has brought us 
one step closer to proposing a less resource-demanding 
design. When using VC, the monitor could have a built-in 
video recorder. If a camera and microphone are placed on 
top of the monitor and the team is video-recorded while 
directed towards the monitor, it is also possible to capture 
what they are focusing on. If this recorded picture also 
appears on the monitor, we are able to collect all the sources 
in the same video-recorded picture. Then, the challenge is to 
install this system in all potential operating theaters and give 
someone in the operating theater the responsibility to inform 
the team about the recordings and start and stop the 
recording. This might lead to methodological biases, 
however, which are not discussed in this work. 
Collecting video-recorded observations for approaching 
surgical practice presents several issues and queries. There 
are challenges in several phases of this method, from 
planning, collecting, and analyzing the data. Here, we have 
focused on some challenges with data collection. This paper 
is 
not a 
guideline 
for 
approaching 
video-recorded 
observations of surgical telementoring. It is a complex 
interaction, and the importance of capturing the procedure as 
an outcome of collective actions is often taken for granted. 
The present research contributes to the field of interaction 
studies. The findings will give rich insight into the 
phenomena itself, which is communication and team 
performance in surgical education using videoconference. 
The detailed analysis of the interaction gives insight in 
specific aspects of how they communicate. Our analytic 
concepts will be used to create systematic analysis of 
communication and our analysis becomes a contribution to 
the field of knowledge that investigates surgical team 
performance. In ongoing research, these sources together 
with a review and a theory create the basis for our analytic 
claims, as we in the future will call analytic generalization. 
Analytic generalizations aims to develop concepts that make 
qualitative studies as strong as possible. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to the Northern Regional Health Authority for 
funding this research project (HST-1181-14) and to all the 
informants participating in the study.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. L. Warth, E. M. Bogen, R.-O. Lindsetmo, H.R.H. 
Patel, and K. M. Augestad, “Collaboration in Surgical 
Training: 
A 
Qualitative 
Study 
of 
Mentoring 
Laparoscopic Surgeons by Using Videoconference in 
Northern Norway,” in Proc. The Seventh International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine (eTELEMED 2015), pp. 6-9, Feb. 2015, ISSN: 
2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-384-1. 
[2] 
N. Jacklin, A. Sevdalis, C. Darzi, and C. Vincent, 
“Mapping surgical practice decision making: An 
interview study to evaluate decisions in surgical care”. 
American journal of surgery, 195(5): 2008, pp. 689-696. 
[3] 
B. S. Nedrebo et al., “Survival effect of implementing 
national treatment strategies for curatively resected 
colonic and rectal cancer”. The British journal of 
surgery, 2011. 98(5): pp. 716-723. 
[4] 
N. J. Birkmeyer et al., “Safety culture and complications 
after bariatric surgery”. Annals of surgery, 2013. 257(2): 
pp. 260-265. 
[5] 
R. Latifi, K. Peck, R. Satava, and M.R. Anvari, 
“Telepresence and telementoring in surgery”. Studies in 
health technology and informatics, 2004. 104: pp. 200-
206. 
[6] 
K. M. Augestad et al., “Surgical telementoring in 
knowledge 
translation- 
Clinical 
outcomes 
and 

94
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
educational benefits: A comprehensive review”. Surgical 
innovation, 2013. 20(3): pp. 273-281. 
[7] 
K. M. Augestad and R. O. Lindsetmo, “Overcoming 
distance: 
video-conferencing 
as 
a 
clinical 
and 
educational tool among surgeons”. World Journal of 
Surgery, 2009. 33(7): pp. 1356-1365. 
[8] 
P. Lamba, “Teleconferencing in medical education: a 
useful tool”. The Australasian medical journal, 2011. 
4(8): pp. 442-447. 
[9] 
L. Panait et al., “Telementoring versus on-site mentoring 
in virtual reality-based surgical training”. Surgical 
endoscopy, 2006. 20(1): pp. 113-118. 
[10] 
G. Midiri, V. Papaspyropoulos, and A. Brescia, “Remote 
teaching 
in 
surgery: 
Problem-based 
learning, 
telementoring, and evaluation tests”. Annali italiani di 
chirurgia, 2001. 72(6): pp. 751-755. 
[11] 
H. Sebajang et al., “Telementoring: an important 
enabling tool for the community surgeon”. Surgical 
innovation, 2005. 12(4): pp. 327-331. 
[12] 
C. Kaufmann, P, Rhee, and D. Burris, “Telepresence 
surgery system enhances medical student surgery 
training”. Studies in health technology and informatics, 
1999. 62: pp. 174-178. 
[13] 
C. Vincent, K. Moorthy, S. Sarker, A, Chang, and W. A. 
Darzi, “Systems approaches to surgical quality and 
safety. From concept to measurement”. Annals of 
surgery, 2004. 239(4): pp. 475-482. 
[14] 
T. A. Ponsky, M. Schwachter, J. Parry, S. Rothenberg, 
and K. M. Augestad, “Telementoring: The Surgical Tool 
of the Future”. Eur J Pediatr Surg, 2014; 24; 4, pp. 287-
294. 
[15] 
C. Heath, J. Hindmarch, and P. Luff, Video in 
Qualitative Reseach. Analysing social interaction in 
everyday life. 2010, London; sage Publication. 
[16] 
C. Heath, P. Luff, and M.S. Svensson, “Video and 
qualitative research: analysing medical practice and 
interaction”. Medical Education, 2007. 41: pp. 109-116. 
[17] 
M. Aanestad, J. S. Røtnes, B. Edwin, and T. Buanes, 
“From operating theatre to operating studio- visualizing 
surgery in the age of telemedicine”. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare 2002; 8: pp. 56-60. 
[18] 
A. Budrionis, P. Hasvold, G. Hartvigsen, and J. G. 
Bellika, “Assessing the impact of telestration on surgical 
telementoring: A randomized controlled trial”. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare; ISSN 1357-633X. Doi: 
10.1177/1357633X15585071. Epub ahead of print. 
[19] 
B. Jordan and K. Henderson, Interaction analysis: 
Foundation and practice. The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, 1995. 4 (1): pp. 39-103. 
[20] 
D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data. Methods for 
Analysing Talk, Text and Interaction, 2001, London: 
Sage Publications. 
[21] 
B. Sutter, Instruction at heart. Activity- Theoretical 
studies of learning and development in coronary clinical 
work, in Department of Human Work Science and Media 
Technology, 2001, Blekinge Institute of Technology: 
Karlskrona, Sweden. pp. 276. 
[22] 
S. Kvale, Det kvalitative forskningsintervju [The 
qualitative research interview] 1997, Oslo: Ad Notam 
Gyldendal. 
[23] 
K. Malterud, Kvalitative metoder i medisinsk forskning. 
En innføring. [Qualitative methods in medical research. 
An introduction]. 1996, Aurskog: Tano Aschehoug. 
[24] 
T. Koschmann, C. LeBaron, C. Goodwin, A. Zemel, and 
G. Dunnington, “Formulating the Triangle of Doom”. 
Gesture 2007, 7; 1. pp. 97-118. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

