75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Linked Care – A digital Revolution in Mobile Care and Support 
Development and Implementation of a Digital Documentation System  
for Interdisciplinary Information Transfer 
 
Kathrin Mühlhauser 
Department Health Sciences 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: kathrin.muehlhauser@pmu.ac.at 
Theresa Galanos 
Competence Center for Applied Nursing Research 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: theresa.galanos@fh-campuswien.ac.at 
Doris Zeidler 
Competence Center for Applied Nursing Research 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: doris.zeidler@fh-campuswien.ac.at   
Elisabeth Haslinger-Baumann 
Competence Center for Applied Nursing Research 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: elisabeth.haslinger-baumann@fh-campuswien.ac.at 
Franz Werner 
Department Health Sciences 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: franz.werner@fh-campuswien.ac.at 
Katharina Nopp 
Department Health Sciences 
FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: ka.nopp@protonmail.com 
 
 
Abstract - Mobile care professionals are facing a great 
workload and a lack of information exchange with other health 
professionals. Documentation work is often done off-time due 
to minimal time resources. Information and communication 
technology support can bring improvements for home care and 
all stakeholders, but its full potential is not exhausted. This 
project, namely Linked Care, develops information technology 
systems that address practice-oriented challenges, increase 
digital data availability, and reduce the work-related burdens 
of health professionals as well as clients and their support 
systems. Experiences with existing IT-systems, including the 
current existing Austrian Electronic Health Record System, 
serve as a starting point to enable a continuous information 
supply in mobile care within the project. The solution will 
provide interdisciplinary support of relevant participants in 
the care process, offering a new type of responsive user 
interface. Linked Care investigates the end-users’ needs and 
specifies the processes in workshops with local representatives 
and regional administrators. Therefore, the solution allows for 
the exchange and evaluation of care data via standardized 
interfaces throughout Austria while taking the socio-economic, 
regional, and national environments into account. The project 
will create a software portal that can be linked to existing 
systems. 
The 
project 
consortium 
parties 
ensure 
the 
development of the solution as a business model. The generated 
Care Summary creates new possibilities for data exchange 
within the health care sector. In conclusion, Linked Care is the 
digital solution, which needs to be implemented in mobile care 
and support as it enables a precise and rapid communication 
transfer.  
       Keywords - digital documentation; ICT; interdisciplinary 
communication; mobile health and care; digital healthcare. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nurses experience many burdens and challenges in their 
everyday work [1]. Documentation is often described as 
particularly stressful [2]. It is estimated that 30% of nurses’ 
workload (working hours) is used for documentation. This 
time cannot be spent with clients, which in turn can lead to 
nurses finishing documentation work in their free time to 
have more available hours for direct client-based care [3]. 
The dramatically increasing number of people in need of 
care leads to an increase not only in the objectively 
measurable but also in the subjectively experienced care 
effort. As the complexity within the formal and informal care 
support network is increasing, the need for adequate client-
related coordination between the involved parties is also 
growing. Continuous and detailed client documentation is 
the starting point of client related coordination and 
communication. However, the organization of client 
documentation in the care system is not only challenging in 
terms of effort, but it also shows deficiencies and 
complications regarding the information flow and exchange 
between 
the 
different 
formal 
and 
informal 
care 
giving/providing 
parties. 
Adequate 
documentation 
is 
indispensable for high-quality nursing and medical care, as 
well as interdisciplinary cooperation. Due to the dual 
financing system of medical care, nursing care and 

76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
homecare, the resulting responsibilities may be different in 
nature and “not necessarily conducive to the efficiency of the 
systems" [4]. Moreover, the lack of interdisciplinary 
exchange is closely related to financial and time constraints: 
only 60% of all mobile care service providers cooperate with 
professional groups outside their services [4]. On the one 
hand, the heterogeneity of the documentation and 
communication systems offered by different providers 
complicates the communication connection/link within the 
different mobile services/software solutions. On the other 
hand, the non-existence of an obligatory uniform solution 
forms a massive barrier to continuous information transfer. 
Sophisticated services, which are necessary to support recent 
technological innovations, have not been provided while 
creating data gaps in all areas of social welfare and health 
care. This causes discontinuance and translation problems 
within software solutions.   
So far, the record validity was and is questionable due to 
existing language barriers between the carer’s first language 
and the available application languages. Comprehensive 
documentation is particularly important. For example, 
specific (target) groups were identified, that are not familiar 
with professional care within their households (e.g., ‘people 
with 
migration 
backgrounds’, 
‘people 
with 
mental 
illnesses’). The reason is the lack of affordability in the 
presence of social disadvantage or the lack of information of 
particularly vulnerable groups, for whom care is mainly 
provided informally or within the family. This example 
points out the need for comprehensive documentation and 
communication that combines several information clusters. 
Therefore, it contributes to a subjectively facilitated situation 
and an objectively increased efficiency [4]. Beyond that, it 
also advocates the improvement of communication and 
interface management based on detailed surveys.  
The aim of this project is to enable technology-based 
cooperation between clients as well as their support system 
and professional caregivers, nursing professionals, doctors, 
therapists, and pharmacies while using an efficient, secure 
and low-threshold digital tool, offering optimal information 
technology (IT) support. 
This paper will provide insight into the Linked Care-
project; starting with the ‘State of the Art’ in Section 2, 
followed by Section 3, ‘Method’, and finally describing the 
‘Results’ as well as the ‘Conclusion and Further Works’ in 
Section 4 and 5. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART  
Care network services, such as Linked Care wants to 
provide, currently exist worldwide, but they neither include 
all necessary participants and stakeholders (e.g., ‘medical 
care providers’, ‘pharmacies’, ‘care organizations’) nor do 
they function end-to-end on a digital level. Once integrated 
into one organization, other necessary services such as 
visiting services, home services and nursing care have to be 
organized by the employees [5]. That is their greatest 
detriment, which the Linked Care-solution wants to 
eradicate. 
Most health care professionals in Austria currently work 
with the digital documentation system Mobile Case and Care 
(Mocca) [6] and programs such as Gesellschaft für Software, 
Entwicklung und Datentechnick mbH (GSD Software®) [7] 
and Das Pflegeplanungs- und Dokumentationssystem mit 
ENP® (RECOM®-GriPS) [8], which are linked to one 
another via interfaces. Among the health care organizations 
involved in the Linked Care-project, documentation is still 
being practiced in analogue form while, in some cases, 
programs such as Microsoft Excel and Word are included. 
The use of dual documentation systems (simultaneous use of 
two systems by one organization) is currently also 
ubiquitous. This often results in double documentation, 
which leads to increased workload. 
In the European Union (EU) and the United States of 
America (USA), there have been some digital developments 
in this field. Siemens eHealth Solutions [9] has created an 
electronic health network that brings together clients, care 
teams and medical doctors to exchange relevant data. This 
system was designed for the clinical setting and not for the 
homecare sector. Furthermore, it does not include clients 
involved relatives/support system or therapists. In the USA, 
the My HealtheVet portal [10] is available for Veterans by 
Veterans 
Health 
Administration 
(VHA) 
to 
renew 
prescriptions, organize doctor's appointments, contact health 
care teams, and retrieve information.  
Online Care is a US-platform for clients and healthcare 
providers that is oriented towards GPS (or postcode) entries 
and enables corresponding connections. In Europe, cross-
border healthcare data flow is already established, especially 
in the "eHealth Digital Service Infrastructure" [11]. Patient 
Summaries, ePrescriptions and eDispensation, are currently 
being rolled out. The Austrian Electronic Health Record 
System 
(ELGA, 
an 
acronym 
of 
Elektronische 
Gesundheitsakte) uses the same IT and technology standards, 
to create a feasible connection. In addition to numerous other 
initiatives, the EU is also striving for an "EU Health Data 
Space" to make available data more accessible for practical 
use within the healthcare system.  
In consideration of all these innovative denouements the 
creative minds behind the project will pick out the best and 
combine them into the solution. At the end of development 
Linked Care will be a software portal that can be linked to 
existing systems (e.g., ‘ELGA’) with “one click”. 
III. 
METHOD 
The research project started in April 2021 and will last 
until 2025. The project includes five end-user partners 
(‘Akademie 
für 
Altersforschung 
am 
Haus 
der 
Barmherzigkeit‘, ‚Johanniter Österreich Ausbildung und 
Forschung gem. GmbH‘, ‚Wiener Rotes Kreuz- Rettungs-, 
Krankentransport-, 
Pflege- 
und 
Betreuungsgesellschaft 
m.b.H.‘, ‚Volkshilfe Gesundheits- und Soziale Dienste 
GmbH‘, and ‚Volkshilfe Wien gemeinnützige Betriebs-
GmbH‘), five technology partners (‚CareCenter Software 
GmbH‘, 
‚Loidl-Consulting 
& 
IT 
Services 
GmbH‘, 
‚Compugroup Medical CGM‘, ‚Österreichische Apotheker-
Verlagsgesellschaft 
m.b.H‘, 
and 
‚Steszgal 
Informationstechnologie GmbH‘)‚ as well as three scientific 
partners (‚Fachhochschule Technikum Wien‘, ‚Universität 
Wien‘, and ‚ Fachhochschule Campus Wien - Verein zur 

77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Förderung 
des 
Fachhochschul-, 
Entwicklungs- 
und 
Forschungszentrums im Süden Wiens‘, whereby one partner 
is accountable for the information privacy protection 
mechanisms.  
All required technical functionalities of the product will 
be identified and described by the team of developers and the 
potential end-users, while implementing the user-centered 
design approach [12], which is already currently running. To 
achieve these goals, Linked Care will allow for the exchange 
and evaluation of care data (e.g., ‘nursing’, ‘care’, and 
‘therapy’) via standardized interfaces, such as Integrating the 
Healthcare Enterprise (IHE), Health Level 7 (HL7), and Fast 
Healthcare 
Interoperability 
Resources  
(FHIR) 
based 
throughout Austria.  
A mixed-method approach, supported by profound 
literature research, is used to identify, and approach the 
target groups in question as well as implement the 
appropriate methods for the various target groups and 
settings. Within the first five months of the project, focus 
group interviews, one-on-one interviews, research diaries, 
and documentary analysis are conducted. These methods 
have been chosen to get an encompassing insight into the 
needs of the end-user. The use of a participatory approach 
[13] enables the involvement of people and groups that are 
difficult to reach (e.g., ‘24-hour care but also very vulnerable 
people’). All research methods are applied low threshold and 
in a culturally sensitive manner. The generated data is 
processed using a qualitative content analysis [14]. 
Additional stakeholders from the regional and national 
environment are involved to find solutions for specific 
challenges. Over the course of the project, goal-oriented, 
cross-disciplinary, and cross-role networks of individuals 
and organizations will be created. Sustaining and continuing 
these networks after the end of the project, represents one of 
the long-term project goals. Experts define acceptance 
factors in all development steps, which are validated several 
times during the project in an iterative manner and therefore, 
influence the development process directly. 
Ethical concerns take a very important part in the 
development 
of 
the 
digital 
communication 
system. 
Therefore, ethical reflections are being carried out in the 
areas of care, self-determination, security, justice, privacy, 
participation, and self-image. For example, in terms of 
justice, it is ensured that everyone has equal access to the 
digital documentation, and that especially vulnerable groups 
such as low educational classes are not excluded. Security is 
discussed particularly in terms of IT security, but also in 
terms of the privacy of data. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In total 43 one-on-one interviews, as well as five focus 
group interviews including 30 participations, were carried 
out in the summer of 2021 with people/experts from the 
fields of health, business and politics who represent the 
healthcare providers. Additionally, various digital and paper 
forms of nursing documentation are currently being 
analyzed.   
The results of the project Linked Care contribute to the 
expansion and further development of innovative methods in 
data collection and participatory product development. New 
knowledge tools are going to be developed, which will be 
available for further research issues in the field of care and 
support after the end of the project.  
Currently, during the project, data gaps and new (data) 
information regarding the various stakeholders in the care 
sector are identified and collected. On the one hand, this data 
refers to the situation and needs of people in care as well as 
professional caregivers in the informal or formal sector. On 
the other hand, this data refers to the communicative 
interaction between the care and the medical sector. Thus, it 
provides a valuable basis for the development of new 
projects in both, the nursing, and the care sector. 
Furthermore, the newly developed data sets (indicators) will 
enable previously not used possibilities for data exchange in 
the care sector and for the first time allow for a standardized 
data exchange between general medicine practices and 
pharmacies as well as therapists and other stakeholders 
without digital data discontinuity. The comprehensive 
involvement 
of 
different 
service 
providers 
in 
the 
development of the product offers a solid foundation for the 
adoption of the product and ensures a high-quality exchange 
of relevant information. The job satisfaction of those 
working in the health sector may increase due to reduced 
documentation effort(s), duplications, 
and 
losses 
of 
information – leaving more time for the care of the clients 
themselves. 
A. Healthcare Providers – Trends and Opinions 
The results of the one-on-one interviews as well as the 
focus group interviews are currently being analyzed and 
evaluated, whereby first trends can be recorded. 
1) Important interfaces: The clients’ needs should be in 
focus and all health care professionals and providers 
engaged in the caring process of the client should 
intercommunicate, including doctors, nursing assistants, 
hospice, palliative care, etc. (depending on the intensity of 
care).  Communication (also) allows for an exchange of 
information – the lack thereof can create insecurity and fear, 
which can result in further work-related errors. It is of 
utmost importance that health-related information is 
transparent and accessible to all parties involved. Therefore, 
it is essential that duplicate documentation is avoided to 
reduce time and cost resources and minimize the risk of 
errors.  In order to guarantee a transparent information 
transfer and high-quality client medical treatment and care 
hospitals, regional health insurance funds, and pension 
insurance institutions (and many more) are important 
interfaces, and their staff members are hold on to share a 
client’s documents and clinical documentation among each 
other 
2) Opportunities and risks of digitalization in 
healthcare: All interviewed health professionals describe a 
very segmented documentation in the mobile nursing and 
care setting. None of the health professional groups 
mentioned (such as nurses, doctors, therapists) has 

78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
standardized access to the documentation of the other 
professional groups, even though they work with the same 
clients. This results in a large expenditure of time and 
resources for the collection of relevant information due to 
the non-access to digital documentation. 
Another main finding of the survey is that clients are 
currently not involved in health documentation. This leads 
to dependencies and a great loss of information. A 
considerable challenge is therefore to involve the clients to 
strengthen their autonomy. Maintaining self-determination 
is an essential factor in health care, as the clients 
interviewed repeatedly emphasized. The documentation 
must be designed in such a way that the clients can 
influence it, for example by gaining access to the system 
and being able to grant permissions. 
a) Firstly: Healthcare providers support the expansion 
of digitized information flows in the extramural area, but 
scepticism is omnipresent (regarding its success). Therefore, 
Austria (Linked Care) can learn from other countries, in 
terms of digital media/tools and documentation systems 
(e.g., ‘teleconsultation’, ‘video documentation’).  
b) Secondly: A database needs to be connected to the 
Linked Care-solution, allowing clients to search for reliable 
information.  
c) Thirdly: A digital tool should be added to ensure 
access to caring relatives and all parties involved. Also, a 
stored algorithm could be helpful – e.g., ‘when a blood 
glucose meter is needed in client care, and complementary 
diet advice is required’.  
d) Moreover: Enhanced multidisciplinary access to 
healthcare data can be very helpful in successful therapeutic 
decisions and planning, further scientific research.  On top 
of this, data protection and confidentiality are important 
aspects when it comes to healthcare  
3) Further 
aspects 
and 
possible 
solutions: 
All 
interviewed parties describe the relevance of a patient-
related documentation, which has to be available for all 
technical devices, even in offline mode – documentation 
should not be specific to occupational groups. Community 
nurses are an important interface in home care. The 
interviewed parties clarify that this professional group 
should be responsible for the communication between 
various healthcare professionals. The analysis of the 
interviews also display that at this point in time there is 
hardly any systematic terminology stored, which doesn’t 
allow for a presentation of nursing interventions comparably 
OR for effective and efficient comparison of nursing 
interventions.  
      Regarding the usability, the user interface should be 
clear, transparent, and not too complex in use, especially an 
intuitive usability of the digital system would be important. 
The language barrier of healthcare professionals poses a 
challenge – the Linked Care-solution should integrate a 
translation program and/or a digital dictionary.  
B. Healthcare Professionals – Opinion Poll and Survey of 
Interests 
In one-on-one and focus group interviews health 
professionals were asked about their opinion on the existing 
documentation system. They described prospects and their 
wishes regarding an optimal, interdisciplinary documentation 
system. The analysis is currently in progress. Early results 
show 
that 
healthcare 
professionals 
think 
that 
an 
interdisciplinary documentation system should include the 
following points: 
• 
The digital system should integrate the planning and 
anamnesis, allow medical doctors to sign drug sheets 
and prescriptions digitally, enable physiotherapists 
and occupational therapists to document in the 
digital system, and all necessary parties involved to 
have access to this documentation.    
• 
In addition, the digital documentation should be easy 
understandable and accessible for clients and caring 
relatives. Furthermore, health-related information 
should 
be 
automatically 
adopted 
when 
a 
client/patient is transferred from one to another 
organization. Above of this, risk surveys should be 
included in the digital program 
C. Clients and their Relatives 
The 
inclusion 
of 
affected 
clients 
and 
their 
relatives/support system, ensures the consideration of their 
needs 
and 
requirements 
in 
the 
(ongoing) 
product 
development process. This increases the quality of care 
considerably in two regards: Firstly, the improvement of care 
and nursing on a somatic level is addressed and secondly, the 
consistent 
participation 
of 
clients 
and 
their 
social 
environment also increases the quality of care according to 
the World Health Organization (WHO) comprehensive 
concept of health: Since physical as well as mental and social 
factors are equally included in the documentation process 
and clients themselves can play a decisive role during the 
process, they experience themselves as individuals with the 
power to act, who can influence their environment and living 
conditions. Having the power to act represents a central 
resource for subjective well-being according to the 
salutogenic approach [15].  
The analysis of the one-on-one interviews with this target 
group is currently ongoing. At present, it can be said that 
each individual needs a different form of nursing, care and 
therapy. This should also be considered when it comes to 
healthcare and should be included in the nursing- and care 
process. Communication and a continuous exchange of 
information between the parties involved is particularly 
important – otherwise, the quality of nursing, care and 
therapy would suffer greatly. 
D. Integrability into ELGA 
The interoperability between the project solution and 
general practitioners’ software, pharmacies, and mobile 
services, is novel. The link to ELGA is seminal because it is 
the mainly used electronic health record system in Austria. 
The elaboration and application of indicators in the form of a 
care summary is an essential part of the content-related work 

79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and is only possible in a meaningful way by bringing 
different areas closer together. The increase in knowledge is 
possible due to the cooperation of mobile services, economy, 
scientific partners, and those affected.   
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 The Linked Care-project is innovative. For the first time, 
the broad use of information and communication technology 
(ICT) and the strong networking of different organizations 
and stakeholders will make the assessment of practical 
benefits regarding intended functionalities for the mobile 
care services and relevant support system possible. In turn, 
this will also allow for an assessment of a user-need-based 
design of user interfaces. The user-centered design approach, 
which is applied in the whole research process enables this 
plan.  
The mentioned background literature as well as the focus 
group and one-on-one interviews show first significant 
results. These results provide a solid basis for the ongoing 
research within the next four years. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research is sponsored by the Austrian research 
promotion agency (FFG) under grant number 884194. 
Project partners are: Akademie für Altersforschung am Haus 
der Barmherzigkeit, Johanniter Österreich Ausbildung und 
Forschung gem. GmbH, Wiener Rotes Kreuz- Rettungs-, 
Krankentransport-, 
Pflege- 
und 
Betreuungsgesellschaft 
m.b.H., Volkshilfe Gesundheits- und Soziale Dienste GmbH 
(GSD GmbH), Volkshilfe Wien gemeinnützige Betriebs-
GmbH, CareCenter Software GmbH, Loidl-Consulting & IT 
Services 
GmbH, 
Compugroup 
Medical 
CGM, 
Österreichische 
Apotheker-Verlagsgesellschaft 
m.b.H, 
Steszgal Informationstechnologie GmbH, Fachhochschule 
Technikum Wien, Universität Wien. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Muehlhauser, E. Haslinger-Baumann, T. Galanos, D. 
Zeidler, and F. Werner, “Linked Care - Information Transfer 
in Mobile Care and Support” [Conference presentation 
abstract]. eTELEMED 2021 The Thirteenth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
Nice, 
France, 
July 
2021. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
etelemed_2021_2_80_40109. 
[2] E. Haslinger-Baumann, A. Lilgenau, C. Binder, and K. 
Gugenberger: “Quality characteristics in 24-hour care from 
the perspective of those affected. Results of a pilot survey 
study 
in 
Austria“. 
In 
Pflege 
Die 
wissenschaftliche 
Pflegezeitschrift für Pflegeberufe, 2019. 
[3] B. Mittermann: “Long-term care: Where new challenges meet 
an old system“.  Arbeit&Wirtschaft. Available from:   
https://www.arbeit-wirtschaft.at/langzeitpflege-
herausforderungen/. 
[4] M. Firgo and U. Famira-Mühlberger: “Expansion of inpatient 
care in the federal states. Quantitative and qualitative effects 
of the use of public funds compared to mobile care”. WIFO. 
Vienna. 
Available 
from:   
http://www.wifo.ac.at/wwa/pubid/47447, 2014. 
[5] Care 
Network. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.carenetwork.org.uk/. 
[6] Ilogs 
healthcare 
GmbH. 
Available 
from:   
https://www.ilogs.care/mocca/. 
[7] GSD 
Gesellschaft 
für 
Software, 
Entwicklung 
und 
Datentechnik 
mbH. 
Available 
from: 
 
https://gsd-
software.com. 
[8] RECOM 
GmbH 
& 
Co. 
KG. 
Available 
from:  
https://docplayer.org/33810484-Leitfaden-recom-grips-v-
online.html. 
[9] Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH. Available from:  
https://www.siemens-healthineers.com/at/digital-health-
solutions/digital-solutions-overview/patient-engagement-
solutions/e-health-solutions.   
[10] My 
HealtheVet. 
Available 
from:   
https://www.myhealth.va.gov/mhv-portal-web/home. 
[11] CEF 
Digital 
Connectong 
Europe. 
Available 
from:  
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/. 
[12] L. Jung-Joo: “Against Method: The Portability of Method in 
Human-Centered Design”, Doctoral Dissertation, Aalto 
University, School of Arts, Design and Architecture, 
Department of Design, Helsinki, 2012. 
[13] M. Wright, M. Block, and H. V. Unger: “Levels of 
Participation in Health Promotion: A Model for Assessing 
Participation“. In: Gesundheit Berlin (Hrsg.): Dokumentation 
13. bundesweiter Kongress Armut und Gesundheit, Berlin, 
2007. 
[14] U. Kuckartz, “Qualitative Content Analysis. Methods, 
Practice, Computer Support” (4th edition). Weinheim: Beltz 
Juventa, 2018.  
[15] A. Antonovsky, “Unraveling the mystery of health: how 
people manage stress and stay well”. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1987. 
 

