A Holistic Approach for Forecasting Medical Equipment Risks  
Using Monte Carlo Simulation 
 
Sahar Ismail, Hassan Nehme, and 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering  
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: sahar.ismail93@gmail.com 
Email: hassan.nehme@live.fr 
Bassam Hussein 
Department of Industrial 
Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: bassam.hussein@liu.edu.lb 
 
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Center for Quality Assurance and 
Scientific Research 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Email: 
mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract - As any technology, medical equipment provides 
benefits to patients, but they also present significant risks that 
can affect and threaten patient safety. In healthcare 
organizations, clinical engineering departments play a big role 
in maintaining the safety and reliability of medical equipment. 
In order to mitigate failures of such equipment and control 
risks, a proper Medical Equipment Management Program 
(MEMP) should be established. The purpose of this paper is to 
forecast risks by using Failure Mode and Effect Analysis 
(FMEA) method and apply it on Monte Carlo simulation 
which adds risks analysis to Excel® by @RISK tool. The data 
of some medical devices is extracted from a hospital’s 
maintenance management system and are identified according 
to their likelihood, severity, and difficulty of detection. 
However, the results of this mathematical simulation are 
integrated in a probability distribution function that enable us 
to identify medical equipment risks that affect patients, staff, 
and the work environment and reduce them by providing 
contingency plans, policies, strategies, and other tactics [1]. 
Keywords - medical equipment; risk management; FMEA; 
Monte Carlo simulation; HIQMA. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As medical technology becomes more complicated, a 
MEMP must be applied to ensure that medical devices 
operate according to safety, accuracy, reliability, and 
performance criteria. Maintenance is one of the most 
important processes to improve safety, decrease the risk of 
equipment failure, and minimize the unplanned downtime 
[2]. However, the money spent on maintenance and failure of 
equipment is rapidly increasing because of the development 
of many types of complex medical equipment, the stringent 
environment they are operating under it, and the lack of 
proper management. 
The management program includes a risk management 
process, which comprises the identification, assessment, and 
prioritization of risks (defined in ISO 31000 as the effect of 
uncertainty on objectives) followed by coordinated and 
economical application of resources to minimize, monitor, 
and control the probability and/or impact of unfortunate 
events [3]. The causes of the risks are identified and relevant 
changes in the system are made accordingly in order to 
reduce the probability of the error occurring in the future 
thus reducing harm to patients and providing a safer patient 
care experience. 
Most healthcare organizations follow the manufacturer’s 
recommendations concerning the maintenance program [4]. 
Campbell and Jardine [5] defined the maintenance 
excellence as the balance of performance, risk, resource 
inputs and cost to reach to an optimal solution. In the last 
decade, 
maintenance 
techniques 
have 
been 
notably 
improving, but most of the healthcare organizations do not 
profit from the maintenance excellence that Campbell and 
Jardine established. Moreover, some devices that are similar 
in 
their 
function 
and 
design 
have 
manufacturer-
recommended intervals that vary by one or two factors thus 
leading to financial and time loss. In addition, excessive 
maintenance can have the same impact as an insufficient 
level of maintenance; moderation should be the rule. 
The status of research on maintenance of medical devices 
is presented in different models. Fennigkoh and Smith [6] 
model classified equipment according to three parameters: 
function, physical risks, and maintenance requirements. It 
was known later as risk-based inclusion criteria that allowed 
clinical engineering professionals to apply maintenance on 
limited parts of medical devices. 
Ridgway, in the beginning, noted that Preventive 
Maintenance (PM) is an important factor in terms of 
reliability, but later on, he indicated that PM does not prevent 
failure for all equipment and it is not the ideal solution. 
However, Ridgway provided methods for equipment 
management such as Reliability Centered Maintenance 
(RCM). This latter is a corporate-level maintenance strategy 
that is implemented in any healthcare organization to 
optimize the maintenance program. Endrenyi [7] indicated 
that RCM selects the critical component in the equipment 
and starts a maintenance management to correct the failure. 
Further on, he recognized that RCM is good for indicating 
the budget and for comparing policies, but it cannot help in 
achieving real optimization. 
According to Hall [8], the two keys of RCM are having a 
good maintenance history of the medical equipment and the 
age of the equipment. Further he indicated that RCM is 
applicable for younger equipment. However, to balance 
between preventive and corrective maintenance, Condition 
Based Maintenance (CBM) is presented to observe and 
1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

forecast real time status of machines [8]. CBM is performed 
when some indicators show that the equipment will fail. 
Taghipour et al. [9] presented a multi-criteria decision-
making model to prioritize medical devices according to 
their criticality. Furthermore, in terms of prioritization, 
Jamshidi et al. [10] developed a fuzzy healthcare failure 
modes and effect analysis (HFMEA). HFMEA is a 
systematic method that identifies and prevents equipment 
problems before they occur by ensuring a safe and clinically 
desirable outcome [11]. 
To minimize risk and optimize the cost-effectiveness of 
medical equipment, a maintenance model is suggested by 
Khalaf et al. [12]. They evaluated both elements and the 
results showed poor performance concerning cost and risk 
management. Therefore, Khalaf et al. [13] developed a new 
model in order to be used in Palestinian hospitals, which is a 
mathematical model that uses a mixed integer-based 
approach for maintenance operations schedules for medical 
equipment. They also proposed a greedy algorithm for an 
initial solution for the model. In addition, some data 
extracted from maintenance history of infusion pumps and 
ventilators were used in a global model that measures the 
probability of equipment being available and they were 
analyzed using Matlab. However, this model was validated 
by developing a model that measures the survival of 
equipment as function of maintenance and age of equipment 
using survival analysis approach. 
The studies reported above proposed models that share a 
common theme; different risks are calculated using a single 
measure that is defined and used to lead safety, performance 
inspections, and preventive maintenance activities. These 
models are simple to use and effective in reducing general 
risks yet they lack the ability to identify specific risks. They 
are far from achieving optimal risk minimization. Also, 
research into comprehensive frameworks for prioritizing 
critical medical devices or outsourcing of medical device 
maintenance is still in its infancy. Researchers should apply 
new risk-based maintenance models including different new 
uncertainties to replace the traditional empirical models. 
In our model, a Complete Risk and Decision Analysis 
Toolkit from Palisade: “The DecisionTools Suite” is used. It 
is an integrated set of programs for risk analysis and 
decision-making under uncertainty that runs in Microsoft 
Excel®. The main tool that was used is @RISK, which adds 
risk analysis to Excel® using Monte Carlo simulation. The 
Monte Carlo simulation is a technique used to understand the 
impact of risk and uncertainty in financial, project 
management, cost, and other models which is to identify 
risks related to medical equipment [14]. FMEA method was 
also used to prevent failure of equipment. Data related to 
maintenance and failures of equipment were obtained from a 
Lebanese hospital to apply them in our model in order to 
verify its functionality and applicability. 
The proposed methodology is presented in Section II. The 
implementation process is presented in Section III. This 
latter, includes collecting data, and integrating FMEA 
method using Monte Carlo simulation. This is followed by 
results and discussion in Section IV. Finally, a conclusion 
and our further expectations are presented in Section V.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
   Medical devices are used in healthcare organizations to 
support patient care in terms of health and safety. Currently, 
modern medical devices are complex and operate under 
severe conditions because of the rapid development of 
equipment. The current strategies in hospitals have 
difficulties in identifying risks and applying optimal risk 
reduction activities because they lack proper management 
processes. Therefore, a well-operated management process 
can enhance the function of medical devices in healthcare 
organizations. 
   The proposed model is meant to identify and assess risks 
of medical equipment according to mathematical approach 
using different parameters. It starts with collecting data 
concerning medical devices from a Lebanese Hospital. The 
needed numbers such as the likelihood, detectability, and 
impact of medical equipment failure are then extracted and 
analyzed. 
   There are several methods to calculate the risk value, yet 
FMEA method is used as the preferred choice in the current 
model. FMEA is selected among other methods because it 
contributes to improved designs for products and processes, 
to cost savings, and to the development of control plans, 
testing requirements, optimum maintenance plans, reliability 
growth analysis and related activities [15].  The FMEA 
procedure starts with determining the ways in which the 
input can go wrong, and then determining effects for each 
failure mode. After that, it identifies potential causes for 
each mode and list current controls for each cause. 
Consequently, risk priority number can be determined and 
contingency plans and actions should be set accordingly. 
   After applying the FMEA method, it will be integrated in 
Monte Carlo simulation tool that includes @Risk toolkit. 
@Risk adds risk analysis to Excel® using Monte Carlo 
simulation. Then the simulation will be performed and the 
results will be assessed to draw a conclusion. 
   The methodology is depicted in the following flowchart. 
 
Figure 1. The proposed methodology 
Collect data concerning 
medical devices from the 
healthcare facility (A Lebanese 
hospital in this case) 
Extract the needed parameters 
(likelihood, severity, difficulty 
of detection) from the collected 
data 
Integrate the FMEA method by 
defining the extracted parameters as 
inputs and the calculated RPN as 
output in the Monte Carlo 
simulation tool. 
Conduct the simulation, obtain, 
and dicuss the resutls. 
2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1 summarizes the required steps to accomplish our 
evaluation. Such assessment requires some parameters and 
equations. So, the derivations of all those relations are 
explained in the subsequent sections. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS 
 
The implementation process includes three main steps 
that are “Collecting and Extracting Data”, “Integrating 
FMEA Method in Monte Carlo Simulation Tool”, and 
“Simulation and Results” to be accomplished. 
A. Collecting and Extracting Data 
 
   First, to apply the FMEA method, specific data 
concerning medical devices are collected. 
   Likelihood of the medical device in this case is the 
probability of failure of the machine. Fig. 2 shows the 
number of repeated failures per year with respect to medical 
devices. These numbers are then converted to a scale of 1-
10 as shown in Table I using the following conversion: 
 
Number of repeated failures*(10/ Highest number of 
repeated failures) 
 
 
Figure 2. Number of repeated failure. 
The scores of likelihood of medical devices failures are 
assigned according to the following criteria [16]: 
{1, 2}: Improbable, manifestations of the hazard are very 
unlikely 
{3, 4}: Remote, manifestations of the hazard are possible 
but not likely 
{5, 6}: Occasional, some manifestations of the hazard are 
likely to occur 
{7, 8}: Probable, hazard will be experienced 
{9, 10}: Frequent, hazard likely to occur 
   Severity of medical device is defined as the extent to 
which the defect of equipment can affect patients. The 
scores of severity are assigned according to the following 
criteria [16]: 
{1, 2}: Negligible, no significant risk of injury 
{3, 4}: Minor, potential for minor injury 
{5, 6}: Moderate, potential for minor injury  
{7, 8}: Critical, potential for severe injury  
{9, 10}: Catastrophic, likely to result in death 
   Detection is the ability of the current control scheme to 
detect and then prevent a hazard from occurring. The scores 
of detection are assigned according to the following criteria 
[11]: 
{1, 2}: Almost certain (detection probability <100%), 
potential hazard will almost certainly be detected 
{3, 4}: High (detection probability <80%), high chance that 
potential hazard will be detected 
{5,6}: Moderate (detection probability <50%), moderate 
chance that potential hazard will be detected 
{7,8}: Low (detection probability <25%), low chance that 
potential hazard will be detected 
{9, 10}: Remote (detection probability <10%), very remote 
chance that potential hazard will be detected 
 
Table I. Extracted Parameters. 
Equipment 
Likelihood 
Severity 
Difficulty of 
Detection 
Beds 
10.00 
6 
1 
Sphygmomanometer 
7.43 
5 
1 
Defibrillator 
3.14 
10 
4 
Ultrasound 
0.57 
3 
3 
Pulse Oximeter 
1.43 
7 
2 
Syringe Pump 
3.14 
10 
7 
 
All values of likelihood, severity, and difficulty of 
detection of equipment are given by the hospital. Table I 
shows the scores of likelihood, severity, and difficulty of 
detection for six medical devices on a scale of 1-10. 
 
B. Integrating  FMEA Method in Monte Carlo Simulation 
Tool 
 
The parameters extracted from the collected data will be 
employed in a systematic technique called FMEA. 
3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

   FMEA is one of the first highly structured, systematic 
techniques for failure analysis. It was developed by 
reliability engineers in the late 1940’s to study problems 
that might arise from malfunctions of military systems [17]. 
It is a step-by-step systematic approach for identifying all 
possible failures in a design, a manufacturing or assembly 
process. 
   Failures are prioritized according to how severe their 
consequences are, how likely they may occur and how 
difficult to detect them. The main purpose of the FMEA is 
to take preliminary actions to reduce failures, starting with 
the highest-priority ones [18]. 
  Risk Priority Number (RPN) is a measure used when 
assessing risk to help identify critical failure modes. 
The RPN values range from 1 (absolute best) to 1000 
(absolute worst). It is the product of three ratings on a scale 
of 10 (likelihood of occurrence, severity of impact, and 
difficulty of detection): 
 
                                                  
 
 
Table II illustrates the extracted parameters and the 
calculated RPN for each equipment. 
Table II. Calculated RPN. 
    
After calculating the risk priority numbers, the model is now 
ready to be integrated in the @Risk simulation tool. 
   The first step is to insert Table II in an Excel® sheet and 
define inputs (likelihood, severity and difficulty of 
detection) as normal distributions. Usually, high standard 
deviation is selected in situations where resources are 
limited or gathering real data would be too expensive or 
impractical. In this situation, the data is extracted from a 
real hospital management system, hence a very small 
standard deviation is selected (0.1), as depicted in Fig. 3: 
 
 
Figure 3. Definition of inputs as normal distributions. 
   RPN is the output in our model; Fig. 4 illustrates how 
RPN is defined as an output in the Monte-Carlo simulation 
tool “RiskOutput(“RPN”)”. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Adding @Risk output. 
C. Simulation and Results 
 
@RISK monitors a set of convergence statistics on each 
output distribution during a simulation. During monitoring, 
@RISK calculates these statistics for each output at selected 
intervals (such as: every 1000 iterations) throughout the 
simulation. 
 
As more iterations run, the amount of change in the 
statistics becomes less and less until they reach the 
Convergence Tolerance [19]. 
Convergence tolerance specifies the tolerance allowed for 
the statistic being tested. For example, the current applied 
settings specify that the estimated mean of each output is 
simulated within 3% of its actual value [19]. 
 
   In our model in Fig. 5, we will be performing 5000 
iterations in one simulation. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Changing the number of iterations and starting simulation. 
   At the end of the simulation, the results are integrated in a 
probability distribution function. A probability distribution 
is a statistical function that describes all the possible values 
and likelihoods that a random variable can take within a 
given range [20]. This range will be between the minimum 
and maximum statistically possible values, but where the 
possible value is likely to be plotted on the probability 
distribution depends on a number of factors, including the 
distributions mean and standard deviation. 
 
 
Equipment 
 
Likelihood 
 
Severity 
Difficulty 
of 
Detection 
RPN 
Beds 
10.00 
6 
1 
60.00 
Sphygmomanometer 
7.43 
5 
1 
37.15 
Defibrillator 
3.14 
10 
4 
125.60 
Ultrasound 
0.57 
3 
3 
5.13 
Pulse Oximeter 
1.43 
7 
2 
20.02 
Syringe Pump 
3.14 
10 
7 
219.80 
4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

   Fig. 6 illustrates one example of the results obtained; the 
risk priority number of hospital Beds (60) is centered 
between 49.98 and 70.09 for 90% of the probability 
distribution. The x-axis represents the possible risk priority 
numbers and the y-axis represents the probability of 
occurrence for each probable RPN incrementing by 0.02 on 
a scale of 0.1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Results after simulation. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
   The result of the Monte Carlo Simulation via @RISK is a 
probability distribution. Figs. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 show the 
probability density for the chosen examples: beds, 
defibrillator, 
ultrasound, 
syringe 
pump, 
sphygmomanometer, and pulse oximeter. 
 
 
Figure 7. Probability distribution for defibrillator. 
   Fig. 7 shows the risk priority number of defibrillator 
(125.60) is centered between 117.18 and 134.38 for 90% of 
the probability distribution. 
 
Figure 8. Probability distribution for ultrasound. 
   Fig.8 shows the risk priority number of ultrasound (5.13) 
is centered between 3.59 and 6.69 for 90% of the probability 
distribution.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Probability distribution for syringe pump. 
   Fig.9 shows the risk priority number of syringe pump 
(219.80) is centered between 206.6 and 233.4 for 90% of the 
probability distribution.  
 
Figure 10. Probability distribution for sphygmomanometer. 
5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

   Fig.10 
shows 
the 
risk 
priority 
number 
of 
sphygmomanometer (37.15) is centered between 30.93 and 
43.50 for 90% of the probability distribution.  
 
 
Figure 11. Probability distribution for pulse oximeter. 
   Fig.11 shows the risk priority number of pulse oximeter 
(20.02) is centered between 17.17 and 22.95 for 90% of the 
probability distribution.  
 
Table III. Summary of the Results. 
 
 
 
The results presented in Figs. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 and 
Table III is interpretable as follows: 
 
1. The mean figure for RPN will be 60 for beds, 
37.15 for sphygmomanometer, 125.6 for defibrillator, 5.13 
for ultrasound, 20.02 for pulse oximeter and 219.80 for 
syringe pump. That means, the simulated result will be equal 
to the original calculated RPN. 
 
2. The minimum figure for RPN will be 34.97 for 
beds, 23.29 for sphygmomanometer, 108.23 for defibrillator, 
1.53 for ultrasound, 14.22 for pulse oximeter and 190.83 for 
syringe pump. That means, the minimum probability will be 
lower than the calculated RPN by 25.03 for beds, 13.86 for 
sphygmomanometer, 
17.37 
for 
defibrillator, 
3.6 
for 
ultrasound, 5.8 for pulse oximeter and 28.97 for syringe 
pump. But theses figure are the bottom lines and will only be 
achieved if all negative circumstances would occur. Hence, 
with a probability of 5 %, the figure for RPN will fall low to 
34.97, 23.29, 108.23, 1.53, 14.22, and 190.83.  In other 
words, with a probability of 95 % the RPN will not fall below 
these numbers. 
 
3. The maximum figure for RPN will be 83.82 for 
beds 53.66 for sphygmomanometer, 145.19 for defibrillator, 
8.67 for ultrasound, 28.04 for pulse oximeter and 247.70 for 
syringe pump. That means, the maximum probability will be 
higher than the calculated RPN by 23.22 for beds, 16.51 for 
sphygmomanometer, 19.59 for defibrillator, 3.54 for 
ultrasound, 8.02 for pulse oximeter and 27.9 for syringe 
pump. But these figures are the upper limits and will only be 
achieved if all positive circumstances would occur. Hence, 
with a probability of 95 %, the figure for RPN will not 
exceed 83.82, 53.66, 145.19, 8.67, 28.04, and 247.70. In 
other words, with a probability of 5% the RPN will exceed 
these numbers. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Histogram of RPNs 
   Fig. 12 shows a histogram illustrating each device’s RPN. 
This histogram helps us track the severity of risks on each 
device in order to solve the problem before happening. Each 
of the RPN scores will fall under one of the categories, for 
which different colors have been used. Here are some 
details on each of the categories:  
  
High Risk: It represents the red color which is the most 
dangerous category. Example: Syringe pump: almost in the 
high risk category (presented in orange). 
 
Minimum 
Maximum 
Mean 
Beds 
34.97 
83.82 
59.99 
Sphygmomanometer 
23.29 
53.66 
37.15 
Defibrillator 
108.23 
145.19 
125.6 
Ultrasound 
1.53 
8.67 
5.13 
Pulse Oximeter 
14.22 
28.04 
20.02 
Syringe Pump 
190.83 
247.70 
219.80 
6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Medium Risk: The yellow category has less priority than 
the one before but also plans and decisions must be set to 
handle those risks. Example: Beds, Sphygmomanometer, 
and Defibrillator.  
Low Risk: The last category that represents the green color 
has the lowest priority where risks can be monitored 
minimally, and do not cause serious problems. Example: 
Ultrasound, Pulse oximeter. 
 
   After analyzing the results, some recommendations could 
be set to reduce risks such as having alternative or 
redundant devices in the healthcare facility, pay special 
attention to the to the life span of the equipment and its 
working hours when purchasing used devices, and to have a 
well operated maintenance program. Moreover, hospitals 
must be kept financially healthy while achieving financial-
related risk management goals for healthcare organizations 
by reducing the malpractice claims and the number of 
failures. 
   An additional evaluation is possible to show where 
individual risk has a main influence of the final risk priority 
number. Figs. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 show the results of 
those evaluations as regression coefficients. This indicates 
that difficulty of detection has a huge influence of the RPN 
of beds and the likelihood has the higher influence on the 
RPN of the defibrillator. Therefore, these risk factors have 
to be monitored very carefully within an effective healthcare 
management system. 
 
Figure 13. Regression coefficients for beds. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Regression coefficients for defibrillator. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Regression coefficients for ultrasound. 
 
Figure 16. Regression coefficients for syringe pump. 
 
 
 
7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 17. Regression coefficients for sphygmomanometer. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Regression coefficients for pulse oximeter. 
         However, this model could be integrated in the 
HIQMA (Hospital Institution Quality Management) system. 
HIQMA was deployed for the first time in Lebanon in early 
2011 to enhance medical and healthcare services ensuring 
quality [21]. The principle objective is to guarantee patients' 
safety through viable and effective quality management in 
system includes scalability and customizability traits. The 
framework properties incorporate a few applications, 
beginning with the individual beneficiary organizations, 
proceeding with the reformed professional training and 
advisory services concepts, and ending with the created 
administration rules [21].  
   HIQMA is a centralized management system that provides 
a gateway to critical quality information and facilitates 
quality performance improvement through requirement 
tracking, notifications and real-time management reporting 
[21]. This system increases marketability, customer 
satisfaction and service; it also saves time, money and 
resources. Moreover, it improves internal communication 
and 
operational 
performance 
and 
provides 
better 
management control [22].  
   Biomedical engineers and technicians using HIQMA are 
providing the system with important dated information 
included in their reports about each equipment failure, thus 
providing enough data to calculate its probability of 
occurrence. Also, they are mentioning the severity and 
consequences of each occurred failure. The only missing 
information in the reports is the difficulty of detection; it 
can be collected from their experience in a questionnaire 
included in each technical report on a scale from 1-10.  
 
   Finally, a risk severity matrix is employed to raise 
awareness and increase visibility of risks so that sound 
decisions on certain risks can be made. The risk matrix is 
shown in Fig. 18.  Once the risks have been placed in the 
cells of the matrix that corresponds to the appropriate 
likelihood, severity and difficulty of detection, it becomes 
visibly clear as to which risks must be managed at what 
priority. 
 
   Each of the risks will fall under one of the categories, for 
which different colors have been used. Table IV represents 
the letter of each device and under what color it falls. Here 
are some details on each of the categories: 
 
High: The risks that fall in the cells colored in red are the 
risks that are most critical and that must be addressed on a 
high priority basis. Example: ‘X’ Defibrillator, ‘Y’ Syringe 
Pump. 
Medium: If a risk falls in one of the yellow cells, it is best to 
take some reasonable steps and develop risk management 
strategies in time, even though there is no hurry to have 
such 
risks 
dealt 
with 
early. 
Example: 
‘C’ 
Sphygmomanometer, ‘I’ Beds and ‘O’ Pulse Oximeter. 
Low Risk: The risks that fall in the green cells can be 
minimally monitored as they usually do not pose any 
significant problem. However, if some reasonable steps can 
help in fighting these risks, such steps should be taken to 
improve overall performance Example: ‘A’ Ultrasound 
Machine. 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Risk severity matrix. 
8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Table IV. Legend for the risk severity matrix. 
Ultrasound 
A 
 
X-Ray Generator 
B 
 
Sphygmomanometer 
C 
 
CT-Scan 
D 
 
Portable X-Ray 
E 
 
Centrifuge 
F 
 
Warmer 
G 
 
Digital Thermometer 
H 
 
Beds 
I 
 
Monitor Bed 
J 
 
Phototherapy 
K 
 
Portable Oximeter 
L 
 
Stethoscope 
M 
 
ECG 
N 
 
Pulse Oximeter 
O 
 
Blood Pressure + SPO2 
P 
 
Oxygen Flow Meter 
Q 
 
Laryngoscope 
R 
 
Suction Flow Meter 
S 
 
Respirator 
T 
 
Cautery 
U 
 
Cath Unit 
V 
 
Incubator 
W 
 
Defibrillator 
X 
 
Syringe Pump 
Y 
 
Volumetric Pump 
Z 
 
After analyzing the results, some recommendations could 
be set to reduce risks such as having alternative or 
redundant devices in the healthcare facility, pay special 
attention to the to the life span of the equipment and its 
working hours when purchasing used devices, and to have a 
well operated maintenance program. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
   The rapid evolution of medical equipment had a huge 
impact on the improvement and progress of medical 
services. Accordingly, medical devices are expected to 
operate under safety, accuracy, and reliability criteria to 
ensure a protected and efficient environment for patients, 
staff, and the surrounding work environment. As such, this 
research work provided a new methodology for identifying 
and assessing risks based on a mathematical approach and 
not only empirical ones. This method results in a more 
precise scheme that would most likely reduce the risks 
resulting from medical equipment and further provide a 
proper management in healthcare organizations. Moreover, 
this model can be integrated in healthcare facilities to 
identify and forecast risks according to risk distribution of 
Monte Carlo simulation and risk severity matrix that 
classifies and prioritizes medical devices risks.  
    This proposed assessment maybe be further enhanced to 
achieve risk response development, and risk response 
control of medical equipment by developing a complete tool 
that can be used in the medical equipment industry across 
the world. There should also be a further research in the 
field of optimal outsourcing of medical devices. Thus, 
manufacturers, organizations, and clinical engineering 
departments can use this tool in planning for maintenance 
and for the development of medical equipment. Also, it can 
be deployed as monitoring system in service at healthcare 
facilities where it can provide real time data on the risks of 
operating medical equipment. 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  S. Ismail, H. Nehme, M. Hajj-Hassan, H. Bassam and 
H. Khachfe, "A Monte Carlo Simulation Based-
Approach for Medical Equipment Risks Forecasting," 
in Global Health, 2016.  
[2]  K. Wilson, K. Ison and S. Tabakov, Medical 
Equipment Management, CRC Press, 2013.  
[3]  D. Hubbard, The Failure of Risk Management: Why 
It's Broken and How to Fix It, John Wiley & Sons, 
2009.  
[4]  A. Jamshidi, S. Abbasgholizadeh-Rahimi and D. Ait-
Kadi, "Medical Devices Inspection and Maintenance; 
A Literature Review," in Industrial and Systems 
Engineering Research, Canada, 2014.  
[5]  J. 
Campbell 
and 
A. 
Jardine, 
Maintenance 
Excellence:Optimizing 
Equipment 
Life-Cycle 
Decisions, CRC Press, Feb. 13, 2001.  
[6]  L. Fennigkoh and B. Smith, Clinical equipment 
management, vol. 2, JCAHO PTSM Series, 1989, pp. 
5-14. 
[7]  J. Endrenyi, "Aging maintenance and reliability," 
IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, pp. 59-67, May 
2006.  
[8]  A. Hall, Risk-based approach to device management 
has 
multiple 
pathways, 
vol. 
40, 
Biomedical 
Instrumentation & Technology,, 2006, pp. 225-226. 
[9]  S. 
Taghipour, 
D. 
Banjevic 
and 
A. 
Jardine, 
"Prioritization of Medical Equipment for Maintenance 
Decisions," Journal of Operational Research Society, 
vol. 9, no. 1666-1687, p. 62, 2010.  
[10]  A. Jamshidi, S. Abbasgholizadeh-Rahimi, D. Ait-kadi 
and A. Ruiz, "A risk-based Maintenance Strategy 
using Fuzzy HFMEA for prioritization of Critical 
9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Medical Equipment," in Proceedings of the 1st 
Annual World Conference of the Society for Industrial 
and Systems Engineering, Washington, USA, 2012.  
[11  Maintenance 
Assistant™, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.maintenanceassistant.com/reliability-
centered-maintenance/. [Accessed October 2015]. 
[12]  A. Khalaf, Maintenance model for minimizing risk 
and 
optimizing 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
medical 
equipment in Palestine, vol. 14, JClinEng, 2004, pp. 
3649-3653. 
[13]  A. Khalaf, K. Djouani, Y. Hamam and Y. Alayli, 
"Evidence-based mathematical maintenance model 
for medical equipment," in International Conference 
on Electronic Devices, systems and Applications, 
2010.  
[14]  Risk Analysis and Simulation, New York: Palisade 
Corporation, September, 2010.  
[15]  L. Lipol and J. Haq, "Risk Analysis Method: 
FMEA/FMECA in the Organizations," International 
Journal of Basic & Applied Sciences, vol. 11, October 
2011.  
[16]  llloyd. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.mddionline.com/article/risk-analysis- 
beyond-probability-and-severity. 
[Accessed 
November 2015]. 
 
[17]  U.S. 
Department 
of 
Defense, 
Procedures 
for 
Performing a Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality 
Analysis, 1949.  
[18]  [Online]. 
Available: 
http://asq.org/learn-about-
quality/process-analysis-tools/overview/fmea.html. 
[Accessed February 2016]. 
[19]  Palisade Corporation, Guide to Using @Risk: Risk 
Analysis and Simulation,add-In for Microsoft® Excel, 
5.7 ed., 2010.  
[20]  [Online]. Available: 
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/probabilitydistr
ibution.asp. [Accessed March 2016]. 
[21]  B. Hussein, H. Bazzi, W. Hassan, A. Hage-Diab, A. 
Haj-Ali and H. Khachfe, "Software Implementation of 
a Healthcare Quality Management System Based on 
ISO9000 Standards," SM Journal of Biomedical 
Engineering, 2016.  
[22]  [Online]. Available: http://www.bsigroup.com/en-
GB/iso-9001-quality-management/. [Accessed 
February 2016]. 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

