Abstract
This document posits an approach for leaders to gain
advantage through knowledge facilitation within virtual work
environments and presents a leadership model, the Knowledge
Founded Virtual Self-Management Model (KFVSM). The
model addresses the leadership of virtual teams as self-
management founded, to operate within a soft systems
structure, and oftentimes are project based. A proactive
leadership structure incorporating environmental scanning
founded on a dynamic fulcrum provides the superstructure of
the model. The model was developed in reaction to increasing
virtual
work
environments
incorporating
high
levels
of
information technology within dynamic markets demanding
quick
change
and
the
broad
application
of
a
project
perspective to organizational endeavors.
The model operates from a knowledge facilitation platitude
and incorporates some considerations such as crowdsourcing,
Software-as-a-Service, etc. Multiple contextual factors from
the organization and follower perspective are incorporated
along with information on technology advances facilitating
social
networking.
The
model
is
meant
to
propagate
organization paradigm shifts rather than just providing a
method to react to them. Lastly, the KFVSM embraces
leadership learning, change, and growth and views leadership
as a skill to be developed over time and in reaction to change,
knowledge, and need.
Index
Terms—
leadership,
virtual,
memetics,
project
management model
1. Introduction
The
list
of
success
stories
for
our
specie,
nations,
individuals, business organizations, etc. who have advanced,
found victory, and profit based on the application of newly
discovered knowledge, innovative facilitations of archived
knowledge, and the hybridization of new knowledge with old
is extensive and goes back to the start of recorded history. In
fact, the processes used to facilitate and manipulate knowledge
for success is knowledge in, and of itself. It is possible to
relate this knowledge concept directly to the establishment and
successful application of leadership. Successful leadership and
knowledge facilitation run parallel to one another within
organizations. Leaders can gain advantage through knowledge
facilitation within virtual work environments realized through
openness to change and needed information technology and it
is
this
perspective
which
provides
rationale
for
the
development of the KFVSM. (Please see model diagram – p.
9)
2. Leadership / Memetic Foundation
From an historical view, a look to a possible scenario for
knowledge succession of early man provides a glimpse into a
perspective on knowledge discovery and application relative to
the
establishment
of
leadership
within
a
group.
This
rudimentary example provides foundation to an understanding
of
modern day leadership,
for the driving factors are
equivalent. Early humans served as scavengers within their
biomes and protein acquisition would have been greatly
needed but limited in opportunity.
A member of the group may have noticed through trial and
error in conjunction with low level critical thinking, that the
edge of a rock might become sharp during concussion with
other rocks. Creative thinking matriculates the thought that to
concussion the sharp rock on a newly scavenged bone might
reveal what is inside, for this bone marrow has been exposed
through the action of the carnivores from time to time and
consumed by the group. The group moves to a carcass as
advised by their partner who had previously demonstrated to
the food needing cohort the use of this possible bone opening
tool.
All members gain advantage and nourishment through
reproduction of their partner’s actions and newly acquired
knowledge. The critical and creative thinker’s status rises
within the group as the establishment of respect takes place
and the member gains advantage through accepting the risk of
sharing the information with the group, taking a leadership
role. The knowledge fragment or meme disperses throughout
the group and other groups while eliciting a foundation for the
development of other applications involving stone tools,
scavenging, etc. Change offers leadership opportunity.
New knowledge is combined with old and some knowledge
processes used in the past may never return. According to
Holtz:
“…the
human
brain
is
a
constantly
changing
constellation of relationships among billions of cells. Complex
networks of neurons are linked by pathways forged, then
continually revised, in response to experience” [2]. This is the
natural process of cerebral knowledge succession.
An atmosphere of leader trust materializes which creates
fertile ground for the advancement of this new knowledge and
leadership. Leadership legacy germinates, as partners will now
come to their colleague for advice and help on a problem, a
need for change, and a chance to spread knowledge. The new
leader, as well as the group looks to new methods to apply the
newfound tool and exploitation of the new knowledge to aid in
A Knowledge Founded Model Embracing Leadership Change within Virtual
Work Environments
Michael Charles Hitson, D.M., PMP, SSGB, mhitso01@baker.edu
134
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

their survival. Much as a spark to a dry forest, this birth of
knowledge creates multiple pathways for its propagation,
application, and growth. It was put forth by Locke “. . . that the
mind, though possessing natural abilities and manners of
operation, is initially like a tabula rasa, a blank tablet which
not have yet been written” [3].
3. Memetics
The Memetics approach to epistemology and knowledge
development, transition, and perpetuation provides a logical
and observable process to study knowledge and Memetics is
displayed in the previous example. Memetics was first
referenced by Richard Dawkins in 1976 and treats knowledge
as bits or fragments of information and processes advanced
through our species much as a genotype or phenotype might
be and is a foothold from which to observe knowledge
creation and change. The fragments of knowledge are referred
to as memes. According to Heylighen, a meme is a bit of
knowledge or cognitive meaning which can be transmitted
from one individual to another. This is actually a duplication
of the meme within another individual who then also might
go on and spread it to others [4].
The propagation of the meme throughout a populace
emulates advancement of a genetic compliment through a
population. Information technology driven virtuality puts the
advancement into hyper-warp and allows for transmission of a
meme from a single source to 1,000’s in a matter of seconds.
Memes though differ in that they are transferred between any
two individuals, group to group, group to individual, through
whatever media might be available, and are not bound to the
parent-offspring genetic recombination process. Memes take
fragments of time in many cases to transmit and not
generations as in genetics.
When a meme is no longer applicable, when it is passed in
ever decreasing numbers, it is experiencing a decrease in its
level of fitness for application within the time period and will
move from practical existence to the realm of archiving. The
meme may become extinct in direct application and be
replaced in a knowledge niche with other memes, but these
replaced memes add to the foundation of knowledge much as
an individual coral’s body structure adds to the base upon
which active coral survive. Practical application determines
the current presence and validity of knowledge in the
epistemological succession process.
4. Cloud Computing
The way computing is done worldwide is advancing through
a change of direction and perspective. While the actual
definitions may vary, this development is broadly called ‘cloud
computing’. Cloud computing is a method of computing where
scalable and elastic IT-enabled capabilities are provided ‘as a
service’ to external customers using Internet technologies. In
the future, if you are exercising memory or applications which
are housed on your PC, you will not be on the cloud. The
cloud enables storage, application housing, memory, etc. at
remote server sites. This equates to your computing device
basically being an access device to the cloud where all
applications and memory will reside. This configuration will
further
facilitate
virtual
teaming
and
virtual
project
management teams through easy and quick data access,
application, and communication on multiple levels.
Cloud computing is founded on the concept of the globe
reaching a point where the network, Internet, intranets,
massive hardware configurations, in tandem represent a giant
supercomputer of their own. This amalgamated supercomputer
allows a computational arena where users might center all of
their computer software, connectivity, and hardware within the
cloud and not on their individual PC’s or systems. Various
vendors will facilitate the cloud configuration. This results in
the users being able to access there applications, memory,
servers, etc. in the cloud and only use, or rent those computer
services they need at anyone point in time (scalability), and
ensure that whatever is applied is the most up to date version
of the application. These configurations allow for SaaS
(Software-as-a-Service), HaaS (Hardware-as-a-Service), IaaS
(Infrastructure-as-a-Service),
PaaS
(Platform-as-a-Service),
VIaaS (Virtual-infrastructure-as-a-Service), etc.
There are number of concerns for the clients of cloud
computing suppliers and the cloud facilitators and these are
offered from a Berkeley University study in February of 2009
and include:
1. Availability of service
2. Data lock-in
3. Data confidentiality and auditability
4. Data transfer bottlenecks
5. Performance unpredictability
6. Scalable storage
7. Bugs in large distributed systems
8. Scaling quickly
9. Reputation fate sharing
10. Software licensing [5]
The primary way to avoid these pitfalls is to understand the
triggers, include them in your risk control plan, and be sure to
use effective environmental scanning to check for issues and
address them quickly and effectively as well as monitor the
development and maturation of the cloud and adjust as needed.
It is important for organizations to understand the possible
deltas so they might follow strategies to mitigate them as much
as possible as we facilitate, sell, and operate within the cloud
to decrease cost and increase revenue through virtual work and
virtual project application.
5. Crowdsourcing
Definitions
may
vary,
but
the
basic
concept
of
crowdsourcing is to leverage the collective intelligence of
people at large to complete business tasks that a company
would either perform itself or outsource to a provider.
Crowdsourcing has been around since early man, but the
135
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

virtual world puts the concept into hyper-warp in application.
Although it looks like a simple form of benefiting from
collective intelligence, the term is more often used in the
context of organizations making focused efforts to achieve a
specific task by soliciting contributions from a large, loosely
defined community using collaborative technologies as the
facilitator and this applies well to virtual project teaming
configurations since the endeavor is temporary and virtuality
allows the members to function as a displaced, asynchronous,
transitory team. Contributors are often prescreened for their
knowledge and skill level and this would be the case with
virtual project team members.
Crowdsourcing benefits include access to a large talent pool,
reduced expenses and time spent for tasks, and utilizing the
Internet for collecting data and feedback which offers time and
cost benefits for research and development functions. It is a
means for management to keep control ever rising staffing
costs and staffing risks associated with marketplace and
demand fluctuation. When combined with the scalability of
using the cloud for memory and application access, a very
flexible business model emerges which can run on the fly.
Crowdsourcing improves creativity access and provides the
exciting prospect of leveraging new resources with experience
and skills that may not already be apparent within the
organization as well as enhanced flexibility. Crowdsourcing is
another tool to apply to get the most out of virtual human
resources options and bringing the best participants to the
virtual project team.
6. Consumerization of Information Technology
Technology has become more embedded in peoples’ lives,
and is used virtually in all aspects of daily life – on and off the
job. It is important that IT organizations understand how to
harness the new paradigms that consumerization creates and
that this be facilitated to advance the advantages of virtual
working teams. Consumerization recognizes the overwhelming
commonality
of
information
technology
application
and
attempts to exercise that fact to the organization’s benefit.
The key to understanding is to look at consumerization as an
attitude
toward
the
use
of
technology.
Members
of
organizations need to draw from the fact that they are
consumers of technology and are thereby better equipped to
apply it in virtual working arrangements since they use it in all
facets of their lives on a daily basis. Social networking,
blogging, etc. can provide an advantage to an organization and
overcome some of the issues with virtual project teaming such
as trust. Catering to the consumerization acknowledgement
needs
of
employees
will
create
new
opportunities
for
organizations to gain economic advantage.
This consumerization trend presents a conundrum to the
traditional corporate IT organization. Although there is general
agreement that there may be gains in use of consumer
technology, security remains the deal breaker. The challenge
for enterprises is to manage the trend in such a way that does
not limit the usefulness of technologies and not result in any
loss of information, value and time in the virtual workspace.
This security issue is major with distributed virtual teams and
must be dealt with as with any risk. IT and security
organizations should assess value and security pressures in
determining appropriate policies and controls to apply in the
control and monitoring of virtual work teams.
7. Transition to a Business Foundation
This same succession image we find in naturally occurring
memetic knowledge advancement might be applied to the
business environment as organizations and products come and
go on a plane of competition and survival. The spread of
knowledge and application relative to IT consumerization,
crowdsourcing, cloud computing, etc. in meeting organization
needs can provide an advantage in the knowledge niche.
The customer has limited resources to trade for unlimited
desires in the
retail realm.
This fact naturally creates
competition between the businesses attempting to have those
limited resources traded for their products. As is noted by
Argyris, “The key activity in the universe called managing is
creating and bringing about intended outcomes…” and those
intended outcomes are survival, growth, and profit for a
business organization [6]. An environment is realized in which
succession of business processes and products naturally takes
place in an effort to gain the trading of the customer. Those
methods and products, which work the best, will perpetuate
and go through succession along with the knowledge or
memes, which might support them and this phenomenon, is
observable in multiple industries.
Knowledge or meme creation, application, and succession
within
work
environments
entered
a
realm
unlike
any
previously observed in recorded time with the birth of
information technology driven virtual business environments.
Information technology allows for meme communication and
applicability rates never observed in the past enabling world
markets to explode. These meme succession and development
rates now facilitate high speed paradigm shifts bound in a
virtual business environment and leadership must adjust to the
needs of this knowledge and IT driven environment.
Ammeter and Dukerich’s research concluded that leader
behavior is the only predictor of team performance and
suggested that the interaction between leader methodology and
team member performance provides a fruitful opportunity for
an organization to gain an advantage [7]. Leader application of
an
understanding
of
knowledge
hybridization
and
use,
advancement within the business niche, and a realization of the
needed leadership methodologies within the dynamic virtual
realm results in great opportunity and risk within ever
expanding world markets. Proper hybridization of leadership
and knowledge management reduce risk and perpetuate
opportunity.
8. Project Management Proliferation
Project management has moved more to the hub of
management processes than any other management design in
the past quarter of a century [8]. Project management became
a major organizational concern in the 1960’s, although its
foundation
goes
back
to
early
history
and
it
became
136
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

scientifically based in the 19th Century [9]. The real need for
project management links to when business came to the
realization that organizing work around projects provided
benefits [10]. More work is oriented today with a beginning, a
center, and an end. The perpetuation of project management
has grown in business directly along with virtual teaming
(Gray & Larson).
Project management encompasses an endeavor which is
temporary, bringing together a group of individuals, many of
whom might work for differing factions of the parent
organization, to complete a change founded unit of work to
advance the organization on some level. Projects are
typically divided into two different types of endeavors which
include “Greenfield” type projects that encompass some
type
of
construction
endeavor
and
IT
(information
technology) / business based projects which involve some
type IT based application development or change. The IT /
business type projects oftentimes do not result in a tangible
product created somewhere geographically, but rather an IT
founded creation which is housed in virtual space on IT
devices and this type of project is the focus of this writing.
Virtual project teams involve collections of individuals who
function together while being physically separated [11].
IT / Business projects are very applicable to virtual project
team configurations on account of the product itself tending
to be virtual in composition and the majority of the
participants on the project having access to a variety of
virtual worker tools including e-mail, web conference,
instant message, white boards, blogs, mash-ups, webnars,
cloud
bound
applications
and
storage,
Microsoft
applications or
type
applications,
etc.
Virtual
project
teaming provides low cost, high quality, rapid resolutions
through
the
collection,
blending,
and
application
of
knowledge via collective networking [12]. This allows for
the application of crowdsourcing where the project is able to
access
participants
from
the
world
via
participation
solicitation. Thus, the best individuals can be brought to the
temporary
endeavor,
and
other
project
endeavors
simultaneously,
and
then
members
move
onto
other
undertakings upon project completion. It is this fact which
equates to the virtual project participants as being transitory
in make-up.
When
troubles
occur
within
the
project
team,
the
organization oftentimes finds no comprehensible leadership,
individuals working in silos, and the level of social unrest
increases [13]. Hefner and Malcolm, in a survey of 175,000 IT
projects, determined that 16% were completed within budget
and time objectives. They also determined that close to one-
third (32%), were cancelled before completion and that fewer
than half (42%), ever met the initial requirements and
objectives [14].
9. Virtual Work
Virtual work has transitioned from an occasional occurrence
in the early 1990’s to a norm in the present Century. Roebuck
and Britt view the networking virtual process as replacing the
pyramid hierarchy of the workplace [15]. As of 2004, there
were over 24 million people working at remote locations [16].
Talukder determined that 81% of business-based respondents
indicated virtual environments would increase in the next three
to five years [17]. According to Krantz 1990, and referenced
by Humphreys, “Organizations must now contend with vastly
different conditions in which former approaches no longer
apply, and which require that they develop capacity to change,
learn, and adapt quickly and decisively” [18]. This fact lies at
the crux of change and growth for organizations wishing to
apply the appropriate paradigms for success in this global
environment.
The application of virtual technology requires managers and
leaders change methods to meet the demands and opportunity
of the environment [19]. Relationships, or lack there of
between dependencies pertaining to virtual work groups has
the potential of providing knowledge for virtual organization
operations [20]. The importance of high levels of performance
in
virtual
environments
will
continue
to
expand
as
organizations increase virtual operations and the use of teams
that work partially or completely virtually [21].
The proliferation of virtual work equates to managers
being required to provide leadership within the new
environment and the fine-tuning of methods to rally the
demands put on themselves and the team. Virtual team
members have special concerns with trust, multitasking,
current technology use, culture, member burnout, member
development and education, and facilitating self-leadership
and management, and may never meet face-to-face. It is
incumbent upon the virtual leader to take into account these
considerations and how to address them to ensure success.
Virtual project team communication should be monitored
based upon:

Do we have agreement on our team ground rules?

Turn around time on emails, phone calls, etc.

How we share information

Willingness (and method) to give & receive
direct feedback

How we make decisions

How will we effectively use media?

Conference Calls (Whole and/or part of team)

Email

A meeting/interaction platform (i.e., NetMeeting,
others)

Document/Information

Sharing/Knowledge Management

Face-to-face Opportunities (Whole and/or part of
team)

Other tools?

How will this team handle disagreements and/or
conflict?

How will we remain connected to our
stakeholders or customers? [22]
A quantitative, correlational study by Hitson, based on data
collected from virtual workers in 23 nations indicated virtual
workers find the greatest levels of job satisfaction when lead
via a Self-Management style of leadership [23]. Comfort with
a Self-Management style tends to increase as the virtual team
137
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

member increases their tenure in the virtual workplace. The
Self-Management style is characterized by the actions of
leaders who exhibit minor responsibility for team methodology
or results. Leaders who display this style provide negligible
structure,
methodology
leadership,
transformational
leadership, assistance toward objective acquisition, and team
limit management [24]. With this style, the actual team
members have little responsibility for the leadership of the
team as well. The followers tend to lead and manage
themselves individually and depend extensively on information
technology to do so.
Self-managed teams tend to not need much in the form of
leadership or receive much leadership [24]. With this style, the
designated leader or the followers handle leadership behaviors
on an as needed basis. An example of this type of team
leadership scheme would include project teams and quality
improvement teams and project use within organizations as
increased in parallel with the advancement of IT.
According to Hackman, teams lacking rigid leadership
structure
within
the
virtual
environment
show
better
performance [25]. This realization lends credence to the result
that virtual team workers would find a self-management
leadership methodology desirable since they would tend to be
acting on their own much of the time. Literature indicates that
comfort with self-management leadership grows with exposure
to the virtual work environment. Effective and continuous
leader
communication
in
combination
with
knowledge
acquisition, distribution, and rapid application has become
paramount. Please note the following scatter plot which
displays the correlation between follower job satisfaction
relative to the level of agreement between what the follower
desires in their leader and what they are provided.
1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
0.500
0.400
Participant Pearson Correlation
150
100
50
Job Satisfaction Score
R Sq Linear = 0.101
Virtual workers’ level of job satisfaction is directly affected
by the leadership style they are exposed to and certain
leadership styles function better than others do within the
virtual teaming environment [23]. This finding runs in tandem
with studies completed on face-to-face teaming operations.
The greater the agreement between what the follower desires
from their leader and what they receive, the greater the level of
job satisfaction [23]. The leadership needs may vary from
follower to follower and team to team, but meeting those needs
leads to higher levels of performance and follower job
satisfaction.
10. Model Rationale
Project
driven,
rapidly
expanding
virtual
work
environments,
the
business
advantage
of
knowledge
development, application, and hybridization, the advantage of
the Self-Management style in virtual work environments
combine
to
precipitate
a
tripod
of
rationale
for
the
development and facilitation of the KFVSM. The model
works from the perspective that leadership ability and process
is a diagnosable, teachable dynamic function of our specie.
Consideration of the ever increasing dynamic nature of world
business markets as driven by information technology is
facilitated within the model allowing for reactive, expedient
change.
This
empowerment,
change,
knowledge
based
leadership development and application serves as the fulcrum
for the balanced advancement of the organization where the
needs of the organization and the business environment are
held in balance with the needs of the organization members /
followers thus allowing market change to be quickly turned
into an advantage for the whole organization.
Leadership
is
a
group
of
activities
carried
out
by
organizational members that centers on accomplishing the
tasks of setting direction, building commitment, and creating
alignment [16]. Virtual work environments put great stress on
the alignment factor as the target of success is constantly
shifting. Evaluating leadership outcomes requires a multi-
disciplinary approach in order to be successful and this can be
achieved
by
referencing
the
meeting
of
organization
environments relative to the fulfillment of contextual factors of
all stakeholders.
While there are many different mechanisms to parse the
various aspects of leadership, the virtual environment demands
eight key aspects of leadership ability. Those aspects are
advocacy and inquiry, re-definition of leadership, emerging
environments, evaluations, strategy and tactics, organizational
vision, innovation, and normative foundations. These aspects
are
perpetuated
through
intelligence,
responsibility,
task
competency, motivation, courage, resolution, trustworthiness,
decisiveness, self-confidence, assertiveness, and adaptability
which form the center of the leadership pillar of the model.
This suggestion rests on evidence that a prescriptive and
systematic approach to leadership and performance evaluation
is more effective than sporadic or ad-hoc evaluation and
increases the chance of high levels of leadership
and
organization performance.
The
primary
task
of
leadership
in
today’s
virtual
organization environment is to lead change, quick change. The
change environment creates a leadership dilemma for today’s
leaders,
but
this
can
be
mitigated
through
innovation,
knowledge development, and using the memetic process to the
advantage of the organization. The memetic process functions
in unison with information technology to facilitate knowledge
use through self-managed team members. To lead effectively
requires an advocacy and inquiry personal philosophy in which
the leader displays a concrete and rationale approach to the
process
of
leadership
and
knowledge
development,
management, and distribution. This approach must be shifted
to meet environment needs. The leadership dilemma stems
138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

from
decline
related
issues
such
as
increased
global
competition,
restructuring
downsizing,
increasing
virtual
markets,
and
business
failures
in
the
organizational
environment, which present many complex challenges to the
organizational
leader
should
a
systematic
approach
to
leadership not be facilitated [25].
11. Scanning and Predictive Process
According to Kouzes and Posner, people learn to be leaders
by emulating behaviors observed by leaders they view as role
models
[27].
This
involves
the
transfer
of
leadership
knowledge
or
a
leadership
memetic
bound
process.
Understanding leadership requires the evaluation of leadership
behaviors as they work together to influence the outcome of
leadership practices [28]. Evaluating leadership is driven in a
large part by leadership’s ability to divine what the future has
in hold. Breadth of experience, span of knowledge control and
knowledge
feedback
mechanisms,
understanding
organizational and community values, follower needs all
contribute to improving the accuracy of forward-looking
predictions. By contrast, attributes of pride, perceptions of
having to stand alone and power issues all serve to cloud the
vision to be communicated.
Prior
to
a
vision
being
communicated
to
followers,
reflection must give way to an analysis of where the
organization needs to go and this involves continuous scanning
and predicting actions. As an organizational guide, leadership
must develop a strategy that defines the moral, ethics, and
values of where the organization needs to be while at the same
time being cognizant of the foundations of change and
knowledge application which stakeholders will relate to in the
here and now. In other words, the context of change in
congruence with knowledge development and proliferation is
as important as the end result. Scanning and predictive
behavior are integral parts of the KFVSM and encompass both
the
needs
of
the
followers,
the
organization,
and
all
stakeholders.
Each element of a virtual organization strategy needs to be
regularly checked against what leaders think they saw as part
of their managerial crystal ball. In order to do this, a small but
meaningful sample of measurable checks and balances need to
be taken to ensure that what a leader thought was the future is
in fact what transpired. It is here that the crux of evaluation,
scanning, and predicting are especially important because
without measurement, leaders cannot reflect; without reflection
leaders cannot analyze; and without analysis, knowledge
implementation and self-management within virtual work
environments are scattered at best.
12. KFVSM Application
A leadership model for information technology driven
virtual work groups and project teams should provide a
methodology to visualize a process able to deal with the
dynamic parameters and primary variables impacting the
environment under review. The model must rest on the
assumption that leadership is a trait which is trainable and
changeable and that this factor will allow for continuous
leader, follower, and organization success. The memetic
process
lies
at
the
development
and
dissemination
of
applicable, malleable, combinable knowledge, which fosters
continuous change, self-management, and growth for the
virtual
organization.
For
the
memetic
process
and
the
leadership process to function at their highest levels, quality
information technology must be facilitated, properly trained,
and continuously updated.
According to
Ha and Stoele, information technology
accounts for more than 50% of capital equipment investments
within today’s
organizations
[29].
Given such promise,
organizations invest significant portions of their resources on
technology acquisition and implementation only to achieve
returns from these investments a minor 10% of the time [30].
The degree of compatibility between people and technology
correlates to the degree of organizational leadership, strategic
culture application, and applied employee reward system in
place [31]. The goal of the KFVSM is to increase return on
these organizational investments in virtual IT facilitation and
team leadership and functionality.
Leadership forward vision is both figuratively and literally
demanded by KFVSM if the greatest levels of virtual team
leadership success are to be realized. The leader must literally,
through scanning and predictive processes founded in metrics,
evaluate the position of the organization relative to its
objectives and the meeting of the needs of the followers to
ensure that balance and forward progress are being maintained
within both realms of the fulcrum of leadership resting in the
center of the model. The leader must figuratively scan the
organization
playing
field,
the
competition,
markets,
conditions, just as the captain of ship from the bridge, and
make long-term decisions as to the course to be charted to
enable the greatest levels of success. It is from this leadership
position of vision, at the foundational pivot point of the model,
that stability of all stakeholders, organization, and follower
needs and processes are maintained while allowing for growth.
The virtual leader, just as with the traditional leadership
role, must strive for the proper blend of supporting, coaching,
advising, and delegating to members of the follower group.
This can vary from follower to follower and project to project.
Oftentimes virtual team members are transitory in that they
quickly move from project to project and may participate on
multiple virtual teams simultaneously. This moves the team
leader from captaining a team ship to a team fleet where each
member is an independent stand-alone vessel in the virtual
realm. This factor also has impact on proper blend of
supporting, coaching, communicating, rewarding, advising,
and delegation to be applied by the leader.
Contextual factors pertain to certain circumstances and
variables associated with a specific environment [32]. The
primary contextual factors impacting the movement toward
pre-set
organization
objectives
for
virtually
operating
organizations
include
metrics,
processes,
accountability,
creating change, governance, internal communication, external
communication,
organization
culture,
gaining
support,
networking, and diversity. The primary contextual variables
for virtual followers include training, counseling, listening,
139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

rewarding, communicating, multi-tasking, job satisfaction,
analyzing,
follow-up,
evaluating,
and
planning.
These
contextual
factors
must
be
balanced
by the
leader
in
conjunction
with
organization
objectives,
knowledge
application, and dynamic markets through reactive adjustment
of the KFVSM at the point of the fulcrum.
Leadership behaviors that will lead to effective change
implementation and build sustained change capability include
focusing on building the capability of organizational members
to turn continuing change into an advantage and inspiring
shared vision by engaging others with a vision of things which
can be accomplished. Other essential behaviors include
enabling followers to act by believing in their fellow members’
potential and establishing conditions in which their potentials
can be realized. This process encompasses acting as a role
model and displaying integrity via coordination of words and
actions
while
gaining
a
perspective
of the
needs
and
personalities of each follower [33]. Leadership behaviors
which advance the objectives of the organization, stakeholders,
and
executive
leadership
allow for
success and
leader
advancement
within
the
organization.
The
KFVSM
encompasses this advancement within an environment driven
by contextual variables, guided through strategy driven
business environment scanning, founded on time tested and
new leadership practices, and facilitated via knowledge bound
information technology based virtual work.
The model provides a soft system approach to virtual team
leadership
which
serves
as
a
qualitative
methodology
specifically to this soft system where advantage can be gained
through the application of systems thinking to non-systematic
scenarios [34]. As espoused by Couprie, Goodbrand, Li, and
Zhu, “Soft problems . . . . are difficult to define. They will
have a large social and political component. When we think of
soft problems, we don't think of problems but of problem
situations” [35]. Soft systems specifically refer to systems,
which can be very difficult to quantify such as those involving
human beings or human beings interaction with other systems
such as virtual team operations and this is the case with virtual
teams and virtual team leadership. Quantified information and
data can be coupled with soft systems thinking and a path to
understanding motivations, viewpoints, and interactions among
virtual organizations is facilitated [35].
A
soft
systems
approach
to
virtual
work
leadership
recognizes that the system is unstructured and the leader gains
vision through expressing any problem situation through rich
visuals. The KFVSM provides the ability to view the situation
and produce root contextual definitions and allows the leader
to decide from what rich visual perspectives to look at the
virtual leadership environment. The result is the leader
building conceptual models of what the system must do for
each root consideration and compares the conceptual models
with the real world while identifying feasible and desirable
changes in developing recommendations for taking action to
improve the virtual teaming leadership environment from both
sides of the model; a soft-systems self-audit.
13. Conclusion
When leaders construct a new vision and communicate new
meanings to followers, a common theme is facilitated and this
provides strategy to the interaction of the team within, and with
other teams. Bolman and Deal asserted, “Vision turns an
organization's core ideology or sense of purpose, into an image
of what the future might become” [36]. Virtual working
individuals make up the fastest growing segment of the
workforce and this is combined with the advancement of virtual
project teams [37]. Because of these facts, importance is
generated to gain a greater understanding of the dimensions of
distance between virtual employees and leaders because of the
impact the relationship between these two parties has on the
function and performance of the organization.
Amalgamation of virtual follower readiness, transcendent
leadership parameters, understanding of power and influence,
application of project management concepts, knowledge and
application of dynamic leadership styles provide a playing field
where the greatest chance of success exists. Virtual team
leadership enabling trust, project management skills, effective
communication, a transitory perspective, expanding information
technology, and proper team personnel through facilitation of
an understanding of soft systems allows for virtual team
members to experience elf-management, leadership, power,
growth, and success simultaneously. The KFVSM allows for a
strategic approach to virtual team leadership and the flexibility
to meet quickly changing operating environments. Multiple and
changing variables involved within the virtual leadership
equation might be managed effectively and increase leader
performance.
Leaders that spend time exhibiting these behaviors may find
that they have a more proactive workforce, with motivated and
satisfied
employees
[38,
30].
Additionally,
the
shared
knowledge and the ability to identify with the leader bring an
increased level of confidence in both the leader and in
themselves [40]. These outcomes are excellent foundations to
make the organization more resilient for the long term within
virtual work environments and reach greater levels of success.
14. References
[1]
M. C. Hitson, A model for enhancing knowledge creation, application,
and succession while facilitating leadership change within virtual work
environments, International Conference on Information, Knowledge, and
Process Management, eKnow 2009, February 1, 2009.
[2]
P. K. Moser, & A. vander Nat, Human knowledge: Classical and
contemporary approaches (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press, 2003.
[3]
F. Heylighen. (2001, November 23). Memetics. Available:
http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/MEMES.html
[4] Berkley Study Group, Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of cloud
computing. Available on the World Wide Web at
http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2009/EECS-2009-28.pdf,
2009.
[5]
C. Argyris, Actionable knowledge: Design causality in the service
consequential theory, The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, Vol
32 p. 390, Dec. 1996.
[6] A. P. Ammeter, & J. M. Dukerich, Leadership, team building, and team
member characteristics in high performance project teams, Engineering
Management Journal, Vol. 14, pp. 3-11, 2002.
[7] C. Gray & G. Larson, G., Project management: The managerial process.
Boston: McGraw- Hill Primis Custom Publishing 2001.
[8] N. Mingus, N., Alpha teach yourself project management.
140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Madison, WI: John A. Woods Publishing, 2002.
[9] D. F. Cooper, S. Grey, G. Raymond, & P. Walker, Project
risk management guidelines: Managing risk in large
projects and complex procurements, New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd,
2005.
[10]
W. Combs, & S. Peacocke, Leading virtual teams. T+D, 61(2), 27,
2007.
[11]
A. Sivunen, Strengthening identification with the team in virtual teams:
The leader’s perspective. Group Decision & Negotiation, 15(4), 345-
366, 2006.
[12] D. Hefner, & C. Malcolm, 15 Essential steps of IT management.
Health care Financial Management, 63. 2002
[13] D.B. Waters, Help for team efforts. Darwin Magazine, 43, 2004.
[14] D. B. Roebuck, & A. C. Britt, A. C., Virtual teaming has come to stay:
Guidelines and strategies for success, Southern Business Review, Vol.
28, pp. 29-39, 2002.
[15] A. Martin, & C. Ernst, Leadership, learning and human resource
management: Exploring leadership in times of paradox and complexity,
Corporate Governance, Vol. 5, p. 82, 2005.
[16] M. I. Talukder, The perception of professionals and management
personnel on the virtual organization, Journal of Computer Information
system, Vol. 43, pp. 92-99, 2003.
[17]
J. H. Humphreys, Transformational and transactional leader behavior,
Journal of Management Research, Vol. 1, pp. 149-159, 2001.
[18] H. Topi, Supporting telework obstacles and solutions, Information
Systems Management, Vol. 21, p. 714, 2004.
[19] B. S. Bell, & S. W. J. Kozlowski, S. W. J., A typology of virtual teams:
Implications for effective leadership, Group and Organization
Management, Vol. 27, pp. 14–33, 2002.
[20] C. Garton, Managing communication and politics on virtual teams,
Multilingual, Vol. 18, 52-54, 2007.
[21]
M. Noble, Starting up a Virtual Team. Available on the World Wide
Web
at http://www.teambuildinginc.com/article_virtual.htm, 2009
[22] M. C. Hitson, An analysis of leadership methodology and job
satisfaction among virtual team members, Proquest, to be published,
2008.
[23] B. V. Krosigk, A holistic exploration of leadership development,
Journal of Business Management, Vol. 38, pp. 25-3, 2007.
[24] R. J. Hackman, Leading teams: Setting the stage for great
performance. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002.
[25] K. K. Eggleston, & R. S. Bhagat, Organizational contexts and
contingent leadership roles: A theoretical exploration, vol. 46, pp. 1177-
1192, 1993.
[26] J. M. Kouzes., & B. Z. Posner, Encouraging the heart: A leader’s
guide to rewarding and recognizing others, San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass, 2003.
[27] S. J. Zaccaro, Trait-based perspectives of leadership, American
Psychologist, Vol. 62, p. 6, 2007.
[28] Y. Ha, & L. Stoel, Internet apparel shopping behaviors: The Influence
of general innovativeness, International Journal of Retail &
Distribution, Vol. 32, p. 377, 2004.
[29] C. Kontoghiorghes, Key organizational and HR factors for rapid
technology assimilation. Organization Development Journal, Vol. 23,
pp. 26-40, 2005.
[30] M. Crocitto, & M. Youssef, The human side of organizational agility,
Industrial Management + Data Systems, Vol. 103, pp. 388-398, 2003.
[31] J. W. Creswell, Research design: Qualitative &
quantitative approaches, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publishing, Inc,
1994.
[32] M. Higgs, How can we make sense of leadership in the 21st century?
Leadership & Organizational Development Journal, Vol. 24, p. 273,
2003.
[33] Soft Systems Methodology - Checkland. (2005, December 7), Available:
http://www.12.manage.com/methods_checkland_soft
_systems_methodology.html
[34] D. Couprie, A. Goodbrand, B. Li, & D. Zhu. (2005). Soft Systems
Methodology. Available:
http://sern.ucalgary.ca/courses/seng/613/F97/grp4/ssmfinal.html
[35] L. Bolman, & T. Deal, T. Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice,
and leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003.
[36] M. K. Ahuja, L. Robert, K. Chudoba,, &D. H.McKnight, Identity
formation among virtual workers. Paper presented at the Academy of
Management Annual Meetings, Seattle, WA, 2003.
[37]
M. R. Fairholm, Different perspectives on the practice of leadership,
Public Administration Review, Vol. 64, p. 577, 2004.
[38] B. Lim, &R. E. Ployhart, Transformational leadership: Relations to the
five-factor model and team performance in typical and maximum
contexts, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 89, pp. 610-621, 2004.
[39] M. L. van Engen, R. van der Leeden, & T. M. Willemsen, Gender,
context and leadership styles: A field study, Journal of Occupational
and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 74, p. 581, 2001.
[40] C. Aldrich, The new core of leadership. T+D. Vol. 57, pp. 32-37,
March, 2003.
141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

