10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Improving African Healthcare through
Open Source Biomedical Engineering
Carmelo De Maria∗†‡
Email: carmelo.demaria@centropiaggio.unipi.it
Daniele Mazzei∗‡
Email: mazzei@di.unipi.it
Arti Ahluwalia∗†
Email: arti.ahluwalia@centropiaggio.unipi.it
∗ Research Center E. Piaggio, University of Pisa, Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, 56122, Pisa, Italy
†Department of Ingegneria dell’Informazione, University of Pisa, Via G. Caruso 16, 56122, Pisa, Italy
‡FabLab Pisa, Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, 56122, Pisa, Italy
Abstract—The lack of accessible quality healthcare is one of
the biggest problems in Africa and other developing countries.
This is not only due to the unavailability of resources, but also
to the absence of a structured formative process for the design
and management of healthcare facilities. Crucial to the effective
and efﬁcient exploitation of healthcare facilities and biomedical
technology is the support of Biomedical engineers, who form the
link between technology and medical practice. Indeed Biomedical
engineers, together with nurses and doctors, form the pillars of
healthcare systems in the developed world. In this paper, the
Open Source for BioMedical Engineering (OS4BME) project and
its kick off summer school are presented. The OS4BME project
aims at developing a new generation of biomedical engineers,
able to exploit emerging technologies generated by the recent
“Makers” revolution. During the one week summer school,
students from various sub-Saharan countries were introduced to
these new design, development and sharing paradigms. Students
worked together to identify new simple biomedical devices,
which could help in daily clinical practice in their countries. A
cheap and easy-to-use neonatal monitoring device was chosen
as a Crowd design project. The OS4BME Baby Monitor was
designed and assembled by the students during the one week
summer school, demonstrating the creative potential of the
new generation of biomedical engineers empowered with the
paradigms of crowdsourcing and rapid prototyping.
Keywords-Biomedical Engineering; Open Source; Open Hardware;
Crowdsourcing; Africa.
I.
INTRODUCTION
While the givers of healthcare are certainly doctors, clini-
cians and nurses, at least in the developed world, biomedical
engineers are widely recognised as being the cornerstone
of any medical facility with high technology diagnostic and
therapeutic equipment and devices. In the less developed
or emerging countries, the role of engineers in the hospital
context is less well consolidated, as pointed out in our short
paper presented at the VIII International Conference on Digital
Society in 2014 [1].
Indeed, the scarcity of accessible quality healthcare in
Africa is inextricably linked not only with the lack of re-
sources, but also with the lack of adequately trained biomedical
engineers [2]. Excluding South Africa, apart from few singular
initiatives (in Nigeria and Ghana), no university in sub-Saharan
Africa offers a fully-ﬂedged Biomedical Engineering graduate
and post-graduate programme [3].
Several reasons for this can be identiﬁed, but one of the
most important is the absence of a clear common understand-
ing of BioMedical Engineering (BME) as a ﬁeld of study both
in higher education as well as in the medical sector. Although
there are a number of technical level clinical and biomedical
engineering courses scattered through sub-Saharan Africa,
their quality and content are often questionable [4]. Moreover,
medical equipment does not have common standards or oper-
ating protocols; indeed in most developed countries, hospitals
and clinics have very expensive maintenance contracts with
manufacturers who train their own specialized technicians [3].
As a result, the medical device industry in Africa is largely
absent and there is an over reliance on foreign companies
to repair and design biomedical instrumentation, and resolve
technical problems. Very often developed countries donate
machines to African hospitals and clinics. While this is an
honourable act, the machines usually end up being abandoned
when they stop working due to lack of adequate maintenance
[5] [6].
The experience of one of the authors in the ASIALINK
project, “Development of Core Competencies in the areas
of Biomedical and Clinical Engineering in the Philippines
and Indonesia 2005-2008” [7] [8] has shown us that long
term and sustainable improvements can only come through
i) recognition on the part of policy makers, of the importance
of in loco trained experts capable of managing and repairing
biomedical equipment and ii) development of expert skills
through individualized programmes that cater to the speciﬁc
social, cultural and technological needs of a region. These are
the two keys to a sustainable and efﬁcient health care system.
However, the world has completely changed with respect to
2006, when the ASIALINK project was considered a landmark
in South East Asia. The continuous connectivity with tablets,
mobile phones, the rapid dissemination of social networks,
and the access to free e-learning [9], makes teaching easier
and harder at the same time, because of the huge amount of
available information.
The world of BME is also changing, here again thanks to
various virtual communities that live, exchange and discuss
on the web. While, a couple of years ago, the development of
biomedical devices was essentially linked to companies and
universities, now the ﬁrst examples of open source biomedical
devices, such as the Gammasoft Open electrocardiogram and

11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the Smartpulse oximeter are beginning to appear [10] [11].
Although these instruments are not accurate or safe enough to
be inserted in the clinical routine, their use can probably save
a life more than a damaged, unused (e.g., for high cost) or
useless (e.g., because no one knows how to operate) Magnetic
Resonance Imaging machine.
Indeed, as The Economist [12] points out in an insightful
laymans overview of this burgeoning ﬁeld, software-reliant
devices have also brought on new types of potential risks for
patients. The article underlines the difﬁculty of exposing spe-
ciﬁc problems with these products, given that medical software
(and hardware) is proprietary and patent-protected, thus veiled
in secrecy [13]. The open-source approach could, in theory,
make it easier to ﬁx, or even avoid, dangerous ﬂaws before
they hurt or kill hundreds or thousands of patients. Despite this
virtual revolution the mainstream academic community in most
countries, developed or not, remains largely ignorant of the
potential of open source software, hardware and prototyping.
This is particularly evident in Africa - we refer in this paper to
sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa - where tradition
and hierarchy play a strong role at all levels, more so in
academia. The authors are of the opinion that academia, and
speciﬁcally biomedical engineers in higher education, must
embrace these new tools, and pass on the message that an
Open Source product, developed by a community, without a
multinational brand is not equal to un-reliable.
Indeed, today, thanks to crowdthinking and crowdsourcing,
the design of several products has an intrinsic revision process,
driven by the community, which has become an active player,
and no longer a passive element. The community is the best
analyst in terms of quality, reliability and feasibility. While this
philosophy is now well accepted in the “software” world, there
is still an unjustiﬁed unbelief in open “hardware”, because
many people are anchored to the consolidated production
processes, in which product development is affected by high
costs due to the inﬂexibility of high throughput fabrication
technologies (e.g., injection molding). As described in the
seminal work of Chris Anderson “In the next industrial
revolution, atoms are the new bits” [14] [15] 3D printing (later
described in the text) is giving everyone, companies, makers,
and inventors, the tools that were the exclusive prerogative of
a few companies less than ten years ago.
A note of caution however; the freedom given by the Web,
and by the possibility to share, fork and re-implement projects,
which characterises the Open Source Software, Electronic,
and Hardware world, has one major drawback: organizing
information (schematics, blueprints) and quality control are the
boring parts that are not always pursued in a passion-driven and
self assembled community. In the context of BME however,
this latter aspect is critical for ensuring safety and efﬁcacy
of biomedical devices, and must go hand in hand with the
adoption of open resources for medical applications.
We present here a position paper on the beneﬁts and
use of Open Source tools and platforms in BME speciﬁcally
in Africa - a continent that needs to jump on the fastest,
cheapest and greenest wagon to growth and self-sufﬁciency
in healthcare or face being left behind. The adoption of these
new methods of creating and thinking needs to be coupled
with open standards and regulations for medical device safety.
We thus argue that the new virtual sharing mentality should be
wholeheartedly embraced, valorised and overseen by African
universities through a common Open Source for Biomedical
Engineering platform (OS4BME) rendering the development,
and maintenance of medical equipment accessible to the
African continent.
After a discussion on the potential of Crowdthinking (Sec-
tion II) and BME in an African context (Section III), we
describe the OS4BME project (Section IV) and its kick-start
initiative in Nairobi in 2013 (Section V).
II.
CROWDSOURCING AND CROWDTHINKING PLATFORMS
Currently, there are several resource sharing platforms
available on the internet. Their use is spreading throughout
the developed World, starting from Europe and the US. The
growing accessibility of these platforms, like any shared
common resource, has resulted in the generation of huge
amounts of garbage. Sifting the useless from the useful is
a monumental task and requires experience in design and
engineering as well as some skills in negotiating the now
cluttered internet of things. More importantly, at present, there
are no speciﬁc engines or platforms focused on the sharing
of biomedical instrumentation and devices. This is because,
by their very nature, biomedical devices possess stringent
performance requirements to comply with regulatory standards
to ensure patient safety.
In the past few years, various studies on social episte-
mology and group judgment aggregation have been published
[16] [17] demonstrating both theoretically and practically the
superior heuristic value of collective, non expert, knowledge
compared to individual or small group assessment, based on
consolidated rules and expectations. In 2006, Jeff Howe coined
the Crowdsourcing Neologism in a futuristic article in Wired
magazine [18]. Publishing of a neologism related to society
cooperation in a magazine instead of in a traditional journal
paper is a clear indication of how this new ﬁeld is driven by
a sort of creative talent of the community leading to tangible
products for business and non-proﬁt purposes [19].
Crowdthinking platforms are becoming important tools
for design and development of new products. Platforms like
Wikipedia [20], Thingiverse [21], YouMagine [22], Instructa-
bles [9] allow the generation of information that spans from
text documents to complex designs and blueprints. Recently,
the National Institute of Health of United States has proposed
the 3D printing exchange portal [23], that collects 3D-printable
ﬁles related to biomedical ﬁeld from molecular and anatomical
models to designs of prosthetic hands. Two more targeted
initiatives are represented by Appropedia [24] and Open
Source Ecology [25]. The ﬁrst is focused on collaborative
solutions in sustainability and poverty reduction, collecting
projects on construction, energy saving, food, agriculture and
also medical devices. The underlying theme is represented by
the concept of Appropriate Technology, a term which indicates
those technologies that are easily and economically used from
readily available resources by local communities to fulﬁl their
needs, compling with environmental, cultural, economic, and
educational resource constraints of the local community [26].
The Open Source Ecology represents a network of people,
farmers, engineers, architects and supporters, whose objective
is to create an open technological platform that allows for the

12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
easy fabrication of the 50 different Industrial Machines that
it takes to build a small civilization with modern comforts.
Thus, several web based communities [27] have an active role
in crowd-development and crowdthinking and also various Fa-
bLabs (Fabrication Laboratories) [28] are being born with the
aim of bring technology to the people, empowering the creative
process with the possibility of building real, physical objects.
Using this approach healthcare issues such as prosthetics are
also being addressed. For example, Not Impossibles Project
Daniel, uses 3D printers to make prosthetic arms for children
in worn-torn Southern Sudan [29].
Leaving aside large diagnostic and imaging equipment and
prosthetic implants, the vast majority of biomedical devices
have a large turnover and no one company monopolizes the
market. They are also extremely diverse: examples are plasters,
thermometers, hospital beds, sphygomanometers, etc. In this
arena, there is huge scope for Crowd driven improvements
and innovation.
In the context of BME, we still need a high level of
supervision, to control the quality and to guarantee the respect
of safety standards. By virtue of their access to the brains
of the future, universities are the right (and perhaps the
only) institutions to properly teach instruments for exploiting
cloud and crowd based technology and “doing”, while giving
due importance to concepts, such as ethics, standards and
regulations. However, the former is often unknown to even
the most brilliant professors. More worrying is that fact that
in very few universities do BME core competencies include
knowledge on regulatory pathway development for medical
devices. In addition, there are very few e-learning courses in
BME and few universities make use of the newer technology
platforms for teaching this discipline.
We deﬁne the Crowd, with a capital “C”, as groups of
individuals trained and assisted by institutions of technical
and higher education, to design, innovate and build together
through sharing. As such, the Crowd can and should consist
of healthcare providers as well as engineers and technicians.
If properly guided by standards and regulations, guaranteed
by universities as the organ for control, certiﬁcation, knowl-
edge and learning, the Crowd is an enabling system for the
design and development of medical devices. In addition, the
Crowd philosophy can be extended to production processes so
fostering local economic growth. In fact, the new methods of
production now accessible to all do not require the delocaliza-
tion of manufacture.
III.
CONTEXTUALIZATION
A. Biomedical Engineering for Africa Today
As Nkuma-Udah et al. point out [3], there are few African
universities which offer BME courses. Those that do are based
on curricula which were designed for Western universities
over 20 years ago and which place undue emphasis on niche
subjects like MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMs), nano
medicine and cell engineering and less on the learning of new,
hard technology and equipment management, maintenance
and repair [30]. Evidence from the ASIALINK project has
demonstrated the value of developing expert skills through
individualized programmes that cater to the speciﬁc social,
cultural and technological needs of a region. While we are
not advocating a complete revolution in BME teaching here,
we are strongly in favour of the upgrading of curricula based
on solid engineering principles (as outlined by Linsenmeier
[31]) with new courses, new technology and new ways of
thinking and problem solving, speciﬁcally adapted to the needs
of countries with few resources. This approach is similar to
that proposed by Tzavaras et al. [32] on computer enhanced
education laboratories. Fusing the crowd design philosophy
with the Biomedical Engineer’s objective of improving hu-
man healthcare requires that patient safety and efﬁcacy be
the paramount concern and also the motivating force behind
Crowd driven innovative biomedical device design. Biomedical
devices must be designed with safety and efﬁcacy in mind, and
they should adhere to regulatory standards (albeit most of the
countries in the region of interest have no regulatory authority
for biomedical devices). Thus, the Crowd not only needs to
be empowered with the technological know-how, but also be
given the means to intelligently scan and ﬁlter the internet for
useful open source materials without being overwhelmed by
the choice available. To do so requires fundamental knowledge
on biomedical devices, ergonomics, engineering and human
physiology: this multidisciplinarity cries out for Crowd, but
with a controlled accredited infrastructure capable of design-
ranking and accreditation, as we discuss in Section V.
B. Social Context
Today, Africas healthcare systems are at a turning point.
A growing urban middle class is willing to pay for better
treatment. Donors and governments are now beginning to
provide better healthcare facilities and increased access to
medicine, at least in urban areas. There is no question that
technology has played a key role in improving the quality and
cost effectiveness of health services as well as access to health
care facilities. Technology is at the heart of effective healthcare
services helping medical and paramedical personnel in all
stages of their work: from prevention to diagnosis, treatment
and monitoring. Yet, technology entails huge investments in
economic, physical and human resources; it comes with a price
tag that can bear heavily on the limited resources of many
African countries. To be able to function properly and safely, it
requires an appropriate physical environment, proper care and
maintenance, and skilled operators. However, Africa lacks the
human resources needed to install, maintain, manage, upgrade,
design and produce medical devices, leaving it ever more
reliant on foreign technical expertise. Honourable initiatives,
such as the Engineering World Health (EWH) [33] or the
Amalthea Trust [34], which work in partnership with local
hospitals, educational institutions and governments, providing
training courses for improving local capacity, have a limited
impact because they are not Africa-driven programmes. Thus,
once the volunteer goes home, there is no-one left to take over.
We are fully aware that although professors, students and
technicians maybe very enthusiastic with the idea of open
source and Crowd driven biomedical device design, some
Ministries of Health, or some powerful economic and other
interest groups in developing countries could to be linked
to major device manufacturers and therefore can block or
hinder our initiative because their interests are threatened. For
this reason, part of our project is also focused on creating
awareness-raising activities and workshops targeting policy-
makers, e.g., representatives of the Ministries of Health and

13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Education. Through the help of our funders we will develop
advocacy campaigns for the recognition of the importance and
relevance of biomedical and clinical engineering in the health
care system. Policy makers will be made aware that local
and locally trained Biomedical Engineers equipped with the
means to create, design, innovate and fabricate are crucial for
generating and managing a sustainable high technology health
care system, which does not rely on foreign economic aid or
volunteers. Indeed, our aim is to give the universities the tools,
guide them through the platform and then let them research the
best social conditions (at state level, society level, and so on)
to turn the implementation of the project into a success. We are
extremely sensitive about the issue of not imposing our ideas
and cultural values on the People of Africa. Unfortunately, as
recently observed by many African NGOs and local leaders,
the passion for helping Africa is, more often than not, driven
by the need to feel good about ourselves and seldom truly
serves Africans or Africa to move forward. This push has to
come from within Africa and should not be propelled by our
need for self fulﬁlment or create publicity. The Daniel Project
is a good example of this type of high proﬁle, unsustainable
aid.
IV.
OS4BME PROJECT: THE CROWD PHILOSOPHY IN THE
BME CONTEXT
What we advocate therefore is giving biomedical engineers
in sub-Saharan Africa, through their universities, the tools and
know-how they need to design, develop and maintain their own
equipment based on the new open hardware and open source
revolution, which is happening before our eyes. To achieve this
ambitious goal, we outline three main objectives:
•
the development of human resources in higher educa-
tion in Biomedical Engineering in Africa,
•
the creation of the expert-based OS4BME infras-
tructure, a sharing, making and repository platform
(based on the customization and integration of already
available web tools) for vetting, searching and ranking
designs to propel continuous improvement and inno-
vation;
•
the making of a new genre of Biomedical Engineer
(in Africa but also in the western countries) equipped
with the capacity to exploit and develop innovative
designs on the OS4BME platform and of discriminate
use of web based and open source resources.
OS4BME capacity building efforts in design, entrepreneur-
ship and regulation will ensure that Africa can timely exploit
the open revolution. Setting up the OS4BME platform requires
the creation of a professional BME working group, versed
in the regulatory aspects of biomedical safety and standards,
which is able to assess, vet and categorize projects, designs or
blueprints and then make them available through the platform
open repository. The philosophy is summarised in Figure 1.
Device development will be underpinned by quality and
performance benchmarks to ensure safe human-device interac-
tion, as the ﬁrst step towards harmonisation of technology and
biomedical device regulations across the African continent. At
the same time, worldwide institutions involved in Biomedical
Engineering, rapid prototyping, healthcare technology, higher
Figure 1.
Scheme of the OS4BME project: integrating capacity building with
a web platform for the creation of safe open source biomedical devices
education, medical device and prosthesis development can
use the design, data and technology sharing platform as a
reliable repository of innovative projects, ideas and networks
for cooperative and excellent research and growth.
A. Capacity building: A New Genre of BMEs Empowered with
Crowd Thinking and Design Tools
The Open revolution is creating a deluge of information
where only some “pearls” are contained. Building a new genre
of BME professionals means making them able to ﬁnd these
cores of quality information. To do this, they have to be trained
not with a new set of disciplines but rather with a new “forma-
mentis” giving them the proper tool-set. Maths and Physics
remain cornerstones but their use in design and prototypes
dramatically changed in the last 10 years: nowadays, the
designing phase can be interwoven with prototyping steps
creating the new concept of pretotyping [35]. Having the
possibility to do “tangible design” means optimizing the entire
design process, but also enhancing new ideas and solutions.
The identiﬁcation of the most suitable instruments and
classroom management and organization is the ﬁrst step to
demonstrate the potential of open source in the BME context.
We targeted three main areas of teaching, necessary to give a
shape, a brain and to share the ideas:
1) Rapid prototyping: The term Rapid Prototyping (RP)
indicates a group of technologies that allows the automatic
fabrication of physical models based on design data using a
computer. RP processes belong to the generative (or additive)
production processes. In contrast to abrasive (or subtractive)
processes, such as lathing, milling, drilling, grinding, eroding,
and so forth in which the form is shaped by removing material,
in rapid prototyping the component is formed by joining
volume elements. In general, RP techniques follow a Computer
Aided Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAD/CAM)
approach. The object is designed using a computer (CAD),
which then sends the instructions to the machine to obtain the
desired shape (CAM), fabricated layer by layer. For the imple-
mentation of the RP principle several fundamentally different
physical processes are suitable, such as photopolymerisation,
conglutination of granules or powders by additional binders,

14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
extrusion of incipiently or completely melted solid materials
[36] [37]. RP was originally conceived as a way to make one-
off prototypes, but as the technology spreads more things are
being printed as ﬁnished goods [38]. Although 3D printing
is not competitive for mass production (millions of parts), it
is perfect in ﬁelds where the customization of products is
important: because the expense of making tools no longer
ﬁgures in the equation, the economics of mass production will
give way to mass customisation. Parts will then be made in
production runs not of a million or even of a few thousand, but
of one. Thus, 3D-printed products will continue to creep into
the medical, dental and aerospace industries where clients are
willing to pay a premium for custom products. In industries
that are not built on “markets of one”, 3D printing will help
product designers accelerate the design process. 3D printers
would also be invaluable in remote areas [39].
Thanks to the various Do-It-Yourself (DIY) communities,
several models of Open 3D printers are now available on
the Web. One of the most famous is the RepRap community
[40] built around the ideas of Adrian Bowyer. He imagined
a printer that can print its own parts, and hence through
a process of self replication is able to spread this technol-
ogy throughout the population [41]. The Fused Deposition
Modelling (FDM) approach was chosen for its simplicity: a
ﬁlament of plastic material is extruded through a hot nozzle
following a predeﬁned tool-path to build the various slices of
a layered object [36]. All the parts of this 3D printer (there
are several versions) are open source. The electronics is based
on Arduino (see the next section), the software is open source
and produces standard G-code ﬁles. Designs can be shared
and any unprinted parts of the machine are easy to ﬁnd in
any DIY shop. Although, the quality of 3D printed parts made
by a RepRap is not high, we believe it is the right starting
point to teach the potential of 3D printing to newcomers.
The design and printing process is completely transparent so
that each step of the complex procedure is easy to follow
and replicate. Furthermore, recently the open 3D printing has
been indicated, for the African scenario, as an Appropriate
Technology [26]. As a conﬁrmation of this statement, the
supply of printing ﬁlament material, even in remote areas, can
based on plastic recycling, whose energy cost is lower than the
price of commercial ﬁlament [42]. Open source devices which
can produce useable ﬁlament from recycled post-consumer
plastic are current available on the web [43].
2) Electronic Prototyping Systems: Until about ten years
ago, electronic system design and development was a ﬁeld
accessible only to skilled users, such as engineers, technicians,
physicists, etc. Each time an electronic control system was
required in a project, the design process had to necessarily
include the choice of microcontroller, of a communication
system, of a power source, etc. This choice was then bind-
ing for the selection of further components, interfaces and
programming software. In 2005, a team of designers led by
Massimo Banzi created Arduino [44], a tiny board onto which
a microcontroller was mounted together with all the necessary
circuits and peripherals required for powering, communication
and expansion. A revolution had begun: electronic control
systems were not the bottleneck of prototyping anymore. With
Arduino, even users without electronics and programming
skills could integrate and electronic control system in their
own project pushing the limits of complex system design and
prototyping. The key factor of the Arduino platform is not
only the board but also the easy-to-use programming envi-
ronment, which allows unskilled users to program through a
very intuitive C like programming language. These two factors
allowed the birth of a huge user community, which empowered
the home and even industrial and academic electronics world
through the sharing of code, libraries and projects with open
source license. The availability of a pre-made piece of code
allowed people to focus their designs on the development of
functional and challenging parts using other projects and codes
as inputs for their own designs.
3) Content Management and Sharing platforms: As high-
lighted previously, the fast growing DIY community leaves
several interesting projects to languish without documentation
or with missing parts because a new, more interesting idea
was released. Indeed, one of the most challenging aspects of
cooperation in design and development is the organization and
sharing of information and content. However, thanks to the
revolution introduced by the blogging phenomenon, there are
various free and open source Content Management Systems
(CMS) available nowadays, which allow an easy and intuitive
co-production of documents. These systems have been demon-
strated to be useful even for the documentation of engineering
and technical projects. MediaWiki [45] in particular is the
core engine of the most famous web based encyclopedia
Wikipedia. With MediaWiki or similar engines it is possible
to create hypertexts made of a huge number of cross-linked
pages allowing the creation of very detailed documentations
and designs. MediaWiki is designed for the creation of text
based documents with embedded pictures and table. Graphics
and templates are very minimal allowing users to focus on the
real content, which is a core feature of a concurrent design.
B. OS4BME platform design and implementation
The OS4BME platform is a virtual research infrastructure
conceived as a facility for creating open excellence in Biomed-
ical Engineering, comprising an array of design resources,
including blueprints and performance data.
The platform will be composed of four sections, to fulﬁll
speciﬁc tasks of the project lifecycle:
•
a needs identiﬁcation section, open to everyone (gen-
eral public, healthcare providers), aimed at identifying
problems using forums and surveys, and also at gen-
erating disruptive new ideas;
•
a project management part, open to accredited
Crowd and coordinated by the new BMEs, using spe-
ciﬁc project management tools (e.g., Redmine [46]);
•
a repository, for free download of projects blueprints
which passed the development phase and have been
certiﬁed as compliant with standards;
•
a funding section, for supporting selected OS4BME
initiatives.
The development of a generic project is described in the
following subsections; here it is important to highlight the
differences with respect to the most popular web repositories
[21] [22] [23]: the OS4BME platform will allow a coordi-
nated development of a each single project and it will be

15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
downloadable only after vetting by a team of BME experts,
which will assess and score designs; only those considered safe
will be accessible for download. Moreover, full performance
and safety documentation and instructions on calibration and
maintenance have to be available. The OS4BME project goes
beyond the mission of EWH or Amalthea Trust [33] [34],
coupling capacity building to Africa-driven concurrent design,
achieved through the OS4BME platform.
1) Platform management and maintenance: As already
stated above, organizing information (schematics, blueprints)
and quality control are usually the weak point of the self
assembled communities for the “classic” open development.
Furthermore, in the context of BME, devices demands in terms
of safety and efﬁcacy require a more structured design. For
this reason, the OS4BME platform will foresee a Managing
Group (MG), composed of the new genre of BMEs, with the
aim at formalizing the problems and the needs that have to be
solved and fulﬁlled, and series of Project Leaders (PLs) that
will organize the speciﬁc project into horizontal or vertical
tasks. While the MG have to be considered as a sort of
“resident” group, any user can be the PL. The developers,
above deﬁned as Crowd, can participate to carry out the various
tasks, according to their speciﬁc skills. From the formal point
of view, there are no limits, in terms of academic title, to be
part of the network as a user, as it happens with other developer
communities; and it seems also reasonable that an academic
group can be logged as a single unit with the same ﬂag as a
single user.
The maintenance of the OS4BME organization/platform
(servers, people, meeting, summer schools and workshop or-
ganizations) will have of course a certain cost. We identiﬁed
possible sources for the upkeep:
•
fee payment from non-African Universities and Re-
search Institutes. The participation in a program as
OS4BME is to be considered prestigious, offering
students the possibility to design useful biomedical
devices, with a collaborative approach;
•
ﬁnancing from government. Considering the potential
impacts on education on economy that the OS4BME
project can develop, it seems reasonable that national
and international governative organizations can fund
this initiative;
•
crowdfunding: speciﬁc projects, under the initiative of
the project leader, can opt to access to Crowdfunding,
publishing the campaign in the “funding section” of
the OS4BME platform, or accessing other services
such as Kickstarter [47];
•
economic contribution from companies (see ensuing
paragraphs): companies that want to commercialize
the products developed thanks to the OS4BME plat-
form can contribute as an investment to this “dis-
tributed” R&D sector;
•
private donations.
2) Needs identiﬁcation and project development: That the
devices developed be useful in the African healthcare context
is central to the OS4BME philosophy. Quite often biomedical
equipment is left in the hands of healthcare workers through
donations, whether they are needed or not. Local conditions
such as availability of water, electricity and dust are quite
different in rural hospitals, and these must also be taken
into account. Thus, the most important criteria for identifying
devices for the platform is that they respond to speciﬁc needs
and provide speciﬁc solutions to daily problems that healthcare
workers face. This requires close contacts with medical and
nursing staff and local knowledge, thus the establish of formal
relationships with hospitals is an important component in the
implementation of the project. After the identiﬁcation of the
needs and the constraints, the project is formalized by the MG
in terms of objectives, norms and standards. At this point, any
user can propose himself as PL, organizing the work packages
of the project, receiving feedback from other users who can
participate in the various tasks according to their skills. At
this stage of development, the decision on the validity of the
project proposal is made in an indirect way by the Crowd
itself, supporting or not a project. The PL has in any case the
possibility to revoke a task and assign it different users if a
deadline or a project speciﬁcation is not respected. When a
project is completed, the MG has the role to verify the quality
of the speciﬁc products and its conformity to standards. A
sustainable approach can be the assignment to three different
Universities (not involved in the project) the task to built and
test the product, according to the documentation provided by
the developers. If this internal quality check is passed, the
MG will ask three Hospitals, which are part of the OS4BME
network, to test the product. After that, it will be available for
downloading.
As depicted in Figure 2, the lifecycle of a project also
comprises other two sections, the fund raising, and industrial
upscale. While the latter is not strictly part of the OS4BME
platform, a section of the platform is dedicated to support
from the economic point of view. In particular, crowdfunding
can be considered as a showcase for involving more partners;
furthermore, the MG can help the PL to write a winning
proposal to the various calls of funding agencies. Investor
and business angels can also see a fertile ground to sponsor
challenging ideas in OS4BME.
3) Project ranking: Starting from the consideration that
more than one design can be proposed to fulﬁll a speciﬁc
task/need, a classiﬁcation is required in order to facilitate the
users in the choice of the best solution for the speciﬁc case,
on the basis of local conditions. Starting from the necessary
requirement that the downloadable projects respect safety
standards, we identiﬁed three different criteria for ranking:
Feasibility The feasibility criterion is related on the building
phase of the device, and thus the following entries have to be
taken into account: cost (raw material and time), components
and material availability, construction simplicity (equipment,
and thus skills needed), procedures for quality check.
Usability The usability of the speciﬁc design solution refers
to those features related to the operating performance and
operating condition of the device: accuracy, adaptability to
various working conditions (e.g., salability of water, stable
power supply), level of competences needed, easy of use,
reusable/disposable.
Maintenance The maintenance criterion will provide a clas-
siﬁcation on the basis of the procedure needed to upkeep
the device in optimal working condition: number and costs
of maintenance interventions, necessity of specialized techni-

16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2.
Project lifecycle, from the identiﬁcation of needs to the design of
a product, up to a possible commercial exploitation, under open license, by
an external partner
cians.
After an initial score given by the developers and platform
board members, the ranking will be updated on the basis of
the users’ feedback.
4) OS4BME as a ﬂywheel for local economies: The authors
are aware of the differences that exist between the design for
prototyping and the design for manufacturing. The projects
available for downloading are safe and compliant to standards,
but are far from being deﬁned as a “product” in the industrial
sense (e.g., optimization of the production procedure, supply
chain). Design for manufacturing, the business model, the
business plan, the marketing campaign are beyond the limits
of the OS4BME platform, which however encourages the en-
trepreneurial spirit. The biomedical devices are in general high
added-value products, and authors believe that the platform can
be a ﬂywheel for local economies. In order to to guarantee a
sustainable development of these “spin-offs”, and ensure that
the open-source aspect will remain intact, the following three
requisites have to be satisﬁed:
•
the products and their documentation have to continue
to be open-source;
•
the companies have to be located in Africa;
•
the companies will economically sustain the OS4BME
project.
Figure 3. Group photo from OS4BME class, hosted by the innovator Summer
School, in the Kenyatta University Conference Center.
The MG will be in charge of signing agreements with these
companies. It is also expected that some of the products will
be copied by other entities in other countries (as it happens
sometimes also with patented products), but they will be not
branded as “OS4BME compliant”.
V.
OS4BME CLASS
To kick start the initiative and to demonstrate the potential
of a regulated open source design and prototyping platform
to academics and regulators/decision makers, we proposed a
short term intensive course. The course was implemented in
August 2013 in Nairobi, Kenya. Our aim was to introduce
the OS4BME concept to the African Engineering community
and thus create a small working group who will be involved
in the set-up of the new platform. To fulﬁl this objective,
the course was focused on the design of a biomedical device
from ﬁrst principles, its assembly and testing and discussion
of regulatory issues in device development.
The OS4BME course was hosted by the Innovators Sum-
mer School held at the Kenyatta University Conference Center,
Kenya and took place from the 12th – 16th of August 2013.
The Innovators Summer School is an initiative of United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA [48]), and
is aimed at fostering the economic development of Africa by
powering the higher education of the African students. The key
player in the initiative is the African Biomedical Engineering
Consortium (ABEC [49]), a consortium of African universities
with the common mission of bringing excellence to BME in
Africa. Over 48 students, technicians and lecturers from the
ABEC universities: Kenyatta University (Kenya), University of
Nairobi (Kenya), University of Eldoret (Kenya), Addis Ababa
University (Ethiopia), Makerere University (Uganda), Kyam-
bogo University (Uganda), Mbarara University (Uganda), Uni-
versity of Malawi (Malawi), Muhimbili University of Health
and Allied Sciences (Tanzania), University of Zambia (Zam-
bia) and University of Pisa (Italy) attended the course (Figure
3).
After introductory lessons to explain the aim of the course,
and some preliminary basics on RP Hardware, software,
electronics, and safety regulations, hands-on sessions were
provided, giving the students the opportunity to learn by
doing. Following the spirit of the course, the free and open
CAD/CAM software programs (FreeCAD [50], Slic3r [51],
and Pronterface [52]) were adopted to introduce the design

17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approach for 3D printing. For the electronics part, the Arduino
platform was selected, for both price, ease of use and ﬂexi-
bility. All documentation was reported using Mediawiki. The
keystone of the course was represented by the brainstorming
coordinated by the authors with the help of Dr. Molyneux,
a pediatrician from the University of Malawi, to understand
the problems of a pediatric department in an African hospital
context.
The discussion was centred on the respiratory problems of
new born premature babies and the monitoring of breathing
and body temperature. Together the class established the aim
of designing and building a low cost device, for monitoring
respiratory movements and temperature, able to shake the cot
to resuscitate the normal breathing of the baby when it stops,
and equipped with a sound and light alarm to call a nurse to the
cot. The implementation of these features was deﬁned together
with students, after the brainstorming session. The discussion
was focused not only on the functional aspects of the devices,
but also on their cost, feasibility safety and reliability, giving
the right direction to the project from its start.
After the deﬁnition of design speciﬁcations, students and
attendees were divided into four thematic groups, on the basis
of their previously indicated preferences: 1) mechanical design;
2) electronic design; 3) software design; 4) standard and
regulation identiﬁcation, and documentation. The subdivision
in groups was fundamental in order to keep everyone involved
in something they enjoyed: creativity is fed by passion and
enthusiasm, boredom kills innovation.
The proposed approach led to the design and fabrication
of an open source and low cost baby monitor (Figure 4) in the
space of 3 days. The monitor was composed of three modules:
•
an elastic band, to monitor the temperature and the
respiration of the baby;
•
a vibrating box, activated when the baby stops breath-
ing for more than 15 seconds;
•
a control unit, with a LCD display, 3 LEDs, sound
alarms and all the control boards.
Students were encouraged to refer to ISO standards, such
as IEC ISO 80601-2-56, with the aim of using these documents
to help their work rather than a constraint.
At the end of the course an evaluation survey was con-
ducted by the funders. Over 81% of participants expressed
extreme satisfaction in the course, although a good proportion
(46%) of them could have beneﬁted from more time and
previous knowledge on electronics, CAD and programming. In
fact, only one participant had previously been exposed to open
source technology. There was also interest in the regulatory
aspects and standards in medical devices. As the participants
were from different backgrounds, many had very little idea
what medical devices are and the critical importance of safety
issues in such devices. The action thus served to bring home
the importance of this aspect during the design of instruments
for BME.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The objective of the OSBME project was to develop and
nurture resource sharing and technological self-competency
Figure 4.
Some moments during the OS4BME class: preliminary test of the
device.
through the establishment of a virtual platform containing
ideas, blueprints, ranking criteria, FAQs and safety regula-
tions for creating new, competitively priced and innovative
biomedical devices. We envisage an OS4BME platform man-
aged, regulated and monitored through an academic led pan-
African organization, assigned with the task of collecting,
classifying, vetting and disseminating information and know-
how on the design and development of biomedical devices
and instrumentation. In the long term, the sharing of ideas and
designs should become the norm, allowing continuous user-
driven improvements in healthcare.
A summer school was organized to kick off these ideas,
with the aim to create a cohesive working group to initiate the
construction of the the platform. The response from students,
professors and technicians involved in the school was enthusi-
astic. It was crucial for participants to play an active role in the
identiﬁcation of the problem, selection of components, design,
assembling and testing of the device and in the discussion of
regulatory issues in the development of the device. Participants
were able to gain a hands-on introduction to electronic system
design and programming. All teaching materials, including
course documentation, the baby monitor design blueprints are
available online for the community to take on and develop
further. The 3D printer and all components are now hosted at
Kenyatta University’s Faculty of Engineering (Figure 5) and
being put to good use.
According to the funders’ survey the course was an un-
doubted success. Most students and staff were unaware of the
existence of tools, such as Arduino, FreeCad, Slic3r, Media
Wiki, etc., let alone the power and implications of open source
design and prototyping. The experience was instrumental in
bringing this knowledge to the participants, and their keen
interest throughout, particularly on 3D printing was apparent.
The blueprints of the devices developed in OS4BME,
which comprise not only the designs, but also the proper
guidelines and data for needs, quality and safety assessment
will be shared by and through the OS4BME community. In the
long term, the community will embrace not only African and
European universities and research centers, but also hospitals,
giving the possibility, through Creative Commons-like licenses,
to fabricate medical devices that will greatly enhance the qual-

18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.
Final ceremony of the OS4BME summer school. The 3D printer,
printing materials, Arduino electronic boards and the baby monitor were
donated to Kenyatta University.
ity of healthcare in developing countries. As a consequence,
the project will also foster economic growth both by creating
a substrate of highly-skilled personnel and by transforming
ideas generated by OS4BME open and crowd approach into
commercial products. In addition, national legislation on med-
ical devices amongst the ABEC countries is highly fragmented
and/or non-existent. The infrastructure will provide a common
substrate through which local biomedical device regulations
can be harmonised with the speciﬁc contribution of local
regulatory authorities.
Although there are several resource sharing platforms avail-
able as well as several courses on RP, digital design and
embedded electronics, none of these is dedicated to biomedical
devices. This is because biomedical devices must be designed
ﬁrst and foremost with patient safety and efﬁcacy in mind.
The OS4BME infrastructure, managed by the new genre of
biomedical engineers, can be the tool to address this challenge,
and its implementation is our objective in the next few years.
The initial cornerstone of this project was an intensive course,
the ﬁrst of its kind, addressing safety, ergonomics, biomedical
device design, and RP in an integrated manner. Further courses
of a similar nature are planned at all participating universities.
This open education and crowd-based design model could be
exported to universities in developed countries. Let us not
forget that the true beneﬁciaries are the students, who are
exposed to the web world at an early age. Educators should
keep pace with the open revolution and their pupils’ modes
of learning, adopting and integrating the approaches proposed
here in the teaching curricula. When embraced, the presented
Open Source tools and sharing mentality will give BME a
new impetus, open to novel teaching, learning, and design
paradigms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the UNECA, particularly
Dr. Victor Konde for supporting the OS4BME project and
ﬁnancing the summer school. The authors would also like
to thank Kenyatta University and in particular Prof. Martin
Nzomo and Dr. Daniel Oyoo for the logistic and the local
organization of the event. The OS4BME project and the related
summer school activities are documented and reported on the
ABEC website [49]. Dr. Molyneux was an important source
of guidance throughout the summer school. The authors would
like to thank also the University of Pisa and the FabLab Pisa
for supporting the preparation and organization of the summer
school. Part of the electronic material used for the course
and for the development of the Baby Monitor was donated
by Arduino [44] and the OS4BME experience was reported
on their ofﬁcial blog [53]. Finally the authors would like to
thank Eng. Giorgio Mattei, Eng. Serena Giusti and Alejandro
Callara for their excellent work in supporting and tutoring the
OS4BME summer school student groups during the course.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. De Maria, D. Mazzei, and A. Ahluwalia, “Open source biomedical
engineering for sustainability in african healthcare: Combining aca-
demic excellence with innovation,” ICDS 2014, The Eighth Interna-
tional Conference on Digital Society, 2014, pp. 45–53.
[2]
S. Mullally, Clinical Engineering Effectiveness in Developing World
Hospitals, ser. Canadian theses.
Library and Archives Canada =
Biblioth`eque et Archives Canada, 2008.
[3]
K. Nkuma-Udah and E. Mazi, Developing Biomedical Engineering in
Africa: A case for Nigeria.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 14,
pp. 3828–3831.
[4]
UNESCO Science Report 2010, Second revised ed.
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, Paris, France, 2010.
[5]
A.
Jones.
Medical
equipment
donated
to
developing
nations
usually
ends
up
on
the
junk
heap.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=
medical-equipment-donated-developing-nations-junk-heap
[retrieved:
January, 2014]
[6]
K. H. Courage. Medical technology donations often fail to help. [On-
line]. Available: http://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/observations/2012/
08/01/medical-technology-donations-often-fail-to-help/ [retrieved: Jan-
uary, 2014]
[7]
A. D. Ahluwalia, “Lessons from asia: Implementing higher education
in biomedical engineering for improvement of the healthcare system,”
in AfricaHI 2012 - The 2nd IASTED African Conference on Health
Informatics, Gaborone, Botswana, 2012.
[8]
J. Webster, “Strengthening bme in southeast asia [around the world],”
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 26, no. 1,
2007, pp. 10–10.
[9]
Autodesk
Inc.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.instructables.com
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[10]
Gamma
Cardio
Soft
S.r.l.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
gammacardiosoft.it/openecg/ [retrieved: April, 2015]
[11]
Freescale
Semiconductor
Inc.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
freescale.com/ﬁles/32bit/doc/app note/AN4327.pdf?tid=AMdlDR
[re-
trieved: May, 2015]
[12]
The Economist. Open-source medical devices: When code can kill or
cure. [Online]. Available: http://www.economist.com/node/21556098
[retrieved: April, 2015]
[13]
Z. Bliznakov, G. Mitalas, and N. Pallikarakis, Analysis and Classiﬁ-
cation of Medical Device Recalls.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007,
vol. 14, pp. 3782–3785.
[14]
C. Anderson. In the next industrial revolution, atoms are the new
bits. [Online]. Available: http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/01/ff
newrevolution/ [retrieved: January, 2014]
[15]
——, Makers: the new industrial revolution.
Random House, 2012.
[16]
J. Surowiecki, The wisdom of crowds.
Random House Digital, Inc.,
2005.
[17]
A. Doan, R. Ramakrishnan, and A. Y. Halevy, “Crowdsourcing systems
on the world-wide web,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 4,
2011, pp. 86–96.
[18]
J. Howe. The rise of crowdsourcing. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html [retrieved: January,
2014]

19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[19]
G. Fantoni, R. Apreda, D. Gabelloni, and G. Montelisciani, “You solve,
i learn: A novel approach to e-learning in collaborative crowdsourcing,”
in Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE), 2012 18th Interna-
tional ICE Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–10.
[20]
Wikimedia Foundation Inc. [Online]. Available: http://www.wikipedia.
org [retrieved: May, 2015]
[21]
Makerbot Industries LLC. [Online]. Available: http://www.thingiverse.
com/ [retrieved: January, 2015]
[22]
Youmagine 3D BV. [Online]. Available: https://www.youmagine.com
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[23]
M. F. Coakley, D. E. Hurt, and N. Weber, “The NIH 3D Print Exchange:
A Public Resource for Bioscientiﬁc and Biomedical 3D Prints,” 3D
Printing and Additive Manufacturing, vol. 1, no. 3, Sep. 2014, pp. 137–
140.
[24]
L. Grafman. [Online]. Available: http://http://www.appropedia.org/
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[25]
M.
Jakubowski.
[Online].
Available:
http://opensourceecology.org/
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[26]
J. M. Pearce and U. Mushtaq, “Overcoming technical constraints
for obtaining sustainable development with open source appropriate
technology,” Audio, Transactions of the IRE Professional Group on,
Sep. 2009, pp. 814–820.
[27]
Leaning Lab. [Online]. Available: http://www.leaninglab.org [retrieved:
May, 2015]
[28]
Fablab Pisa. [Online]. Available: http://www.fablabpisa.org [retrieved:
May, 2015]
[29]
Not
Impossible
LCC.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
notimpossiblelabs.com/#!project-daniel/c1imu [retrieved: April, 2015]
[30]
T. R. Harris, J. D. Bransford, and S. P. Brophy, “Roles for learning sci-
ences and learning technologies in biomedical engineering education: A
review of recent advances,” Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2002, pp. 29–48.
[31]
R. Linsenmeier, “What makes a biomedical engineer?” Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 4, 2003, pp. 32–38.
[32]
A. Tzavaras, N. Kontodimopoulos, E. Monoyiou, I. Kalatzis, N. Pil-
iouras, I. Trapezanidis, D. Cavouras, and E. Ventouras, “Upgrading
undergraduate biomedical engineering laboratory training,” in Engi-
neering in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE-EMBS. 27th Annual
International Conference of the, 2005, pp. 353–356.
[33]
Engineering World Health. [Online]. Available: http://www.ewh.org
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[34]
Amalthea Trust [Online]. Available: http://www.amaltheatrust.org.uk/
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[35]
A. Savoia, “Pretotype it-make sure you are building the right it before
you build it right,” 2011.
[36]
A. Gebhardt, Rapid prototyping.
Hanser Verlag, 2003.
[37]
C. K. Chua, K. F. Leong, and C. C. S. Lim, Rapid prototyping:
principles and applications.
World Scientiﬁc, 2010.
[38]
B. Berman, “3-d printing: The new industrial revolution,” Business
Horizons, vol. 55, no. 2, 2012, pp. 155 – 162.
[39]
R. N. Beyers, A. S. Blignaut, and L. Mophuti, “Mobile fablabs: Local
and rural innovation in south africa,” in Proceedings of World Confer-
ence on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications
2012, T. Amiel and B. Wilson, Eds.
Denver, Colorado, USA: AACE,
June 2012, pp. 112–122.
[40]
[Online]. Available: http://www.reprap.org [retrieved: January, 2015]
[41]
A. Bowyer, “3d printing and humanity’s ﬁrst imperfect replicator,” 3D
Printing and Additive Manufacturing, vol. 1, no. 1, March 2014, pp.
4–5.
[42]
M. Kreiger and J. M. Pearce, “Environmental life cycle analysis of
distributed 3-d printing and conventional manufacturing of polymer
products.” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, vol. 1, no. 12,
2013, pp. 1511–1519.
[43]
S. R. Feeley, B. Wijnen and J. M. Pearce, “Evaluation of potential
fair trade standards for an ethical 3-d printing ﬁlament,” Journal of
Sustainable Development, vol. 7, no. 5, 2014, pp. 1–12.
[44]
Arduino. [Online]. Available: http://www.arduino.cc [retrieved: January,
2014]
[45]
Wikimedia Foundation Inc. [Online]. Available: http://www.mediawiki.
org [retrieved: May, 2015]
[46]
J.-P. Lang. [Online]. Available: http://www.redmine.org [retrieved:
May, 2015]
[47]
Kickstarter
Inc.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.kickstarter.com
[retrieved: May, 2015]
[48]
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. [Online]. Available:
http://www.uneca.org [retrieved: May, 2015]
[49]
African Biomedical Engineering Consortium. [Online]. Available:
http://www.abecafrica.org [retrieved: May, 2015]
[50]
J.
Riegel,
W
.Mayer
and
Y.
van
Havre.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.freecadweb.org [retrieved: January, 2014]
[51]
A. Ranellucci. [Online]. Available: http://www.slic3r.org [retrieved:
May, 2015]
[52]
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/kliment/Printrun
[retrieved:
January, 2014]
[53]
Z. Romano. [Online]. Available: http://blog.arduino.cc/2013/10/10/
a-baby-monitor-goes-open-source/ [retrieved: May, 2015]

