Innovation Routes and Evidence Guidelines for 
eHealth Small and Medium-sized Enterprises 
Towards Feasible yet Convincing Evidence 
 
Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga, Sikke Visser, Robbert Menko,  
Hilco Prins, Irene Krediet, Timber Haaker, and Lianne Bodenstaff 
Research group ICT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{TJWM.Janssen}{M.Hettinga}{S.Visser}{RA.Menko}{H.Prins}{I.Krediet}@windesheim.nl 
Timber.Haaker@novay.nl, L.Bodenstaff@bizzdesign.nl 
 
 
Abstract - eHealth applications hold many promises, for 
instance to improve the quality of health care, to increase its 
accessibility, or to reduce its cost. Yet, many eHealth 
innovations never reach the stage where they get embedded 
into routine health care. This is due in part to a lack of 
evidence that these innovations indeed deliver what they 
promise. For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
particular, 
collecting 
convincing 
evidence 
for 
eHealth 
innovations proves to be a challenge as the available time, 
resources and expertise to do so are often limited. In response 
to this challenge, the research group ICT Innovations in Health 
Care at the Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
initiated the project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth. 
The project is a cooperation between 28 parties in The 
Netherlands: health care providers, patient organizations, 
health insurance companies, national health care authorities, 
and 15 eHealth SMEs. Its aim is to speed up eHealth 
innovation by providing eHealth SMEs with guidelines for 
collecting feasible yet convincing evidence. In this paper the 
project’s approach is introduced and the main results and 
lessons learned are discussed. The evaluation of eHealth 
innovations was found to be highly context-driven, with parties 
involved each employing their own criteria. Among the 
project’s main results is an eHealth innovation map, a diagram 
showing eHealth SMEs which parties in the Dutch health care 
system to involve, their roles and their mutual relations, their 
interests in eHealth innovation, and the kinds of evidence that 
may convince them of the added value of an eHealth 
innovation. A set of corresponding fact sheets was developed to 
provide eHealth SMEs with concise yet easily accessible 
information for choosing an innovation route and for 
determining what evidence to collect for relevant stakeholders. 
Keywords - eHealth; innovation route; evidence guidelines; 
health care system; stakeholder 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Getting an eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
health care often turns out to be a challenge. Several causes 
can be identified, including a narrow focus on technological 
aspects of the innovation, too little involvement from key 
stakeholders during design and implementation, or lack of a 
good underlying business model [2]. The research group ICT 
Innovations in Health Care at the Windesheim University of 
Applied Sciences (Zwolle, The Netherlands) has dedicated 
itself to study these issues and to support small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) in overcoming them. For instance, 
the research group recently published the eHealth Innovation 
Matrix [3]; an online assessment and library that offers 
eHealth SMEs 1 guidance in developing and evaluating a 
business model for their eHealth innovations. 
A. Problems collecting evidence for eHealth innovations 
In 2011 the research group organized a series of 
workshops for eHealth SMEs and organizations in health 
care. During these workshops an inventory was made of the 
problems encountered when getting eHealth innovations 
embedded in routine health care. Among the list of problems, 
collecting evidence for an innovation came out first. To get 
their innovation accepted by patients and care providers, 
reimbursed by health insurance companies, endorsed by 
patient organizations, or approved by national health care 
authorities, innovators often need to show evidence for the 
innovation’s effectiveness, for instance to improve treatment 
quality or reduce the cost of delivering health care. 
For a typical eHealth SME it is often unclear what kind 
of evidence is expected and by whom, and according to 
which standards this evidence should be collected. In other 
cases, the standard may be clear (e.g., a randomized 
controlled trial) yet practically unfeasible for an SME due to 
a lack of available time, (financial) resources, or expertise. 
To complicate matters further, care providers, insurance 
companies and care authorities offer no clear guidelines for 
eHealth innovators. They recognize that this discourages 
eHealth adoption and that it impedes innovation within the 
Dutch health care system [4]. 
Other researchers have also identified this barrier to 
eHealth implementation, albeit not specifically for SMEs. 
For instance, Mair et al. [5, 6] conclude in a meta-review of 
eHealth implementation studies that lack of validation and 
                                                           
1 eHealth SMEs are defined here as small and medium-sized enterprises 
offering eHealth products and services to patients, health care providers, 
and the general public. All eHealth SMEs participating in the project had 
less than 10 employees. 
188
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

evaluation is frequently presented as a barrier to eHealth 
implementation: “Without strong data demonstrating that a 
system works, improves standards of care, can be used 
efficiently and easily, and is cost-effective to implement, it is 
unlikely to win the confidence of policy makers and users.” 
[5, p. 23]. 
B. Towards feasible yet convincing evidence 
The project described here, Successful Entrepreneurship 
in eHealth [1], was initiated by the research group to address 
these challenges. The project constitutes a cooperation 
between 28 eHealth SMEs, health care providers, patient 
organizations, health insurance companies, and national 
health care authorities in The Netherlands. The project’s aim 
is to establish guidelines for collecting evidence in such a 
way that (i) it is practically feasible for eHealth SMEs to do 
so and (ii) the resulting evidence is acceptable and 
potentially convincing for care providers, health insurers, or 
care authorities. Hence, the project’s motto: towards feasible 
yet convincing evidence. 
To achieve its aim, the project set out to address the 
following research questions: 
1. What kinds of evidence for eHealth innovations are 
generally recognized? Are there any commonly 
accepted evaluation frameworks? 
2. What are relevant outcome indicators and methods 
to collect specific kinds of evidence? How do these 
compare in terms of methodological quality and 
practical feasibility? 
3. Which parties in the Dutch care system (patients, 
care providers, health insurance companies, national 
care authorities, others) will need to be convinced of 
the effectiveness of an eHealth innovation before it 
can be embedded into routine practice? 
4. How do these parties value the kinds of evidence 
mentioned earlier? What typically constitutes 
“convincing evidence” for these parties? 
 
By generating answers to these questions the project aims 
to offer guidance to eHealth SMEs: which parties will need 
to be convinced of the effectiveness of an innovation, what 
evidence will be required, and how to collect this evidence in 
a feasible yet acceptable way. 
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. 
In Section II the approach followed will be introduced, 
including the four phases in which the project was structured. 
Next, Sections III to VI will discuss the main results for each 
of the project’s phases (inventory, case studies, guidelines & 
best practices, and consolidation & tool development). 
Finally, Section VII summarizes the main conclusions. 
II. 
APPROACH 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth 
started at the beginning of 2012 and will conclude at the end 
of 2013. At the outset the project was structured into four 
phases. These phases are briefly outlined in this section. 
A. Phase 1: Inventory 
During this phase an inventory was made of generally 
recognized types of evidence. This was done by means of a 
literature review, consultation of online documentation, an 
expert session with representatives of Dutch health care 
providers, insurers, patient organizations, and national health 
care authorities, and a series of follow-up interviews with 
these experts. Questions to be answered included: Which 
parties are involved when getting an eHealth innovation 
embedded in routine health care? What kind of evidence is 
generally needed, and how should it be collected? How do 
parties value various kinds of evidence? And what criteria 
are typically used? 
The expert session was recorded and transcribed, and of 
each follow-up interview a report was made and sent to the 
participant for verification. The results of the expert session 
and the follow-up interviews were then summarized in a 
joint interpretation session by the research team, using so-
called affinity diagramming [7]. Thus, the main results of 
this phase were: 
 
An overview of (scientifically founded) frameworks 
for the evaluation of eHealth innovations; 
 
A detailed list of outcome indicators and methods, 
clustered into three identified themes (effectiveness, 
cost efficiency, and labor savings); 
 
A comprehensive description of the Dutch health 
care system, including the roles of the parties 
involved and their interests in eHealth innovation; 
 
An outline of four main strategies (“innovation 
routes”) to get eHealth innovation embedded into 
routine health care; 
B. Phase 2: Case studies 
Whereas the analysis during the inventory phase was top-
down, the analysis during the case studies was deliberately 
bottom-up – to involve the SMEs and to enrich the analysis 
with examples of concrete situations, dilemmas and 
obstacles encountered. To this end, cases from the 
participating eHealth SMEs were subjected to a detailed 
study by means of in-depth, semi-structured interviews and 
an analysis of available documentation. Questions included: 
How are SMEs trying to get their innovations embedded into 
routine care? Which stakeholders do they identify and 
involve? What kinds of evidence do these stakeholders 
require? What evidence did the SMEs collect so far, and in 
what ways? How did stakeholders evaluate the evidence, 
against what criteria? 
During each interview, the path followed by the SME to 
get its eHealth innovation embedded into routine care was 
reconstructed. Particular attention was paid to the 
stakeholders that had been identified and involved, and (if 
applicable) the evidence that had been collected. Where 
available, underlying documentation was used to analyze the 
collected evidence, in particular the outcome indicators and 
methodology used, the conclusions drawn, and, if applicable, 
how these conclusions were translated into a business case 
for stakeholders. Of each interview a report was made and 
sent to the participant for verification. Here as well, the 
189
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

results were summarized in a follow-up interpretation 
session using the affinity diagramming technique [7]. The 
main results included: 
 
Detailed, in-depth descriptions of successful and less 
successful strategies followed by SMEs to get their 
eHealth innovations embedded in routine health 
care; 
 
Specific examples of evidence that was collected 
and, if applicable, how it was evaluated by health 
care providers, insurers, patient organizations, or 
national health care authorities. 
C. Phase 3: Guidelines and best practices 
In this phase, the insights gained from the inventory and 
the case studies were combined. Best practices for 
embedding eHealth innovations in routine health care were 
identified, and guidelines for collecting required evidence 
were developed. Best practices and guidelines were then 
combined into a systematic approach for collecting evidence 
for eHealth innovations: the “eHealth innovation map”. This 
was done in a series of joint interpretation sessions by the 
research team. At several moments during this process, 
intermediate results were presented to and discussed with 
experts and project partners to collect feedback and 
suggestions for improvements. 
To validate the newly developed approach it is currently 
being applied and evaluated in a second series of case 
studies. Validation has also been performed during a series 
of workshops, both within the project (as part of the regular 
project meetings) and outside of the project (e.g., at national 
and regional eHealth-related conferences and symposia). In 
these workshops the approach was applied to a range of 
different cases at hand (usually provided by workshop 
participants) and evaluation happened afterwards by means 
of questionnaires and discussions with participants. Thus, the 
results of this phase included: 
 
A systematic approach, consisting of an “eHealth 
innovation map” showing which parties to involve, 
their roles and mutual relations, their interests in 
eHealth innovation, and the kinds of evidence that 
may convince them; 
 
A set of corresponding fact sheets providing concise 
yet detailed information for choosing an innovation 
route and for determining what evidence to collect 
for relevant stakeholders; 
 
Validation of the approach, including an inventory 
of practical issues and points for improvement 
(partly this is still work in progress). 
D. Phase 4: Consolidation and tool development 
In this final project phase, the systematic approach 
described above is being consolidated in a workshop 
protocol and a web-based tool, and documented in a booklet: 
 
The workshop protocol and web-based tool both 
provide guidance in choosing the most promising 
innovation route, identifying relevant stakeholders, 
and determining which kinds of evidence they may 
require. 
 
The booklet documents the systematic approach in a 
concise and accessible way, and aims to disseminate 
the project’s results to the wider audience of eHealth 
SMEs in The Netherlands. 
E. Ongoing dialogue 
Next to the activities in the above four phases, regular 
project meetings were organized to stimulate an ongoing 
dialogue between the participating organizations. During 
these meetings, SMEs introduced their cases, representatives 
of health care organizations discussed procedures or criteria 
used to evaluate eHealth innovations, and the research team 
presented the project’s latest results. To collect feedback 
from the project’s participants, mini-workshops were 
organized to evaluate the usefulness and correctness of the 
developed tools (such as the eHealth innovation map and fact 
sheets), typically by applying these tools to cases at hand. 
This approach resulted in several collaborations among 
the project’s participants. For instance, during one of the 
meetings a representative of a health insurance company 
called upon the participating SMEs to enroll their 
innovations at the company’s health innovation desk. Three 
SMEs did, and the progress of the three enrollments was then 
monitored closely by the research team to learn about the 
procedure and the criteria being used by this health insurance 
company to evaluate the three innovations. During this 
process both sides (SMEs and insurance company) were 
regularly heard by means of structured telephone interviews 
or brief questionnaires sent and answered by email. 
Furthermore, and as part of this process, the insurance 
company provided a list of the indicators used by its 
innovation desk to select promising eHealth innovations. 
III. 
RESULTS: INVENTORY 
This section highlights the results and lessons learned 
from the first phase, the inventory. 
A. Frameworks for evaluating eHealth 
During the literature study more than a few reports and 
scientific papers offering proposals for eHealth evaluation 
frameworks were found, most of them containing guidelines 
for setting up a proper evaluation study, lists of outcome 
indicators and measures for various aspects of eHealth’s 
impact, or descriptions of methods and instruments to collect 
data. We will describe four representative examples here. 
The extent to which these frameworks are actually being 
adopted and used, could not be established from the 
literature. 
1) NTOIP 
The Canadian National Telehealth Outcome Indicators 
Project [8] is a comprehensive framework covering four 
dimensions 
of 
evaluating 
eHealth: 
quality, 
access, 
acceptability, and cost. It is based on a hierarchy consisting 
of categories (for instance, “health status”), themes 
(“quality”), 
indicators 
(“quality 
of 
life”), 
measures 
(“morbidity”), and tools (“SF-12”). In total, 12 outcome 
indicators have been defined for the dimension quality, 6 for 
access, 15 for acceptability, and 11 for cost. For each 
dimension a top-3 of most important indicators has also been 
190
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

selected. Per outcome indicator, detailed information is 
provided on 16 elements, including purpose, characteristics, 
definition, rationale, potential uses, outcome measures and 
tools. NTOIP was designed to improve the scientific quality 
of evaluations of eHealth applications by providing guidance 
on specific outcome indicators. It is based on the results of 
an extensive literature review followed by a national experts 
workshop, and is aimed primarily at academic researchers. 
2) MAST 
In the European Union, Model for the Assessment of 
Telemedicine Applications [9] follows a similar approach. 
The model contains three elements: preceding considerations 
(to determine whether it is relevant to carry out an 
assessment), a multidisciplinary assessment (to describe and 
assess different outcomes of an eHealth application), and a 
transferability assessment (to assess the transferability of 
study results from one setting to another). In the 
multidisciplinary assessment, eHealth applications are 
evaluated in terms of seven domains, ranging from safety, 
clinical effectiveness, and patient perspective to economic, 
organizational, and socio-cultural aspects. Each domain is 
defined, and issues to consider within each domain are listed. 
No detailed guidelines are given with regard to study 
designs, methods, and outcome measures, although a manual 
is provided with examples of outcome measures for each 
domain, and methods for data collection. The development 
of MAST was initiated by the European Commission and 
carried out by a consortium of academic institutions using 
consensus building workshops with experts and decision 
makers. Its aim is to provide guidelines for a consistent 
assessment of eHealth outcomes, primarily for academic 
researchers performing evaluation studies to inform decision 
makers in health care. 
3) CADTH Economic Guidelines 
Economic evaluation (i.e., “value for money” analyses) 
of eHealth applications is an important area and specific 
frameworks have been developed for this purpose. An 
example of a rigorous framework is Guidelines for the 
Economic Evaluation of Health Technologies [10] by the 
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. The 
third edition of the Economic Guidelines contains 61 
guideline statements (do’s and don’ts) on 14 topics: study 
questions, 
types 
of 
evaluations, 
target 
population, 
comparators (i.e., alternatives likely to be replaced), 
perspective (e.g., society), effectiveness, time horizon, 
modeling, valuing outcomes (e.g., in terms of QALYs: 
quality-adjusted 
life-years), 
resource 
use 
and 
costs, 
discounting (“translating” future costs and outcomes to 
present-day values), variability and uncertainty, equity 
(“fairness”), generalizability, and reporting. Five types of 
economic evaluation are discussed (cost-utility analysis, 
cost-effectiveness analysis, cost-minimization analysis, cost-
benefit analysis, and cost-consequence analysis), selection of 
which depends on the research question, the health condition 
of interest, and the availability of data on outcomes. The 
framework is primarily aimed at experts performing 
economic evaluations to inform decision makers in health 
care. 
 
4) Health IT Evaluation Toolkit 
In contrast to the above frameworks, the Health 
Information Technology Evaluation Toolkit [11] by the U.S. 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is primarily 
aimed at the non-expert. The toolkit provides step-by-step 
guidance for project teams who are developing evaluation 
plans for health IT projects. It does so by means of a 
comprehensive template guiding the team through the 
process of determining the goals of a project, what is 
important to its stakeholders, what needs to be measured to 
satisfy stakeholders, what items are realistic and feasible to 
measure, and how to measure these items. To this end, each 
step is accompanied by explanations and checklists. 
Furthermore, examples are provided of eHealth evaluation 
projects with suggested evaluation methodologies, as well as 
a detailed list of evaluation measures (with suggested data 
sources, cost considerations, potential risks, general notes, 
and references to the literature). These measures include 
clinical outcome measures, clinical process measures, 
provider adoption and attitudes measures, patient adoption, 
knowledge, and attitudes measures, workflow impact 
measures, and financial impact measures. 
The Health IT Evaluation Toolkit was developed as part 
of a remote mentorship initiative by the AHRQ, to address 
common challenges experienced by health IT project teams 
at nonacademic institutions [12]. These challenges include: 
leaving evaluation as something to be determined “later”, 
overscoped and unrealistic evaluation plans, a mismatch 
between the health IT being implemented and the evaluation 
measures chosen, searching for relatively rare events without 
the required statistical power, incorrect initial assumptions 
about data quality and feasibility of data collection, using an 
improper comparison group, insufficient attention to the 
details on data collection and analysis, and a lack of 
consideration of qualitative methods. It is very likely that the 
same or similar challenges are also faced by eHealth SMEs 
when they set out to collect evidence. 
B. No generally accepted evaluation practice 
Other frameworks were found in the literature as well. 
Like the examples discussed above, most are comprehensive 
and detailed. With a few exceptions, they are developed for 
academic researchers or experts informing decision makers 
in health care. They offer guidance – at least, once the aim of 
evaluating an eHealth innovation has become relatively clear 
– and a collection of outcome indicators, measures, methods 
and tools with clarifications to make informed choices. 
However, none of the frameworks found provide the same 
detailed and comprehensive guidance with regard to 
identifying the various stakeholders involved in embedding 
an eHealth innovation into routine care, their interests in the 
innovation, and subsequently the aim of an evaluation and 
the kinds of evidence that may be required. Possibly, these 
choices are too simply dependent on the specific case at hand 
to establish generic guidelines. 
Furthermore, there seems to be a general consensus in the 
literature that there are currently no commonly accepted 
standards for collecting evidence for eHealth applications 
[e.g., 13, 14]. Some researchers have argued that the 
191
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

assumptions, methods, and study designs of experimental 
science may altogether be less suited for application in the 
socio-political context in which eHealth evaluations usually 
take place, and that alternative approaches that view 
evaluation as social practice rather than scientific testing 
need to be considered [15]. Others argue that the tendency to 
focus on “hard” evidence as provided by randomized 
controlled trials may result in a disregard for the interests and 
experiences of the individual patient [16]. The Council for 
Public Health and Health Care in the Netherlands, which 
advises the Dutch government on health care policy, concurs 
[17]: “The advance of evidence-based medicine has brought 
about a lot of good things. [...] However, there are 
disadvantages as well. The emphasis on scientific evidence 
may lead to a diminished appreciation for types of care 
where acquiring such evidence is impracticable, and to a 
neglect of elements such as personal attention, trust and 
‘presence’. The ethical question of what constitutes good 
(and reimbursable) care is being reduced to the question of 
what has been proven effective. [...] We must ask ourselves 
the question: what kind of evidence fits what kind of care? 
Hard evidence where it is attainable, but for other types of 
care where it is not realistic, different requirements need to 
be imposed. In short, we need to look for suitable evidence.” 
Some researchers argue for a contextualized approach in 
which all relevant stakeholders are actively involved in the 
definition of the outcome indicators that will be used for 
evaluation [18, 19]. These findings were confirmed later on 
during workshops and interviews with representatives of the 
participating organizations; they have become a cornerstone 
in the approach that has been developed. 
C. Three main themes for evidence 
During the expert session with representatives from 
health care providers, insurers, patient organizations, and 
national health care authorities, three dominant themes were 
recognized by the participants within the larger concept of 
evidence: effectiveness (“did health care get any better?”), 
cost efficiency (“did it get any cheaper?”) and labor savings 
(“did it get any less labor intensive?”). Below we briefly 
describe each theme, including a few relevant issues 
mentioned by the participants. 
1) Effectiveness 
This kind of evidence relates to clinical effectiveness, 
quality of care, safety, accessibility, timeliness, and patient 
satisfaction. However, eHealth’s primary purpose may not 
always be patient recovery; frequently, eHealth is directed at 
retaining autonomy, strengthening the involvement from 
relatives, maintaining social participation, or improving a 
patient’s wellbeing. Although these aspects are hard to 
measure, they are important from the patient’s perspective 
and also valued by care professionals and society as a whole. 
2) Cost efficiency 
This includes evidence with regard to cost savings, cost 
control, and efficiency in terms of time, money, and other 
resources. eHealth applications have traditionally been 
considered as a promising way to reduce the cost of 
delivering health care. With the growing emphasis on budget 
control in health care, evidence for eHealth’s cost efficiency 
is becoming increasingly relevant for decision makers. The 
current Dutch health care policy, for instance, is directed at 
stimulating cost-efficient eHealth applications that are 
replacing (instead of supplementing) traditional forms of 
care [4].  
3) Labor savings 
This relates to evidence that the same number of patients 
can be treated with the same quality, but with fewer hours 
worked by health care professionals. Although labor savings 
might be considered a special case of cost efficiency, the 
predicted labor shortage in the Dutch health care system 
justifies this kind of evidence to be considered separately. 
Labor savings also occur when an eHealth application 
reduces the complexity of a particular task, allowing highly 
schooled professionals to delegate part of their work to less 
skilled staff, or when applications directed at self-
management stimulate or allow patients and their informal 
caretakers to assume an active role in a treatment. 
Various outcome indicators and methods relating to the 
above themes of evidence have been identified during the 
session and also from the literature. They have been 
compiled into three detailed overviews, i.e., one for each 
theme. The results of this are reported elsewhere [20]. 
D. Putting evidence into perspective 
During the same expert session with representatives of 
health care organizations it became clear that strong forms of 
evidence 
(obtained 
using, 
for 
instance, 
randomized 
controlled trials) are certainly not always necessary to 
facilitate the uptake of eHealth applications. The participants 
agreed that randomized controlled trials are not always 
useful, necessary, or practically feasible. Furthermore, care 
providers and health care insurers indicated that they will 
still rely on their own patient data to support any decisions 
they make about embedding eHealth applications. 
National care authorities, on the other hand, hold the 
view that eHealth applications typically only change the way 
in which health care is being delivered. As long as there are 
no indications that safety or clinical effectiveness are at 
stake, and within the limits defined by regulations governing 
the provision of health care, care providers and health care 
insurers are free to negotiate and decide about the use (and 
reimbursement) of eHealth applications. 
E. “Innovation routes” for eHealth innovations 
One topic which arose very prominently during the 
expert session, is that it is not straightforward which path an 
SME should follow within the Dutch care system to get an 
eHealth innovation embedded into routine care. In part this is 
due to the wide variety of applications that fall under the 
common denominator of eHealth, but it is also due to the 
complexity of the Dutch care system, which is highly 
regulated and in which various authorities and other parties 
each play a distinct role. An SME should consider very 
carefully which “innovation route” to follow, as the chosen 
route will determine which stakeholders to address and 
involve. 
Stakeholders 
will 
have 
their 
own 
roles, 
responsibilities and interests, and hence will need their own 
arguments to get convinced of an eHealth application’s 
192
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

added value. It is, therefore, the chosen innovation route that 
determines the context in which evidence will be collected, 
the purpose for which it is collected, and the requirements 
that it should satisfy. 
Based on the above findings, a review of online 
documentation pertaining to innovation in the Dutch health 
care system took place (e.g., [21-25]), and follow-up 
interviews with representatives of the participating health 
care organizations were organized. These efforts resulted in a 
comprehensive description of the Dutch health care system, 
including the roles of the parties involved, their interests in 
eHealth innovation, and criteria they use to evaluate eHealth 
innovations. Four main innovation routes were identified and 
described, including the specifics of each route and criteria 
for when to choose which route: 
 
The consumer route where an eHealth application is 
offered to and paid by patients/consumers. For 
example, a medical translation app that can be used 
when visiting a doctor abroad. 
 
The provider route where an application is offered to 
and paid by health care providers. For instance, an 
online treatment plan which allows clients to consult 
their plan and report about their progress. 
 
The insurer route where an application becomes part 
of an existing treatment that is offered by a care 
provider and reimbursed by a health insurance 
company. For example, a real-time medication 
monitoring service to improve the medication 
adherence of a diabetes patient. (In this case, the 
medication is the existing treatment and real-time 
monitoring becomes part of it.) 
 
The government route where an application leads to 
a new treatment not yet offered by care providers or 
reimbursed by health insurance companies, and 
where health care authorities need to decide whether 
it should be admitted to publicly insured care. Here, 
an 
example 
might 
be 
the 
introduction 
of 
telemonitoring of epilepsy patients in the home 
environment, to respond quickly in the event of a 
major seizure. 
 
More details about the innovation routes are presented in 
Section V of this paper, and elsewhere [20]. 
IV. 
RESULTS: CASE STUDIES 
This section highlights the results and lessons learned 
from the second phase, the case studies. During this phase, 
eight cases submitted by seven SMEs were selected for in-
depth, semi-structured interviews. Table I lists relevant 
details per case. 
The selected cases represented a variety of eHealth 
applications, including telemonitoring services, electronic 
health records, telemedicine, and electronic consultation. 
Although the SMEs would usually mention a combination of 
intended impacts, the primary intended impact was most 
frequently on effectiveness or cost efficiency; in one case it 
was on labor savings. Nearly all applications were designed 
to be used within the cure or care domains; one was aimed at 
prevention. None of the cases concerned applications that 
would lead to new treatments; instead, all were intended to 
impact the way in which care is being organized or existing 
treatments are being provided. With one exception, all were 
in the latest stages of development: pilot and roll-out. 
In the following sections we discuss the main findings; 
detailed results per case are reported elsewhere [26]. 
A. The paths followed 
The interviewed SMEs followed paths which can, in 
terms of the above innovation routes, be classified as either 
“provider routes” (where an application is offered to and 
paid by the care provider) or “insurer routes” (where an 
application becomes part of a treatment already offered by 
care providers and reimbursed by insurers). In the first case, 
the SMEs had indeed identified and involved the care 
provider as the main stakeholder (i.e., the party using the 
application and paying for it), in the second case the main 
stakeholders identified and involved were the care provider 
(the party using the application) and the health insurance 
company (the party reimbursing it). Sometimes other 
stakeholders were identified as well, for instance a patient 
organization (for endorsement or financial support) or a 
professional association (for approval). 
In two cases the provider route had been followed, and in 
both cases with success. However, these cases had more in 
common than just the route followed: both innovations 
concerned electronic health records and were intended to 
organize the provision of care in a more efficient or client-
centered way, the involved entrepreneurs had themselves a 
background in health care, they had developed their 
TABLE I: RELEVANT DETAILS PER CASE. 
Case 
Type 
Phase 
Domain 
Route 
Stakeholders 
Impact 
Evidence 
1 
telemonitoring 
roll-out 
care 
insurer route 
care provider, insurer 
cost efficiency 
trial, business case 
2 
electr. health record 
roll-out 
care 
provider route 
care provider 
cost efficiency 
 
3 
electr. consultation 
pilot 
cure 
insurer route 
care provider, insurer, 
professional association 
effectiveness 
 
4 
telemonitoring 
pilot 
care 
insurer route 
care provider, insurer, 
patient association 
effectiveness 
trials (ongoing) 
5 
electr. health record 
roll-out 
cure, care 
provider route 
care provider 
effectiveness 
 
6 
telemedicine 
roll-out 
cure 
insurer route 
care provider, insurer 
labor savings 
trial, business case 
7 
telemonitoring 
inventory 
prevention 
insurer route 
care provider, insurer 
cost efficiency 
 
8 
telemonitoring 
roll-out 
cure 
insurer route 
care provider 
effectiveness 
trial 
 
193
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

applications to address trends and challenges readily 
recognized by care providers, and they had done so in close 
cooperation with health care professionals. Hence, they 
needed little or no evidence to convince care providers: an 
appealing vision on trends in health care or challenges faced 
by the care provider, or a concise business case identifying 
the main costs and benefits, combined with the option to let 
professionals gain hands-on experience with the application 
(using a demonstrator setup, or by means of trial licenses) 
sufficed. 
Compared to the paths classified as “provider routes”, the 
paths classified as “insurer routes” tended to be less clear and 
more challenging. The key issues encountered by SMEs 
following this route are: 
 
Entrepreneurs with little or no experience in the 
health care sector often had difficulties in identifying 
a successful innovation route. The paths they 
followed were frequently based on trial and error, 
during which they steadily built up a better 
understanding of how the health care system works. 
 
The role of health insurance companies in the health 
care 
system, 
their 
interests 
in 
health 
care 
innovations, and the criteria by which they evaluate 
eHealth innovations were often unclear to the SMEs. 
 
SMEs tended to involve health insurance companies 
too early, when strong support among care 
providers, endorsements from patient organizations, 
or approvals from professional associations were still 
lacking. Insurance companies, on the other hand, 
used these as principal criteria for the selection of 
promising innovations. 
 
Health 
care 
providers 
and 
health 
insurance 
companies often had partly conflicting interests, 
making it difficult to come up with a business case 
which was compelling to both parties at the same 
time. 
 
Within this route, clinical trials were often essential 
to 
build 
up 
evidence 
for 
an 
innovation’s 
effectiveness. Generally, SMEs lacked the expertise 
and financial resources to carry out a proper trial, 
forcing them to involve experts and to find 
sponsoring. Furthermore, it was not always clear 
exactly what evidence was required. 
 
At the moment the interviews took place, none of the six 
SMEs following the insurer route had yet achieved success. 
In three cases this was because plans for pilots were still 
being made or trials were still ongoing. However, in three 
cases evidence had been collected in trials – yet in all three 
cases it failed to convince important stakeholders. 
B. The evidence collected 
In all three cases where evidence had been collected in 
trials, this had been done using randomized controlled trials 
– the “golden standard” for clinical trials [27]. Two of these 
cases concerned the application of real-time medication 
monitoring (RTMM) to improve medication adherence, 
albeit for different patient groups and in different contexts: in 
one case (no. 1) for patients with diabetes type 2 [28] and in 
the other (no. 8) for patients with refractory epilepsy [29]. 
The third case (no. 6) concerned the application of a 
computer-assisted therapy for patients with knee or hip 
replacements [30]. This application had been developed by a 
large German firm, and the clinical trial had already been 
performed in Germany; the participating SME was now 
trying to convince care providers and health insurers in The 
Netherlands of its added value. Table II provides more 
details about the designs, methods and outcome indicators 
used in each of these cases. 
In all three cases, the trials were designed and performed 
by (or in close cooperation with) experts from scientific 
institutes. These experts assumed responsibility for deciding 
which evidence was to be collected and how this should be 
done. As said, in all cases (including case no. 4, where 
evidence was still being collected) they opted for randomized 
controlled trials in which a combination of objective 
measures and subjective judgments were being used. 
However, with the exception of case 1 (where the innovation 
department of a health insurance company was closely 
involved) it remained unclear to which extent external 
stakeholders – such as decision makers in care providers or 
insurance companies – had been consulted before these 
choices were made. 
In cases 1 and 6 the results from the trial were further 
developed by the SME into a business case for stakeholders; 
in case 1 this was again done in close cooperation with a 
health insurance company. Table II includes information on 
how trial results were translated into a business case for 
stakeholders. The approach followed in case 1 is illustrative: 
the effect that was found on the intermediary outcome 
measure used in the trial (an increase in medication 
adherence) was first translated into an effect on a relevant 
end measure (a reduction in health related costs) using the 
results of a systematic review found in the scientific 
literature. The reduction in health related costs that was 
calculated, was then translated into a reduction in insurance 
claims for the health insurance company using the results of 
an internal study performed by the health insurance 
company. In this way, the clinical trial could focus on an 
intermediary outcome measure where effects could be 
measured on a much shorter time scale.  
In none of the cases were the obtained results sufficient 
to convince the main identified stakeholders. The reasons for 
this varied. In the case 1 the trial had shown satisfactory 
results; however, the health insurer’s purchasing department 
required that an additional economic analysis be carried out 
before it could support a nationwide adoption and 
reimbursement of the innovation. Unfortunately, the parties 
involved were unable to reach a consensus about this. In case 
8 the care provider was convinced of the benefits for the 
treatment of its patients, yet the insurance company (having 
been requested to reimburse the use of the innovation) was 
unconvinced by the effects found during the trial. In case 6, 
the implementation model proposed by the SME (which 
entailed the establishment of new clinics where care 
provision would be centered on computer assisted therapy) 
did not satisfy the insurer’s purchasing policy and so the lack 
of success had little to do with the evidence collected.  
194
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The few cases described above are clearly insufficient to 
draw any firm conclusions. Yet, judging from these cases, it 
does seem necessary that decision makers (for instance in 
health insurance companies, but also in other stakeholders) 
are more closely involved when an evaluation is being 
planned. In this way, the criteria that play a role in the 
decision process can be clarified early on, when they can still 
TABLE II: DETAILS ABOUT THE THREE CASES WHERE EVIDENCE HAD ALREADY BEEN COLLECTED. 
Case 
Patient group 
Design 
Outcome indicators 
Conclusions 
Business case 
1 
161 diabetes type-2 
patients, randomly 
divided over a control 
group (no RTMM) 
and two intervention 
groups (RTMM with 
SMS-reminders; 
RTMM without 
SMS-reminders) 
1. pre-measurement 
2. intervention 
3. post-measurement 
4. follow-up 
 
duration of the 
intervention: 
6 months 
medication adherence: 
 refill adherence 
(determined from 
pharmacists’ delivery 
registrations); 
 days without dosing, 
percentage missed doses, 
and percentage of doses 
taken within standardized 
time intervals 
(determined by real-time 
registration of medication 
intake) 
 
 
experiences of patients: 
 judgments on medication 
adherence (determined 
using surveys) 
 judgments on satisfaction 
(determined using 
surveys) 
medication adherence: 
 significantly higher refill 
adherence (+26,5% for 
RTMM with SMS-
reminders, +15,3% for 
RTMM without SMS-
reminders, +10,5% for 
control group);  
 patients receiving SMS-
reminders took 
signiﬁcantly more doses 
within predeﬁned time 
windows than patients 
receiving no reminders 
 
experiences of patients: 
 positive experiences of 
patients with the use of 
RTMM and with SMS-
reminders 
translation into financial 
consequences for a health 
insurance company, in two 
steps: 
1. increased medication 
adherence (in %) was 
translated into a 
reduction in health 
related costs (in %), 
based on a published 
systematic literature 
review into this relation; 
2. the reduction in health 
related costs (in %) was 
translated into a 
reduction of insurance 
claims (in €), using an 
internal study performed 
by the insurer into the 
costs of hospitalizations 
of diabetes patients 
6 
274 rehabilitating 
patients with hip or 
knee replacements, 
randomly divided 
over a control group 
(conventional 
therapy) and an 
intervention group 
(computer assisted 
therapy) 
1. pre-measurement 
2. post-measurement 
 
duration of the 
intervention: 
6 months 
effectiveness: 
 judgments determined 
using standardized 
surveys (Harris Hip 
Score, Hospital for 
Special Surgery Score, 
FIM instrument, and 
Hanover Functional 
Ability Questionnaire) 
 
acceptance by patients: 
 determined using surveys 
effectiveness: 
 no statistically significant 
difference in 
effectiveness between 
conventional therapy and 
computer assisted therapy 
 
 
 
 
acceptance by patients: 
 positive acceptance by 
patients of computer 
assisted therapy 
translation into labor savings 
for care providers: the 
intensity of the therapy can 
be increased by 20% with 
the same number of hours 
worked by therapists 
 
(further details are unknown) 
8 
28 epilepsy patients, 
randomly divided 
over two intervention 
groups (RTMM with 
SMS-reminders; 
RTMM first without 
and then with SMS-
reminders) 
1. pre-measurement 
2. intervention 
3. post-measurement 
 
duration of the 
intervention: 
ranging from 2 
months to 2 years 
medication adherence: 
 percentage missed doses 
and percentage of doses 
taken within standardized 
time intervals 
(determined by real-time 
registration of medication 
intake) 
 
 
experiences of patients: 
 judgments on medication 
adherence, seizure 
frequency and intensity 
(determined using 
surveys); 
 judgments on quality of 
life (determined using the 
QOLIE-31 survey); 
 seizure frequency 
(determined using 
diaries) 
medication adherence: 
 significantly higher 
medication adherence for 
RTMM with SMS-
reminders compared to 
RTMM without SMS-
reminders: +14,4% 
correct intakes, 
and -10,8% missed doses 
 
experiences of patients: 
 positive experiences of 
patients (higher 
medication adherence, 
reduced seizure 
frequency or intensity; 
 no significant effect on 
quality of life except for 
higher overall health; 
 diaries showed no clear 
reduction of seizure 
frequency 
translation into benefit for 
the care provider: increased 
effectiveness of the 
treatments offered to patients  
 
(no detailed business case 
had been developed yet) 
 
195
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

be taken into account in the development of evaluation plans 
or business cases, or in the design of clinical trials. 
C. The criteria used by the insurance company 
As mentioned before in Section II.E, three participating 
SMEs (i.e., cases 3, 4 and 6) accepted the open invitation to 
enroll their innovations at the health innovation desk of one 
of the participating health insurers. These three SMEs had all 
been following the insurer route. 
Over the course of the ensuing procedures it became 
clear that three criteria are essential for the insurer: (i) is 
there sufficient support for the innovation among care 
providers (for instance, does it address any evident needs or 
demands), (ii) does the innovation fit into existing health 
care processes, and (iii) will it be able to substitute for 
existing forms of care. Other important criteria were: (iv) is 
the innovation fully developed, (v) is it fully interoperable 
with existing systems (for instance, systems in use by general 
practitioners), and (vi) is the potential for a nationwide 
adoption clear. Evidence for an innovation’s effectiveness 
was among the criteria listed by the insurer, yet in these three 
cases it did not seem to have played a central role. However, 
a detailed business case supported by relevant figures was a 
clear requirement used within all three cases.  
Of the three enrollments, one (i.e., case 4) ultimately led 
to a follow-up in which the involved SME, a care provider, 
and the insurer are currently planning a joint evaluation 
study of the innovation. In this particular case: 
 
The SME had gained clear support from a care 
provider, who eventually took over the negotiations 
with the insurance company; 
 
The 
application 
was 
fully 
developed 
and 
interoperable, and had already been used on a small 
scale in several pilots; 
 
The SME and the care provider were able to come 
up with a detailed business case showing how the 
innovation would be implemented in existing care 
processes, and where it would lead to substitution of 
existing care. 
 
Summarizing, most of the criteria used by the insurer 
seem to be driven by a concern to identify early on which 
innovations will most likely be successfully implemented. 
However, the principal criterion is cost reduction by means 
of substitution: an eHealth innovation should either lead to 
the replacement of an existing form of care by a more cost 
efficient one; or, by being more effective, it should 
contribute to a reduced health care consumption in the near 
future. To convincingly show this to the health insurer, a 
detailed quantitative business case will be required. 
V. 
RESULTS: GUIDELINES AND BEST PRACTICES 
This section highlights the results and lessons learned 
from the third phase, guidelines and best practices. In the 
preceding phases of the project it had become clear that, 
when evaluation plans or clinical trials are being planned, 
relevant stakeholders should be identified and there interests 
taken into account. This is especially important because, 
ultimately, the evidence that is collected will be constituting 
the foundation beneath a business case in which all relevant 
stakeholders and their interests are accounted for. Preferably, 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Elementary version of the eHealth innovation map, showing the main parties in the Dutch health care system. 
Each of these parties and their interests in eHealth innovations are further described in accompanying fact sheets. 
 
reimburses
care
offers a
service
provides
care
develops
standards
promotes
interests
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
pays
premium
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
supervises
health care
market
regulates
publicly
insured care
advices on 
publicly
insured care
196
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

principal stakeholders should be involved as early as 
possible, and the required evidence defined and collected in a 
cooperative effort. 
To facilitate this, eHealth SMEs required a “map”: to 
find the most promising innovation routes within the Dutch 
care system, and to identify relevant stakeholders and their 
interests. Creating such a map, and complementing the map 
with “fact sheets” (detailed yet concise and accessible 
information on innovation routes, relevant stakeholders and 
their interests, and types of evidence required) became the 
project’s highest priority. 
A. The eHealth innovation map 
The starting point when developing the innovation map 
was that it should provide concise yet accessible information 
for SMEs on (i) the Dutch health care system, (ii) the roles of 
the main parties within it, (iii) the interests these parties have 
in eHealth innovations, and (iv) examples of applicable 
evidence to convince them. Furthermore, the map should 
visualize the four innovation routes and so facilitate the 
identification of relevant stakeholders. The map should 
provide only an overview; detailed information with 
guidelines and best practices was to be provided in sets of 
accompanying fact sheets (of one page each): a set on the 
innovation routes, a set on the stakeholders involved, and a 
set on applicable evidence. The following paragraphs briefly 
discuss each of these elements. 
1) The innovation map 
Figure 1 shows the innovation map in its elementary 
version, displaying only the main parties in the Dutch health 
care system and the relations among them. Care has been 
taken to streamline the map without oversimplifying it. 
Three thematic versions of the innovation map display 
additional information: one shows the various stakeholders 
within each party, one the interests that stakeholders may 
have in eHealth innovations, and one the kinds of evidence 
(or other applicable forms of proof) that may be used to 
convince them. For practical reasons these three thematic 
versions are not shown here; instead the information has 
been summarized in Table III. Last, there are four thematic 
versions displaying the identified innovation routes; these 
versions are shown in Figure 2. Each version is accompanied 
by a brief description of what is shown. In this way, SMEs 
are provided with “at a glance” information which acts as an 
index to the accompanying sets of fact sheets. 
2) Fact sheets on stakeholders 
Each party is described in more detail in its own fact 
sheet. These fact sheets contain concise information on (i) 
the role of this party in the health care system, (ii) relevant 
stakeholders within this party that may play a role in decision 
making, (iii) their interest (or interests) in eHealth 
innovations, and (iv) general guidelines on how (and by what 
means) this party can be convinced. For instance, the fact 
sheet on the insurer mentions that the insurer will reimburse 
care that has been provided to patients and not the use of 
eHealth applications as such. It mentions the roles and 
interests of its innovation, investment, purchasing and 
commercial departments, for instance, the partly conflicting 
interests of innovation department (interested in the potential 
of new developments) and the purchasing department 
(interested in the efficiency of concluding large contracts). It 
also mentions the main criteria by which these parties will 
evaluate an eHealth application, listing critical success 
factors such as clear support among care providers, and a 
detailed business case showing the potential for substitution 
or cost reduction. Table IV shows a representative example 
of a stakeholder fact sheet. 
3) Fact sheets on innovation routes 
The four innovation routes are also described in their 
own fact sheets. These fact sheets contain information on (i) 
situations where a particular route is applicable, (ii) matters 
to take into account when following a route, (iii) special 
circumstances or regulations that may play a role, (iv) the 
main stakeholders that need to be involved, and (v) the main 
anticipated risks (pitfalls). The fact sheet on the insurer 
route, for example, mentions that this route is appropriate 
when an eHealth application leads to a new way of 
organizing care, or a when it will be used for providing a 
treatment that is already being offered by care providers and 
reimbursed by insurers. It mentions the importance of first 
TABLE III: SUMMARY OF THE INFORMATION DISPLAYED IN THE THREE THEMATIC VERSIONS OF THE INNOVATION MAP. 
Party 
Stakeholders within party 
Interests in eHealth innovations 
Evidence or other applicable forms of proof 
care provider 
nurses, specialists, ict, board 
“will it improve the quality or 
efficiency of my work?” 
a strong vision, a sound business case, experiences of 
care professionals 
patient 
partner, parents, children, 
informal carers 
“will it aid in my recovery or 
improve my well-being?” 
advice of care professionals, experiences of other 
patients 
health insurer 
innovation, purchasing, 
commerce, investment 
“is it effective care for a reasonable 
price?” 
a business case supported by the results of a clinical 
trial 
professional 
association 
medical specialists 
“is it safe and well-founded?” 
results of clinical trials, experiences of care 
professionals 
patient association 
patients, advisors 
“will it improve the quality of care 
for our patient group?” 
results of clinical trials, experiences of the patient group 
health care 
authority 
advisors 
“is there support for it among care 
providers and insurers?” 
joint innovation requests from care providers and 
insurers 
health care 
insurance board 
advisors 
“has it been proven effective?” 
viewpoints of professional associations, scientific 
research results of the highest possible quality 
ministry of public 
health 
policy makers 
“does it contribute to affordable 
care?” 
positive advice by the health care insurance board 
 
197
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

gathering 
sufficient 
support 
among 
care 
providers, 
professional associations and patient associations before 
turning to the insurer, and it mentions the special 
circumstance where a care provider and an insurer should 
jointly file an innovation request to the Dutch health care 
authority before a pilot can be started. Table V shows a 
representative example of an innovation route fact sheet. 
4) Fact sheets on evidence 
The third set of fact sheets concerns the evidence that 
will be required to convince the main stakeholders along 
each of the four innovation routes. The information provided 
in these fact sheets is necessarily generic; details on exactly 
which evidence to collect will depend on the specific 
situation (e.g., the type of eHealth application, where it is 
being used and to what effect, and the specific interests of 
relevant stakeholders). The fact sheets therefore contain (i) a 
concise description of the kinds of effects that need to be 
demonstrated for the main stakeholders, (ii) examples of the 
kinds of evidence that may be applicable, (iii) a few generic 
guidelines and best practices on how to collect evidence, and 
(iv) references to relevant sources of information, such as the 
frameworks discussed earlier in Section III.A. For instance, 
in the insurer route cost savings are mentioned as a principal 
effect to be established for the insurer. To this end, it should 
be shown how the eHealth innovation leads to the 
replacement of an existing form of care by a more cost 
efficient one, or how the application contributes to reduced 
health care consumption in the near future. Methods to 
establish these effects are mentioned such as, in the first 
case, a process analysis comparing care processes before and 
after introduction of the application or, in the second case, a 
clinical trial followed an elaboration of the effects found in a 
detailed, quantitative business case. Given the lessons 
learned during the project, the main best practice mentioned 
in this particular example is to closely involve key decision 
makers in the care provider and the insurer in order to clarify 
the criteria that will play a role in the decision process. Table 
VI shows a representative example of an evidence fact sheet. 
B. Validation of the innovation map 
Validation of the eHealth innovation map and the 
corresponding fact sheets has been (and is currently being) 
 
 
 
(a) The consumer route 
 
 
 
(b) The provider route 
 
 
 
(c) The insurer route 
 
 
(d) The government route 
Figure 2: Thematic versions of the innovation map showing the four innovation routes. Thick arrows represent subsequent steps that should be 
undertaken by the SME or other involved stakeholders. Each version is accompanied by a descriptive fact sheet. 
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
198
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

performed along four different lines: 
 
First, experts from the participating health care 
providers, patient associations, and government 
organizations have been asked to carefully check the 
map and the fact sheets for correctness and 
completeness of the provided information. Several 
corrections and suggestions have been made by 
them, which have subsequently been incorporated 
into the materials. 
 
Second, the usability and usefulness of the map and 
fact sheets have been evaluated with representatives 
from eHealth SMEs during a series of workshops 
where the eHealth innovation map was applied to a 
range of different cases at hand. In this way, a 
substantial amount of valuable feedback was 
collected and used to improve the materials. 
 
Third, validation of the map is currently being 
performed by means of “action research”, where the 
research team is getting actively involved in a few 
selected cases (i.e., cases 4 and 8 from Table I, and 
one additional case contributed by a medical 
research center) with the aim to evaluate and extend 
the current insights. At the time of writing this 
research is still ongoing. 
 
Fourth, a number of successful cases are currently 
being analyzed by means of desk research and 
interviews with parties involved, to assess the 
innovation routes that have been followed and the 
evidence that has been collected. This, too, is at the 
time of writing still ongoing. 
 
Due to the “mixed methods” approach followed during 
the project, with ample involvement of both experts and 
SMEs, a substantial amount of feedback and support has 
been collected for the innovation map. Overall, the responses 
given by these parties have been very favorable. Judging 
from the feedback that was given, the innovation map does 
indeed manage to provide a concise and accessible overview 
of the various ways in which eHealth innovations can be 
embedded in routine health care. The innovation route and 
stakeholder fact sheets are no “recipes for success”, instead 
they are considered by both parties as highly useful scenarios 
TABLE IV: EXAMPLE OF A STAKEHOLDER FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER. OTHERS DISCUSS THE CARE PROVIDER, 
THE PATIENT, THE PATIENT ASSOCIATION, THE PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION, AND THE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS. 
(ORIGINAL VERSION IN DUTCH. REFERENCES TO SOURCES HAVE BEEN OMITTED.) 
Fact sheet healthcare insurer 
 
Role 
The healthcare insurer is the party paying for the care being provided to patients with the eHealth application. Keep in mind that there will be various 
stakeholders within the insurer, all with particular interests with regard to the eHealth application: 
 
The innovation department, where potential eHealth applications are selected and evaluated. 
 
The investment fund, which backs the development of eHealth applications financially. 
 
The purchasing department, which negotiates with care providers and purchases large quantities of healthcare (as efficiently as possible). Therefore, 
the role of eHealth applications it often limited. 
 
The commercial department, which sets up additional insurance packages for private parties and collective insurances for organizations and which 
sees eHealth as a distinguishing feature. 
Keep in mind that any enthusiasm in the innovation department is not necessarily shared by the other stakeholders! 
 
Interests 
As far as healthcare insurers are concerned, what is most important is high-quality care at low cost, which translates into the following demands being 
made regarding eHealth applications: 
 
The application needs to have sufficient support among care providers and patients (through co-creation). 
 
The application must deliver healthcare gains (better quality care or higher quality of life). 
 
The application has to reduce healthcare costs (through increased independence on the part of the patient or reduced burden on the healthcare 
provider). 
 
The application has to lead to substitution (no extra care but substitution of existing care). 
 
The application has to lead to reduced health-related absence (prevention or quicker recovery). 
 
The application has to be in line with national agreements and purchasing policies. 
Healthcare insurers do business with care providers, who they see as interlocutor, which means it is important to make sure that the application is 
suggested to the healthcare insurer by an enthusiastic care provider (rather than by the entrepreneur). 
 
Persuasion 
Healthcare insurers have medical advisers who will assess the added value of an application on the basis of their expertise. Generally speaking, they will 
demand to see a business case, based on financial estimates and supported by research results (for instance a clinical trial or pilot project). 
 
A business case can be created in stages, for instance by translating the effects that have been detected in a pilot study into financial consequences for the 
healthcare insurer. Always determine the design of a pilot study or clinical trial (what is being measured, and how) together with the care provider and 
healthcare insurer. 
 
199
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to be explored by an SME and used as a means to create a 
stakeholder inventory. The evidence fact sheets are highly 
useful to start the discussion with stakeholders and experts 
when drafting plans for an evaluation.  
At the time of writing there is a strong interest in the 
map. It has, for instance, been made accessible to a large 
audience via the website of the Netherlands Organization for 
Health Research and Development [23] and a well-known 
website maintained by a joint initiative of four government 
organizations (the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board, the 
Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
and Sports, and the Netherlands Organization for Health 
Research and Development) [24]. 
VI. 
RESULTS: CONSOLIDATION AND TOOL DEVELOPMENT 
The fourth and last phase of the project, consolidation 
and tool development, is currently nearing completion. 
Based on the eHealth innovation map a workshop protocol 
has been developed, and the innovation map and the fact 
sheets have been incorporated into an interactive, web-based 
tool [31]. The workshop protocol and the web-based tool 
both aim to provide guidance to SMEs in finding a 
promising 
innovation 
route, 
in 
identifying 
relevant 
stakeholders to involve, and in determining which evidence 
they may require. 
Last, the project’s results have been documented in an 
accessible and illustrated booklet for SMEs [32]. The booklet 
summarizes all the information contained within the 
innovation map and the fact sheets, such as the descriptions 
of the main parties in the Dutch health care system, the 
identified innovation routes, the interests of various parties in 
eHealth innovations, and various kinds of evidence that may 
be required. It is hoped that in this way, the project’s results 
will be well consolidated and accessible for all interested 
eHealth SMEs in The Netherlands. 
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the research 
presented here, is that evidence constitutes the foundation 
underneath a business case in which all relevant stakeholders 
and their interests are accounted for. Preferably, principal 
stakeholders should be involved as early as possible when 
TABLE V: EXAMPLE OF AN INNOVATION ROUTE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS THE CONSUMER ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(ORIGINAL VERSION IN DUTCH. REFERENCES TO SOURCES HAVE BEEN OMITTED.) 
Fact sheet insurer route 
 
When does this route apply? 
An eHealth application is integrated into care that is already being provided or reimbursed. The application does not alter the care being provided, only 
the form in which it is delivered. As a result, for example, the care becomes more accessible or it can be provided more efficiently.  
 
Examples 
 
An online nutrition diary that is used as part of diet advice by a dietician and promotes the patient’s self-management. 
 
A pillbox that alerts patients when they forget to take their medication. This takes place on doctor’s order and promotes patient discipline.  
Points of interest 
Make sure there is sufficient support! It is important for care providers, patients and patient organizations to be enthusiastic about the application, which 
is why it is crucial to involve them at an early stage in the development (co-creation). The specialists’ professional association plays an important role in 
nationwide up-scaling, because they determine the guidelines for good and safe care.  
 
If an application leads to cheaper or less labor-intensive care, while the quality of the provided care remains the same at least, this is interesting for the 
care provider and it may not be necessary to involve the insurer. If, on the other hand, the application makes the care being provided more expensive, it 
has to be demonstrated that the quality of the care has improved and a larger support base is needed. Do not approach the insurer yourself, but let the 
enthusiastic care provider do the negotiations. 
 
As far as insurers are concerned, it is crucial for the application to lead to a replacement of existing care (for instance through substitution or self-
management) and, ultimately, to a reduction in reimbursements. It is important to demonstrate this in a detailed business case. 
 
Special details 
If an application does not match the existing care descriptions defined by the Dutch Healthcare Authority (for example due to restrictions in the 
description or rate), the care provider and insurer together can submit an application at the Dutch Healthcare Authority. The Dutch Healthcare Authority 
can modify an existing care description or create a temporary one, giving the application time to “prove” itself. 
 
The main stakeholders 
 
Care provider and professional association 
 
Patients and patient association 
 
Care insurer 
 
Dutch Healthcare Authority (if a care description needs to be modified or a temporary one created) 
Pitfalls 
Creating insufficient support (among patients, care providers, patient associations and professional associations). Approaching the insurer yourself 
without the backing of at least one care provider. Paying insufficient attention to the substitution of the existing care. 
 
200
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

planning an evaluation study or a (clinical) trial. In this way, 
the criteria that will play a role later on in the decision 
process can be clarified early on, when they can still be taken 
into account. 
This insight has become the corner stone of the approach 
developed in the project “Successful Entrepreneurship in 
eHealth”. Following this approach, the chosen innovation 
route, the identified stakeholders, and their interests in the 
eHealth innovation at hand eventually determine which kinds 
of evidence will be needed and how they should be collected. 
The developed eHealth innovation map, the workshop 
protocol, and the web-based tool were all developed to 
provide guidance to eHealth SMEs, allowing them to make 
better, more informed decisions. The design, implementation 
and analysis of clinical trials will nevertheless remain the 
domain of academic experts or highly trained staff members 
working at care providers; the level of expertise that is 
required makes this simply unavoidable. 
The implications of this research are threefold. First, 
further research is needed to deepen and validate the insights 
gained so far, preferably by consistently applying the 
developed approach along the full development cycles of a 
number of eHealth services, and by evaluating the results. 
Since this is a process that can take several years to 
complete, this could not be done within the current project. 
Furthermore, academic experts involved in the development 
of frameworks to evaluate eHealth should place more 
emphasis an stakeholders’ varying roles and interests, and 
incorporate these factors into their designs. Second, policy 
makers in both government and health organizations could 
use the identified innovation routes to identify any unwanted 
obstacles (for instance, conflicting requirements imposed by 
parties involved), take measures to alleviate barriers along a 
route, and initiate any required coordination between 
stakeholders, thus streamlining each route.  Third, eHealth 
SMEs would do well to study the workings of the health care 
TABLE VI: EXAMPLE OF AN EVIDENCE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES EVIDENCE FOR THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS EVIDENCE FOR THE CONSUMER ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(ORIGINAL VERSION IN DUTCH. REFERENCES TO SOURCES HAVE BEEN OMITTED.) 
Fact sheet evidence within the insurer route 
 
What needs to be demonstrated? 
A business case needs to be developed in which the interests of the care provider (see the provider route) and the health insurer are combined. 
Ultimately, healthcare insurers want to see a reduction in healthcare costs (through substitution or self-management), but they also focus on support 
among providers, scalability and compatibility with existing care processes. See the ZonMw website for a list of relevant criteria. 
 
Which evidence is suitable? 
Demonstrating a reduction in healthcare costs can be done in two ways: 
1. 
By replacing expensive forms of care by less expensive ones (“substitution”). This leads to “definite”, short-term cost reductions. Make clear 
to the insurer how the current care process will change and how this will lead to labor savings, process optimization, or lower costs. Pay 
attention to the aspects that will be included in the business case, and how this will be measured in a pilot or trial. Insurers will want to know 
how substitution is actually accomplished. 
2. 
More effective care will lead to a reduction in care consumption in the long term, but the cost reduction is surrounded by uncertainty. Note that 
insurers will want to see a return on investment within three years. Reduced healthcare consumption will need to be demonstrated with 
methodologically sound research, for instance using this three-stage process: (1) a clinical trial aimed at measuring a process measure or 
intermediary measure, (2) translation of the effects found on the process or intermediary measure into an effect on a relevant end measure, 
based on the best available scientific evidence on the relation between these two, (3) calculation of the potential cost reduction based on insurer 
data. The Achmea Health Database is a good source of information to do this. 
Some eHealth applications may be attractive for health insurer for commercial or marketing purposes (e.g., to attract or maintain subscribers). In 
such cases, contact the commercial department, which is responsible for  additional insurances for consumers and collective insurances for 
organizations. In the latter case, it should be clear how the application can lead to fitter employees or reduced sick leave. 
 
Things to keep in mind: 
 
In the case of improved efficiency, there has to be a clear (clinically relevant) improvement, which has to be demonstrated through 
scientifically sound research. 
 
Be careful about making assumptions, for instance in translating an intermediary measure (for instance, medication adherence) to an end 
measure (reduction or delay of complications). Do not add assumptions to assumptions.  
 
“Pick your battle”: using a certain application may prove more beneficial with some syndromes compared to others. Think about this carefully.  
 
“Hard” data (which can be determined objectively) have more weight than “soft” data (opinions or experiences of patients and other people 
involved), no matter how they are collected. “Hard” data can also be obtained through routine registrations of care suppliers. 
Important: 
 
Discuss as early as possible with the insurer and the care provider what evidence will be required. 
 
Involve important stakeholders, such as decision-makers, when working out the appropriate research approach. 
 
Consult experts when methodologically strong research is needed, but keep stakeholders involved. 
 
201
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

system, for instance by using the proposed innovation map 
as a scenario building instrument and by applying it early on 
for stakeholder inventory and analysis. 
Now that the project is nearing completion, the question 
arises how unique the Dutch situation really is. Can the 
eHealth innovation map be generalized to other countries? 
When an early concept of the innovation map was presented 
at an international eHealth conference [1] it seemed from the 
responses given by the international audience that certain 
basic principles, such as the roles and interests of the care 
provider and the insurer, are certainly generalizable. Other 
aspects, such as the government legislation pertaining to the 
health care system, will vary. Nevertheless, judging by this 
first impression it seems that the proposed approach may be 
fruitful for parties in other countries as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Stichting Innovatie Alliantie 
for 
financially 
supporting 
the 
project 
Successful 
Entrepreneurship in eHealth. Furthermore, they would like 
to thank the eHealth SMEs and all other organizations who 
participated in the project: Achmea divisie Zorg en 
Gezondheid, ActiZ, Be4Care, BeagleBoxx, Bonstato, 
College voor Zorgverzekeringen, Consuming Knowledge, 
DiaDerma, Dutch IT Consultants, Eusamed, Evalan, 
EvoCare, Focus Cura, Health Valley, Installatie Techniek 
Masseling, Isala Klinieken, MS Nederland, Nederlandse 
Zorgautoriteit, Novay, Nederlandse Patiënten Consumenten 
Federatie, Nederlandse Vereniging voor eHealth, SalesSpirit, 
SymaX, Syntens, Valetudo Interpres, Vos Projectadvies 
Gezondheidszorg, VRC Telecom, and Zorgverzekeraar 
VGZ. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, H. Prins, S. Visser, R. Menko, I. 
Krediet, T. Haaker, and L. Bodenstaff, “Developing evidence 
guidelines for eHealth small and medium-sized enterprises,” 
Proc. eTELEMED 2013, Feb. 2013, pp. 92-95. 
[2] J.E. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, H.C. 
Ossebaard, S.M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E.R. Seydel, “A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies,” J. Med. Internet Res., 2011, 
13(4):e111. 
[3] R.A. Menko, S. Visser, R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, and T. 
Haaker, “Applying the STOF business model framework in 
eHealth innovations,” Proc. eTELEMED 2013, Feb. 2013, pp. 
108-113. 
[4] Koninklijke Nederlandsche Maatschappij tot bevordering der 
Geneeskunst, Nederlandse Patiënten Consumenten Federatie, 
and Zorgverzekeraars Nederland, “Nationale Implementatie 
Agenda (NIA) eHealth,” Utrecht: Koninklijke Nederlandsche 
Maatschappij tot bevordering der Geneeskunst, 2012. 
[“National eHealth implementation agenda”. In Dutch.] 
[5] F. Mair, C. May, E. Murray, T. Finch, G. Anderson, C. 
O’Donnell, P. Wallace, and F. Sullivan, “Understanding the 
implementation and integration of e-health services,” London: 
NHS Service and Delivery R and D Organisation (NCCSDO), 
2009. 
[6] F. Mair, C. May, C. O’Donnell, T. Finch, F. Sullivan, and E. 
Murray, “Factors that promote or inhibit the implementation 
of e-health systems: an explanatory systematic review,” Bull. 
World Health Organ., 2012, 90:357-364. 
[7] J. Hackos and J. Redish, “User and task analysis for interface 
design,” New York: Wiley, 1998. 
[8] R.E. Scott, F.G. McCarthy, P.A. Jennett, T. Perverseff, D. 
Lorenzetti, A. Saeed, B. Rush, and M. Yeo, “Telehealth 
outcomes: a synthesis of the literature and recommendations 
for outcome indicators,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2007, 13 Suppl 
2:1-38. 
[9] K. Kidholm, A.G. Ekeland, L.K. Jensen, J. Rasmussen, C.D. 
Pedersen, A. Bowes, S.A. Flottorp, and M. Bech, “A model 
for assessment of telemedicine applications: MAST”, Int. J. 
Technol. Assess. Health Care, 2012, 28(1):44-51. 
[10] Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 
“Guidelines 
for 
the 
economic 
evaluation 
of 
health 
technologies: Canada [3rd edition],” Ottawa: Canadian 
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 2006. 
[11] C.M. Cusack, C. Byrne, J.M. Hook, J. McGowan, E.G. Poon, 
and A. Zafar, “Health information technology evaluation 
toolkit: 2009 update,” Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, 2009. 
[12] E.G. Poon, C.M. Cusack, and J.J. McGowan, “Evaluating 
healthcare information technology outside of academia: 
observations from the National Resource Center for 
Healthcare Information Technology at the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality,” J. Am. Med. Inform. 
Assoc., 2009, 16(5):631-6. 
[13] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews,” Int. 
J. Med. Inform., 2012, 81(1):1-11. 
[14] A.D. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell, T. 
Bokun, B. McKinstry, R. Procter, A. Majeed, and A. Sheikh, 
“The impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of health 
care: 
a 
systematic 
overview,” 
PLoS 
Med., 
2011, 
8(1):e1000387. 
[15] T. Greenhalgh and J. Rusell, “Why do evaluations of eHealth 
programs fail? An alternative set of guiding principles,” PLoS 
Med., 2010, 7(11):e1000360. 
[16] E. Cummings and P. Turner, “Patients at the centre: 
methodological considerations for evaluating evidence from 
health interventions involving patients use of web-based 
information systems,” Open Med. Inform. J., 2010, 4:188-94. 
[17] D.W. Willems, R. Vos, G. Palmboom, and R. Lips, “Passend 
bewijs. Ethische vragen bij het gebruik van evidence in het 
zorgbeleid,” Den Haag: Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en 
Zorg, 2007. [“Suitable evidence. Ethical questions regarding 
the use of evidence in health care policy.” In Dutch.] 
[18] M.P. Gagnon and R.E. Scott, “Striving for evidence in e-
health 
evaluation: 
lessons 
from 
health 
technology 
assessment,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2005, 11, Suppl 2:S34-6. 
[19] H. Hyppönen, E. Ammenwerth, and N. de Keizer, “Exploring 
a methodology for eHealth indicator development,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., 2012, 180:338-42. 
[20] T. Haaker, L. Bodenstaff, R. Menko, S. Visser, H. Prins, I. 
Krediet, M. Hettinga, and R. Janssen, “Inventarisatie eHealth 
innovatieroutes 
en 
evidence,” 
Zwolle: 
Hogeschool 
Windesheim, 2013. [“Inventory of eHealth innovation routes 
and evidence.” In Dutch.] 
[21] Website Nederlandse Zorgautoriteit, www.nza.nl. [Website of 
the Dutch Healthcare Authority. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
December 6, 2013. 
[22] Website College voor Zorgverzekeringen, www.cvz.nl. 
[Website of the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board. In Dutch.] 
Last accessed: December 6, 2013. 
[23] Website 
ZonMw, 
www.zonmw.nl. 
[Website 
of 
the 
Netherlands 
Organization 
for 
Health 
Research 
and 
Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: December 6, 2013. 
 
202
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[24] Website Zorg voor Innoveren, www.zorgvoorinnoveren.nl. 
[Website by a joint initiative of 
four government 
organizations: the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board, the 
Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
and Sports, and the Netherlands Organization for Health 
Research and Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
December 6, 2013. 
[25] Website Nictiz, www.nictiz.nl. [Website of the National IT 
Institute for Healthcare in the Netherlands. In Dutch.] Last 
accessed: December 6, 2013. 
[26] R. Janssen, W. de Haan, T. Haaker, L. Bodenstaff, S. Visser, 
R. Menko, H. Prins, I. Krediet, and M. Hettinga, “Rapportage 
casestudies,” 
Zwolle: 
Hogeschool 
Windesheim, 
2013. 
[“Report about the case studies.” In Dutch.] 
[27] P.M. Ho, P.N. Peterson, and F.A. Masoudi, “Evaluating the 
evidence. Is there a rigid hierarchy?” Circulation, 2008, 
118(16):1675-84. 
[28] M. Vervloet, L. van Dijk, J. Santen-Reestman, B. van 
Vlijmen, P. van Wingerden, M.L. Bouvy, and D.H. de 
Bakker, “SMS reminders improve adherence to oral 
medication in type 2 diabetes patients who are real time 
electronically monitored,” Int. J. Med. Inform., 2012, 
81(9):594-604. 
[29] M. Hettinga, T. Gutter, and J.T. te Gussinklo, “Real time 
medication monitoring with customized SMS reminders for 
people with refractory epilepsy,” Proc. eTELEMED 2013, 
Feb. 2013, pp. 162-167. 
[30] U. Eisermann, I. Haase, and B. Kladny, “Computer-aided 
multimedia training in orthopedic rehabilitation,” Am. J. 
Phys. Med. Rehabil., 2004, 83(9):670-80. 
[31] Website 
Innovatieroutes 
in 
de 
Zorg, 
www.innovatieroutesindezorg.nl. [A website and interactive 
assessment about four eHealth innovation routes, maintained 
by the Research group ICT Innovations in Health Care, 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences. In Dutch.] Last 
accessed: December 6, 2013. 
[32] R. Janssen, L. Bodenstaff, E. Gyaltsen-Lohuis, T. haaker, W. 
de Haan, I. Krediet, R. Menko, H. Prins, S. Visser, and M. 
Hettinga, 
“Succesvol 
ondernemen 
met 
eHealth: 
Innovatieroutes 
in 
de 
zorg,” 
Zwolle: 
Hogeschool 
Windesheim, 2013. [“Succesful entrepreneurship in eHealth: 
innovation routes in health care.” In Dutch.] 
203
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

