Porphyrin – Cis-Platin drug system for HeLa cells photodynamic treatment
Rodica-Mariana IONa,b,*, Luciana MARESCAc, Danilo MIGONId, Francesco P. FANIZZId
ICECHIM, Bucharest, Romania; Valahia University from Targoviste, Romania
e-mail: rodica_ion2000@yahoo.co.uk
Bari University, Dept of Chemical Pharmaceutic, Bari, Italy
e-mail: maresca@farmchim.uniba.it
Universita di Lecce, Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche ed Ambientali, Lecce, Italy
e-mail: fp.fanizzi@unile.it
Keywords: Photodynamic therapy, HeLa cells, singlet oxygen, TSPP, Cis-Pt
Abstract
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a clinical approach that
use light-activated drugs for the treatment of different kind of
tumor tissues. HeLa tumor cells, as an experimental model
for study the new biomedical concept of associated PDT with
5,10,15,20-sulphonato-phenyl-porphyrin
(TSPP)
and
an
antitumor agent – cisplatin (CisPt), yielded to an enhanced
effect on the suppression of tumor cells in vitro. The
ultrastructure changes of cells caused by the action of the
new concept and laser irradiation were analyzed, putting
into evidence a linear survival curves, by the linear
quadratic model. The ultrastructural morphologic aspect of
the HeLa cells phototreated with TSPP reinforces the results
that a great number of cells with plasma membrane damage,
characteristics of irreversible cellular lesions were observed.
1. Introduction
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a novel treatment
for cancer and certain non-cancerous diseases that are
generally characterized by overgrowth of unwanted or
abnormal cells [1]. By using a combination of a
photosensitizer and a light source, the procedure
require
exposure
of
cells
or
tissues
to
a
photosensitizing drug followed by irradiation with light
of the appropriate wavelength, compatible with the
absorption spectrum of the drug [1,2]. In PDT,
photosensitizers are used to absorb energy from a light
source
after
its
administration
to
tumour
cells,
producing reactive oxygen species that will cause cell
death.
Intense research has been devoted to understanding
the molecular processes involved in apoptotic cell
death and deciding about the strategies that can restore
the apoptotic potential to tumor cells. PDT with most
of the sensitizers tested, acts via singlet oxygen
production. Singlet oxygen has been indicated as the
active PDT agent causing injury to cells and tissues.
Because of the short half live of this excited species in
cells (<0.1 ms) and short radius of action (<0.02 mm),
damage will occur mainly next to the region the
sensitizer is concentrated. Incubation time of cells with
photosensitizer, is another parameter that will affect the
mode of cell death during exposure to light. For short
period of incubation, the plasma membrane is an
important site of damage [3]. Prolonged incubation
with Photofrin®, the first PDT photosensitizer to win
approval by regulatory agencies in several countries,
tends to localize in the mitochondria membrane.
Many of the sensitizers used in the experimental or
clinical
PDT,
localize
in
the
plasma
membrane,
mitochondria, endoplasm reticulum and lysosomes [4].
In
photodynamic
therapy,
the
cellular
photo-
modification consists of: photosensitizer transport to
the active site; possible binding or aggregation; light
absorption
by
the
site;
production
of
energetic
intermediate
states;
reaction
with
cellular
bio-
molecules; modifications of cellular function.
Proteins, lipids and nucleic acids are the most
vulnerable cellular targets which can support their
photo-oxidation.
As documented in the literature, many efforts have
been made to discover new sensitizers with high singlet
oxygen yield and high photodynamic activity. Among
different molecules, porphyrins can be considered ideal
sensitizers because of their optimal photodynamic
activity [5]. Cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum;
cisPt) is a potent inducer of growth arrest and/or
apoptosis in most cell types and is among the most
effective and widely used chemotherapeutic agents
36
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

employed for treatment of human cancers. Cisplatin as
one
of
the
most
widely
used
metal-containing
anticancer drug, is one of the most effective agents
used to treat various types of human cancer (bladder,
testicular, ovarian, and head and neck tumors) and, but
its clinical effectiveness has been limited by significant
undesiderable side effects, such as dose-dependent
nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity. Moreover, the use of
cisplatin is limited by lack of activity against tumors
with neutral or acquired resistance to this drug. Pt(II)
compounds have also an extensive history exhibiting
virucidal activity, including a recent report of anti HIV-
1 activity [6]. In this context there is a clear evidence
that the carrier ligand influences the antiviral activity
and modifications of the carrier ligand in cisplatin may
broaden the range of antitumor and antiviral activities,
therefore, there is still a need to synthesize platinum(II)
complexes with novel ligands and to test them for
antitumor activity, in the hope of overcoming the above
mentioned limitations. There is an urgent need for the
development of new anticancer drug candidates to
replace CisPt causes apoptosis by DNA fragmentation.
The toxicity of platinum anticancer drugs presents a
major obstacle in the effective treatment of tumours.
Much of the toxicity stems from a lack of specificity of
the drugs for the sites at which they are able to exert
maximum
anticancer
activity.
An
improved
understanding of the behaviour of the drugs in the
tumour environment may assist in the rational design of
future
platinum
anticancer
agents
with
enhanced
specificity and reduced toxicity.
Platinum complexes currently make up one of the three
most widely used groups of anticancer drugs in the
world.
The
anticancer
activity
of
cisplatin
(cis-
[PtCl2(NH3)2],
see
Figure
1)
was
discovered
serendipitously in the 1960s. Since 1978 it has been
used in the clinic against a variety of cancers, including
testicular, ovarian, head and neck, bladder, cervical,
lymphoma and melanoma. Treatment with cisplatin
often causes severe side effects such as nausea,
vomiting, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, myelotoxicity,
and emetogenesis. These side effects arise mainly as a
result of the limited selectivity of cisplatin for tumour
cells as compared to healthy cells, and may also be due
to reactions with thiol-containing species in blood
plasma, such as cysteine and human serum albumin. In
spite of its widespread clinical use, many tumours are
unresponsive to cisplatin treatment due to intrinsic (eg.
colon cancer, non-small-cell lung cancer) or acquired
resistance (eg. Ovarian cancer, small-cell lung cancer).
The cellular mechanisms of cisplatin resistance have
been identified and recently reviewed. The main factors
that
modulate
resistance
include
decreased
drug
accumulation, increased levels of intracellular thiols
that
can
deactivate
cisplatin,
and
an
increased
capability of cells to repair or tolerate DNA damage
caused by cisplatin. Other processes have also been
implicated.
Porphyrins, however, have limited photo stability, so
their association with other drugs, in order to increase
both light stability and photodynamic efficiency, is
strongly recommended [7-10].
Photosensitizer as TSPP (TSPP = 5,10,15,20–tetra-
sulphonated-phenylporphyrin) are able to decrease the
fraction of single stranded circular genomic DNA by
converting it to linear form [11]. Porphyrin and/or
metalloporphyrin mediated cleavage of nucleic acids
occurs via oxidative attack on the sugar moiety with
consequent nucleobase modifications leading to strand
scission; or by a photo induced mechanism involving
either the porphyrin excited state or singlet oxygen.
The photosensitized tumor therapy, carried on in the
presence of certain chemical agents, can lead to
enhanced tumor and tumor cell response. In this
context, the combination between a porphyrin, TSPP,
and a drug, cisplatin (CisPt), appears to be a useful and
promising system, which has been studied, and it will
be described hereafter.
In this work, HeLa tumor cells were used as an
experimental model for studying the action of different
new sensitizers in photodynamic therapy (PDT). Tumor
monolayer cultures were incubated for 18 h at 37° C
with TSPP and CisPt, and observed before and after
photodynamic
treatment
with
He-Ne
laser.
The
association of a sensitizer with an antitumor agent, such
as cisplatin, has an enhanced effect on the suppression
of tumor cells in vitro which is more pronounced than
that caused by individual components. Also, the
ultrastructure changes caused by the action of two
photosensitizers
and
laser
irradiation
on
HeLa
(neoplastic)
cells
were
analyzed
by
transmission
electron microscopy. The results showed induction of
apoptosis.
2. Experimental part
2.1. Photosensitizers
TSPP (Figure 1a) has been prepared and purrified
according to a published procedure [12].
37
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

(a)
(b)
Figure 1.
The structure of TSPP (a) and CisPt (b)
Cisplatin (CisPt) (Figure 1b) has been used as
pharmaceutical
product
without
any
further
purification; the optimal concentrations were between
20-50 ng (105 cells) incubated for 18 h at 37° C.
2.2. Cell culture
Human HeLa cervical adenocarcinoma cells (ATCC
CCL-2) were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified sterile
atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37 °C, using
DMEM supplemented with fetal calf serum (10%, v/v),
glucose (4.5 g/l), L-glutamine
(292 mg/l), streptomycin sulfate (10 mg/l) and
potassium penicillin (10000 U/l). HeLa cells were
maintained frozen in DMEM with 10% DMSO. 1.8 ml
CryoTubes™ (Nunc, Nalge Nunc International, IL,
USA) were filled with the cellular suspension and then
were placed in a cell Cryo 1 °C Freezing Container
(Nalgene, Nalge Nunc International, IL, USA) to be
slowly frozen up to -80 °C at a cooling rate of -1
°C/min for successful cell cryopreservation. Frozen
cells were rapidly transferred to a liquid nitrogen
container (-196 °C) and stored. HeLa cells are adherent
cells which grow up to form cellular monolayers
toward confluence after inoculation. Cell viability was
evaluated with 0.2 % trypan blue solution. HeLa tumor
cell cultures were treated with TSPP, CisPt and
TSPP/CisPt.
2.3. Methods and apparatus
All spectroscopic measurements were carried out in
1-cm quartz cuvettes (Hellma, Germany) at room
temperature and, in the case of cell suspensions, the
samples were continuously stirred.
2.4. Cellular uptake
The cellular uptake of the photosensitizers was
estimated by flow cytometry, using Foreskin cells
cultured in 75 cm2 tissue culture flasks as indicated
above. Our compounds, dissolved in DMSO:water
(0.05%-99.95%), were added
to
the flasks at a
concentration of 1 M when a confluence of 80–85%
was reached and the cells were incubated with the
sensitizer for different periods of time in the dark.
Immediately after each time, the cells were washed
with PBS to remove the non-entrapped sensitizer.
Trypsinization was carried out using PBS containing
0.2% trypsin and 0.5 mM EDTA. The suspension of
cells was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. The pellet
was suspended in PBS and prior to flow cytometric
analysis, the new suspension was filtered through nylon
filters
(Nytal,
70
m mesh, Sefar Maissa S.A.,
Barcelona, Spain) to exclude cellular aggregates.
2.5. Irradiation protocol
Cell suspensions were subjected to photodynamic
therapy (PDT), namely pre-incubated for 1h-18h with
the derivatives, and subjected to irradiation after
washing them 3x in culture medium and resuspended at
3  105 cells/mL. The cell suspension irradiation was
performed with a polychromatic lamp in a quartz
cuvette,
exposure
time
30
minutes.
Cellular
photodegradation
kinetics
were
recorded
during
irradiation
with
an
UV-VIS
double-beam
spectrophotometer (Carl Zeiss Jena), connected to an
external computer for data processing. Cell numbers
were evaluated by means of maximum absorption at the
band located at 275 nm, and fitted with a mathematical
model. The absorption of UV in this region in a fixed
volume of solubilized cells is proportional to the cell
number, and therefore can be used as a simple means of
obtaining a cell count. Cell counts obtained in this way
can be combined with measurements of the inhibition
of DNA synthesis ([3H]-thymidine incorporation) by
test compounds, to produce an index of cytotoxicity
[17]. A time dependency of log (No/N) was plotted,
representing the decrease in the actual number of intact
cells during the irradiation period, where No = initial
number of cells and N = number of cells at a given time
point. As cellular controls, we have used unloaded cells
suspensions subjected to irradiation.
After irradiation, cell suspensions were washed twice
for removal of cell debris generated during irradiation.
After PDT, cell suspension was recorded in the
38
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Counting Chamber (Roth) with 0.4% Trypan Blue
Stain and the actual decrease in the number of cells
subjected to PDT was presented.
2.5. Singlet oxygen test
Measurements were carried out in a quartz cell
(1cm x 1cm) at 20oC. A DMSO solution (2.3 ml)
containing sensitizer (4.8 x 10-5 M) and DPBF (2.7 x
10-5 M) was irradiated with light beam from a UV-Vis
spectrophotometer.
Solutions
of
sensitizers
were
freshly
prepared
and
kept
in
the
dark
before
measurements.
The
decreasing
of
the
DPBF
concentration was followed by a special programm
ruled on a computer at the absorbance from 415 nm
(the molar coefficient of absorption for DPBF is 23300
M-1cm-1) as function of the irradiation time (irradiation
cycles 50 x 25 s). The reaction showed a zero order-
kinetics in the first 100 s. The incident photon flow was
4.65 x 10-9 M.s-1. Using the absorption spectra of the
photosensitizer, the absorbed photon flow (Iabs) was
evaluated. The quantum yield of the photooxidation of
DPBF was calculated from the eq.l
DPBF = ([DPBF]/I abs.V); V= 3 cm3
(1)
The quantum yield for singlet oxygen generation was
calculated from eq.2.
1/DPBF=1/1O2 + (1/1O2 Kd/Ka)(1/[DPBF]) (2)
From the intercept of the Stern-Volmer plots,we
obtained
the
quantum
yield
for
singlet
oxygen
generation.
2.6. Cell phototoxicity after irradiation
The cells were plated at a number of 106 cells/ml in
each well of a 24 wells plate (Nunc, Denmark) as
follows: six wells for light and photosensitizer and, six
wells for light only (control). After 24 h of culture,
cells were incubated with 10 M of TSPP or Cis Pt in
culture medium without serum for 60 min. Cells were
washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and
200 l of fresh PBS was added for irradiation. Dark
barriers were placed between wells to avoid scattered
light during irradiation. Another dark barrier with an
orifice of the diameter of the wall was placed on the
top of the 24 wells plate for the same purpose. The
irradiation was done in the dark with a He-Ne laser
light exposure (Jena, 632.8 ms, power 50 mW) was
performed for different times at 37° C in bottles with
quartz windows, the cell suspensions being gently
stirred during irradiation.
After He- Ne laser treatment, cell suspension were
1:10 diluted with growth medium (1x105 cells/ ml final
concentration).
The
cellular
suspensions
were
incubated for 24 h at 37° C in 5% CO2 atmosphere.
After
irradiation, PBS was removed
and
culture
medium with 10% FBS was added to the cells for 24,
48 and 72 h of culture in a humidified 5% CO2 at 37ºC.
After each period of incubation, the number of living
cells was counted by the Trypan blue exclusion test.
2.7. Proliferation assay
The
growth
inhibitory
effect
of
the
studied
compounds (TSPP, CisPt, or a combination of the two)
towards HeLa cells was evaluated by using the
spectrophotometric MTT assay [13]. The cells, grown
in the culture flasks, were trypsinized and seeded at a
density of 106 cells/well in well plates. DMEM growth
medium (with 10% FBS) was used, and the cells were
incubated overnight at 37°C in humidified environment
containing 5% CO2 to allow adherence. The tested
compounds were diluted in FBS-free growth medium
and then administered in growing doses (1, 10, 100 and
200 M); their cytotoxic effect was evaluated using
different periods of incubation (24, 48 and 72 hours).
The MTT solution (5 mg/ml) was added to each well
(10 l) at the end of the incubation time with inhibitors
and further incubated for 4 h at 37°C. After this period,
the medium was aspirated and the purple crystals of
formazan, which had been formed, were dissolved by
addition of isopropanol/HCl 0.04 N (100 l/well).
Absorbance
at
550
nm
was
measured
on
a
spectrophotometer. The absorbance of the treated cells
was then given as percentage of that of control cells
and the resulting data are based on the mean value of 8
wells  S. D.
2.8. Kinetic model
Irradiation of cells with light radiation produces
linear survival curves [14]. The relationship between
the surviving fraction S and the light dose D is then:
S = exp (-D)
(3)
where:
S is the number of surviving cells;
- is the slope
D is the radiation dose delivered.
The relationship is more commonly represented as:
S= log N/No = exp(-D/Do)
(4)
39
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

by defining Do as 1/. When D=Do, S = e-1 = 0.37.
2.9. Electron microscopy
After irradiation, PBS was replaced by medium with
serum. After 24 h of culture, cells were washed twice
with PBS and fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4%
freshly prepared formaldehyde in phosphate buffer
0.1M (pH 7.2) for at least 2 h at 4ºC. Cells were
detached from the dish with a cell scraper, centrifuged
three times (1500g, 10 min) with 0.1M fresh phosphate
buffer and post fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide in
phosphate buffer for 30 min. Finally, cells were wahsed
again and dehydrated in acetone and embedded in
Epon. After sectioning, cells were contrasted with
uranyl acetate for 30 min and lead citrate for five min.
Transmission
electron
microscopy
was
performed
using a Zeiss 900 and a Zeiss EM10 microscope.
2.10. Fluorescence microscopy
It was performed in order to investigate the cellular
loading efficiency. Thus, in an Nikon E300 inverted
fluorescence microscope with image capture, HeLa
cells loaded 24h with non-toxic concentration of the
investigated compounds were investigated with the
V2A filter, excitation 380-420nm, emission < 450nm.
After loading, cells were washed and in RPMI1640
medium without phenol red resuspended at 5x106
cells/mL concentration. Live cell suspensions were laid
on
fluorescence
slides
(Marienfeld).
Image
was
captured both in fluorescence and in phase contrast.
2.11. Confocal fluorescence microscopy
HeLa cells were viewed using a BIO RAD Radiance
Plus Confocal Microscope. Images were obtained using
a
100
x
oil
immersion
objective
(Nikon).
The
compounds CisPt, TSPP and CisPt-TSPP were excited
at 543 nm, and detected at em = 555 – 626 nm. Stains
were excited using ex = 488 nm, and detected at em
= 500-560 nm. HeLa cells were viewed using a Zeiss
LSM510 confocal laser scanning microscope (Carl
Zeiss,
Welwyn
Garden
City,
UK).
Images
were
obtained using a 63x objective oil immersion objective.
The compounds were excited at 543 nm, 76% laser
strength, and detected at em >560 nm. Stains were
excited usingex = 488 nm, 10-15% laser strength, and
detected at em = 505-530 nm.
2.11. Caspase-3 activity
It was measured from cell lysates by a colorimetric
method
(CaspACE™
Assay
System,
Promega
Corporation), using its high sensitive substrate coupled
to a cromophore (p-nitroaniline, pNA). The free pNA
released
from
substrate
upon
enzyme
action,
is
spectrophotometrically detected at 405 nm. Using a
calibration curve and the actual proteic concentration in
cell lysates (Bradford method) the specific caspase
activity was calculated to the total proteic content of
each lysate and normalized to 1x105 cells. Results are
presented as microMpNA/1x105 cells. Cell cultures
were tested in different stages of the cell cycle,
different batches of the same cell lines or primary cell
cultures in order to have the statistical significant basal
caspase 3 activity related to the cell type.
2.12. Apoptosis
It was evaluated by flow cytometry, using the
annexin V / propidium iodide method (BD Biosciences
kit). Annexin V (Ann) highlights apoptosis-associated
loss
of
plasma
membrane
asymmetry,
namely
phosphatidylserine (PS) translocation from the inner to
the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane, which is
recognized by annexin V. Propidium iodide (PI) is
used as vital stain. Annexin V staining identifies early
apoptosis
events,
while
cells
double
positive
(Ann+PI+) are in late apoptosis or already dead.
Positive
controls
were
camptothecin
1microM
(apoptosis
inducer)
treated
cells.
Samples
were
analyzed by flow cytometry (FACScalibur cytometer,
Becton Dickinson) within one hour, using CellQuest
software.
3. Results and discussion
Exposition of HeLa tumor cells to a combination
TSPP with cisplatin showed a significant synergistic
effect, which improves the efficacy of the antitumor
drug, Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Survival rate of HeLa in the presence of TSPP/CisPt
40
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

In the treatment with TSPP, at 10mM concentration
of the drug, the surviving cell population was reduced
to 60% after 24 h, and to less than 20% after 48 h of
incubation
respectively
(the
effect
being
more
important for higher cisplatin concentration), Figure 3.
Figure 3.
MTT test for HeLa cells (control)-left and incubated with
TSPP-CisPt 4 mM (right)
HeLa tumor cells were exposed to a photosensitizer
(TSPP) alone or in association with an antitumor agent
(cisplatin).
When
HeLa
cells,
in
a
stationary
development
stage,
were
treated
with
TSPP
in
concentrations ranging between 1 and 200 M (or 5
and 500 ng/105 cells), the surviving rates were almost
100% after 24 h, and not less than 90% after 48 h of
incubation (Figure. 4).
Figure 4.
Number of living cells (HeLa) after photodynamic
treatment with TSPP, CisPt, TSPP/CisPt at different
times.
On irradiation of HeLa tumor cells only with He-Ne
laser, or Cis Pt not significant cytotoxic effect had been
observed.
HeLa tumor cells were then irradiated wit He-Ne
laser before and after treatment with TSPP, CisPt, or a
combination of the two, and SEM examination of
treated and untreated cells was also performed.
It is known that laser radiation can stimulate cell
proliferation, a mechanism dependent on the fluency
applied. In this work, the fluency used (0.5 J/cm2) has
an inhibitory effect of He-Ne laser (632.8 nm) in the
region of 300 to 600 mJ/cm2 in HeLa cells. It is widely
accepted that non-ionized species can cross the plasma
membrane more easily than charged compounds [15].
TSPP that is soluble in water is not capable of
penetrating into the cell by means of passive diffusion.
It is endocytosed by the cell and therefore localized in
endosomes and lysosomes. Many authors consider that
the cell uptake of the sensitizer is more efficient for
lipophilic photosensitizers due to the better penetration
through the cell membranes.
The ultrastructural morphologic aspect of the HeLa
cells phototreated with TSPP reinforces the results that
a great number of cells with plasma membrane damage,
characteristics of irreversible cellular lesions were
observed. These are characteristics of the cell necrosis
process. Despite the knowledge that TSPP localizes
preferentially in the mitochondrial membrane and that
after laser irradiation activation of proteins leads to the
apoptotic
process,
the
initial
localization
of
the
photosensitizer in the plasma membrane and the
interaction time in our experiments suggest a process of
cell death with necrosis like characteristics.
PDT of HeLa cells with TSPP, shows ultrastructure
features
that
suggest
apoptotic
cell
death.
A
characteristic of this kind of death is the conservation
of membrane integrity. According to Zhang [16], the
relation between the mode of cell death (apoptosis or
necrosis) and the dose of PDT, may be dependent
mainly on the cell line and the photosensitizer used.
Our results demonstrate cell apoptosis occurring in the
neoplastic cell line. This may be related to the fact that
lesion to the lysosomes membrane are followed by
enzyme leakage to the cytoplasm. The activation of
these enzymes causes enzymatic digestion of cellular
components evidenced by nuclear alterations like
picnotic nuclei and the characteristic ladder pattern of
DNA fragmentation. TPPS as hydrophilic sulfonated
porphyrin is taken up into lysosomes by endocytosis.
PDT
with
either
of
the
membrane-
localizing
photosensitizers resulted in increasing numbers of cells
becoming apoptotic (TUNEL positive) during the first
12 h, but apoptotic bodies were not observed. In
contrast,
after
photoactivation
of
the
lysosome
localized photosensitizers, apoptotic cells were not
detected until after 12 h but extensive fragmentation of
the cells into apoptotic bodies was found. These data
provide evidence for at least two distinct pathways by
which PDT can induce apoptosis. HeLa cells present a
specificed
morphological
aspect,
where
only
mitochondrial
alteration
is
observed.
However,
maintaining the cell membrane integrity as a whole.
The oxygen free radicals partially reduced are highly
toxic molecules that cause lesion to cell membranes
and other cell constituents [17]. Mitochondria and
lysosomes have been identified as key components in
the induction of apoptosis [18, 19].
41
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

SEM scan of untreated HeLa tumor cells, cultured
72 h at 37° C, showed a continuous, uniformly
distributed monolayer without any cellular alteration
(Figure 5). After laser irradiation the following features
could
be
observed:
(i)
cyto
plasmatic
extensions
branching
out
towards
the
periphery
and
contacting
the
neighboring
preelongations and membranes, (ii) swellings on the
cells surface, and finally (iii) some breaks (ruptures) at
the cells periphery. Some cytoplasmatic prelongations
appear, some of them having the tendency of branching
with others cells.
Figure 5.
SEM scan of untreated HeLa tumor cells, cultured 72 h
at 37° C (left) and laser irradiated (right)
a
b
c
Figure 6.
HeLa tumoral cells after PDT treatment for control cells
(a), TSPP treated (b) and TSPP/ CisPt (c)
The main explanation resides in the fact that
cisplatin
induces
apoptosis
in
HeLa
tumor
cells
implying attack on mitochondria (Fig. 6).
With TSPP, under He-Ne laser irradiation, presence
of microvilli with or without microswellings, flattening
tumoral cells, smooth surface without microvilli but
with swellings on their surface, small craters in the
central zone resulted from cytoplasmatic swellings,
cytoplasmatic prelongations some of them having the
tendency of branching with others cells.
The interpretation of the shape of the cell survival
curve is still debated, as is the best way to fit the types
of data mathematically.
For a linear kinetic curve (single hit, single target)
the parameter Do can then be used to characterize the
sensitivity
in
the
linear
region
of
the
curve.
Extrapolation of the terminal straight line portion of the
curve back to the abscissa defines a value, n, the
extrapolation number.
In the shoulder region of the curve the proportion of
the cells killed, two interpretations are possible:
• Cell death results from the accumulation of events
that are individually incapable of killing the cell, but
which become lethal when added together (target
models).
• Lesions are individually repairable but become
irreparable and kill the cell if the efficiency of the
enzymatic repair mechanisms diminishes with number
of lesions and therefore the dose (repair models).
In this case, linear-quadratic model is the most used
model for HeLa cells, from the following point of view:
• Do, the initial slope, due to single event killing, the
dose to reduce survival to 37%, valuable for all the
case except TSPP/CisPt;
• D, the final slope, interpreted as multiple-event
killing, the dose to reduce survival by 67% from any
point on the linear portion of the curve, which could
apply for TSPP/CisPt.
The linear quadratic model assumes that a cell can
be killed in two ways.
• Single lethal event
• Accumulation of sub lethal events.
From kinetic point of view, the survival fraction is
evaluated as a plot of log (N(t)/N0) versus irradiation
time. In this case, could be applied the Theory of Dual
Radiation Action, where the lesions responsible for cell
photo destruction result from the interaction of sub
lesions, resulted from unrepaired DNA double-strand
breaks.
In the presence of the combined drugs TSPP-CisPt
and under He-Ne laser irradiation could be observed
flattened and covered cells with microswellings, micro
craters at the cell periphery, lysis of the swellings and
cells with smooth aspects.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a standard treatment
for various cancers (lung, esophagus, stomach, cervix,
bladder, etc.) as well as for non-malignant conditions
such as age-related
macular degeneration, actinic
keratoses and psoriasis. It is based on the selective
retention
of
a
previously
administered
nontoxic
photosensitizer in the target cells, and irradiation of
these
cells
with
visible
light
at
the
appropriate
wavelength (1). Upon illumination, the photosensitizer
generates reactive oxygen species (singlet oxygen and
free radicals, such as OH-, HO2
- and .O2
-; Figure 7).
These reactive species ultimately eliminate highly
proliferating cells by damaging membranes, DNA and
other cell structures, and also by affecting extracellular
matrix (ECM) components.
42
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 7.
Photosensitization process represented by a modified
Jablonski diagram. PS S0 = singlet ground state
photosensitizer; PS S1 = short-lived singlet excited
state photosensitizer; PS T1 = long-lived triplet state
photosensitizer; hf = fluorescence; hp =
phosphorescence; isc = intersystem crossing; 1O2 =
singlet oxygen.
Cell membranes have been identified as an important
intracellular
target,
and
many
of
their
natural
constituent macromolecules are readily susceptible to
the
organism,
reacting
with
the
singlet
oxygen
produced during the photochemical pathway, typically
present in the PDT process. Such membranes include
the
plasma
membrane
surrounding
the
cell,
the
membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum distributed
throughout the cytoplasm and the membranes of
mitochondria and Golgi apparatus.
Cytoplasmatic
residues
resulted
from
cells
desintegration as a consequence of the combined
treatment. Scanning examination of He La tumor cells,
exposed to photodynamic treatment (TSPP) associated
with CisPt put into evidence various morphological
lesions such as: microswellings, microcraters at the cell
periphery, lysis of the swelling.
Apoptosis, also known as ‘programmed cell death’
or ‘cellular suicide’, is an active form of death with
particular changes in cell morphology and protein
activity. It is characterized by cell shrinking, surface
membrane blebbing, chromatin condensation and DNA
fragmentation. Apoptosis can be initiated in various
manners, including PDT, and the common effector
mechanism is to induce caspase-mediated cleavage of
substrates. Initiator caspases are responsible for the
first
proteolytic
events,
e.g.
cleavage
of
the
cytoskeleton and related proteins including actin, and
fodrin (a membrane-associated cytoskeletal protein).
Amongst others, these early apoptotic events are
thought to be responsible for the characteristic cell
surface blebbing.
Three principal mechanisms are suggested for PDT
action: cellular damage of targeting (photodamage by
involving the process of apoptosis), vascular damage
and immunological response.
Figure 8.
Control HeLa cells. (N=
nuclear chromatin; arrows
= mitochondria).
Figure 9.
HeLa cells 24 h after
photodynamic treatment
with TSPP-CisPt.
By
transmission
electron
microscope
structural
alteration it was a found that characterize the apoptotic
death mechanism for example, in the organization of
the
citoplasmatic
membrane
(figures
8,9),
the
condensed chromatin and aggregated chromatin in the
nuclear peripheral, the condensation and presence of
apoptotic
bodies
Our
results
indicate
that
the
morphological criteria (apoptotic cell rounding and
shrinkage) allow distinguishing the apoptosis as cell
death mechanisms of photodynamic treatment. Thus,
the morphological analysis under light microscopy and
transmission electron microscope constitutes a very
important and even decisive tool to identify the specific
type of cell death unambiguously.
After photodynamic treatment with TSPP-CisPt,
HeLa
cells
presented
condensed
chromatin,
cell
elongation, and cytoplasm condensation. All these are
proves for apoptosis. Aspects of apoptotic bodies
generated into cells are visualized in Figures 10,11.
Figure 10. Apoptotic bodies inside HeLa cells
(arrowhead).
43
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 11. TEM micrographs of control HeLa cells
Figure 12 show that the CisPt-TSPP probe was
confined to the nuclear compartment. It should be
noted that shorter (<1 hour) and longer incubation
times (>24 hours) revealed similar distribution patterns.
Hence the above compound do not localise in the
nuclei of the cells.
Figure 12.
Confocal image of CisPt-TSPP in HeLa cells
4. Conclusion
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a clinical approach
that uses light-activated drugs for the treatment of
different kind of tumor tissues. HeLa tumor cells, as an
experimental model for study the new biomedical
concept of associated PDT with 5,10,15,20-sulphonato-
phenyl-porphyrin (TSPP) and an antitumor agent –
cisplatin (CisPt), yielded to an enhanced effect on the
suppression of tumor cells in vitro. The ultrastructure
changes of cells caused by the action of the new
concept and laser irradiation were analyzed, putting
into evidence a linear survival curves, by the linear
quadratic model.
In the presence of the combined drugs TSPP-CisPt
and under He-Ne laser irradiation could be observed
flattened
and
covered
cells
with
microswellings,
microcraters at the cell periphery, lysis of the swellings
and cells with smooth aspects. Cytoplasmatic residues
resulted from cells desintegration as a consequence of
the combined treatment. Scanning examination of He
La tumor cells, exposed to photodynamic treatment
(TSPP) associated with CisPt put into evidence various
morphological
lesions
such
as:
microswellings,
microcraters at the cell periphery, lysis of the swelling.
5. References
[1] R.M.Ion, L. Maresca, D. Migoni, and F.P. Fanizzi,
“Concept of associated photodynamic therapy with porphyrin
– cis-platin drug system and applications on HeLa cells”,
Biocomputation,
Bioinformatics,
and
Biomedical
Technologies, 2008, BIOTECHNO 2008, Int. Conf. on
Volume, 2008, pp. 70–75.
[2]
K.R.
Weishaupt,
C.J.Gomer
and
T.J.
Dougherty.
“Identification of singlet oxygen as the cytotoxic agent in
photoinactivation of a murine tumor”, Cancer Res., Vol.36,
1976, pp. 2326-2329.
[3] T.J. Dougherty, C.J. Gomer, B.W. Henderson, G. Jori, D.
Kessel, M. Korbelik, J. Moan and Q. Peng, “Photodynamic
Therapy: Review”. J Natl Cancer Inst., Vol.90, 1998, pp.
889-902.
[4] J. Moan and K. Berg, “The photodegradation of
porphyrins in cells can be used to estimate the lifetime of
singlet oxygen”, Photochem Photobiol., Vol.53, 1991, pp.
549-553.
[5] T. Christensen, L. Smedshammer, A.Wahl and J. Moan,
“Photodynamic effects and hyperthermia in vitro”, Adv Exp
Med Biol., Vol.193, 1985, pp. 69-78.
[6] A.N. Vzorov, D. Bhattacharyya, L.G. Marzilli, and R.W.
Compans, “Prevention of HIV-1 infection by platinum
triazines”, Antiviral Res., Vol. 65, 2005, pp. 57–67.
[7] N.L. Oleinick, “Apoptosis in response to photodynamic
therapy”. Photodynamics News., Vol. 6, 1998, pp. 8-9.
[8] M.L. Agarwal, M.E. Clay, E.J. Harvey, H.H. Evan, A.R.
Antunez and N.L. Oleinick, “Photodynamic therapy induces
rapid cell death by apoptosis in L5178Y mouse lymphoma
cells”, Cancer Res.Vol. 5, 1991, pp. 5993-5996.
[9] K.Berg, Q. Peng, J.M. Nesland and J. Moan , “Cellular
responses to photodynamic therapy”, Proc. SPIE. Vol.2078,
1995, pp. 278-285.
[10]
R.M.
Ion,
D.V.Brezoi,
M.Neagu,
G.Manda,
C.Constantin, “Laser effect in photodynamic therapy of
tumors”, Proc.SPIE, Vol. 6606, 2007, pp. 66061G-660671G.
[11] R.Alexandrova, O.Sabotoniv, E.Stoykova, RM Ion,
S.Shurilinkov, G.Minchev, “In vitro cytotoxicity assessment
of TSPP on animal tumor and non-tumor cell lines”, Proc.
SPIE, Vol. 5449, 2004, pp. 227-232.
[12] R.Alexandrova, R.M. Ion, E.Stoykova, S.Shurilinkov,
“In vitro investigation on cytotoxic activity of TS4PP
[5,10,15,20-tetra (4-sulfophenyl) porphyrin]”, Proc. SPIE,
Vol. 5226, 2003, pp. 423-427.
[13] T.R. Mosman and T.A.T. Fong, “Specific assay for
cytokine production by T cells”,
J Immunol Methods,
Vol.116, 1989, pp. 151–158.
[14]
R.Oliver
and
B.J.Shepstone,
“Some
Practical
Considerations in Determining the Parameters for Multi-
44
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

target and Multi-hit Survival Curves”, Phys. Med. Biol.
Vol.9, 1964, pp. 167-175.
[15] M.Neagu, G.Manda, C.Constantin, E.Radu, RM Ion,
“Synthetic porphyrins in experimental photodynamic therapy
induce a different antitumoral effect”, J.Porphyrins and
Phthalocyanines, Vol.11(01), 2007, pp. 58-65.
[16] W.W. Zhang, L.X. Zhang, R.K. Busch, J. Farrés and H
Busch, “Purification and characterization of a DNA-binding
heterodimer of 52 and 100 kDa from HeLa cells”, Biochem.
J., Vol. 290, 1993, pp. 267-272.
[17] R.Alexandrova, E.Stoykova, RM Ion, E.Nedkova, K.
Zdravkov, G.Minchev, “In vitro cytotoxicity assessment of
phthalocyanines on virus-transformed animal cells”, Proc.
SPIE, Vol. 5830, 2005, pp.404-408.
[18] J. Piette, C. Volanti, A. Vantieghem, J.-Y. Matroule,Y.
Habraken and P. Agostinis, “Cell death and growth arrest in
response to photodynamic therapy with membrane-bound
photosensitizers”, Biochemical Pharmacology, Vol.66, 2003,
pp. 1651-1659.
[19] P. Castano, T. N. Demidova and M.R. Hamblin,
“Mechanisms in photodynamic therapy: part two—cellular
signaling,
cell
metabolism and modes of cell death”,
Photodiagnosis and Photodynamic Therapy, Vol.2, 2005,
pp. 1-23.
45
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

