132
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Remote Rehabilitation System for Cerebrovascular Patients Combined 
with Video Call Center 
 
Kotaro Suzuki 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science, 
Iwate Prefectural University Graduate School 
Takizawa, Japan 
g231n019@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, kyoshida@ipu-office.iwate-
pu.ac.jp
 
Abstract— Japan’s low birthrate and rapidly aging population 
are causing medical expenses to take up ever more of the 
national budget and leading to a shortage of young medical 
professionals. As a result, rehabilitation therapy is being 
shifted from hospital-care to home-care. Thus, we propose a 
remote rehabilitation system combined with a video call center 
to make up for the shortage of rehabilitation therapy done by 
visiting physiotherapists. In this paper, we focus on 
cerebrovascular patients and adopt MS-KINECT to measure 
strain of the upper body and the Balance Wii Board to 
measure weight and center of weight for home usage. A remote 
rehabilitation system is also introduced that includes standing-
up and sitting-down therapy content. 
Keywords- rehabilitation; remote rehabilitation; motion 
capture; KINECT; Balance Wii Board; standing-up and sitting-
down therapy; video call center 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Japan’s low birthrate and rapidly aging population are 
causing medical expenses to take up ever more of the 
national budget and leading to a shortage of young medical 
professionals. To suppress this increase in medical expenses, 
medical treatments, including rehabilitation, are being shifted 
from 
hospital-care 
to 
home-care. 
The 
amount 
of 
rehabilitation therapy in a home done by a visiting 
physiotherapist is limited by law and is insufficient for 
patients to recover completely. Thus, we proposed a concept 
of remote rehabilitation system combined with a video call 
center to make up for the shortage of rehabilitation done by 
visiting physiotherapists [1].  
 
Figure 1. Ratio of disease for rehabilitation 
 
Forty-four percent of rehabilitation patients suffer from 
cerebrovascular diseases as shown in Figure 1 [2]. These 
diseases also have the longest rehabilitation term as shown in 
Figure 2 [2].  
 
 
Figure 2. Total points of the national healthcare insurance (NHI) according 
to the duration of feeding period from treatment start date in Japan 
 
Therefore, we focus on cerebrovascular patients in the 
first part of our research. 
In case of cerebrovascular disease, most patients have 
paralysis on one side of the body, and their bodies lean and 
twist to the paralysis side. Also, because of unusual muscle 
strain, their hands and feet become stiff. In some cases, 
muscles of the upper body go into convulsions. Because of 
these strain of upper body, it is difficult for them to keep the 
body balance. 
In case of a hand or foot, a joint angle is easy to measure 
with a protractor. However, a joint angle of a body is very 
difficult to measure with a protractor, because the joint angle 
combines the lead and the twist. A motion monitoring 
system, Vicon [3], which uses multiple video cameras, has 
been introduced to big hospitals and rehabilitation centers. 
Unfortunately, it is too expensive for a small facility to 
introduce. As a matter of course, it is impossible to adopt for 
a remote rehabilitation system, because the remote 
rehabilitation system is used personally. 
One of the most important types of training for 
cerebrovascular patients is standing-up and sitting-down 
training (hereinafter called standing-up training). If patients 
cannot get up from a bed, they have to continue to stay on 

133
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the bed and sometimes have bedsores. Therefore, the 
standing-up training is usually put into practice as the first 
stage. We develop a standing-up and sitting-down therapy 
content that utilizes the Nintendo Balance Wii Board. This 
training content also improves imbalance of the body. 
Changes of weight and center of weight under the feet and 
buttocks are necessary to advice patients how to stand up 
from and sit down on a chair in the standing-up training. 
Since most pressure-sensitive mats are too expensive for 
home use, we adopt the Nintendo Balance Wii Board. 
It is very difficult for patients to continue the self-
rehabilitation at home, so our system has two features to help 
them continuously: 
 
A patient can check data to see the effect of 
rehabilitation. 
 
A call center operator guides patients through the 
therapy and encourages them with images and 
conversation through the Internet. 
We believe that patients should see practical data 
showing them getting better and hear a person’s voice to 
improve their morale and to motivate them to continue 
rehabilitation. 
In our proposed remote rehabilitation system, a call 
center operator guides patients instead of a physiotherapist. 
Hence, our system has supervising functions for a 
physiotherapist to coach a call center operator like 
supervising functions in existing voice call center. 
In this paper, we introduce not only concepts of the 
proposed remote rehabilitation system RRS but also how to 
design it. 
After introducing related works in Section II, we describe 
the concepts and features of the remote rehabilitation system 
in Section III. Expression formats of strain of the upper body 
and change of weight and center of weight are explained in 
Section IV. Measuring schemes for the ante-flection, lean, 
and twist of the body are described in Section V. The 
standing-up training is detailed in Section VI. System 
designs to realize the above concept and functions are 
explained in Section VII. The key points are summarized in 
Section VIII. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In 
this 
section, 
we 
introduce 
existing 
remote 
rehabilitaion systems, tools for measuring the strain of 
upper body, MS-KINECT usage applications adopted in 
rehabilitation, and therapies for standing-up and sitting-
down. 
A. Remote rehabilitaion 
Traditionally, 
remote 
rehabilitation 
has 
been 
administered between a therapist and a patient through a 
video conference system or video phones, without using 
measuring and monitoring tools [4]. In accordance with 
evolution of remote monitoring tools, robotics and virtual 
reality technologies, they are combined with video 
conference system. Holden et al. applied virtual reality 
technologies to their tele-rehabilitation system [5]. Carignan 
reported rehabilitation system for which robotics was 
applied including remote rehabilitation [6]. Bradley et al. 
reported investigations of 
the design, control and 
implementation of a form of the intelligent exoskeleton, 
web-based strategies and robotics for remote rehabilitation 
[7]. In these researches, therapists directly guide or coach 
patients through their systems. Therefore, existing remote 
rehabilitation systems can shorten convey time for a visiting 
therapist. However, these systems are insufficient to make 
up for the shortage of therapists. 
B. Measurement tools for the strain of upper body 
Vicon is one of the most famous companies in the 
motion capture industry. They can measure complex 
motions of joints in a body [3]. Vicon’s system needs plural 
specialized video cameras, and know-how is needed to 
measure motions of joints. Thus, this system is too 
expensive for a small rehabilitation center or an individual 
to purchase and operate. Akimoto et al. developed a 
measurement tool for scoliosis [8]. It uses MS-KINECT to 
measure undulations on a body. This tool can express 
measurement data with an image, a graph, and numerical 
data and store them. Jing Tong et al. developed new 
scanning technology that can fully scan the body and show 
VR images of it [9]. It uses three MS-KINECTs. However, 
they did not account for measuring the lean and twist of a 
body. Burba et al. applied MS-KINECT to measure 
breathing rates derived from motions of the chest, and the 
number of shakes of tapping the knee derived from motions 
of the knee [10]. 
C. Therapy contents adopted MS-KINET and Ballance Wii 
Board to rehabilitation 
Garrido et al. applied MS-KINECT rehabilitations for 
patients who have trouble with their sense of balance with 
cerebrovascular disease [11]. They express the lean of the 
body by an image of the balance scale and show arrows to 
correct a patient’s posture. 
There are also many video games for rehabilitation that 
use MS-KINECT [12][13][14]. 
Fraser Anderson et al. developed a therapy content that 
combined the Balance Wii Board and a virtual game to 
improve the sense of balance [15]. This content can measure  
and record performance of a virtual game and show it to a 
patient to motivate him or her to continue rehabilitation. 
D. Therapy for standing up by the physiotherapist 
We heard about physiotherapists trained in standing-up 
and sitting-down therapy, and searched for it on the Internet 
[16]. The standing-up and sitting-down therapy consists of 
the following four steps: 
Step 1: A patient bends her or his upper body down to shift 
her or his center of weight to her or his toes and  
raises her or his buttocks from a chair. 

134
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Step 2: The patient streches her or his knees and 
simultaneously bends her or his upper body up. 
Step 3: The patient slightly bends her or his upper body 
down to shift her or his center of weight to her or 
his toes from the upright position. 
Step 4: The patient sits down on a chair. 
 
This training emphasizes bending her or his upper body 
up and down to shift her or his center of weight. However, 
most cerebrovascular patients have paralysis on one side of 
the body, and their bodies lean and twist to the paralysis 
side. Imbalance of the upper body will need to be corrected 
for rehabilitation. 
 
III. 
CONCEPT OF THE RRS WITH VIDEO CALL CENTER 
Our RRS is based on the following ideas: 
 
Practical data that shows the patients getting better 
will effectively encourage them to continue 
rehabilitation, more than simply giving them vague 
information such as “you are a little better than 
yesterday”. 
 
Hearing a person’s voice is likely to cheer patients 
up. 
Additionally, we plan to employee non-professionals as 
operators instead of physiotherapists to hold down operation 
costs and compensate for a shortage of physiotherapists.  
We introduce roles of a physiotherapist and operator, 
and necessary functions to realize above concepts. 
A. Roles of a physiotherapist and operator 
Roles of a physiotherapist are as follows: 
 
Teaching operators how to guide patients through 
rehabilitation and supervising the operators.  
 
Deciding and changing therapy programs on the 
basis of diagnostics data and measured data. 
Roles of an operator are as follows: 
 
Monitoring motions of a patient and measuring 
joint angles by the measuring tools.  
 
Coaching a patient in how to move his or her body 
using the administration tools and therapy contents 
on the basis of therapy programs.  
B. Necessary tools 
As shown in Figure 3, this system comprises following 
components: 
 
Administration tools: An operator uses these tools 
to guide patients. 
 
Measuring tools: An operator uses these tools to 
measure conditions of a patient including joint 
angles. Kinds of measuring tool that are kind of 
sensors are easily added to the RSS as necessary. 
 
Supervising tools: A physiotherapist uses these 
tools to coach operators. A physiotherapist can 
monitor how an operator is coaching patients and 
instruct him or her in therapy with these tools. 
 
Communication 
exchange 
application: 
This 
application connects a patient with an operator. 
This application works on a video conference 
server. 
 
Therapy contents: Presentation contents to explain 
how to train, or training content such as video 
games for rehabilitation. 
 
Patient database: Patient data that include profile 
data, measured data, therapy programs, and 
coaching video are stored and managed by this 
database. The access permission policy for this 
database has to be decided by the management 
organization of this system. 
The supervising tools and communication exchange 
application are newly added to introduce operators to the 
remote monitoring system. However, existing remote 
rehabilitation systems have also same roles for the other 
components. As a matter of course, practical tools of these 
components are different in each system. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. System concept of the remote rehabilitation 
 
IV. 
EXPRESSION FORMATS OF SENSOR DATA 
We design the proposed RRS to be able to easily add as 
many kinds of sensors as necessary as described in Section 
III. At present, we think that at least the motion monitoring 
sensor to measure strain of the upper body and the pressure 
distribution mat to sense changes of weight and center of 
weight are needed for rehabilitation of cerebrovascular 
patients. We choose MS-KINECT as the motion monitoring 
sensor and Balance Wii Board as the pressure distribution 

135
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mat for the home use. Both sensors are reasonably enough 
priced for home use.  
In this section, we describe expression formats of strain 
of the upper body, and changes of load and the center of 
weight to show operators and physiotherapist in Figure 3. 
A. Strain of the upper body 
In this paper, strain of the upper body is shown from the 
ante-flexion, lean, and twists. We describe how to express 
the ante-flexion, lean, and twist in this section. 
 
1) Ante-flexion 
In the case of a skeleton model of the pre-packaged 
program in MS-KINECT v1, measuring points on the spine 
are the neck and the nave. However, these points are not 
sufficient to express the ante-flexion. Therefore, we add 
measuring points between the neck and the navel as shown 
in Figure 4 and measure the depth of each point. We decided 
to express the ante-flexion as shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Skeleton model used in this research 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Expression format of the ante-flexion 
 
2) Lean 
We express the lean of the upper body with both a line 
connecting the right shoulder and the left shoulder and a line 
connecting the right hip and the left hip from the front view. 
Two types of front view formats are considered to express 
the lean of the upper body. One is making a triangle 
between the right shoulder, left shoulder, and navel, and a 
triangle between the right hip, left hip, and navel as shown 
in Figure 6 (a). The other is that both a line connecting both 
shoulders and a line connecting both hips are plotted on the 
X-Y plane on which middle points of both lines are plotted 
on the origin as shown in Figure 6 (b).  
 
 
(a) Triangle expression format 
 
 
 
 
(b) No triangle expression format 
Figure 6. Expression format for the lean of upper body 
 
We asked 30 people which expression more easily 
explained the lean of the upper body. Results of answers to 
this question are shown in Table I. Most respondents chose 
the triangle expression format (a). 
 
3) Twist of upper body 
We express the twist of the upper body with both a line 
connecting both shoulders and a line connecting both hips 
from the top view. Two types of top view formats are 
considered to express the twist of upper body. One is 
plotting positions of the head and navel in addition to the 
above mentioned two lines as shown in Figure 7 (a). The 
other is plotting just the above mentioned two lines on the 
X-Z plane in which middle points of both lines are plotted 
on the origin as shown in Figure 7 (b). We asked 30 people 
which expression more easily explained the twist of the 
upper body. Results of answers to this question are shown in 
Table I. Most students chose the lines-only plotting format. 
On the other hand, 9 of 14 workers who responded chose 
the relative position consideration format. Every healthcare 
worker (3 people) said that positions of lines of the 
shoulders and the hips relative to the head were important to 
understand the twist. They all chose Figure 7 (a). 
 
 
(a) Relative position consideration format 

136
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(b) Lines-only plotting format 
Figure 7. Expression format for the twist of upper body 
TABLE I. 
 RESULTS OF QUESTIONNAIRE ABOUT WHICH EXPRESSION 
FORMATS ARE EASIER TO UNDERSTAND 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Lean 
Students 
15 
1 
Workers 
13 
1 
Twist 
Students 
0 
16 
Workers 
9 
5 
 
B. Changes of weight and the center of weight 
As a result of hearing about the standing-up training 
content described in Section VII to physiotherapists who 
work in Yokohama Central Hospital, they requested us to 
express not illustrations of the body, but visually changes of 
load and the center of weight such as graph or something. 
Since physiotherapists who give us suggestions want to 
know timings at when they say guides to patients, we 
express a change of weight as a line graph in accordance 
with the change of time like Figure 8, and  the change of 
center of weight as not a real-time position or a trace with a 
solid-line, but the trace with a arrow-line like Figure 9. 
Lines of feet and buttocks are plotted on a same graph easy 
to know timing at when they say guides. 
 
 
Figure 8. Expression format for change of the weight 
 
 
Figure 9. Expression format for change of the center of weight 
V. 
MEASURING FUNCTIONS FOR STRAIN OF UPPER BODY 
We developed a tool for measuring the strain of the 
upper body that will be a component of our remote 
rehabilitation system.  
A. Measuring application 
1) Ante-flexion measuring application 
Depth of the neck, the navel, and three points that divide 
the neck and the navel into four equal parts are measured in 
this application. The number of measuring points can be 
increased. An example picture of the display is shown in 
Figure 10. A video image is shown for a call center operator 
to easily guide a patient on the upper-right portion of a 
display. Measured data include error caused by the curve of 
body and clothes. Therefore, we recommend measuring not 
the front view but the back view as shown in Figure 11.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. Example of front view measuring the ante-flection 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Example of back view measuring the ante-flection 
 
 
2) Lean measuring application 
Since most respondents chose the triangle expression 
format as shown in Table I, we adopted it. We showed 
numerical angles between the X axis and the line connecting 
both shoulders and between the X axis and the line 
connecting both hips to make practical data easy to 
understand as shown in Figure 12.  
 

137
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 12. Example of measuring the lean 
 
3) Twist measuring application 
Since 30% of respondents (including every healthcare 
worker) chose the relative position consideration format and 
70% of them chose the lines-only plotting format in Table I, 
we designed both of them. We showed numerical angles 
between the X axis and the line connecting both shoulders 
and between the X axis and the line connecting both hips to 
make practical data easy to understand, the same as the lean. 
Example screenshots are shown in Figure 13. 
 
 
 
(a) Example of the relative position consideration format 
 
 
 
 
(b) Example of the lines-only plotting format 
Figure 13. Example of measuring the twist 
 
B. Evaluation of measured data 
Since the depth value in MS-KINCT is the shortest 
distance between the X-Y plane on the depth measuring 
camera and a measuring point, a tape measure or an acoustic 
measure is not useful. Hence, we evaluated the angle of the 
ante-flection, lean, and twist by comparing between values 
measured by MS-KINECT and by a big protractor (see 
Figure 14). We fixed a string to a protractor that had a 
weight at one side for indicating it was the perpendicular to 
the earth. 
 
 
Figure 14. Protractor used in this research 
 
1) Ante-flexion 
The horizontal bar of the protractor is set on the floor. A 
rectangular board is fastened to the vertical bar; and an 
upper body is placed along with the rectangular board to 
remove influence derived from the curve of the body, as 
shown in Figure 15.  
We varied the angle between the horizontal bar and the 
vertical bar from 0 to 15 degrees. Data measured by the 
ante-flexion measuring application corresponding to an 
angle of a protractor is shown in Figure 16. We measured 20 
samples. Average and standard deviation data are plotted on 
the graph. Errors are a few degrees, which would be small 
enough for practical use. 
 
 
Figure 15. Measuring image of the ante-flection 
 

138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 16. Measured data of the ante-flection 
 
2) Lean 
The angle between the X-axis and the line connecting 
both shoulders was varied from -20, -10, 0, +10, +20 
degrees instead of the lean angle. These values were 
measured by the protractor fitted on both shoulders from the 
back. We measured the lean of the body by the lean 
measuring application, and measured data is shown in 
Figure 17. There are no errors. 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Measured data of an angle between X-axis and a line connecting 
both shoulders 
 
3) Twist 
We measured the angle between the X-axis and a line 
connecting both shoulders from the top view. The horizontal 
bar of the protractor is fastened to both shoulders, and the 
vertical bar points to the MS-KINECT to remove the 
influence derived from the curve of the body as shown in 
Figure 18. We also measured the line of hips the same as the 
line of shoulders. Measured data is shown in Figure 19. 
Errors for the right rotation in both the shoulders and the 
hips are very small. However, errors for the left rotation are 
a few degrees. We are not sure of the reason for this 
difference. 
 
 
Figure 18. Measuring image of the twist 
 
 
 
(a) Measured data for the shoulders 
 
 
(b) Measured data for the hips 
 
Figure 19. Measured data of the twist 
 
VI. 
STANDING-UP TRAINING CONTENT 
We develop training content for cerebrovascular patients 
to learn how to stand up from a bed and sit down on it. A 
chair is used instead of a bed. We designed this content for 
patients to learn not only with an operator’s guidance but 
also by themselves. 

139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. System configuration 
We use two Balance Wii Boards: the patient puts his or 
her feet on one and sits on the other as show in Figure 20. 
Both of them are connected to the patient’s PC via 
Bluetooth. A Balance Wii Board has four load sensors at its 
four corners and puts out loads at each sensor: total load and 
the center of load. The scale of the center of load 
approximately corresponds to its surface size as shown in 
Figure 21. MS-KINECT is also connected to the patient’s 
PC to monitor a motion of patient. 
 
 
 
Figure 20. System configuration of the standing-up training content 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Scale of the balance in the balance Wii Board 
 
B. Training steps 
Therapy by a physiotherapist puts emphasis on bending 
the upper body down and up and shifting center of weight. 
However, we add correcting strain of the body to learning 
how to stand up and sit down. Guiding illustrations for each 
step are shown in Figure 22. 
This training content is comprised of the following eight 
steps; 
Step 1: A patient corrects imbalance of her or his upper 
body. An illustration on a screen leads the patient to 
correct imbalance of her of his upper body. While 
the patient leans to the right or left, the training 
content continues to show a left or right arrow and 
says “To the left” or “To the right” repeatedly until 
the center of load under the buttocks is between the 
decision levels ±TH1 (all TH values are described in 
the next sub-section.). When the patient maintains 
balance for 3 seconds, the next training step starts.  
The above guidance and decision functions are 
used for self-learning. In case of guidance by an 
operator, the operator verbally instructs a patient 
with not illustrations or written instructions, but a 
graph of change of the center of weight like Figure 9. 
This scheme is the same as in the following steps. 
Step 2: The patient moves her or his knees forward while 
continuing sitting on a chair. This step is not in 
therapy by a physiotherapist. Since it is impossible 
to stand up while the ankles are further forward than 
the knees, we add this step. The training content 
continues to show a forward arrow and say “Go 
forward” repeatedly until the center of load under 
the buttocks is shifted over the decision level TH2. 
When the patient maintains her or his balance for 3 
seconds, the next training step starts. 
Spep 3: The patient bends her or his upper body down to 
shift her or his center of weight to her or his toe and 
raise her or his buttocks from a chair. The training 
content continues to show a forward arrow and say 
“bend your body down and raise your buttocks up 
from the chair” repeatedly until the load under the 
buttocks is less than the decision level TH3. When 
the patient maintains this condition for 3 seconds, 
the next training step starts. 
Step 4: The patient stretches her or his knee and 
simultaneously bends her or his upper body up. The 
training content says “Please stand up.” Since this 
step does not include a conscious action to learn, it 
has no illustration. 
Step 5: The patient corrects imbalance of the body while 
standing up. While the patient leans to the right or 
left, the training content continues to show a left or 
right arrow and says “To the left” or “To the right” 
repeatedly until the center of weight under the feet is 
between the decision levels ±TH4. Vice versa, while 
the patient leans to left, the training content 
continues to show a right arrow and say “To the 
right” repeatedly. When the patient stays upright for 
3 seconds, the next training step starts. 
Step 6: The patient slightly bends her or his upper body 
down to shift the center of weight to her or his toes 
from the upright position. The training content 
continues to show a forward arrow and say “Bend 
your upper body down slightly” repeatedly until a 
load under the center of weight under the feet 
shifting over the decision level TH5. The next 
training step starts as soon as the patient has 
maintained this condition. 
Step 7: The patient sits down on a chair. The training 
content says “Please sit down.” Since this step does 
not include a conscious action to learn, it has no 
illustration. 
Step 8: The patient bends her or his upper body up and 
returns to Step 1. 
 

140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(a) Steps1 & 2 
 
 
(b) Step 3 
 
 
(c) Steps 5 & 6 
 
 
(d) Step 8 
Figure 22. Guidance illustrations 
 
C. Decision levels 
We describe how to decide the decision levels TH1 – 
TH5 described in the previous sub-section. These decision 
levels are decided from measurement data. Five able-bodied 
students did the above eight steps. Changes of loads and 
center of load under the buttocks and feet were measured for 
them. We decided the common values for every participant 
plus the loosen value. 
(1) TH1: Since every participant can stand upright and we 
could not collect data from disabled people, we decide 
TH1 (center of load) = 3. After collecting data from 
disabled people, we will reconsider this value. 
(2) TH2: When participants move their knees forward, the 
center of loads under both the buttocks and feet move 
forward. However, since the change of a center of the 
buttocks is bigger than that of the feet, we choose the 
center of the buttocks as shown in Figure 23. Changes of 
the center of load under the buttocks for every 
participant are less than -4 on the Y axis, so we decide 
TH2 = -3 (loosen value = 1). 
(3) TH3: Most participants could not perfectly raise their 
buttocks up from a chair. Since the worst value is 17kg 
(see Figure 24), we decide TH3 = 20 (loosen value = 3). 
(4) TH4: We decide TH4 = 3, the same as TH1. TH4 will 
have to be reconsidered after data are collected from 
disabled people. 
(5) TH5: Changes of the center of load under the feet for 
every participant are less than -3 in Y axis as shown in 
Figure 25. Hence, we decide TH5 = -2 (loosen value = 
1). 
 
 
Figure 23. Change of the center of load under the buttocks (red) and feet 
(blue) when moving the knees forward 
 
 
Figure 24. Change of weight under the buttocks (red) and feet (blue) when 
bending the upper body down and forward 

141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 25. Changes of center of load under the feet 
 
D. Evaluation of decision levels 
We did an experiment to verify whether the above 
decision levels work well. There were six participants. All 
were able-bodied students who did not participate in the 
experiment to decide the decision levels. Each participant 
did steps 1 to 8 for five cycles. Experimental results are 
shown in Table II. We count 0.5 when a patient does the 
same step a few times. The recognition rates in steps 2, 6, 
and 8 are not 100%. We will reconsider these decision 
levels or schemes. 
 
VII. SYSTEM DESIGN OF THE RRS 
We have already finished designing a practical remote 
rehabilitation system, and some of its features have been 
implemented. 
A. Design concepts 
This system is comprised of the call center node, a 
patient’s PC, an operator’s PC, and a physiotherapist’s PC 
as shown in Figure 3. MS-KINECT is just connected to the 
RRS introduced in eTELEMED 2015 [1]. However, the 
advanced RRS is designed for other kinds of sensors to be 
connected in addition to MS-KINECT. Basically, all sensors 
work simultaneously to measure a patient’s condition in the 
RSS. Since output data of sensors have to be sent 
synchronously to the call center, all sensor data are 
aggregated at the same module. 
Basically, we design applications as Web applications to 
avoid on-site maintenance.  
B. Synchronizing scheme between video images and 
skeleton data 
Since video images and skeleton data are independently 
output from MS-KINECT, both have to be synchronized to 
enable monitoring at a remote office. Thus, we serialize 
skeleton data in JSON format and add them to each item of 
video frame data, which is resized, transferred to the JPEG 
format, and then transferred to the Base 64 text data at the 
application on a patient’s PC as shown in Figure 26. These 
data are sent to a Web server in the call center. They are 
separated again and individually drawn on the canvas of the 
html monitoring page as shown in Figure 27. Video image 
data are drawn on a lower layer and skeleton data are drawn 
in our presentation format on a transparent upper layer as 
shown in Figure 28. Finally, video and skeleton images 
formatted in accordance with our proposed method move in 
synchronization with a Web browser on a physiotherapist’s 
PC as shown in Figures 9-12. 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Flow diagram for aggregating video images and skeleton data 
 
TABLE II.  
RECOGNITION RATE FOR MOTION IN EACH STEP 
Participant 
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step3 
Step 4 
Step5 
Step 6 
Step 7 
Step 8 
A 
5 
4 
5 
－ 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
B 
5 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
C 
5 
4 
5 
－ 
5 
4 
－ 
4.5 
D 
5 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
4.5 
－ 
4.5 
E 
5 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
3.5 
－ 
4 
F 
5 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
5 
－ 
5 
Average 
5.0 
4.7 
5.0 
－ 
5.0 
4.5 
－ 
4.7 
Rate 
100% 
93% 
100% 
－ 
100% 
90% 
－ 
93% 
 

142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 27. Flow diagram for composing pictures 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28. Example of composing video image and skeleton data. 
 
C. Storing measured data 
An operator monitors the video and skeleton images, 
change of weight, and change of center of weight, and stores 
important data for a physiotherapist to understand a 
patient’s condition and reschedule a training plan. After 
saying to a patient something such as “Let’s start 
measuring”, the operator starts by pushing the start button to 
record monitored data and stops by pushing the stop button. 
Those data are stored as a temporarily file. The operator 
usually monitors this file again. If it is fine, the operator 
pushes the save button to save it as a permanent file. The 
operator can also store still image data in addition to video 
data. A physiotherapist can search for these data by using a 
patient’s name, an operator’s name, and date and time. 
 
D. Supervising function 
A physiotherapist needs conversation data between a 
patient and an operator to supervise an operator. These 
verbal communication data have to be stored synchronously 
with measured sensor data. Therefore, these data are 
recorded on the patient’s PC and sent to the call center 
server together with other sensor data. We adopt the JASON 
format as the sending data format. Kinds of data sent from a 
patient’s PC to the call center server are KINET video 
image data, KINECT skeleton data, Balance Wii Board data, 
an operator’s voice, and a patient’s voice. If other sensors 
are added in the future, output data of these sensors will also 
be sent together with existing data. 
 
E. Block diagram 
Block diagrams of the call canter node, the patient’s PC, 
the operator’s PC, and the physiotherapist’s PC are shown 
in Figure 29. 
MS-KINECT and Balance Wii Board are connected to 
 
Kinect 
control
app.
Kinect
Balance
Wii
Board
Data
aggregation
Standing up
Training app.
Monitoring
data
send
Monitoring
data
receive
Patient’s PC
Data
divide
Front
view
Side
view
Top
view
Weight
Center of  
weight
Operator
app.
Supervisor
app.
Patient/
Operator
/Physio.
profile
Training
plan
Measured 
file
Monitor 
file for SV.
Web
RTC
Call center server
Measured
data
Monitored 
file
Web
browser
WWW Server
RDBMS
Voice 
comm.
App.
Record
control
Monitor
Control
Patient
app.
ICE 
server
Operator’s PC
Physiotherapy’s PC
Web 
browser
Measured 
data
Web 
data
Web 
data
Web
RTC
BWB
control
app.
 
 
Figure 29. Block diagram of the RRS 

143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the patient’s PC. Since Microsoft has released MS-KINECT 
v2, we developed a remote rehabilitation system with MS-
KINECT v2, not v1. Since the skeleton model in MS-
KINECT v2 is slightly different from that in MS-KINECT 
v1, expression formats described in Section IV are modified 
slightly. Practically, the navel is replaced with the spine-
middle, and the shoulder center with the neck. 
We design applications as Web applications to make on-
site maintenance unnecessary as soon as possible as 
described in the design concept. However, since we have no 
technologies to control MS-KINECT v2 and the Balance 
Wii Board by a Web browser, application programs 
controlling MS-KINECT v2 and the Balance Wii Board are 
implemented as native programming code and installed on a 
patient’s PC. The standing-up training application is also 
developed as native programming code and installed on a 
patient’s PC. Output data of MS-KINECT and Balance Wii 
Board are aggregated to the data aggregation program and 
sent to the call center through the monitoring data sending 
program. Both the data aggregation program and the 
monitoring data send program are developed as native 
programming code and installed on a patient’s PC. Voice 
data between a patient and an operator are also aggregated 
at the data aggregation program. A Web browser is also 
installed on the patient’s PC for presentation of guidance 
contents and voice communication.  
On the other hand, no applications except a Web 
browser are installed on the operator’s PC and the 
physiotherapist’s PC. Coaching applications for an operator 
and supervising applications for a physiotherapist work on a 
Web browser as Web applications. A voice communication 
function is implemented with the Web RTC [17]. 
The call center server is comprised of many kinds of 
modules. The monitoring data receiving module receives 
data sent from a patient’s PC. The monitor control module 
divides received data into each sensor data and draws them 
as each expression format introduced in Section IV. The 
record control module stores KINET video image data, 
KINECT skeleton data, and Balance Wii Board data 
produced by an operator’s operation. These stored files are 
managed by the database management system. On the other 
hand, the record control module stores conversation data 
between a patient and an operator automatically. Patients’ 
profiles and therapy contents are also managed by the 
database 
management 
system. 
Operators’ 
and 
physiotherapists’ profiles are also stored as database. 
This time, 
a voice 
communication function is 
implemented with the Web-RTC and ICE [17].  
F. System sequence 
This sub-section explains the sequence of using the 
remote rehabilitation service. As shown in Figure 30, first, 
operators log in, and then a patient logs in and selects an 
available operator.  
The designated operator selects a training content on the 
basis of a training menu planned by a physiotherapist. A 
patient who watches a presented training content follows the 
presentation by doing the training. The operator monitors 
and suggests training for the patient and saves video images 
and skeleton data as necessary. After training, an operator 
measures the strain of the patient’s body. 
 
 
 
Figure 30. System sequence for using remote rehabilitation service 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
We proposed a remote rehabilitation system combined 
with a video call center to make up for the shortage of 
rehabilitation therapy done by visiting physiotherapists. We 
focused on cerebrovascular patients and adopted MS-
KINECT for home usage to measure the strain of the upper 
body. We also proposed expressing strain of the upper body 
by dividing the ante-flexion, lean, and twist and developed 
an application for measuring them. In the results of 
evaluating these measuring applications, their measurement 
errors are sufficiently small.  
We are still in the process of completing the remote 
rehabilitation system. The concept of employing non-
professionals as operators instead of physiotherapists to 
hold down medical expenses is novel. We introduced the 
standing-up training content that adopts the Nintendo 
Balance Wii Board and a system configuration that realizes 
the above concept and introduced functions. The proposed 
RSS would probably suppress increment of medical expense 
and affect institutions of the national healthcare insurance. 
Thus, new business schemes have to be created in addition 
to developing the system to introduce it as a service. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Mr. Isamu Morohashi and Mr. Hiroki 
Yamashita, physiotherapists at the Iwate Rehabilitation 
Center, 
Ms. 
Hiroko 
Shibao 
and 
her 
colleagues, 
physiotherapists at the Yokohama Chuo Hospital, and Dr. 
Kouya Sato, physiotherapist at the Better Life Iwate for 
their useful suggestions to develop the proposed remote 
rehabilitation system. 
 

144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
[1] Yoshitoshi Murata, Shuhei Nagasawa, and Akimasa Suzuki, “A 
Proposal of Remote Rehabilitation System for Cerebrovascular 
Patients Combined with Video Call Center,” IARIA, The Seventh 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine eTELEMED 2015, Proceeding of Digital World 2015, pp. 
228-233, 2015. 
[2] Investigation for an actual state of a medical examination, Ministry of 
Health, Labour and Welfare, 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/shingi/2007/11/dl/s1128-14h.pdf   (in 
Japanese), November 2015. 
[3] VICON, http://www.vicon.com/, November 2015. 
[4] David M. Brennan, Sue Mawson, and Simon Brownsell, 
“Telerehabilitation: Enabling the Remote Delivery of Healthcare, 
Rehabilitation, and Self Management,” IOS Press, Advanced 
Technologies in Rehabilitation, 2009. 
[5] Maureen K. Holden, Thomas A. Dyar, and Lilian Dayan-Cimadoro, 
“Telerehabilitation Using a Virtual Environment Improves Upper 
Extremity Function in Patients With Stroke,” IEEE, Transactions on 
neural system and rehabilitation engineering, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 36-42, 
2007. 
[6] Craig R. Carignan and Hermano I. Krebs, “Telerehabilitation 
robotics: Bright lights, big future?,” JRRD vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 695–710, 
2006. 
[7] D.A. Bradley et al., “Nexos: Remote Rehabilitation Using an 
Intelligent Exoskeleton,” Gerontechnology Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 71-80, 
2005. 
[8] Toshinari Akimoto et al., “Development of Measurement System for 
Scoliosis Using 3D Camera,” IEEJ transactions on electronics, 
information and systems 133(11), pp. 2082-2088, 2013-11 (in 
Japanese). 
[9] Jing Tong, Jin Zhou, Ligang Liu, Zhigeng Pan, and Hao Yan, 
“Scanning 3D Full Human Bodies Using Kinects,” IEEE, 
Transactions on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 18, no. 4, 
pp. 643 – 650, 2012. 
[10] Nathan Burba, Mark Bolas, David M. Krum, and Evan A. Suma, 
“Unobtrusive Measurement of Subtle Nonverbal Behaviors with the 
Microsoft Kinect,” IEEE, Virtual Reality Conference 2012, 2012. 
[11] Juan Enrique Garrido, Irma Marset, Victor M. R. Penichet, and Maria 
D. Lozano, “Balance Disorder Rehabilitation through Movement 
Interaction,” IEEE, 7th International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare and Workshops, 2013. 
[12] Shih-Ching Yeh et al., “A study for the application of body sensing in 
assisted rehabilitation training,” IEEE, 2012 International Symposium 
on Computer, Consumer and Control, 2012. 
[13] Belinda Lange et al., “Interactive Game-Based Rehabilitation Using 
the Microsoft Kinect,” IEEE, Virtual Reality 2012, 2012. 
[14] Marientina Gotsis et al., “Mixed Reality Game Prototypes for Upper 
Body Exercise and Rehabilitation,” IEEE, Virtual Reality 2012, 2012. 
[15] Fraser Anderson, Michelle Annett, Walter F. Bischof: Lean on Wii: 
Physical Rehabilitation With Virtual Reality and Wii Peripherals, 
Annual Review of Cyber Therapy and Telemedicine 8(1), pp.181-184, 
2010. 
[16] Rehabilitation by family: standing up, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f2duk_9qLog (written and 
spoken in Japanese) , November 2015. 
[17] Web RTC, http://www.webrtc.org/, November 2015. 
 
 
 

