Recommendations  on  Promoting  Peer Interactions Within a Future Innovative 
Distance Learning Device Intended for French Orthodontic Practitioners  
Contribution of a Community of Practice Analysis 
 
Aurélie Mailloux  
Orthodontics 
Reims Hospital 
Reims, France 
e-mail: aurelie.mailloux@univ-reims.fr 
 
 
 
Jérôme Dinet 
CNRS, INRIA, Loria 
University of Lorraine 
Nancy, France 
e-mail: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract-The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and 
needs of orthodontic practitioners related to (i) cancellation of 
all the continuing education events, which led to the 
disappearance of formal and informal exchanges on the 
practice (ii) emergence of numerous videoconferences, but 
without any prior identification of practitioners’ needs. The 
problem of interaction within a continuing education online 
environment is paramount: promoting interaction between 
peers within the system is essential to (i) reduce the feeling of 
loneliness (ii) promote users’ commitment. Most French 
orthodontic practitioners were already involved in a virtual 
active Community of Practice (CoP) with their own way of 
fostering identification, cohesion, and collaboration. The 
purpose of this user-centered research is to identify 
requirements for creating an innovative comprehensive 
distance continuing education environment that would meet 
expectations and needs in terms of interactions of most CoP 
members, according to their experience (novices to experts). 
After an extensive state-of-the-art, used to better understand 
the changes in training and education related to orthodontic 
domain, we conducted (a) a detailed examination of the 
discursive activities within a CoP (e.g., content, interactions, 
rhythm, objectives) (b) four focus group (c) a survey consisting 
of two questionnaires (online, and face-to-face) (d) an 
ergonomic inspection of the e-orthodontie.com website. The 
collected data confirmed that an innovative complete distance 
continuing education environment could meet many CoP 
members’ needs, such as: anonymous, scientifically validated 
content, extensive or limited discussion forums, clinical case 
sharing, videoconferences instant translation, ease of access 
and cost and time saving. From a theoretical point of view, this 
study highlighted the crucial role of the community of practice 
in producing requirements for creating a useful, usable, and 
acceptable digital education environment for orthodontic 
practitioners. 
 
Keywords-elearning; 
community 
of 
practice; 
psycho-
ergonomic study; innovative device; orthodontics; continuing 
education. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and needs 
of orthodontic practitioners towards continuing education. 
Among others, the replacement of face-to-face congresses by  
videoconferences had led to the disappearance of direct 
formal and informal exchanges between novices and/or 
experts of the Community of Practice (CoP): the 
videoconferences current format only allows one-to-one 
vertical interactions between participants and speakers. 
However, in the field of distance continuing education, it is 
necessary to support a form of “e-presence” between 
members because one of the major dropout factors is the 
loneliness felt within the education device. Indeed, attrition 
rate is lower when the user is supported by his/her peers and 
interacts with them regularly [1]–[3].  
The peer discussions on clinical cases could therefore 
help novices  gain  expertise (i.e., theoretical knowledge and 
practical skills) [4]–[6]. 
According to the state-of-the-art [7]–[10], several 
solutions are mentioned to promote interactions and 
commitments within an education distance device, such as 
distance tutoring, and e-portfolio. However, their results are 
heterogeneous, and their implementation complex. 
This innovative continuing education environment is 
addressed to French orthodontic practitioners who are mostly 
already involved in an informal active virtual CoP, built on 
Facebook© in 2014. In 2022 February, this CoP was 
gathering almost half of the French orthodontic practitioners. 
The purpose of this user-centered research is to analyze 
requirements to promote interactions within an innovative 
learning system based on a dual approach. On the one hand, 
the CoP discursive activity was assessed quantitatively and 
qualitatively, and on the other hand, the CoP members’ 
needs were identified by conducting four focus groups, a 
survey (which was carried out face-to-face and online), and 
an ergonomic inspection of the e-orthodontie.com, a 
dedicated website for orthodontic continuing education, 
although underused by practitioners. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
After a state-of-the-art (Section II), Section III describes the 
data gathered and methodology applied in three different 
studies to identify the CoP members interactions needs and 
attitudes according to their experience (novices to experts). 
This is followed by an overview of findings in Section IV, 
categorized by the discursive analysis, the CoP members 
interaction needs and the requirements. Section V 
78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

summarizes the value of these findings and outlines elements 
of future research to be conducted on the subject.  
II. STATE-OF-THE-ART 
We conducted an extensive state-of-the-art to identify (i) 
the possible benefits of designing an innovative distance 
learning device in the orthodontic domain (ii) the current 
solutions to promote interactions within distance education. 
A. Interest of a “demand-pull” approach  
The design industry has evolved from a "technology-
push" to a "demand-pull" perspective [11]. It is now 
commonly known that the supply does not create its own 
demand because: 
• 
from the designer’s point of view, the actual uses were 
often disappointing 
• 
intended and actual uses did not match 
• 
 actual uses are sometimes very heterogeneous [12]–
[14]. 
Our user-centered design research is in line with this 
approach. Indeed, this study consisted in analyzing the 
practitioners’ needs, expectations, and behaviors in terms of 
(i) continuing education, (ii) interactions and upstream of the 
design phase. 
B. Contribution of an innovative device  
The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and needs 
of orthodontic practitioners. The need to shift the traditional 
format to remote access is now widely shared. The COVID 
epidemic has greatly accelerated this trend related to 
cancellation of all the continuing education events [15]–[17]. 
The state-of-the-art [11]-[18][30][31] demonstrated that 
many devices dedicated to the continuing education of 
dentists or orthodontists have been created over the past 20 
years, particularly in Anglo-Saxon countries. These devices 
were a source of satisfaction for the participants and 
effective in terms of learning and acquisition of skills but 
they were mainly centered on one unique theme (e.g., 
recognition of oral pathologies) and were not focused on the 
orthodontic discipline [18][19]. However, an innovative 
complete distance continuing education environment could 
have many advantages, such as flexibility, lower costs, no 
office closing and accreditation by the French body of 
Continuing Professional Development (CPD) [20]–[24]. 
C. Existing distance learning device 
According to the state-of-the-art [11]-[18], there was no 
complete distance learning environment adapted to the 
French orthodontic practitioners’ needs. Only two complete 
websites dedicated to distance continuing education were 
intended for orthodontic practitioners: the World Federation 
of Orthodontists (WFO) and the e-orthodontie.com websites. 
First, the WFO website, with online videoconferences 
access and its smartphone application (with notifications), is 
the most complete digital continuing education environment 
available to date, particularly concerning the diversified 
content, supports, and the scientific validity. Despite this, 
none of the interviewed practitioners were registered with 
WFO probably because this device was neither adapted (i) to 
their expectations and attitudes (ii) nor to their way of 
interacting with each other. Correlation between cultural 
and/or social dimensions with the use of a distance education 
device has already been highlighted in a previous study [25]. 
Second, the French e-orthodontie.com website has been 
created in 2007 without any prior user-centered research to 
assess practitioners’ needs and expectations [19][20]. That 
could explain why this website was very little used by 
French orthodontic practitioners. This is evidenced by the 
fact that the activity in the forums section was close to zero. 
D. The interactions within the devices 
According the state-of-the-art [29], the loss of peer-to-
peer interactions was the major drawback of the current 
distance education experiences for participants. That is why 
interaction represents one of the main issues to be considered 
for the design process. Nevertheless, several solutions are 
mentioned in the literature to create a kind of “e-presence” 
within the distance device, such as (i) virtual small groups of 
practitioners sharing same centers of interest or geographical 
proximity [27] (ii) creation of a collaborative e-portfolio 
[11][12] or (iii) tutoring [9][10]. But interactions between 
novices and their teachers via an e-portfolio were often 
limited, because, among other factors, teachers considered 
the digital feedback as a waste of time [11]. Concerning the 
remote tutoring, it remained generally underused because 
users struggled to meet their “ideal” tutoring model [9][10]. 
There are difficulties to maintain mutual commitment 
and trust in an online environment, hence the importance of 
examining the interactions within a current active CoP for 
creating a useful, usable, and acceptable digital education 
environment for orthodontic practitioners. We considered 
that 
an 
innovative 
distance 
continuing 
education 
environment, supported by the CoP members (and vice 
versa), could promote users’ commitment. We based our 
approach on the horizontal social learning theories [3]-[6]. 
E. Contribution of a community of practice analysis for 
education device design 
Several research-actions involving the design of training 
devices, in particular digital ones, are based on the notions of 
professional community in the education fields [33][34].  
Nevertheless, CoPs case studies are very rare in the 
health sector and focus more on the education field (e.g., 
learning in a school context) [34]. One reason being that 
CoPs in the health sector (i.e., traditional and virtual) are 
fewer, less structured and often informal, therefore difficult 
to identify [35][36]. 
However, horizontal exchanges between peers represent 
an important source of cohesion and group identification 
within the CoP [1]–[6][21]. Besides, learning results from 
the interaction with other individuals and particularly with 
peers [3][4].  
F. Definition of Community of Practice  
First, the community of practice is defined by a common 
interest for a domain (this is what distinguishes CoP 
members from non-members) [41]. Second, a community, 
unlike project-focused teams, endures over time.  The CoP 
79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

members discuss, help each other, and share information in 
their fields. Third, they develop a shared repertoire of 
resources on their common practice: experiences, stories, 
tools, ways to handle issues. It is therefore by developing 
these three elements (domain, community, practice) that a 
CoP can grow and endure. The concept of communities of 
practice (CoP) is based on the idea that all individuals have 
always expanded their knowledge by discussing their 
practice with others, on a daily basis [42]. 
The 
social 
dimension 
of 
learning 
is 
therefore 
fundamental for understanding communities of practice [43]. 
Moreover, among the different types of communities (e.g., of 
interest, learners, epistemic) and working groups (e.g., 
project team, functional), the community of practice involves 
the strongest cohesions and interactions between its 
members. Regular interactions between peers within a CoP 
promote (i) mutual commitment, (ii) the emergence of a 
common project and (iii) the development of a shared 
repertoire. Exchanges have different values and purposes 
(e.g., learning, cohesion, identity affirmation). Some 
elements can either promote participation (e.g., trust, 
recognized expertise) or discourage it (e.g., fear of 
judgement, absence of answers, long delays). To last, a CoP 
must find a balance in interaction dynamics: nature, quantity, 
and rhythm. 
Virtual learning communities have been on the rise in the 
past decade. Exchanges within these virtual communities are 
more fluid and faster than in traditional ones. However, they 
raise specific issues such as privacy, data security and the 
difficulty to create a user-friendly climate along with 
enabling  confidence between the members [44]. 
G. Experts and novices  
The Dreyfus model (Fig. 1) illustrates the five-phase 
trajectory from novice to expert including the  intermediate 
stages (i.e., advanced beginner, competent and  proficient) 
[45]. The process also involves several cognitive shifts 
ranging from the strict adherence to rules with lack of 
independent judgment, to deep contextualized intuitive 
understanding. 
 
 
Figure 1. The 5 stages of learning within a CoP. 
 
Learning paths vary depending on members’ quest for 
personal and professional identity. The key focus is to find 
out their own way of becoming a “practitioner”. This 
learning process is reflexive and built through access to 
heterogeneous practices and visions, which  structure a real 
“landscape of practices” [39]. 
H. Community of practice and learning  
The current remote videoconferences are based on the 
traditional vertical “teacher/learner” scheme. However, it is 
commonly accepted that a social learning environment is 
essential to foster adult education [46]. CoPs support their 
members’ professional training by sharing their issues or 
experiences [47]. The resulting  discussions from shared 
clinical experiences could help novices gain expertise by 
developing their ability to (i) analyze a new clinical situation, 
(ii) identify its consequences, (iii) adapt their behavior and 
(iv) consider other points of view [34][40][41]. Promoting 
peer interactions and encouraging them to share clinical 
issues are essential in theoretical and practical discipline 
such as orthodontics. This could help novices articulate these 
aspects [48].  
III. DATA & METHODOLOGY 
 
To produce design recommendations on creating a 
useful, usable and acceptable digital education environment 
for orthodontic practitioners, three techniques have been 
used (Fig. 2). First, we observed the interactions and 
discursive activities within a virtual CoP “discutons entre 
spécialistes (let’s discuss among specialists)”. Second, we 
conducted four focus groups to identify behaviors related to 
continuing education, their needs, and expectations. Third, 
we carried out two surveys: one was addressed to members 
of a virtual CoP online and a second questionnaire survey 
was administrated during a congress, to collect data about 
attitudes and expectations towards continuing education. 
Figure 2 illustrates the adopted methodology and its 
objectives. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The triangulation of our methodology. 
A. Focus group  
Four focus groups with 4 to 6 CoP novices were carried 
out: three focus groups were conducted before the health 
crisis and one after. The process was conducted in three 
stages: 
80
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(1) Identification of the difficulties, obstacles, and 
prospects of continuing education. 
(2) Presentation of an existing French training system: 
the website e-orthodontie.com, to evaluate the participants’ 
perception of digital training tools. 
(3) Co-construction of “an ideal” website architecture 
dedicated to continuing education. 
B. Questionnaire Survey (online and face-to-face) 
The online survey was conducted among practitioners, 
members of a virtual CoP. The electronic survey 
was prepared and distributed by the software Limesurvey© 
to all CoP members, first on January 11, then on January 25, 
2022 (n=59 CoP members, including 41 CoP experts and 18 
novices).  
This online survey was conducted to identify: 
(1) Reasons for which practitioners became members. 
(2) what the CoP actually provided for its members. 
(3) The members status: novices or experts. 
In this study, CoP novices were defined as either 
orthodontic resident (i.e., already qualified in dental 
medicine) or practitioner with less than three years of clinical 
experience. CoP experts were defined as orthodontic 
practitioners with more than three years of clinical 
experience. 
The face-to-face survey was set up during a professional 
congress (n=42 practitioners, including 23 experts and 19 
novices). The design of the questionnaire focused on the 
following items: current practices, digital uses, obstacles, 
success criteria of a training experience, opinions on 
distance continuing education and the vision of continuing 
education for the future. 
C. Examination of a virtual CoP  
The dual purpose of this examination was (i) an 
identification of the current interactions and (ii) description 
of the discursive activity (in term of content, nature of 
exchanges, objectives, rhythms, comments and likes 
generated, etc.) according to their experience (expert vs 
novice) within the CoP. This enables to study the discursive 
activity (e.g., rhythm, type of interactions, content within this 
CoP) and to identify the needs, attitudes, and expectations of 
the CoP members according to their experience (expert vs 
novice).  
Qualitative discursive analysis enables the distinction 
between the different digital forms of interactions. Indeed, 
these revealed  different level of participation, commitment 
and profiles of active members [49]: 
• 
“Passive” digital participation includes document and 
posts reading 
• 
“Active” participations, (i.e., contributions) includes: 
o Non-verbal reactions (e.g., likes), specific to digital 
speech.  
o Links, emojis, emoticons, which imply a higher level of 
participation (either consensus or controversy elements). 
o Verbal contributions (e.g., publication of photographs, 
videos, or the writing of a publication, a question, an 
opinion). Their authors are considered as central and active 
CoP members.  
On this basis, we examined the posted clinical cases (11 
out of the 59 published in September 2021) and the peer 
comments and reactions. Qualitative analysis of peer 
comments was carried out using an existing quality grid (for 
content) [40] and on identified studies of digital discourse 
(for typology) [46] [47] 
This qualitative analysis allowed us to (i) describe finely 
their forms and content (ii) edit some recommendations to 
encourage qualitative interactions that foster learning and 
members commitment. 
D. Ergonomic inspection 
The eorthodontie.com website (also presented during 
focus groups) was the subject of an ergonomic inspection, to 
determine if this interface was suitable for the practitioners 
[26]. We applied the ergonomic quality criteria developed 
by 
Bastien 
and 
Scapin. 
They 
organized 
the 
recommendations in the form of categories of ergonomic 
criteria such as: guidance, workload, brevity, explicit 
control, 
adaptability, 
error 
management, 
homogeneity/consistency, 
significance 
of 
codes 
and 
denominations, behaviors and compatibility [50]–[52]. This 
approach is based on the implicit idea that a digital device 
which meets these criteria is deemed adapted to the end 
user. The twin objective of this ergonomic inspection is to 
(i) understand better the reason why this website was little 
used by French orthodontic practitioners and therefore (ii) to 
edit some ergonomic recommendations toward the future 
design of an innovative device. 
E. Data analysis 
The focus group and the online survey data were 
analyzed as follows: 
The textual analysis was carried out using free software 
IRAMUTEQ based on the R software and the Python 
language. After a manual thematic analysis, several       
automated analyzes were applied and in particular (i) the 
Reinert Descending Hierarchical Classification (DHC) 
model (ii) the Factorial Correspondences Analysis (FCA) 
and (iii) the similarity analysis. The DHC made it possible to 
divide the statements into classes marked by the contrast of 
their vocabulary. We completed DHC with a FCA which 
enabled us to observe the classes “geographical” proximity 
or distance. We also applied the similarity analysis when the 
number of segments was insufficient to obtain a saturation of 
the statements. We analyzed together the first three focus 
groups data (conducted before the health crisis), to compare 
them with the last focus group data (conducted after the 
health crisis). We also compared the online survey collected 
data between experts and novices (41 experts and 18 
novices) to identify their common or divergent expectations 
and benefits of becoming member of a CoP. 
The CoP posts and comments were analyzed as follows: 
All posts and interactions (in the form of comments or 
likes) of the month of September 2021 were subjected to a 
81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

thematic content analysis to group them within categories 
/themes. The nature of the exchanges (e.g., copresence, 
cooperation, collaboration, identification), correlated with 
different contents and levels of interaction, have been studied 
in accordance with Proulx's taxonomy [53]. Interactions 
level was measured as the sum of comments and/or likes of 
each publication (low: < or= to 10; medium: > to 10 and < or 
= to 20; and high: >20). 
We analyzed the comments (i.e., categories, feedback 
type and specific application) generated by clinical case 
posts based on an evaluation grid of the "quality" of peer 
comments, produced in a previous study [5]. 
The face-to-face questionnaire collected data were 
analyzed as follows: 
R studio analysis software was used for all statistical 
analyses. A p-value of less than 0.05 was chosen as the 
minimum significance value.  
Two univariate analyzes were carried out according to 
age and years of experience. 
The Welch test made it possible to evaluate the 
covariance between several quantitative and qualitative 
variables with several modalities. For example, the number 
of days devoted to continuing education, between several 
groups (i.e., novices and experts).  
The Khi2 test provides the means to compare the 
distributions of a categorical variable (e.g., obstacles to 
following a training course) between several groups (e.g., 
novices and experts). When the Khi2 application conditions 
could not be met, a Fisher's test was performed. 
 
IV. MAIN RESULTS 
 
A. Contribution of the ergonomic inspection  
 If the main objective of this website is to train 
practitioners based on interactivity (the site presentation 
specifies: "interactive site of orthodontics, presentation of 
clinical cases, photos, videos and medical forums. 
Orthodontic training guaranteed!”), it is struggling to meet 
its stated goal. 
A descriptive approach made it possible to measure the 
current activity of the eorthodontie.com website, by relying 
on the “forum”, “articles” and “downloads” sections. The 
census of "forum" activity (Fig. 5) revealed that the 
publication activity was sporadic and generated very few 
interactions (compared to the Facebook© discussion group 
"Let's discuss among specialists"). The eorthodontie.com 
website also seemed more active with patients than with 
intended end-users (i.e., orthodontics practitioners). Indeed, 
the most recent discussions in the “forums” section mainly 
concerned patients undergoing orthodontic treatment who 
were seeking another opinion. 
The interaction, therefore, appeared to be very limited 
because: 
• the only answers came from a single moderator, 
• there was no discussion between practitioners, 
• the last posts dated more than three months ago. 
 
Forum titles
Date of last 
publication
Number of 
responses
patient issues
22/12/2027
0
around a clinical case
24/11/2021
1
ideas or requests
01/11/2021
0
The corner of orthodontics
06/09/2021
0
general discussion
01/05/2021
1
presentation of newcomers
07/01/2021
0
junior doctors
09/07/2019
0
events
20/03/2014
0
Forum activity (date of census : 2022-03-09)
 
Figure 3. Table summarizing the activity (date of last publication and 
responses) of the available discussion groups. 
The ergonomic criteria inspection revealed that: 
• 
Overall informational density was too high  
• 
Immediate feedback was well respected 
• 
Workload was increased due to the lack of brevity and 
conciseness and the high number of unnecessary actions 
• 
Certain 
procedures 
were 
unnecessarily 
too 
heterogeneous 
• 
Readability could be improved 
The interface adapted very little to the user's experience and 
there was no error management. Regarding the content, it 
lacked completeness, updating, and was not sufficiently 
scientifically 
validated. 
This 
website 
examination 
emphasized the importance of (i) respecting the ergonomic 
criteria during the device design and (ii) conducting a 
preliminary practitioner needs assessment. 
 
B. Need for  “e-presence” 
 
Figure 4. Main disadvantages of distance learning mentioned by 
practitioners in the questionnaire survey (number of occurrences in 
descending order after manual thematic grouping). 
 
According to the state-of-the-art, the loss of contact with 
peers as well as the lack of meetings and exchanges were 
the main distance learning disadvantage for CoP novices 
and experts interviewed (questionnaire survey collected 
data) [54] (Fig. 3). The Welch test highlighted that for 
younger practitioners (Fig. 4) the decision to participate in a 
face-to-face congress was correlated with the presence of a 
close member (p-value: 5.366e-09), probably because of 
their peripheral position within the CoP. 
82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5. Boxsplot representing the importance of the presence of a close 
person to attend a training according to the age of the participants. 
These results confirmed the importance to consider the 
problem of remote presence in the device design. 
C. Contribution of the virtual CoP discursive analysis 
 
This innovative continuing education environment is 
addressed to French orthodontic practitioners who are mostly 
already involved in an informal virtual CoP, built on 
Facebook© in 2014. This virtual active CoP “let’s discuss 
among specialists” (in French: discutons entre spécialistes) 
has significantly grown these last years. The growth of the 
informal virtual CoP these last three years (see Fig. 2) 
seemed to be an underlying trend (i.e., +170% members 
since 2019). Indeed, the first COVID-19 lockdown (i.e., start 
date 03/17/2020) did not seem to have modified this growth. 
In 2022 February, this CoP was gathering 1082 practitioners, 
representing almost half of the population (i.e., 2420 
orthodontic specialists). 
 
 
 
Figure 6. CoP growth since 2019. 
The analysis of the publication’s rhythm in September 
2021 (n=59) revealed its cyclical aspect (see Fig. 7). The 
analysis of the authors’ status showed that the start of a new 
cycle of publications coincided with a publication by a 
central CoP member (i.e., moderator, administrator, or 
recognized expert): their role was crucial in maintaining and 
developing the interaction 
  
 
Figure 7. Distribution of the posts in September 2021. 
. 
 
Thematic / sub theme
number   
interaction level 
(low, medium, 
high or 
inconstant)
Interactions type 
(none/comments 
and/or likes)
Co-presence (n=24)
job ads
3
low
likes
training information
8
low
likes
sale of practice
5
low
likes
patient communication
1
low
comments/likes
patient transfer
6
low
comments
link to other CoP
1
none
none
Cooperation (n=18)
product/equipment advice
7
medium
comments
HR/legal advice 
11
medium
comments
Collaboration (n=14)
sharing of clinical cases
11
low or high
comments/likes
clinical tips
3
medium or high
comments/likes
Identification (n=3) 
ethical problem
1
medium
comments
criticism of private training
2
high
likes
Number of publications, interactions level and type  after thematic 
classification  (n=59 on september 2021) 
 
Figure 8. Publications thematic analysis and the level of interactions 
generated. 
Figure 8 shows the publications thematic analysis and the 
level of interactions generated. Most publications were of the 
order of co-presence among members, creating few reactions 
(mostly likes). Their content were mainly informational. 
Publications on the mode of cooperation were less frequent 
but generated a higher level of interaction (mostly 
comments). The collaborative publications, generating a 
sustained interaction (i.e., clinical cases and clinical tips) 
were also rarer. During the month of September, three 
publications with strong identity value were published (i.e., 
one ethical problem and two criticisms of private training). 
These elicited many reactions (likes or comments).  
However, all CoP members did not publish in all 
categories. The publications allowing either reflection on the 
83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

orthodontics practice or collaboration among members, came 
exclusively from the CoP core experts, administrators, and 
moderators. The novices never participated in the form of 
posts or comments and very rarely in the form of likes. This 
observation is consistent with the data collected by focus 
group: all CoP novices (pre and post COVID-19 focus 
group) expressed their fear of being judged by the CoP 
experts. That was indeed the main barrier to their 
participation [5][37]. It is for this reason that anonymity was 
such a strong novices’ expectation.  
 
 
Figure 9. Shared clinical cases detailed thematic analysis. 
Figure 9 shows that practitioners never shared failures or 
treatments incidents, although this was an explicit strong 
request from novices, according to post COVID-19 focus 
group collected data. 
The analysis of the 11 clinical contributions allowed us to 
carry out thematic groupings. The peer reactions and 
comments were correlated to the topic. 
• 
Four clinical contributions were “well-ended” clinical 
cases (treated by an innovative technique). These 
generated a variable number of comments, mostly in the 
form of likes, but also, thanks, encouragements, or 
requests to use the same technique. They were published 
only by the active and recognized CoP experts. 
• 
Two contributions were requests for help with a 
complex diagnosis or treatment plan. The peers’ 
comments were numerous, and their form diversified: 
link to videos, photographs or links to other published 
cases, articles, etc. They sometimes gave rise to (i) 
debates (between active CoP experts only), (ii) searches 
for a consensus (iii) discussions on corollary subjects 
(e.g., techniques, devices) (iv) expressions of support 
toward peers (i.e., the author or other practitioners) 
• 
Two were requests regarding regional issues (e.g., 
search for a genetic reference center near the 
practitioner), generating few reactions (i.e., likes) and 
comments. 
• 
Three publications about rare clinical issues (rare 
pathologies or technical complex situations). This 
category generated few comments, in the form of 
sharing clinical experience, purely informational (i.e., no 
request) 
 
The description of the peer comments was carried out 
using the evaluation grid edited by Ortoleva & Bétrancourt 
(2016) and allowed us to make the following observations: 
• The 11 clinical cases were exclusively posted by active 
CoP experts. 
 Among these 11 clinical cases, none could be considered 
as “failed” or “treatment incident”. However, the novices 
interviewed in the focus groups clearly expressed their 
expectation of publishing treatment incidents as well. 
According to the literature, sharing these failures represents 
an excellent source of learning [5]. 
• None of the peers’ comments were personal clinical 
situations, they referred only to "imaginary" situations or 
previously published clinical cases.  
• As of the two complex clinical cases, only experts 
discussed the best way to handle the situation. This is the 
category in which we observed the most (i) discursive 
precautions, (i.e., politeness) and (ii) diversified supports 
(e.g., link to other clinical cases, videos, training).  
• From a formal point of view, concerning the 
readability, 
intelligibility 
and 
exhaustiveness 
of 
the 
comments, these criteria were well respected.  
 
D. Impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the CoP members 
learning needs 
The comparison between the focus groups data collected 
before versus after the health crisis enabled us to describe 
finely the changes of continuing education perception, 
raised 
by 
the 
literature 
[15]–[17]. 
Regarding 
the 
interactions, in the pre COVID-19 focus group, the lack of 
informal exchanges between peers was a significant barrier 
to distance learning. The "ideal" learning experience was a 
face-to-face conference, with limited costs and duration. In 
contrast, in the post COVID-19 focus group, the” ideal” 
learning experience consisted in clinical cases sharing (i.e., 
especially failed treatment) illustrated step by step, 
anonymous, internet-based literature search, scientifically 
validated content, and videoconference instant translation 
into French. The need to translate was strong for CoP 
novices, 
probably 
because 
they 
were 
afraid 
of 
misunderstandings without being able to detect them. The 
health crisis changed deeply the practitioners’ perception 
toward distance learning (Fig. 10). According to the 
literature, an innovative complete distance continuing 
education environment could henceforth meet many CoP 
members’ needs [21][22][23]. 
 
 
Figure 10. Evolution of experts and novices’ needs after the COVID-19 
crisis 
E. Experts/novices: interactions attitudes, needs, and 
expectations 
The distinct similarity analysis produced from novices 
and experts’ responses to the online survey, allowed us to 
Thematic/sub-theme
 
number
interaction 
level
interactions 
type
Requested concerning a rare pathology
5
low
comments
  =>including referring practitioners
2
low
comments
Sharing of successful clinical cases 
4
high
comments/likes
Requested concerning complex diagnoses
2
high
comments/likes
Themathic analysis of clinical posts  (n=11 on september 2021)
84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

distinguish their expectations and needs towards the CoP. 
Figure 11 shows two different profiles in terms of content, 
interaction needs and attitudes within the virtual CoP “let’s 
discuss among specialists”. The experts expected to (i) be 
informed about the novelties, (ii) discover the practice and 
clinical tips of their peers. Their main goals were to evaluate 
their own practice and eventually modify it: that was a 
reflective learning process based on reciprocity. Concerning 
novices’ needs, they expected to obtain expert opinions and 
were in an observant attitude. 
 
 
Figure 11. Experts and novices’ needs in terms of content, learning and 
interaction. 
F. Interest of being member of a CoP 
 
According to the online survey collected data, the 
reasons why practitioners become members of a virtual CoP 
depended on their status.  
For the novices, the members of a virtual CoP was 
mainly looking for a "network" and "professional 
announcements". The verbs "to share", "to obtain opinions" 
and "to see" which accompanied the notion of " clinical 
cases". For the novices, the added value of being a part of a 
virtual CoP was “to see others’ clinical cases” and “to 
discover their peers’ practice”. This highlights to the 
importance of interactions and sharing practice for their 
professional development. These results were consistent 
with the observational posture of novices within a CoP. 
As of the experts, the members of a virtual community 
of practice were mostly looking for "what's new", "tips and 
tricks" and to "help each other". The recurring verbs 
associated with the notion of "clinical cases" were "to learn" 
and "to exchange". 
Concerning this group, the interactions take place based 
on reciprocity, which is consistent with their more central 
position within the CoP. 
G. Interaction quality improvement 
To improve the efficiency of the practitioners' comments 
in terms of learning and collaboration, a participation 
charter could be draw up, according to the peers’ comments 
quality evaluation grid [32]: 
• By specifying the rules of participation (e.g., use of a 
friendly tone), this charter could encourage the participation 
of novices who were afraid to be judged by the CoP experts. 
• It could improve the “quality” of peer discussions by 
encouraging them to (i) share personal clinical cases, (ii) 
come up with questions, (iii) make suggestions, (iv) share 
scientific articles. That could indeed promote learning and 
address the needs of novices.  
The publication of recommendations for speakers could 
allow videoconferences to meet (i) the expectations of CoP 
members, (ii) and comply with recommendations for good 
practice. These suggestions could encourage them: 
• To cite scientifically validated articles. 
• To be exhaustive and up-to-date. 
• To focus on daily practice and clinical aspects. 
• To answer questions from practitioners. 
• To produce a bibliography to deepen the subject. 
H. Several requirements to promote peers’ interactions 
The current virtual CoP via Facebook© did not allow to 
create small discussion groups, nor to publish anonymously. 
An innovative continuing education environment should 
offer these possibilities to encourage novices’ participation 
and ultimately stimulate interactions between peers. 
According to the state-of-the-art and our collected data, 
some criteria should be respected to promote practitioners’ 
participation: 
First, participation in discussions forums could be done 
under a pseudonym. However, each practitioner’s status 
should be known (novices/experts), so that novices could 
trust in the posted information. 
Second, the content scientific validity could be ensured 
by various means: 
-Review by known International/European clinical experts. 
-Review by teachers from universities. 
-Review by a mixed college (universities teachers and 
clinical experts).  
Some of these experts should also be involved in 
facilitating the forum and take on the role of moderator to 
promote the interactions, as in the virtual CoP “let’s discuss 
among specialists”. 
Third, the device should offer the possibility of 
exchanging on his/her clinical cases via a forum, seeking the 
opinions of other practitioners or even having access to very 
detailed clinical cases (step by step). 
Fourth, the device should allow the creation of limited or 
extended discussions groups based on professional status 
(expert/novices). The geographical discussion group could 
also be relevant according to the CoP discursive analysis: 2 
of the 11 clinical posts were indeed requests for referring 
practitioners in the same region (see Fig. 5). 
Finally, active (e.g., contributions, likes, emojis) and 
passive (e.g., reading content) participations are valuable to 
build trust between members. In the Facebook virtual 
community, passive participation is not known, yet passive 
participation is essential for authors to be aware of being 
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

read. Thus, to value the passive participation, the number of 
views for each post could be visible 
V. DISCUSSION 
 
The collected data (focus group, online survey, virtual 
CoP examination) agreed and complemented each other. 
This confirmed the interest of adopting a data triangulation 
method to formulate relevant recommendations [56]. 
Although learning within a CoP is a trajectory from 
novice to expert passing through intermediate stages, the 
data analysis conducted by dividing them into two groups 
(novices vs experts) allowed us to reveal different attitudes, 
needs and expectations in terms of continuing education. 
It is commonly accepted that novices participated less 
than experts, because of their peripheral position within the 
CoP [3]-[6]. However, an education device should encourage 
all CoP members to participate on a voluntary basis, to 
reduce the feeling of loneliness and foster their commitment 
[4]. But, if virtual CoPs share the same principles than 
traditional ones (e.g., commitment and mutual trust), this is 
more difficult to maintain in an online environment [57]. 
Our collected data explained more precisely why the 
WFO and the e-orthodontie.com websites did not match 
users’ expectations. Concerning the WFO website, there was 
a strong language barrier: in all focus group, the need to 
translate everything into French was commonly shared. 
Concerning the French e-orthodontie.com website, the 
content was perceived as not scientifically valid by 
interviewed practitioners. Moreover, this website was 
accessible 
to 
patients, 
specialist, 
and 
non-specialist 
orthodontic practitioners. This “open access” was the subject 
of numerous criticisms by all the interviewed practitioners. 
In addition, these websites did not qualify for Continuing 
Professional Development credits.  
In addition, the virtual CoP "let's discuss among 
specialists", although active and growing, is struggling to 
involve novices despite expressing a significant need to share 
their clinical cases and their "failures". Furthermore, the 
impossibility of forming small discussion groups and the 
lack of anonymity seem to hinder their participation. 
However, this sharing of clinical cases on the part of novices 
and the solicitation of peer comments on them could help 
them better articulate the practical and theoretical 
dimensions of the discipline. Moreover, the clinical cases 
presented by the experts are above all very complex 
diagnoses (never failures, etc.) or successful clinical cases 
but whose treatment management deviates somewhat from 
the recommendations. 
All surveys revealed indeed the significant tension within 
this CoP related to the various academic backgrounds 
(specialists versus non-specialists). The open or limited 
access of non-specialists to the innovative distance learning 
environment should be carefully considered: the specialists 
considered the non-specialists as an outgroup of the CoP, 
whereas 
the 
non-specialist 
probably 
considered 
the 
specialists as experts of the CoP. 
This paper showed that orthodontic practitioners 
commonly needed (i) scientifically validated content, (ii) 
extensive discussion and limited groups, (iii) anonymous, 
(iv) publications on clinical cases (successful AND 
unsuccessful). These results were consistent with the state-
of-the-art. But contrary to the literature, in our study, the 
discussion forums group should be centered on the 
professional status (CoP novices and/or experts) and not on 
the center of interest [27]. 
It would have been interesting to carry out focus groups 
of CoP experts, but professional constraints (solitary 
practice, geographically scattered, lack of time) prevented us 
from doing so. Nevertheless, the online survey enabled us to 
include mostly CoP experts. The experts were numerous 
either because they participated more actively into the CoP, 
and/or because they were more represented there. 
We conducted this user-centered psycho-ergonomic 
study by limiting the notion of users to practitioners who 
need 
to 
be 
trained 
and 
not 
to 
speakers 
and/or 
trainers/facilitators/tutors who provide resources and/or 
animate the CoP. However, it would seem necessary to 
identify the needs of all the actors to promote the 
acceptability of the system. It would therefore be interesting 
to extend this work by evaluating the different stages of 
design by the different actors. 
 
VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
A complete, careful analysis of the orthodontic 
practitioners’ needs, expectations, and interactions behavior 
within the virtual active CoP “let’s discuss among 
specialists” was done for this innovative distance 
environment to comply with the criteria of usability and 
acceptability.  
According to our data collection, a comprehensive 
distance learning environment could meet many novices and 
experts’ expectations. Indeed, the CoP novices reported 
their need to (i) interact with experts anonymously (to avoid 
being judged), (ii) create restricted or extended online 
discussion, (iii) ask for questions about all available content 
(e.g., videoconferences, articles), and (iv) be informed of 
news by notification. The needs and attitudes of novices and 
experts we described in this study are supported by the data 
on the CoPs [1]-[6], particularly concerning cohesion, 
sharing of experiences and identity needs. However, the 
way to proceed is specific to each profession and, to our 
knowledge, no previous study has analyzed the orthodontic 
practitioners’ community.  
This research revealed that discussions on the posted 
clinical experiences constituted the CoP added value 
perceived by its members and helped novices articulate the 
theoretical and practical dimensions of orthodontics. As 
such, the sharing of clinical experience must be encouraged 
in the future system 
This study allowed us to identify the CoP members needs 
and expectations in terms of (i) content (and the categories 
structuring it), (ii) expected interactions between novices or 
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

experts (e.g., rhythm, themes, anonymity, etc), (iii) scientific 
validity, (iv) sharing or observing the peers’ positives or 
negatives clinical experiences. Our findings indicates that (i) 
COVID-19 crisis modified the CoP members learning needs 
and (ii) the interaction needs, attitudes, and expectations of 
CoP novices and experts were different. On this basis, 
several requirements in term of interactions and contents 
have been proposed. 
This users’ center research showed that an innovative 
education environment would greatly enrich the CoP, 
particularly in terms of content, support, and variety of 
possible exchanges. All focus groups participants co-created 
a website architecture and discussed their expectations in 
terms of supports and contents to design an “ideal” distance 
learning device. The contents and supports will be the focus 
of a future article. 
Our user-centered approach must be extended during the 
design/redesign phases by empirical methodology at 
different stages without and /or with “real” users, to ensure 
compliance with the device ergonomic criteria [58]. In the 
next phases, the concept of users should encompass lecturers 
and facilitators. 
The security and legal standing of shared medical data 
such as X-rays and/or photographs of patients’ needs to be 
addressed. Further studies on the security aspects of the 
device are also important to be conducted to minimize the 
risks of malicious attacks and gain more confidence from the 
practitioners. 
Further experimentation should be conducted, including 
more in-depth investigation of practitioners’ expectations 
during the post COVID-19 period to justify usefulness of the 
proposed requirements. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Mailloux and J. Dinet, "Requirements Analysis Towards 
Future Design of an Innovative Distance Learning Device 
Intended for French Orthodontic Practitioners Contribution 
of a Community of Practice Analysis," The Sixteenth 
International Conference on Digital Society, June 2022.  
[2] 
A. Jezegou, "distance in formation. First milestone for an 
operationalization of the theory of transactional distance". 
Distances et savoirs, Vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 341-366, 2007. 
[3] 
J.-H. Park and H.-J. Choi, "Factors Influencing Adult 
Learners’ Decision to Drop Out or Persist in Online 
Learning," 
Learning 
& 
Technology 
Library 
(LearnTechLib)" 
2009. 
https://www.learntechlib.org/p/74987/ 
[retrieved: 
September 2022] 
[4] 
J. Lave and E. Wenger, "Situated learning: Legitimate 
peripheral participation," New York, NY, US: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 26-49, 1991. 
[5] 
G. Ortoleva and M. Bétrancourt, "Supporting productive 
collaboration in a computer-supported instructional activity: 
peer feedback on critical incidents in health care education," 
J. Vocat. Educ. Train., vol. 68, no. 2, pp.178-197, Apr. 
2016. 
[6] 
M. Gosselin, A. Viau-Guay, and B. Bourassa, "The 
different 
learning 
processes 
experienced 
by 
health 
professionals participating in a community of practice," 
Phronesis, vol. 6, no 3, pp. 36-50, 2017. 
[7] 
V. Glikman, "Learners and tutors: a European approach to 
human mediations," Education permanente, vol 152, pp. 55-
69, 2002. [retrieved: May 2022] 
[8] 
V. Glikman, "Remote Tutor," in Distance education 
tutoring, B. D. Lievre, C. Depover, A. Jaillet, D. Peraya, 
and J.-J. Quintin, De Boeck, pp. 137-158, 2011.  
[9] 
C. Vernazza, "Introduction of an e-portfolio in clinical 
dentistry: staff and student views," vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 36-41, 
Eur J Dent Educ, 2011. 
[10] 
R. L. Kardos, J. M. Cook, R. J. Butson, and T. B. Kardos, 
"The development of an ePortfolio for life-long reflective 
learning and auditable professional certification," Eur. J. 
Dent. Educ. Off. J. Assoc. Dent. Educ. Eur., vol. 13, no. 3, 
pp. 135-141, August 2009. 
[11] 
K. Errabi, "Demand-Pull" or "Technology-Push": "survey 
of recent literature and new econometric tests," p. 165, 
2017. 
[12] 
A. Chaptal, "Abstract," Distances Savoirs, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
121-147, 2003. 
[13] 
S. Caro Dambreville, "Design of digital documents. 
Methodological path," Doc. Numér., vol. 12, no.  2, pp. 
7‑22, 2009. 
[14] 
G.-L. Baron and E. Bruillard, "Informatics and its users in 
education," Paris: PUF, 1996. 
[15] 
X. Liu, J. Zhou, L. Chen, Y. Yang, and J. Tan, "Impact of 
COVID‐19 epidemic on live online dental continuing 
education," Eur. J. Dent. Educ., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 786-789, 
Nov. 2020. 
[16] 
H. C. Cheng, S.-L. Lu, Y. C. Yen, P. Siewchaisakul, A. M. 
F. Yen, and S. L. S. Chen, "Dental education changed by 
COVID-19: Student’s perceptions and attitudes," BMC 
Med. Educ., vol. 21, no. 1, p. 364, July 2021. 
[17] 
R. Elledge, R. Williams, C. Fowell, and J. Green, 
"Maxillofacial education in the time of COVID-19: the 
West Midlands experience," Br. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg., 
vol. 60 no. 1, pp. 52-57, July 2020. 
[18] 
L. Browne, S. Mehra, R. Rattan, and G. Thomas, 
"Comparing lecture and e-learning as pedagogies for new 
and experienced professionals in dentistry," Br. Dent. J., 
vol. 197, no. 2, pp. 95-97, July 2004 
[19] 
L. Stow and D. Higgins, "Development and evaluation of 
online education to increase the forensic relevance of oral 
health records," Aust. Dent. J., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 81-93, 
March 2018. 
[20] 
K. M. Bernie, E. T. Couch, and M. Walsh, "Perceptions of 
California 
Dental 
Hygienists 
Regarding 
Mandatory 
Continued Competence Requirements as a Condition of 
License Renewal," J. Dent. Hyg. JDH, vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 
275-282, Oct. 2016. 
[21] 
M. Bonabi, S. Z. Mohebbi, E. A. Martinez-Mier, T. P. 
Thyvalikakath, and M. R. Khami, "Effectiveness of smart 
phone application use as continuing medical education 
method in pediatric oral health care: a randomized trial" 
BMC Med. Educ., vol. 19, no. 1, p. 431, Nov. 2019. 
[22] 
K. P. Klein, K. T. Miller, M. W. Brown, and W. R. Proffit, 
"In-office distance learning for practitioners," Am. J. 
Orthod. Dentofac. Orthop. Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Orthod. 
Its Const. Soc. Am. Board Orthod., vol. 140, no. 1, pp. 
126-132, Jul. 2011. 
[23] 
E. W. Odell, C. A. Francis, K. A. Eaton, P. A. Reynolds, 
and R. D. Mason, "A study of videoconferencing for 
postgraduate continuing education in dentistry in the UK--
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the teachers’ view," Eur. J. Dent. Educ. Off. J. Assoc. Dent. 
Educ. Eur., vol. 5, no. 3, pp .113-119, Aug. 2001. 
[24] 
N. Mattheos et al., "Potential of information technology in 
dental education," Eur. J. Dent. Educ., vol. 12, pp.  85-92, 
Feb. 2008. 
[25] 
K. T. Miller, W. M. Hannum, T. Morley, and W. R. Proffit, 
"Use of recorded interactive seminars in orthodontic 
distance education,"Am. J. Orthod. Dentofac. Orthop. Off. 
Publ. Am. Assoc. Orthod. Its Const. Soc. Am. Board 
Orthod., vol. 132, no 3, pp. 408-414, sept. 2007. 
[26] 
J. M. C. Bastien and D. L. Scapin, "A validation of 
ergonomic criteria for the evaluation of human‐computer 
interfaces," Int. J. Human– Computer Interact., vol. 4, no. 2, 
pp. 183-196, Apr. 1992. 
[27] 
É. Brangier and J. M. C. Bastien. "The evolution of the 
ergonomics of computer products: accessibility, usability, 
emotionality and influenceability," Presses Universitaires de 
France, pp. 307-328, 2010. [retrieved: Apr. 2022]. 
[28] 
P. Rekawek, P. Rice, and N. Panchal, "The impact of 
COVID-19: Considerations for future dental conferences," 
J. Dent. Educ., vol. 84, no. 11, pp. 1188-1191, Nov. 2020. 
[29] M. Grangeat, "L. S. Vygotski: group learning", Éditions 
Sciences Humaines, pp. 134-141, 2016 
[30] 
H. Spallek et al., "Supporting emerging disciplines with e-
communities: needs and benefits," J. Med. Internet Res., 
vol. 10, no. 2, Apr-Jun. 2008. 
[31] 
P. Ratka-Krüger, J. P. Wölber, J. Blank, K. Holst, I. 
Hörmeyer, and E. Vögele, "MasterOnline periodontology 
and implant therapy-revisited after seven years: A case 
study of the structures and outcomes in a blended learning 
CPD," Eur. J. Dent. Educ. Off. J. Assoc. Dent. Educ. Eur., 
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 7-13, Feb. 2018. 
[32] 
L. Cifuentes, G. Maxwell, and Ş. Bulu, "Technology 
Integration Through Professional Learning Community," J. 
Educ. Comput. Res., vol. 44, pp. 59-82, Jan. 2011. 
[33] 
S. Ouellet, I. Caya, and M. P. Tremblay, "The contribution 
of a learning community to developing collaborative and 
inclusive practices: action research," Éducation Francoph., 
vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 207-226, 2011. 
[34] 
A. le May, "Communities of Practice in Health and Social 
Care," John Wiley & Sons, p. 144, 2009. 
[35] 
L. C. Li, J. M. Grimshaw, C. Nielsen, M. Judd, P. C. Coyte, 
and I. D. Graham, "Use of communities of practice in 
business and health care sectors: A systematic review," 
Implement. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 27, Dec. 2009. 
[36] 
M. Poirier, "Communities of Practice in Mental Health," 
vol. 3, no. 1, 2010. https://cremis.ca/publications/articles-et-
medias/les-communautes-de pratiques-en-sante-mentale/ 
[retrieved: September 2022] 
[37] 
E. Wenger, "Communities of Practice and Social Learning 
Systems: the Career of a Concept," in Social Learning 
Systems and Communities of Practice, C. Blackmore, 
London: Springer, pp. 179-198, 1998. 
[38] 
E. Wenger, R. A. McDermott, and W. Snyder, "Cultivating 
Communities of Practice," Boston, Mass: Harvard Business 
Review Press, 2002. 
[39] 
P. Lièvre, E. Bonnet, and N. Laroche, XXI. Etienne 
Wenger, "Community of practice and social theory of 
learning," EMS Editions, pp. 427-447, 2016.  
[40] 
J. Brown, "Online learning. CDS to present debut webinar 
on Direct Resin Pearls," CDS Rev., vol. 103, no. 5, pp. 
14-15, Oct. 2010. 
[41] I. Bourdon, N. Teissier, and C. Kimble, "Relationships and 
participation within a virtual community of practice: case 
study in a multinational engineering company", Recherches 
en sciences de gestion, vol.100, pp. 121-141, 2014. 
[42] 
A. Bandura, "Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of 
behavioral change", Psychol. Rev., vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 
191-215, 1977  
[43] 
A. Amiel, J.-F. Camps, G. Lutz, F. Plégat-Soutjis, and A. 
Tricot, "Designing an Open and Distance Learning 
System", p. 24, 2002.  
[44] 
S. E. Dreyfus, "The Five-Stage Model of Adult Skill 
Acquisition," Bull. Sci. Technol. Soc., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 
177-181, 2004.  
[45 L. Stoll, R. Bolam, A. McMahon, M. Wallace, and S. Thomas, 
"Professional Learning Communities: A Review of the 
Literature," J. Educ. Change, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 221-258, 
2006. 
 
[46] 
M. C. Smith and T. Pourchot, "Adult Learning and 
Development: Perspectives From Educational Psychology," 
Routledge, p. 296, 2013. 
[47] 
G. Ortoleva, M. Bétrancourt, and S. Morand,"Between 
personalization and collective constraints: A user-centric 
approach for the implementation of a digital Pedagogical 
Monitoring booklet," Sci. Technol. Inf. Commun. Pour 
LÉducation Form., vol. 19, no. 1, p. 233-251, 2012,  
[48] 
M. Alomran, "Transdisciplinary qualitative approach to 
analyze interactions and instrumentations in online 
discussions," 
Comprehensive 
research 
& 
qualitative 
approaches (the 10th Doctoriades), Oct. 2021. [retrieved: 
Juil. 2022]  
[49] 
J. M. C. Bastien and D. L. Scapin, "A validation of 
ergonomic criteria for the evaluation of human‐computer 
interfaces," Int. J. Human– Computer Interact., vol. 4, no. 2, 
pp. 183-196, Apr. 1992.  
[50] 
J. M. C. Bastien, "Ergonomic criteria: a step towards a 
methodological aid to the evaluation of interactive 
systems," Doctoral Thesis, Paris 5, 1996.  
[51] 
C. Bastien et D. Scapin, " User-centered interactive 
software design: steps and methods," in Ergonomie, Presses 
Universitaires de France, pp. 451-462, 2004. 
[52] 
S. Proulx, "Virtual communities: what makes a connection," 
in S. Proulx, L. Poissant and M. Sénécal, "Virtual 
communities: thinking and acting in a network," Presses de 
l’Université Laval, pp. 13-26, 2006. 
[53] 
] H. Spallek et al., "Supporting emerging disciplines with e-
communities: needs and benefits", J. Med. Internet Res., 
vol. 10, no. 2, Apr-Jun. 2008 
[54] 
L. Arcand, "The community of practice a relevant tool: 
summary of knowledge adapted to the context of public 
health," INSPQ, Nov. 2017 [retrieved: Dec 2022] 
[55] 
T. Apostolidis, "Social representations and triangulation: 
theoretical methodological issues," In: J. C. Abric, 
"Methods of studying social representations", Ed Érès, pp. 
13-35, 2003. 
[56] 
B. Mercieca, "What Is a Community of Practice?," in 
Communities of Practice: Facilitating Social Learning in 
Higher Education, J. McDonald and A. Cater-Steel, 
Singapore: Springer, pp. 3-25, 2017. 
[57] 
C. Lewis and J. Gould, "Designing for usability: key 
principles and what designers think," Communications of 
the ACM , pp. 300-311, 1985. [retrieved: Mar 2022] 
 
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

