56
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Sensitive Data Discovery in Care Pathways using Business Process Modelling and 
HL7-CDA 
 
Intidhar Essefi 
University of Tunis el Manar, The 
Higher Institute of Medical 
Technologies of Tunis 
Research Laboratory of Biophysics 
and Medical Technologies 
Tunis, Tunisia 
e-mail: essefi.intidhar@gmail.com 
 
Hanen Boussi Rahmouni 
University of the West of England, the 
Computer Science Research Center 
Bristol, UK 
e-mail: hanene4.rahmouni@uwe.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
Mohamed Fethi Ladeb 
Radiology Department 
Kassab Orthopedics Institute 
Manouba, Tunisia 
e-mail: fethiladeb@hotmail.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— Medical data communication is an important 
process 
enabling 
collaboration 
between 
healthcare 
professionals. The use of patient Electronic Health Record 
(EHR) ensures an enhanced continuity of care since it provides 
a centralized patient information access in a seamless way. In 
data protection law, the electronic exchange of medical data 
should comply with privacy obligations and data security 
safeguards. It is therefore a legal requirement for hospitals to 
ensure that patient information are processed and shared 
throughout clinical business processes in a standardized and 
structured form in order to be able to clearly discover and 
highlight the patient protected information manipulated in 
each process. In this work, we propose a clinical pathway 
specification methodology that is at the same time data driven 
and privacy aware. Our model gives special attention to the 
structure and the data content of shared medical documents. 
These documents are usually structured following the Health 
Level 7 (HL7)-Clinical Document Architecture (CDA). This 
research aims to define a legally shared HL7 structure of 
medical data ought to be processed and exchanged within 
clinical processes. Throughout the use of an ontology 
information model of medical data, we are aiming to capture 
and classify the data used in each clinical process into 
categories. We put special emphases on the level of protection 
required by each category of data in respect of the 
international health data legislation namely, the Health 
Insurance and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Particularly, our 
model ensures the implementation of the privacy by design 
principle since it ensures the adoption of data protection 
requirements starting from a very early stage of Hospital 
Information Systems (HIS) design. 
Keywords-business process modeling; clinical pathways; data 
driven; legally HL7 structured medical data; HIPAA legislation; 
ontology; patient privacy; privacy requirements; CDA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the era of EHRs (Electronic Health Records), many 
questions are raised: who can access these records in the 
course of providing health care to the patient, under which 
circumstances and how? When, if so, can these documents 
be used for other purposes, such as public health, care 
quality improvement and public research? When is the 
consent of the data subject necessary for such "secondary" 
use of the patient's data? Without the consent of the patient, 
what are the implications for confidentiality and the sharing 
of personal medical records or their secondary use?  
In order to improve services’ quality within a hospital 
environment, it is important to automate the underlining 
workflows of each clinical process adopted within the 
hospital. This requires an explicit design and the 
implementation of business process models tailored for the 
concerned field. Medical healthcare is a multidisciplinary 
field. Its business processes and workflows are very 
complex. Throughout each medical process, several types of 
clinical information need to be circulated and treated within 
or without the hospital’s boundaries. Medical data are 
produced, transmitted between medical departments and 
shared between healthcare professionals as specified by the 
clinical pathways enforced by the hospital information 
systems in use. Throughout this processes, several types of 
medical data documents are being manipulated, including 
admission papers, insurance documents, prescriptions, 
confidential letters, medical images, imaging reports, 
biological reports, other types of medical reports, etc. All 
the mentioned clinical documents include diverse health 
information, among 
which we distinguish sensitive 
information that is considered as highly Protected Health 
Information (PHI) [1]. Personal healthcare information is 
not only used in healthcare practices and shared between 
healthcare professionals, but also in public practices and 
research activities such as public health surveillance and 
public health research. Public health practices and research 
present risks that are related to the unauthorized disclosure 
of PHI [2]. Therefore, it is crucial for healthcare 
organizations to ensure PHI protection and to preserve the 
privacy of individuals. Particularly, the individual’s privacy 
protection is required by legislation, such as the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
legislation [3][4] and the GDPR (General Data Protection 
Regulation) [5] on personal data protection. Consequently, 
privacy requirements should be respected and ensured when 
designing systems and procedures for health data 
management. For that, data oriented care pathway models 

57
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
present a highly required mean of sensitive data discovery 
within the shared clinical documents. Furthermore, using a 
standard structure of medical documents facilitates the 
discovery and the protection of the included PHI. Medical 
data classification using ontology for the clinical documents 
architecture could provide more data fluidity in order to 
implement personal data protection law. This facilitates the 
map of each level of protection to a set of privacy 
requirements as demanded by international health data 
legislation namely, the Health Insurance and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA). We believe our model could enhance 
compliance with privacy with regards to the protection of 
sensitive patient data within hospitals. Furthermore, the 
model we are presenting in this paper, describes the 
different clinical workflows typically included in hospitals 
care pathways as well as the set of input and out-put data for 
each workflow, which simplifies the sensitive data 
discovery task. 
Our approach suggests a set of steps towards a legally 
shared HL7 clinical documents architecture ontology based 
on the privacy by design principle, which means the 
implementation of privacy requirements since an early stage 
of healthcare information systems design with respect to 
carrying out clinical pathways. In this paper, we take the 
osteosarcoma clinical pathway as a case study to validate 
our approach. The details of our approach are as follows: 
● 
Model medical care pathways as business processes 
that emphasise shared clinical data aiming to 
identify sensitive health information among them.  
● 
Identify the privacy requirements and procedures 
for each type of sensitive health data identified 
within the business process representing each care 
pathway. 
● 
Identify a clinical data model based on the business 
process modelling. 
● 
Define the sensitive health information categories. 
● 
Define the HIPAA legislation requirements to 
preserve the patient’s privacy and confidentiality 
with regards to the use of their PHI. 
● 
Model the clinical pathways based on business 
process modelling in order to extract the shared 
clinical 
documents 
between 
healthcare 
professionals. 
● 
Map clinical documents’ data to a set of attributes 
as a step towards a clinical data ontology 
development. 
● 
Identify the PHI underlining each process model. 
● 
Define privacy requirements for PHI protection 
from any disclosure or misuse. 
This paper is divided into sections as follows: in Section 
II, we present the related work; in Section III, we present the 
clinical pathway subject to study, as well as the clinical 
pathway modelling language of our choice. We adopt a data 
driven business process clinical pathway modelling 
approach. In Section IV, we present our clinical document 
architecture. In Sections V and VI, we define the privacy 
requirements for PHI, followed by results and discussion. In 
Section VII, we present the conclusion and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the literature, the study of clinical care pathways is 
vast due to the diversity of the modelling approaches, the 
analyses purposes and the care pathway level of 
specification. Depending on the concerned field, four groups 
of modelling techniques are defined [6][7][8]: 1) Statistical 
and mathematical techniques, based on the finding of 
significant relations among variables in order to assess the 
relation between patient’s identifiers and their medical 
history [8], 2) Data mining for clinical pathways, based on 
discovering patterns in the medical events sequencing in 
order to predict the outcome of the next step of the care 
pathway [7], 3) Business process modelling, the modelling 
stage relies on a domain specific ontology for presenting 
systems in order to be analyzed and improved, it gives 
attention to the medical resources and documentation 
presentation in addition to the control-flow [9] [10] and 4) 
Process mining algorithms, dedicated to the processes 
analyses [11].  
The modelling approach is based on questionnaires 
collecting information throughout interviews with doctors. 
They do not consider any data source and are subjective. For 
that, clinical pathways are textually and medically 
described. Their business processes and workflows are 
mostly detailed by doctors using textual description of the 
sequenced tasks. Due to the technological revolution in the 
medical field that includes medical information systems, 
several methods and business process modelling languages 
were suggested. This includes the Integration DEFinition 
language (IDEF) (V.0 and V.3), the Unified Modelling 
Language (UML) V.2.0 and the Business Process Model 
and Notation language (BPMN). Most of these technologies 
were also used to model clinical pathways [12]. 
BPMN is the most widely used and accepted language in 
medical process modelling thanks to its simple and high-
level process construction. Clinical pathways processes are 
known as complex to be understood by medical 
practitioners. This needs a transparency of the whole 
process elements such as structures, participants, tasks, 
roles, etc. Modelling care pathways in the form of clinical 
processes is considered as a solution to overcome its 
complexity and define its requirements with regards to 
patients and health care professionals’ needs. Therefore, 
medical process models should be simple, transparent and 
understandable as much as possible [13][14]. 
Despite the importance of business process modelling in 
clinical pathways and efforts for processes’ automation, few 
works are dealing with care pathways’ automation. Most of 
them are relying on a business process-based modelling 
approach. Besides, there is some suggested BPMN 
extension implementation such as the Clinical Pathway (CP) 
extension of the BPMN, called BPMN4CP, which proposes 
an ontology based- extension for e-health process 

58
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
management. Other existing research works offer clinical 
textual description of the care pathways processes. In 
addition, other works were interested in analyzing systems 
behavior throughout business process-based modelling 
using UML, particularly, UML class diagram [15][16][17].  
However, less effort has been made in investigating 
approaches for clinical data modelling with special interest 
in privacy preservation. In this context, our work is 
addressed to the respect of privacy requirements since a 
very early stage of HIS design in order to ensure a protected 
rolling of data driven business processes that are clinical 
pathway-oriented. Based on the modelling approach and the 
implementation 
of the 
Business Process Modelling 
technique, we highlight shared medical data throughout 
document centric clinical care pathway modelling and HL7-
CDA standard investigation [18]. This is for presenting a 
shared data model and mapping them to a set of 
characteristics aiming to develop an ontology representing 
data related to the care pathway field. This will facilitate the 
definition of the required security level for each data type 
with respect to personal data protection legislation. 
III. 
CLINICAL PATHWAYS  
Clinical pathways are acknowledged as complex 
processes due to the diversity of the participating entities 
(e.g., 
healthcare 
professionals 
and 
medical 
service 
providers). Throughout the literature exploration of the 
clinical pathways’ modelling and automation, we extracted 
the main phases underlining care pathway processes. A 
generic clinical pathway begins by an admission phase in 
which the patient is allowed to get access to the care 
establishments. This is usually followed by a diagnosis 
phase: that describes the visiting of the consulting doctor 
and having clinical diagnosis performed. The treatment 
phase should then occur: after identifying the pathology in 
the second phase, the treating doctor identifies the treatment 
protocol. This clinical pathway ends with the follow-up 
phase which allows the involved practitioner to monitor and 
evaluate the effectiveness of the prescribed treatment or to 
control the pathology progression [19]. 
The clinical pathway is a set of processes and sub-
processes in which one or more healthcare professionals 
participate. The business process modelling of clinical 
pathways allows to identify the tasks, the participants and 
their roles in the care pathway proceeding. Even the shared 
data between healthcare professionals may also be modelled 
and identified among a clinical pathway-oriented business 
process [20]. 
In the following sections, we will detail the clinical care 
pathway of osteosarcoma and describe a step by step 
methodology to model our clinical business process and 
sensitive data discovery. 
A. An Overview of Osteosarcoma Clinical Pathways 
Osteosarcoma is a bone cancer. It most commonly 
reaches those aged from 10 to 30. A great part of this 
affected population concerns teenagers. Each year, from 800 
to 900 people are estimated to be diagnosed with 
osteosarcoma in the United States. Osteosarcomas are 
primary malignant bone tumors. They can be classified 
according to cells’ behavior under the microscope as high, 
intermediate or low grade [21]. 
Osteosarcoma clinical care pathways are characterized 
by their complex and multidisciplinary procedures with their 
difficult management facts. By Ferrante [13], the 
osteosarcoma 
first 
diagnosis 
starts 
with 
symptoms 
appearances like bone pain or soreness, a felt mass through 
the skin, swelling and redness, etc. During the clinical 
pathway diagnosis phase, while an osteosarcoma is 
suspected some standard imaging exams must be performed. 
Once the osteosarcoma is confirmed and its malignancy is 
not excluded, a biopsy should be performed allowing the 
cancer staging. As a final checkup step, several imaging 
exams are performed to verify the existence of metastases. 
A percentage of 85% indicates that the most common 
metastases appear in the lung whereas the bone is 
considered as the second most common site of distant 
disease [22]. 
The osteosarcoma checkup and grading steps allow the 
choice of the treatment procedure which includes 
chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery operation. The 
identification of the right therapy protocol is based on 
biological analyses. To verify and evaluate the treatment 
efficiency, the patient has to be periodically followed-up. 
This osteosarcoma clinical pathway follow-up step is based 
on the performing of imaging exams in addition to 
biological analyses as needed [22][23][24]. 
The complexity of the osteosarcoma clinical pathway 
business process is due to the collaboration between 
healthcare professionals from several medical departments. 
This process cannot be accomplished without clinical data 
sharing and transmission. Among those data, we find 
various sensitive data which are individually identifiable 
that are transmitted or maintained in electronic media [25]. 
For that, it is necessary to respect the applicable data 
protection regulation. For that, we need data driven clinical 
pathways’ models, which facilitate the data discovery step 
and mapping them to sensitive data protection principals. 
Those models allow defining shared and transmitted clinical 
documents throughout medical processes. The clinical care 
pathways modelling step is based on the clinical processes 
description within the literature while the data discovery 
step is based on the investigation of the HL7-CDA standard. 
Then, we defined sensitive data according to the HIPAA 
regulation. As a consequence, the sensitive data discovery 
step is fulfilled according to both HL7-CDA standard and 
HIPAA regulation. 
B. BPMN As Clinical Pathway Modelling Language 
To model clinical pathways, we used the BPMN as a 
modelling language. It is the most widely used language in 
healthcare business process modelling. First, we explored 

59
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
the clinical healthcare pathways in the literature on 
description of clinical pathways. Then, we divided them into 
three main phases, diagnosis or check-up, treatment and 
follow-up, mentioned above. Throughout the studied 
clinical pathways, we present the osteosarcoma clinical 
pathway as a case study to illustrate our data driven clinical 
healthcare pathway model. In order to elaborate the clinical 
pathway data driven model, we used the common patterns 
and symbols of the BPMN modelling language [12]. 
C. Osteosarcoma Clinical Pathway Modelling Using 
BPMN 
In order to identify the clinical data that may be 
transmitted and shared between healthcare professionals as 
required by standard care pathway specifications, we 
modelled the osteosarcoma clinical pathway in the form of a 
business process model. In this way, we could first identify 
the characteristics of performed clinical tasks. Then, we 
could highlight the data driven tasks for the chosen 
pathology. The sections below present the data driven 
clinical pathways of osteosarcoma for the check-up, the 
treatment and the follow-up phases respectively.  
1) 
Osteosarcoma checkup clinical pathway 
Fig. 1 presents the check-up phase of the osteosarcoma 
clinical pathway as well as the shared and transmitted 
clinical documents, ensuring the steps required by the care 
pathway definition. The osteosarcoma clinical pathway is 
complex and involves collaboration of healthcare providers 
and diverse medical services including radiology, biology, 
nuclear medicine, surgical units, etc., as shown in Fig. 1, 
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. After the patient admission, a medical 
consultation takes place. According to the clinical 
examination, medical tests are performed to accomplish the 
diagnoses phase and precise the pathology Fig. 1. The 
fulfilment of this phase needs the transmission and the share 
of diverse medical documents types (e.g., reports, orders, 
images, etc.) and subtypes (e.g., imaging report, anatomic 
pathology report, etc.) between healthcare providers. 
According to the HL7-CDA standard, each clinical 
document has a predefined standard structure [18].
 
 
Figure 1. Osteosarcoma clinical pathway business process of checkup 

60
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
2) 
Osteosarcoma treatment clinical pathway: 
Based on tests’ findings within the diagnosis phase 
clinical documents, the doctor defines the treatment phase 
according to systems review by biological tests, audiogram 
hearing tests and heart tests. By Luetke [23], during the 
treatment, medical tests and clinical examination are 
performed to evaluate its effectiveness as shown in Fig. 2. 
As the previous phase of the osteosarcoma clinical pathway, 
the treatment phase needs that many healthcare providers to 
get involved in it in order to be successfully fulfilled. Shared 
and transmitted medical documents in the course of this 
phase processes may be used for many purposes as the 
public healthcare and the public research. Besides, those 
documents are generally transmitted to the cancer registry in 
order to elaborate statistics. For that, the impact of the 
findings 
in 
medical 
documents 
(e.g., 
findings 
in 
chemotherapy, surgical operations and radiotherapy) on care 
quality improvement is very important. As a consequence, 
data discovery presents a crucial step to extract useful data 
for the medical data secondary use. This allows the sensitive 
data discovery which need to be protected in compliance 
with the HIPAA regulation. 
3) 
Osteosarcoma follow up clinical pathway: 
The last phase in the osteosarcoma clinical pathway is 
the following-up phase presented in Fig. 3. According to 
Paiolil [24], the doctor follows the patient health status by 
performing some tests and medical examination to check 
periodically the treatment effectiveness. Findings in medical 
documents managed in this phase may be used also for 
secondary use. Throughout the three phases of the 
osteosarcoma clinical pathway, diverse clinical documents 
are shared, transmitted and updated within the Shared 
Medical Record (SMR) ensuring the healthcare continuity. 
Furthermore, clinical documents management enforced 
by Hospital Information Systems increases the risk of 
sensitive data disclosure or misuse. Despite the enhanced 
security 
measures 
while 
implementing 
network 
infrastructure and Hospital Information Systems, data 
hackers still find ways to penetrate networking systems and 
hack data. As a consequence, for a secondary use, the risk of 
sensitive data disclosure or misuse increases too. For that, 
we have resorted to sensitive data discovery managed 
throughout clinical pathways. This allows reinforcing its 
protection in compliance with the HIPAA regulation by 
predicting the risk rate of data disclosure that each type of 
medical document faces, then implementing computerized 
security methods in Hospital Information Systems since an 
early 
stage 
of 
their 
design 
for 
ensuring 
privacy 
enhancement. 
 
Figure 2. Osteosarcoma clinical pathway business process of treatment 

61
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Osteosarcoma clinical pathway business process of follow up 
 
IV. 
SHARED CLINICAL DOCUMENT ARCHITECTURE  
A patient’s Electronic Health Record (EHR) must 
contain all types of clinical documents including their 
medical history record, discharge summaries, typical paper 
charts, mental status examinations and other medical reports 
such as medical tests and operative reports. 
Throughout a clinical business process, the EHR is 
transferred, updated and shared between healthcare 
professionals ensuring the continuity of care. Each clinical 
document included in the EHR contains medical data as it is 
required in the concerned healthcare establishment.  
The general clinical document architecture is divided 
into documents, fragments and data. As shown in Fig. 4, 
clinical documents are composed of many fragments. They 
provide 
information 
about 
patients, 
procedures, 
practitioners, diagnosis, findings and appointments. The 
clinical shared documents’ architecture model, illustrated in 
Fig. 4, could be adapted to another health care 
establishment, according to the used medical documents’ 
structure in their boundaries. In each clinical document 
fragment, several medical data are found with specific 
properties which need the implementation of privacy by 
design approach. This is dedicated to the PHI use and 
disclosure 
within 
the 
HIS. The identification and 
demographic fragments in clinical documents include PHI. 
Its use should obey to the data protection law principles and 
privacy requirements ensuring the PHI privacy and the 
security of the medical data in use [26][27].  
Based on data discovery using the HL7-CDA standard, 
the identification of sensitive data among the shared and the 
transmitted clinical documents facilitates the application of 
the required security measures. This could be applied by the 
use of security computerized methods (e.g., encryption, 
decryption, anonymization and pseudonymization) since an 
early stage of the design of the HIS. 
 

62
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4. Clinical shared document architecture 
 
V. 
HL7 CLINICAL DOCUMENTS ARCHITECTURE 
MAPPING 
Data driven business process modelling enabled us to 
highlight shared clinical documents throughout different 
clinical workflows typically included in hospitals care 
pathways. 
Referring 
to 
the 
HL7-CDA 
standard 
documentation [18], we were able to investigate and define 
the shared clinical documents architecture as well as the 
included attributes. Thanks to the personal data protection 
principals, the PHI privacy requirements included in the 
HIPAA rules and the PHI defined within the HIPAA, we 
were able to discover sensitive data and highlight the PHI 
included in the shared clinical document.  
The use of standardized architecture of clinical 
documents could facilitate distinguishing PHI from other 
included data. Furthermore, it facilitates the implementation 
of data protection methods while insuring a simplified 
clinical documents management and processing. The 
ontological 
representation 
of 
clinical 
documents’ 
architecture allows capturing clinical information in the 
form of medical terminologies. Besides, it allows the 
classification of the clinical data into categories and the 
mapping each data category to a set of adequate data 
protection mechanisms as required by HIPAA Privacy Rule 
[3][4]. The use of ontologies helps us to deal with the nature 
of realism; it is the science or the study of being [28]. It 
allows the description of the included data in the clinical 
documents regarding to the human logic and philosophy to 
analyze the reality of things [29]. It generally provides a 
domain or a subdomain knowledge representation. A data 
model representation using ontologies generally provides a 
formal and conceptual model describing the logic of the data 
structure as well as the meaning of the data elements, which 
allow it to be understandable to both human and machine. 
Ontology-based 
models 
usually 
describe 
individuals 
(instances or objects), classes (concepts or types of objects), 
properties (attributes) and relations in a particular domain. 
Those relations describe ways in which classes and 
individuals could be related to one another [28]. 
Based on the CDA (Clinical Document Architecture) 
documentation of the HL7 standard, we mapped clinical 
documents to a set of characteristics aiming to provide a 
mean of classifying the included data in shared clinical 
documents. Each clinical document is characterized by a set 
of attributes providing information about the clinical 
document name, the category of each document (e.g., 
medical reports, medical record, etc.) and the clinical 
document architecture. This allows sensitive data discovery 
within shared clinical documents. After deep study of the 
general architecture of a clinical shared document, we could 
classify the included content into a set of metadata, data and 
values as shown in Table I and in Fig. 5. 
The clinical document architecture is divided into two 
main parts: a header and a body. The first part of the 
document provides information about the document title, the 
document type, the document version, the participants, the 
organization, etc. As for the second part, it provides 
information about the clinical document content as the 
findings, reason for study, history, procedure context, study 
act and observation. So, we could map the clinical 
documents’ data to attributes, as described in Table I. In this 

63
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
part, we are taking an imaging report as an example to 
illustrate the clinical documents architecture according to 
the HL7-CDA standard [30]. The chosen document belongs 
to the category of medical reports. Particularly, it is a part of 
the medical tests as represented in Fig. 4. Most of the data 
values are associated with some standard variables part of 
CDA. However, many other variables are user defined to 
allow adaptation of the process model to specific 
organisational contexts. Some data could have suggested 
possible values as for the case of the clinical document type 
which can take a CT Report as a value for example. The 
included data in a clinical document has a hierarchical 
structure that specifies the recommended information for 
each shared document, participant, authorization, clinical 
statements and each section required to be present in this 
document according to its type. For example, for the 
participants section in the header of the imaging report, we 
found record target representing the patient’s information, 
author, 
data 
enterer, 
information 
recipient, 
legal 
authenticator and participant as sub sections. For each sub 
section, a set of data values are required to be affected while 
the document processed and managed within the patient 
care pathway building the medical processes of the hospital 
information system. As it is illustrated in Fig. 5, the record 
target (patient) sub section affords information about the 
patient role which includes address, phone number, patient 
name, birthdate and his gender. 
Data mapping and classification based on HL7-CDA 
standard presents the first step of our sensitive data 
discovery approach. As for the second step, it is based on 
the investigation of personal data protection principals and 
the extraction of the defined PHI within the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule as described in the following section. Matching 
findings of the first step with those of the second one 
allowed the sensitive data discovery within data driven 
clinical pathways. 
 
TABLE I. CLINICAL DOCUMENT ARCHITECTURE DATA MAPPING 
Characteristics  
Attributes 
Metadata 
Data 
Values 
Clinical Document 
Name 
Name 
_ 
Value of the document name 
Imaging report 
Category 
Category to which 
belong the clinical 
document 
_ 
Value of the document category 
Reports 
Clinical Document 
Architecture 
Header 
Clinical Document 
Title, date (effective time), version 
Values are affected within the 
hospital information system 
Type 
- Diagnostic Imaging Report 
- CT Report 
- MRI Report 
- Ultrasound Report 
- Nuclear Medicine Report 
- PET Scan Report 
- Cardiac Catheterization Report 
- Echocardiography Report 
- Colonoscopy Report 
- Endoscopy Report 
- Electrophysiology Report 
- Obstetrical Ultrasound Report 
Participants 
Record target (patient), author, data 
enterer, information recipient, legal 
authenticator, participant 
Values are affected within the 
hospital information system 
In fulfillment of 
Order 
Documentation of 
Service event, physician reading study 
performer 
Authorization 
Information about the authorization 
Related document 
Parent document  
Component of 
Encompassing encounter 
Body 
Dicom 
Object 
Catalog 
Study, series, SOP Instance UID 
Values are affected within the 
hospital information system 
Findings 
Sections (include paragraphs) 
Optional sections 
Reason for study, history, impression 
Clinical statements 
Procedure context, study act, text 
observation 

64
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 5. Example of the hierarchical structure of the participants section within an imaging report  
 
VI. 
PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS FOR PHI PROTECTION 
The use of clinical healthcare data is governed by many 
jurisdictions as it may present risks threatening a person’s 
life and may affect both his/her privacy as well as his/her 
professional life. For this, clinical data usage must be set for 
data protection principles. In particular, the following eight 
principles should be respected as required in HIPAA 
regulation and the European directive:  
1- Lawfulness, fairness and transparency: personal 
data should be processed lawfully, fairly in a 
transparent way. 
2- Purpose limitation: personal data should be 
processed for specific purposes. 
3- Data minimization: personal data should be 
adequate, relevant and limited to the precise 
purposes. 
4- Accuracy: personal data should be kept up to date. 
5- Storage limitation: personal data should be kept for 
no longer than the necessary period for the purposes 
for which those data are processed. 
6- Rights: people have the right to access their data 
and give permission for other entities to use or 
disclose them. 
7- Integrity and confidentiality: personal data should 
be processed in a secure way. They should be 
protected also against any unauthorized or unlawful 
processing, accidental loss, destruction or damage. 
8- International transfers: personal data should not be 
transferred outside countries [26]. 
International law frameworks, such as European 
directive and HIPPA for personal data protection are based 
on the previous data protection principles. The present work 
is developed with regard to Protected Health Information 
within HIPAA regulation. The HIPAA Privacy Rule is 
published by the department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS) to ensure health information privacy. The privacy 
rule is applied to covered entities as health plans, healthcare 
clearinghouses and the healthcare providers. It defines a set 
of rules in order to protect sensitive health information with 
respect to its use and disclosure. Sensitive health 
information is known as Protected Health Information 
(PHI). They are individually identifiable health information 
related to the patient’s past, present and future physical or 
mental health conditions, the healthcare provision to the 
individuals and the past, present or future healthcare 
provision to individuals [2]. The individually identifiable 
health information includes demographic data and many 
common identifiers. PHI usage and disclosure are permitted 
without the patient’s informed consent for some purposes 
and situations as to the individual, the treatment, payment 
and healthcare operations, opportunity to agree or object, 
incidence to an otherwise permitted use and disclosure or 
public interest and benefit activities as well as a limited data 
set for research, public health or healthcare operations 
purposes or when it is required by law. As for the not 
permitted PHI usage and disclosures, an individual’s written 
authorization (consent) must be obtained [3].  
In addition to permitted PHI use and disclosure, 
prohibited ones are defined in Privacy Rules. For example, 
genetic information is considered as PHI and they shall not 
be used or disclosed for underwriting purposes as well as 
the psychotherapy notes. Furthermore, PHI may not be sold 
by covered entities. The PHI use and disclosure must be 
limited to the minimum necessary. However, PHI may be 
used to create a non-individually identifiable health 
information or a de-identified information [3][4]. 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule also defines a set of PHI de-
identification requirements in order to use and disclose it 
without the patient’s authorization. A covered entity may 
de-identify PHI by removing the eighteen identifiers 
specified in the following list as defined in HIPAA Privacy 
Rule: 
1. Names. 
2. Addresses with all geographic subdivisions smaller 
than a State. 
3. Dates except year (birthdate, admission and 
discharge date, date of death). 
4. Telephone numbers. 
5. Fax numbers. 
6. Email addresses. 
7. Social security numbers. 
8. Medical record numbers. 
9. Health plan beneficiary numbers. 

65
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
10. Account numbers. 
11. Certificate/license numbers. 
12. Vehicle identifiers, serial numbers and license plate 
numbers. 
13. Device identifiers and serial numbers. 
14. URLs (Web Universal Resource Locators. 
15. IP (Internet Protocol) address numbers. 
16. Biometric identifiers (finger and voice prints). 
17. Full face photographic images and any comparable 
images. 
18. Any unique identifying number characteristic or 
code [1]. 
For the above identified PHI usage and disclosure 
purposes, de-identification based on computerized methods 
is necessary to respect the PHI privacy and ensure its 
protection from any illegal use or other threatening risks. 
Furthermore, they allowed us to identify the PHI included in 
the shared clinical document with regard to a set of clinical 
document data attributes as described in Section V. Our 
sensitive data discovery is based on the defined PHI in 
HIPAA Privacy Rule. They could be defined as sensitive 
information while our clinical document architecture 
ontology 
development. 
This 
will 
facilitate 
clinical 
documents and data mapping to a recommended data 
protection techniques that ought to be HIPAA compliant. 
For that, we will first start by defining generic data 
protection techniques as required by HIPAA then we will 
highlight the applicable techniques according to the clinical 
document type and the contained sensitive data. 
VII. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this present work, we are interested in discovering 
sensitive data within the shared and transmitted medical 
document throughout clinical business processes. Therefore, 
we studied medical business processes in order to elaborate 
a data driven clinical pathway model, based on the BPMN 
language. Then, we mapped the clinical documents included 
data to a set of characteristics in order to provide a 
meaningful data classification. Based on the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule, we extracted personal data protection principals as 
well as the eighteen identifiers defined as Protected Health 
Information. The aim here is to ensure the respect of privacy 
requirements since early stages of HIS design. Then, we 
divided clinical data into categories and extracted PHI 
among them in the form of data model clinical pathway. 
After that, we defined both personal data protection 
principles and HIPAA privacy requirements for the 
specified PHI use and disclosure. Finally, all of the above 
listed objectives were validated through the modelling of 
osteosarcoma care pathway business process model chosen 
as a case study, mapping clinical data to a set of 
characteristics and discover sensitive data among them in 
order to facilitate our clinical data ontology development.  
As for the completion of the modelling phase of 
osteosarcoma clinical pathway, we have modeled its 
complex care pathway which is divided into three phases: 
check-up, treatment and follow-up. This was done using the 
actual BPMN language simple patterns. Hence, personal 
data processing is integrated in the processes, particularly, 
in a legislation compliant manner which adds more trust to 
medical documents processing and sharing during the 
clinical process implementation. The shared clinical 
document data mapping to sets of attributes has allowed 
discovering sensitive data and classifying clinical data into 
formal concepts that are clearly structured and outlined. 
Data protection principals’ definition according to the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule allowed the identification of sensitive 
clinical data or PHI included in shared clinical documents. 
This data ought to be protected using HIPAA compliant 
data protection techniques within the clinical document 
processing and management throughout clinical business 
processes and workflows. Data protection techniques will be 
defined according to the shared clinical documents’ type 
and structure within the HL7-CDA standard and the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule compliance. 
Many difficulties were encountered in clinical pathway 
modelling using BPMN due to the complexity and 
multidisciplinary aspect of medical procedures. This has led 
us to conclude the necessity of a more specialized care 
pathway modelling language. This has also highlighted the 
need for a new care pathway modelling and automation 
language that is sensitive-data driven and could integrate 
privacy requirements specification. Thus, a new extension 
of the BPMN modelling language is required. 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Clinical pathways automation is highly required in 
standardized HIS. This is traditionally ensured by business 
process modelling. In this context, we developed a data 
driven clinical pathway business process model for 
osteosarcoma, as a case study. We used BPMN as clinical 
pathway business process modelling language. A shared 
clinical data model was elaborated further to the clinical 
business process model. Based on the HL7-CDA standard, 
we were able to discover clinical data and define its 
structure. Moreover, the mapping of the obtained data to a 
set of clinical document elements was necessary to specify 
the logic of the shared clinical data formal representation. 
This 
facilitates 
sensitive 
data 
discovery 
and 
PHI 
highlighting within the shared clinical documents referring 
to PHI defined in HIPAA Privacy Rule. This allows the 
application of personal data protection techniques in a more 
fluid compliance to HIPAA. 
Since personal data management must obey to data 
protection law, we defined both personal data protection 
principles and HIPAA privacy requirements with relation to 
patients identifying medical documents, in terms of their 
both use and disclosure.  
The adoption of privacy by design approach offers a 
better enforcement of privacy since an early stage of 
computer-based healthcare systems design. This allows an 
orthogonal integration of privacy obligations throughout the 

66
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
clinical process. For this reason, we are working currently 
on sensitive data discovery within shared and transmitted 
clinical documents between healthcare providers. Mapping 
discovered data to a set of personal data protection 
requirements. Then, we identified the defined PHI within 
HIPAA Privacy Rule. This was very useful to discover 
sensitive data that need more protection than other shared 
data. This is crucial step to achieve our clinical documents’ 
ontology development and apply HIPAA compliant 
measures. BPMN process modelling language need to be 
extended with privacy annotation features and additional 
patterns to allow modelling privacy specification as part of 
clinical processes and giving them more attention since an 
early stage of the HIS design. The definition of a common 
vocabulary qualifying clinical pathways specifications will 
more enforce the respect of privacy requirements. We 
believe clinical process modelling languages should be more 
adapted to a multidisciplinary clinical systems users’ 
profile. The adoption of a variety of symbols and modelling 
patterns investigation is needed in order to better tailor to 
the requirements of the clinical community.  
Sensitive data discovery based on data driven clinical 
business process models and PHI protection requirements 
within 
HIPAA 
compliance 
facilitated 
distinguishing 
sensitive data from other medical documents included data. 
This provides a mean of classifying the included data in 
shared clinical documents. Thus, it facilitates our clinical 
data ontology development which provides a simple way to 
associate the security level and risk to each sensitive data 
category. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Essefi, H. Boussi Rahmouni, and M. F. Ladeb, “Data 
Driven Medical Process Modelling for Privacy Protection in 
Care Pathways,” The Seventh International Conference on 
Global Health Challenges (GLOBAL HEALTH 2018) 
IARIA, Nov. 2018, pp. 24-31, ISSN: 2308-4553, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-682-8. 
[2] U.S. Department of Health & Human Services HHS: HIPAA 
Privacy 
Rule 
Summary. 
[Retrieved: 
July, 
2013]. 
http://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/laws-
regulations/index.html. 
[3] HIPAA Privacy Rule: Uses and disclosures of protected 
health information: General rules (§164.502). [Retrieved: 
January, 
2013]. 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/45/164.502. 
[4] HIPAA Privacy Rule: Uses and disclosures for which an 
authorization is required (§164.508). [Retrieved: January, 
2013]. https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/45/164.508. 
[5] Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of 
the council of 27 april 2016 on the protection of natural 
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on 
the free movement of such data, and repealing directive 
95/46/ec (general data protection regulation). [Retrieved: 
March, 
2017]. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.L_.2016.119.01.0001.0
1.ENG&toc=OJ%3AL%3A2016%3A119%3ATOC. 
[6] L. Bouarfa and J. Dankelman, “Workflow mining and outlier 
detection from clinical activity logs,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol.45, pp.1185–1190, 2012, Dec. 2012. 
[7] Z. Huang, X. Lu, H. Duan, and W. Fan, “Summarizing 
clinical pathways from event logs,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol.46, pp. 111 – 127, Feb. 2013. 
[8] S. Adeyemi, E. Demir, and T. Chaussalet. “Towards an 
evidence-based 
decision 
making 
healthcare 
system 
management: Modelling patient pathways to improve clinical 
outcomes,” Decision Support Systems, vol.55, pp. 117 – 125, 
Apr. 2013. 
[9] R. Braun, M. Burwitz, H. Schlieter, and M. Benedict, 
“Clinical processes from various angles - amplifying bpmn 
for 
integrated 
hospital 
management,” 
International 
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) 
IEEE, Nov 2015, pp. 837–845. 
[10] M. Shitkova, V. Taratukhin, and J. Becker, “Towards a 
methodology and a tool for modeling clinical pathways,” The 
5th International Conference on Current and Future Trends of 
Information and Communication Technologies in Healthcare 
(ICTH 2015) Procedia Computer Science 63, Sept. 2015, pp. 
205 – 212, ISSN 1877-0509. 
[11] A. A. Funkner, A. N. Yakovlev, and S V Kovalchuk, “Data-
driven modeling of clinical pathways using electronic health 
records,” Procedia computer science, vol. 121, pp. 835-842, 
Nov. 2017. 
[12] E. Rolón, E. R. Aguilar, F. Garcia, F. Ruiz, M. Piattini, and L. 
Calahorra, “Process modeling of the health sector using 
BPMN: A case study,” The First International Conference on 
Health Informatics-Diagnostic Pathology (HEALTHINF 
2008) IARIA, Jan. 2008, pp. 173-178, ISBN: 978-989-8111-
16-6. 
[13] S. Ferrante, S. Bonacina, G. Pozzi, F. Pinciroli, and S. 
Marceglia, “A design methodology for medical processes,” 
Applied Clinical Informatics, vol. 7, pp. 191-210, 2016, 
doi:10.4338/ACI-2015-08-RA-0111. 
[14] F. Ruiz, F. Garcia, L. Calahorra, C. Llorente, L. Gonçalves, 
C. Daniel, and B. Blobel, “Business process modeling in 
healthcare,” Stud Health Technol Inform, vol. 179, pp. 75-87, 
2012. 
[15] R. Braun, H. Schlieter, M Burwitz and W. Esswein, 
“Extending a Business Process Modeling Language for 
Domain-Specific Adaptation in Healthcare,” The 12th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wirtschaftsinformatik 
in 
Osnabrück-Smart Enterprise Engineering (WI 2015), Mar. 
2015, pp. 468-481, ISSN: 0937-6429, ISBN: 978-3-00-
049184-9. 
[16] S. Bielack, D. Carrle, P. G. Casali, and ESMO Guidelines 
Working 
Group, 
“Osteosarcoma: 
ESMO 
clinical 
recommendations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up,” 
Annals of Oncology, vol. 20, pp. iv137-iv139, May. 2009, 
doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdp154. 
[17] V. Augusto and X. Xie, “A modeling and simulation 
framework for health care systems,” IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Systems, vol. 44, pp. 30–46, 
2014. 
[18] HL7 
standard. 
[Retrieved: 
2019]. 
https://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?
product_id=7. 

67
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[19] E. Rojas, J. Munoz-Gama, M. Sepúlveda, and D. Capurro, 
“Process mining in healthcare: A literature review,” Journal 
of biomedical informatics, vol. 61, 224-236, June 2016, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2016.04.007. 
[20] N. Hashemian and S. S. R. Abidi, “Modeling clinical 
workflows using business process modeling notation. In 
Computer-Based 
Medical 
Systems,” 
The 
25th 
IEEE 
International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical 
Systems (CBMS 2012), June 2012, pp. 1–4, ISNN: 1063-
7125, ISBN: 978-1-4673-2051-1. 
[21] K. D. Miller, R. L. Siegel, C. C. Lin, A. B. Mariotto, J. L 
Kramer, J. H. Rowland, K. D. Stein, R. Alteri, and A. Jemal, 
“Cancer treatment and survivorship statistic,” CA: a cancer 
journal for clinicians, vol. 62, pp. 220-241, Jun. 2016, doi: 
10.3322/caac.21149. 
[22] M. S. Isakoff., S. S. Bielack, P. Meltzer, and R. Gorlick, 
“Osteosarcoma: current treatment and a collaborative pathway 
to success,” Journal of clinical oncology, vol. 33, pp. 3029-
3035, Sep. 2015, doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.4895. 
[23] A. Luetke, P. A. Meyers, I. Lewis, and H. Juergens, 
“Osteosarcoma treatment–where do we stand? A state of the 
art review,” Cancer treatment reviews, vol. 40, pp. 523-532, 
May. 2014, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2013.11.006. 
[24] A. Paioli, M. Rocca, L. Cevolani, E. Rimondi, D. Vanel, E. 
Palmerini, M. Cesari, A. Longhi, A. M. Eraldo, E. Marchesi, 
P. Picci and S. Ferrari, “Osteosarcoma follow-up: chest X-ray 
or computed tomography?,” Clinical sarcoma research, vol. 7, 
Feb. 2017, doi: 10.1186/s13569-017-0067-5. 
[25] HIPAA 
Privacy 
Rule: 
[Online]. 
Available 
.from: 
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-
professionals/privacy/index.html, last reviewed: 2015. 
[26] M. C. Oetzel and S. Spiekermann, “A systematic 
methodology for privacy impact assessments: a design 
science approach,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 23, pp. 126–150, 
March. 2014, doi: https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.2013.18. 
[27] S. Rajamani, E. S. Chen, Y. Wang, and G. B. Melton, 
“Extending the HL7/LOINC Document Ontology Settings of 
Care,” AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, Nov. 2001, 
pp. 
994-1001, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2015.09.020. 
[28] C. Barki, S. Labidi, H. Boussi Rahmouni. “Ontology-driven 
generation of radiation protection procedures,” World 
Academy 
of 
Science, 
Engineering 
and 
Technology, 
International Journal of Environmental, Chemical, Ecological, 
Geological and Geophysical Engineering, vol. 11, pp. 256-
261, 2017. 
[29] B. 
Smith, 
“Beyond 
concepts: 
ontology 
as 
reality 
representation,” The third international conference on formal 
ontology in information systems (FOIS 2004) IOS Press, Nov. 
2004, pp. 73-84. 
[30] R. H. Dolin, L. Alschuler, S. Boyer, C. Beebe, F. M. Behlen, 
P. V. Biron, and A. Shabo, “HL7 Clinical Document 
Architecture, Release 2”, Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 13, pp. 30–39, Jan. 2006. 
 

