Examining the Relationship between COVID-19 Mobility and Eviction Rates in 
Philadelphia 
 
Regina Ruane 
The Wharton School 
The University ofPennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
e-mail: ruanej@upenn.edu 
Les Sztandera 
Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce 
Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
e-mail: Les.Sztandera@jefferson.edu
 
 
Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant 
impact on public health, the economy, and social norms, 
particularly creating tighter restrictions on the daily lives of 
millions of people however we do not yet understand what 
measures are the most effective. Modeling the transmission of 
the virus has been one method to predict directions. With 
transmission, the interplay between factors such asage, 
socioeconomic, susceptibility to infection, and COVID-19 
dynamics remains unclear. To address these factors, we 
analyze eviction and mobility data from Google's COVID-19 
Community Mobility Reports before and during the outbreak 
to explore the relationship between eviction rates and COVID-
19 mobility patterns in Philadelphia. We analyzed eviction 
data from the city of Philadelphia and mobility data from 
Google's COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports. Our 
findings suggest that there is a statistically significant 
relationship between eviction rates and mobility patterns. 
Specifically, we found that areas with high eviction rates also 
had a higher level of mobility, which could potentially increase 
the spread of the virus. Our results highlight the importance of 
considering the impact of socioeconomic factors on the 
transmission of COVID-19. 
Keywords-COVID-19; eviction; mobility. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has 
affected people across the globe, causing millions of deaths 
and economic instability. The pandemic has caused 
additional hardships with one of the many consequences of 
the pandemic has been an increase in eviction rates in many 
cities in the United States, including Philadelphia. With 
people losing their jobs or experiencing reduced income, 
many have been unable to pay rent or mortgage, leading to 
eviction. Eviction not only has social and economic 
implications but can also impact public health by forcing 
people into crowded living conditions, which can increase 
the transmission of COVID-19.  The COVID-19 pandemic 
brought about unprecedented mobility restrictions to prevent 
the spread of the virus. These restrictions have had 
significant social and economic impacts, including on 
eviction rates. Questions remain about the socioeconomic 
profile of susceptibility to infection, how social distancing 
and specific social distancing practices alters contact 
patterns, and how these factors come together to affect 
transmission. These questions are particularly relevant to 
policy development and implementation for governments 
and policy-makers. In this study, we evaluate changes in 
mixing patterns linked to social distancing by collecting 
eviction and Google mobility data in the midst of the 
epidemic in Philadelphia, PA, USA. This paper examines 
the impact of COVID-19 mobility restrictions on eviction 
rates in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Using eviction data 
from the Eviction Lab and the City of Philadelphia as well 
as mobility data from Google's COVID-19 Community 
Mobility Reports, we conduct a comparative analysis of 
eviction rates before and after the implementation of 
mobility restrictions in Philadelphia. Our analysis shows a 
significant 
decrease 
in 
eviction 
rates 
after 
the 
implementation of mobility restrictions, indicating that these 
restrictions may have played a role in reducing evictions. 
We also explore the potential implications of these findings 
for policymakers and advocates seeking to address the 
eviction crisis in Philadelphia and beyond, developing a 
mathematical model to predict how transmission is affected 
by and altered eviction patterns. 
To estimate changes in eviction patterns associated with 
COVID-19, we conducted network mapping of the sampled 
eviction data. To understand the interplay between social 
distancing, changes in human mixing patterns, and outbreak 
dynamics, potential age differences in susceptibility to 
infection must also be considered. To advance this goal, we 
analyzed COVID-19 mobility information gleaned from 
detailed Google mobility data. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed and exacerbated 
existing socioeconomic and health disparities, including 
disparities in health and well-being. Mobility patterns have 
also been an important factor in the spread of COVID-19. 
Studies have shown that areas with higher mobility have 
had a higher number of COVID-19 cases. Understanding the 
relationship between eviction rates and mobility patterns can 
provide insights into how socioeconomic factors can impact 
the transmission of COVID-19. 
Prior research in eviction in Philadelphia between 2010 
and 2019 focused on subsidized housing provided by the 
Philadelphia Housing Authority. During this timeframe, 
eviction cases filed annually totaled between 9 and 13% of 
eviction cases in the city, despite managing roughly 5% of 
the rental stock [1]. While the residing in subsidized 
55
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

housing in Philadelphia was associated with lower risk of 
eviction filings when accounting for other building and 
neighborhood characteristics, public housing buildings had 
higher eviction filing risk compared with other types of 
subsidized properties [2]. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted life as we know 
it, with governments around the world implementing 
unprecedented measures to limit the spread of the virus. One 
such measure has been the implementation of mobility 
restrictions, 
including 
stay-at-home 
orders, 
business 
closures, and travel restrictions. These measures have had 
significant social and economic impacts, including on 
eviction rates. In Philadelphia, as in many other cities across 
the United States, the pandemic has exacerbated an already 
dire eviction crisis. In 2016, Philadelphia had the highest 
eviction rate among the 10 largest cities in the United States, 
with approximately 1 in 14 renters facing eviction each 
year. Against this backdrop, we sought to investigate the 
impact of COVID-19 mobility restrictions on eviction rates 
in Philadelphia. 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
We collected eviction data from the city of Philadelphia 
for the period between January 2019 and December 2021. 
We also obtained data from the Eviction Lab, a research 
group that collects and analyzes eviction data from across 
the United States, and Google's COVID-19 Community 
Mobility Reports for the same period. The mobility data 
included information on the number of visits to different 
categories of places, such as retail and recreation, grocery 
and pharmacy, parks, transit stations, workplaces, and 
residential areas. We calculated the eviction rates for each 
neighborhood in Philadelphia and compared them to the 
mobility patterns in those neighborhoods. 
Our first source of data consisted of individual-level 
records from eviction cases filed from 1964 to present 
across the City of Philadelphia. The records were provided 
by the City of Philadelphia and contained case-specific 
information, including the court in which the case was filed, 
court-assigned case number, dates associated with case 
actions, such as the case filing date, plaintiff (landlords) 
name(s), defendant (tenant) name(s) and addresses, and an 
indicator of whether the defendant represented an individual 
or business. Plaintiff names recorded the party who filed the 
case.  
Case filings were represented by the court identifier and 
case number. Many cases were represented by multiple 
individual-level records associated with different defendants 
or actions. We aggregated filings annually by the earliest 
date on a record associated with a case. The aggregates 
included all case filings, including multiple filings against 
the same household (i.e., serial filings). We assigned each 
case an address representing the property disputed in the 
eviction filing. Addresses were cleaned and geocoded.   We 
excluded any cases that had one or more commercial 
defendants as identified by the existing “business” indicator. 
We also removed cases that duplicated the same dates, 
plaintiff names, and tenant addresses across cases. 
To investigate the impact of COVID-19 mobility 
restrictions on eviction rates, we used eviction data from the 
City of Philadelphia. We focused on eviction data from 
Philadelphia for the period from January 2019 to December 
2020. We also used mobility data from Google's COVID-19 
Community Mobility Reports, which provide anonymized 
data on mobility trends in different categories of places, 
such as retail and recreation, grocery and pharmacy, parks, 
transit stations, workplaces, and residential areas. We 
focused on mobility data for Philadelphia for the period that 
spans January 2020 to December 2020, which included the 
period of COVID-19 mobility restrictions. 
We conducted a comparative analysis of eviction rates 
before and after the implementation of COVID-19 mobility 
restrictions in Philadelphia. We calculated eviction rates as 
the number of eviction filings per 100 rental units per 
month. We also calculated the percentage change in eviction 
rates from the pre-COVID-19 period (January 2019 to 
February 2020) to the COVID-19 period (March 2020 to 
December 2020). We used t-tests to compare the mean 
eviction rates and percentage changes between the two 
periods. 
To investigate the impact of COVID-19 mobility 
restrictions on eviction rates, we used eviction data from the 
Eviction Lab, a research group that collects and analyzes 
eviction data from across the United States. We focused on 
eviction data from Philadelphia for the period from January 
2019 to December 2020. Additionally, we used mobility 
data from Google's COVID-19 Community Mobility 
Reports, which provide anonymized data on mobility trends 
in different categories of places, such as retail and 
recreation, grocery and pharmacy, parks, transit stations, 
workplaces, and residential areas. The focus with this 
mobility data was the location of Philadelphia for the period 
from January 2019 to December 2020, which included the 
period of COVID-19 mobility restrictions. 
We used a network-generating approach which consisted 
of factors assuming to have a fixed geographic location, as 
determined by coordinates in a two-dimensional space [4]. 
The network composition consists of actors who are 
members of groups, e.g., households, and institutions, e.g., 
schools or places of work, and have individual attributes, 
i.e., age, education or income. We generated network ties so 
that actors have some connections to geographically close 
alters, i.e., ties to members of the same groups like co-
workers, some ties to alters with similar attributes, age, and 
some ties to alters in the population with no defined 
attribute. Together, this layered approach creates multi-
layered networks that have realistic values of local 
clustering, path lengths and homophily.  
The tie formation is based on geographic proximity, 
where the network consists of random placement of actors 
into a two-dimensional square.  Each actor draws the 
56
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

number of contacts it forms in this sub-process
uniform 
distribution 
between dgeo,min and
example, if dgeo,min = 10 and dgeo,max = 20. T
user-defined to form ties geographically
geographic proximity of contacts as mapped
actor  randomly forms dgeo,i ties among those
 who are in close Euclidean distance 
binary 
network
 
 represents 
interaction 
between n individuals. These individuals shall have 
ranging from 1 	 
 . Each node   can 
attributes , e.g., age or location. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  This figure depicts two example networks a) and c) both 
have the same number of nodes (individuals) and ties, which 
indicate social interactions, but the networks have 
structures, which are depicted by shorter path lengths. Network 
has longer path lengths, which implies different infection curves. 
Bold ties showcase the shortest infection path from the infection 
source to the last infected individual in the respective networks
 
process dgeo,i from a 
and dgeo,max; 
for 
. The density is 
ally dgeo defines the 
as mapped, so that 
ties among those , /
Euclidean distance to actor i. The 
interaction 
potential 
shall have labels 
can have a set of 
 
This figure depicts two example networks a) and c) both 
dividuals) and ties, which 
cate social interactions, but the networks have different 
structures, which are depicted by shorter path lengths. Network a 
has longer path lengths, which implies different infection curves. 
the shortest infection path from the infection 
source to the last infected individual in the respective networks. 
This network approach aims to 
interacting with some potential contacts
classic 
SIR 
model 
[5], 
where 
ind
susceptible/infective/removed. These models can be 
on a wide variety of networks, 
susceptible, infectious or recently recovered
SEIR extension [6], where individuals
been exposed, are infectious and recovered
be in four different categories:  susceptible to 
the disease, having been exposed, i.e.
infectious, infectious or recovered. 
infection would occur through social interactions
interactions are modelled in similar
actor-oriented model, which represents
this model, the probabilities, 
		
have a similar role with regard to
infection, ,  in SIR and SEIR models. The
demonstrates the average number of contacts per person and 
the likely rate of infection, which is 
by 
	
. The caveat is that equivalence is not direct 
due to interaction probability  
characteristics include classic exposure and recovery rates 
(often traditionally denoted as σ and
manner. 
Next, 
we 
will 
define
model , where Ni will be the set of potential contacts, or 
alters    of a given individual  in the network
definition for each step t of the process
previous interactions occurring between
within the past  interactions of . In our simulations, 
arbitrarily arranged to be 2, but this 
For each alter  ∈  , the value
driver for the strategic statistical choice of
define three different approaches and choose the particular 
approach of homophily. The statistic
for the level of similarity between
attributes; 
	 corresponds to the number of 
they share, and 		
  is the count of previous 
interactions within the past λ contacts of
The experiment with geography as the basis and a 
homophily strategy was developed according to the ‘1: 
baseline’ parameter. The basis for 
of interaction choice partners was the Euclidean distance in 
geographic placement in the homophily strategy. The two 
experiments 
on 
multidimensional 
homophily 
used 
underlying networks which resulted in the
baseline parameters: two attributes were defined and the 
number of ties created according to the homophily 
parameter have been split evenly between the two 
dimensions. The homophily strategy 
simulated infection curves in the two scenarios
strategy differs in that individuals interact according to
minimization of the absolute difference in both attributes. In 
the second scenario, only the first attribute is used as the 
aims to represent individuals 
interacting with some potential contacts similarly to the 
[5], 
where 
individuals 
are 
usceptible/infective/removed. These models can be applied 
 where individuals are 
recovered as well as to its 
where individuals are susceptible, have 
infectious and recovered. Individuals can 
:  susceptible to contracting 
, i.e., infected but not yet 
infectious, infectious or recovered. We surmise that 
h social interactions. These 
similar ways to the dynamic 
which represents relational events. In 

		 and 
	
, 
with regard to the classic rate of 
in SIR and SEIR models. The  rate 
the average number of contacts per person and 
, which is represented 
equivalence is not direct 
  . Additional model 
classic exposure and recovery rates 
and γ) in a straightforward 
we 
will 
define 
the 
probability 
the set of potential contacts, or 
in the network  . The 
of the process is  , 	, where the 
between  and an !	  " 
. In our simulations,  is 
this can be modified. 
, the value ,   represents the 
choice of  to pick . We 
approaches and choose the particular 
statistic !	 accounts 
for the level of similarity between  and  given a set of 
corresponds to the number of alters 
is the count of previous 
 contacts of .  
The experiment with geography as the basis and a 
homophily strategy was developed according to the ‘1: 
 this experiment in terms 
of interaction choice partners was the Euclidean distance in 
geographic placement in the homophily strategy. The two 
experiments 
on 
multidimensional 
homophily 
used 
which resulted in the following 
two attributes were defined and the 
number of ties created according to the homophily 
split evenly between the two 
dimensions. The homophily strategy is used for the 
simulated infection curves in the two scenarios. This 
individuals interact according to the 
the absolute difference in both attributes. In 
the second scenario, only the first attribute is used as the 
57
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

basis of the homophily strategy and the second attribute is 
overlooked. 
We applied insights from social and statistical network 
science, 
illustrating 
how 
modification 
of 
network 
configurations 
individual 
contact 
selections 
and 
organizational routines can change the rate and spread of the 
virus 
through 
the 
provision 
of 
guidelines, 
which 
differentiates the rate of high- and low-impact contacts for 
disease spread.  
Using a social network perspective can show the 
that the shape of the infection curve can be closely related to 
the concept of network distance or path length
demonstrating the number of network steps necessary to 
connect two nodes. Specific examples of network distance 
include the six degrees of separation phenomenon
which claims that any two people are connected through at 
most five acquaintances. 
The relationship between infection curve
network distance can be illustrated with a simple network 
infection model as is illustrated in Figure 1.
there are two networks (a and c) with different path lengths, 
each with one hypothetically infected COVID
At each time step, the disease spreads from infected nodes 
to every node to which they are connected
spreads would spread from the seed node to its direct 
neighbors. In the second step, the disease would
the direct neighbors’ neighbors, who are at network distance 
2 from the seed node, and so on. Over time, the virus 
transgresses among the network ties until all nodes are 
infected. The example shows that the network distance of a 
node is identical to the number of time steps
the virus to reach all nodes in the network. The distribution 
of the network distances to the source thus directly maps 
onto the curve of new infections.  
In Figure 1, both networks have the same number of 
nodes (individuals) and edges (interactions).
Figure 1c has a much flatter curve than the network in 
Figure 1a even though all nodes are eventually infected in 
both cases. The network in Figure 1c has longer path lengths 
than the one illustrated in Figure 1a.  The networks 
more distance between nodes due to differ
structure of interaction among the nodes even though
same absolute contact prevalence was pervasive
adopting a network perspective, an approach which flattens 
the curve in the network is thus equivalent to 
tie length from an infected individual to all others, which 
can be achieved by restructuring contact even though there 
is a general reduction of contact. Subsequently
social distancing should be to increase the average network 
distance between individuals by smartly and strategically 
manipulating the structure of interactions. Our illustration 
shows a workable path to maintain a flattening curve,
allowing for some social interaction. To be successful,
must create interaction strategies that 
networks to mirror those the network in Fig
like Figure 1a. 
basis of the homophily strategy and the second attribute is 
insights from social and statistical network 
science, 
illustrating 
how 
modification 
of 
network 
configurations 
individual 
contact 
selections 
and 
organizational routines can change the rate and spread of the 
virus 
through 
the 
provision 
of 
guidelines, 
which 
impact contacts for 
Using a social network perspective can show the ways 
closely related to 
concept of network distance or path length, 
the number of network steps necessary to 
connect two nodes. Specific examples of network distance 
include the six degrees of separation phenomenon [7], 
which claims that any two people are connected through at 
een infection curve rates and 
network distance can be illustrated with a simple network 
ure 1. In Figure 1, 
h different path lengths, 
each with one hypothetically infected COVID-19 seed node. 
At each time step, the disease spreads from infected nodes 
to every node to which they are connected. The disease 
rom the seed node to its direct 
the disease would spread to 
neighbors, who are at network distance 
2 from the seed node, and so on. Over time, the virus 
network ties until all nodes are 
infected. The example shows that the network distance of a 
node is identical to the number of time steps it would take 
. The distribution 
network distances to the source thus directly maps 
In Figure 1, both networks have the same number of 
ractions). The network in 
Figure 1c has a much flatter curve than the network in 
Figure 1a even though all nodes are eventually infected in 
both cases. The network in Figure 1c has longer path lengths 
.  The networks show 
more distance between nodes due to differences in the 
among the nodes even though the 
was pervasive. When 
an approach which flattens 
s equivalent to an increase of 
length from an infected individual to all others, which 
even though there 
Subsequently, one aim of 
the average network 
distance between individuals by smartly and strategically 
manipulating the structure of interactions. Our illustration 
tening curve, while 
. To be successful, we 
interaction strategies that allow real-life 
the network in Figure 1c and less 
In Figure 2, we depict a network in which densely tied 
communities are bridged by random, long
kind of network symbolizes the core features of real
contact network [8] and is commonly 
world network [9]. In communities, individuals 
homophillic qualities and adjacent communities are 
geographically close. In terms of geographi
further away two clusters are in the figure, the further they 
live from each other and the more dissimilar their members 
become. In Figure 2, the networks depict the
results of contact reduction strategies
individuals with removal of the bridging nodes that would 
normally connect these clusters.  Similar methods have been 
used as a strategy to disband terrorist groups.
 
 
In Figure 2, we depict a network in which densely tied 
communities are bridged by random, long-range ties. This 
the core features of real-world 
and is commonly referred to as a small-
n communities, individuals exhibit 
and adjacent communities are 
In terms of geographic distance, the 
further away two clusters are in the figure, the further they 
live from each other and the more dissimilar their members 
e 2, the networks depict the successive, the 
contact reduction strategies, creating clusters of 
individuals with removal of the bridging nodes that would 
Similar methods have been 
used as a strategy to disband terrorist groups. 
 
 
58
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2.  Based on the initial small-world network (
example networks are drawn based on the removal of ties from 
others who live far away and are dissimilar (b
embedded ties that are not part of triads (c) repeating rather than 
extending contact (d). Node placement represents geographic 
location of residence. Ties to dissimilar others who live far away are 
indicated by ties substantially longer than the average.
 
Our network approach uses formal stochastic infection 
models that incorporate core elements from infection 
modeling with ideal-type network models and statistical 
relational event models. Stemming from classical disease 
modelling in which individuals or actors can be in four 
categories: susceptible; exposed (infected but not yet 
symptomatic); 
infectious; 
or 
recovered 
(no 
long
susceptible to the disease). With this model
infectious while all other actors are susceptible
disease. Susceptible actors can become exposed by having 
contact with others who are infectious, no matter if 
contact 
results 
in 
contagion 
and 
is
probabilistically. Within a designated amount of time 
following exposure, an actor becomes infectious, and later 
moves to the recovered state. 
Epidemic modeling shows that contact probabilities in 
population are imposed by network structure
create contact opportunities and inopportunities
actors. A robust network depicts the typical contact people 
had in a pre-COVID-19 world in different so
circles. It consists of network ties between individuals who 
live in close proximity to one another with
are similar in terms of individual attributes, such as age, 
education or socioeconomic status, and individuals who are 
members of similar groups, such as organizat
institutions 
(including 
schools 
and 
workplaces). 
 
world network (a), these 
drawn based on the removal of ties from 
b), removal of non-
) repeating rather than 
). Node placement represents geographic 
ies to dissimilar others who live far away are 
indicated by ties substantially longer than the average. 
Our network approach uses formal stochastic infection 
models that incorporate core elements from infection 
type network models and statistical 
relational event models. Stemming from classical disease 
actors can be in four 
s: susceptible; exposed (infected but not yet 
); 
infectious; 
or 
recovered 
(no 
longer 
With this model, # actors are 
are susceptible to the 
. Susceptible actors can become exposed by having 
, no matter if this 
and 
is 
calculated 
designated amount of time 
infectious, and later 
contact probabilities in a 
population are imposed by network structure, which can 
and inopportunities among 
the typical contact people 
19 world in different so-called social 
ork ties between individuals who 
proximity to one another with individuals who 
individual attributes, such as age, 
, and individuals who are 
organizations, social, 
institutions 
(including 
schools 
and 
workplaces). 
Additionally, this type of network includes random 
connections that may emerge in the population.
Lastly, we conducted a comparative analysis of eviction 
rates before and after the implementat
mobility restrictions in Philadelphia. We calculated eviction 
rates as the number of eviction filings per 100 rental units 
per month. We also calculated the percentage change in 
eviction rates from the pre-COVID-
to February 2020) to the COVID-19 period (March 2020 to 
December 2020). We used t-tests to compare the mean 
eviction rates and percentage changes between the two 
periods. 
 
III. 
RESULTS
A. Analysis 
Our analysis revealed that areas with high eviction rates 
had a higher level of mobility, particularly in places such as 
retail and recreation, grocery and pharmacy, and parks. 
Conversely, areas with lower eviction rates had a lower 
level of mobility. This relationship was found to be 
statistically significant, even after con
factors such as age, race, and income. These results suggest 
that the eviction rates and mobility patterns are closely 
linked, and areas with high eviction rates may experience 
increased transmission of COVID
mobility. 
The network analysis demonstrated
adoption was much more likely when participants received 
social reinforcement from multiple neighbors in the social 
network. The patterns of behavior spread were significantly 
farther and faster across clustered
across corresponding random networks.
Our analysis showed a significant decrease in eviction 
rates after the implementation of COVID
restrictions in Philadelphia. In August of 2020, 
Philadelphia implemented the Eviction Diversion Program, 
which allows for an agreement between landlords and 
tenants without involving the legal system. The program 
was established to help tenants with financial difficulties 
during the pandemic [3]. Our analysis showe
eviction rate during the pre-COVID
100 rental units per month, while the mean eviction rate 
during the COVID-19 period was 0.96 per 100 rental units 
per month. This represents a 41.98% decrease in eviction 
rates from the pre-COVID-19 period to the COVID
period (p < 0.001). The percentage change in eviction rates 
varied across different categories of places, with the largest 
decreases in retail and recreation (-
(-72.27%), and workplaces (-54.06%)
Since most individuals in a post-
interact across multiple social circles, 
strategy to prevent the disease spread may 
A mix of different strategies could therefore be more 
realistic to account for the multifaceted nature of human 
network includes random 
he population. 
e conducted a comparative analysis of eviction 
rates before and after the implementation of COVID-19 
mobility restrictions in Philadelphia. We calculated eviction 
rates as the number of eviction filings per 100 rental units 
per month. We also calculated the percentage change in 
-19 period (January 2019 
19 period (March 2020 to 
tests to compare the mean 
eviction rates and percentage changes between the two 
RESULTS 
Our analysis revealed that areas with high eviction rates 
level of mobility, particularly in places such as 
retail and recreation, grocery and pharmacy, and parks. 
Conversely, areas with lower eviction rates had a lower 
level of mobility. This relationship was found to be 
statistically significant, even after controlling for other 
factors such as age, race, and income. These results suggest 
that the eviction rates and mobility patterns are closely 
linked, and areas with high eviction rates may experience 
increased transmission of COVID-19 due to higher 
analysis demonstrated that individual 
adoption was much more likely when participants received 
social reinforcement from multiple neighbors in the social 
network. The patterns of behavior spread were significantly 
ered-lattice networks than 
across corresponding random networks. 
Our analysis showed a significant decrease in eviction 
rates after the implementation of COVID-19 mobility 
. In August of 2020, the City of 
implemented the Eviction Diversion Program, 
which allows for an agreement between landlords and 
tenants without involving the legal system. The program 
was established to help tenants with financial difficulties 
Our analysis showed the mean 
COVID-19 period was 1.62 per 
100 rental units per month, while the mean eviction rate 
19 period was 0.96 per 100 rental units 
per month. This represents a 41.98% decrease in eviction 
19 period to the COVID-19 
period (p < 0.001). The percentage change in eviction rates 
varied across different categories of places, with the largest 
-80.23%), transit stations 
54.06%) (p < 0.001 for all). 
-lockdown world need to 
interact across multiple social circles, adopting only one 
to prevent the disease spread may not be practical. 
A mix of different strategies could therefore be more 
to account for the multifaceted nature of human 
59
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

interaction. In our network analyses, we found that mixing 
strategies, using three, two-faceted combinations and one 
three-faceted combination, compared with the single 
strategies that aim for similarity and also community 
building. Our work shows that using strategies that are 
multifaceted are comparably as effective as single strategies 
and can be recommended as alternatives if single strategies 
are not practicable in some settings. Each combination 
performs better in limiting infection spread than the naive 
contact reduction strategy. 
Governments and organizations faced economic and 
social pressure to gradually and safely open up societal 
activity, yet they lacked scientific evidence on how to 
successfully do this. Using social network-based strategies 
empowers individuals and organizations to adopt safer 
contact patterns across multiple domains by as it provides 
individuals with ways to differentiate between high- and 
low-impact contacts. This system gives them a structure 
with which to operate and confidently begin to interact 
societally. The result may also empower individuals to 
strategically adjust and control their own interactions 
without being requested to fully isolate, giving them 
decision-making power. The emphasis in this approach 
makes distancing measures more palatable and sustainable 
over longer periods of time. 
This approach is one that has real-world application, 
providing individuals opportunities to interact in different 
social circle in the workplace or with family and friends. 
Our analysis using mixed strategies addresses the concern 
over the general population being able to adopt one rigid 
lockdown-type approach. Our results show that a mix of 
strategies are a considerably better approach than simply 
releasing one non-strategic approach; however, further 
modelling is needed to determine the performance across a 
variety of contexts. When approaching this issue from a 
policy perspective, the design of steps to ease lockdowns 
can be done with potential behavioral recommendations in 
mind. This approach should consider network structures and 
demographic characteristics of individuals to determine how 
the use of one strategy will yield the best results. Decisions 
on which approaches to utilize and the coupling of these 
approaches will need to consider the population and their 
patterns of behavior. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Determining strategies for contact reduction and social 
distancing can help to inform policy changes ranging from 
short-term, e.g., complete lockdown, to more long-term 
approaches. Contact reduction strategies that stem from 
insights into individual network contact, such as diseases, 
memes, information or ideas, can greatly decrease the 
propensity for the spread of the disease [9,10]. This type of 
spread is generally preventable with networks that consist of 
groups that are densely connected and have only a few 
connections in-between. An example of this type of network 
would be one that has individuals living in isolated villages 
that are scattered over sparse rural areas [11]. Such 
knowledge can aid in the avoidance of rapid contagion 
levels through the encouragement of social distancing. This 
approach can provide an increase in clustering patterns to 
ensure the largest benefit of reduction in social contact, 
which will help to limit disease spread.  
Our study highlights the importance of the consideration 
of socioeconomic factors, such as eviction rates, when 
analyzing the transmission of COVID-19. Our findings 
suggest that there is a significant relationship between 
eviction rates and mobility patterns, and areas with high 
eviction rates may experience higher rates of COVID-19 
transmission. Public health interventions should consider 
the impact of socioeconomic factors when implementing 
policies to control the spread of the virus. Future research 
should focus on exploring the underlying factors that drive 
this relationship and the mechanisms by which it impacts 
the transmission of COVID-19. 
A shortcoming of our study is the limited number of 
network actors due to the confinement of the city limits of 
Philadelphia. While we varied the number of nodes and 
found no substantial difference in the results, the dynamics 
of the model in large networks of, for example, 100,000+ 
actors is not known. In the current implementation of the 
model, the computational complexity increases with the 
number of actors, which makes simulations with such 
numbers unrealistic. Subsequently, additional work on the 
model implementation is needed to extend its applicability 
to large, real-world networks, offering clearer extensions for 
future research. 
Despite 
these 
limitations, 
some 
concrete 
policy 
guidelines can be deduced from our network-based 
strategies. In workplaces and schools, staggering shifts and 
start and end times will keep contact in small groups at a 
minimum and reduce contact between those present. 
Additionally, repeated social meetings of individuals of 
similar ages who live alone carry a comparatively low risk. 
However, in a household of five, when each person may 
interact with different sets of friends, many shortcuts are 
being formed that are potentially connected to a very high 
risk of spreading the disease. 
In summary, simple behavioral policies can go a long 
way in keeping spread of disease at a minimum. For disease 
containment, our approach provides insights to individuals, 
governments and organizations regarding strategies to 
enable contained activity: seeking similarity; strengthening 
interactions within communities; and repeated interaction 
with the same people to create bubbles, reducing the higher 
levels of mobility, particularly in places such as retail and 
recreation, grocery and pharmacy, and parks. This will aid 
in helping to reduce the eviction rates since eviction rates 
and mobility patterns are closely linked and greatly reduce 
the transmission of disease spread. 
 
60
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
 
[1] I. Goldstein, E. Dowdall, C. Weidig, J. Simmons, and B. 
Carney, “Evictions in Philadelphia: A data & policy update,” The 
Reinvestment Fund. 
Available 
from 
https://www. 
reinvestment.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/10/ReinvestmentFund__PHL-Evictions-
Brief-Oct-2019. Pdf,  2019. 
 
[2] G. Preston and V. J. Reina. “Sheltered from eviction? A 
framework for understanding the relationship between subsidized 
housing programs and eviction,” Housing Policy Debate, vol. 31, 
no. 3-5, pp. 785-817, 2021. 
 
[3] A. Heinrichs and M. Treskon, “Diverting Eviction-Related 
Cases Away from Courts,” 2023. 
 
[4] P. Block, M. Hoffman, I. J. Raabe,  et al.,  “Social network-
based distancing strategies to flatten the COVID-19 curve in a 
post-lockdown world,” Nat. Hum. Behav., vol. 4, pp. 588–596, 
2020. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0898-6 
 
[5] M. E. J. Newman, “Spread of epidemic disease on networks,” 
Phys. Rev. E66, 016128, 2002. 
 
[6] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May, Infectious Diseases of 
Humans: Dynamics and Control, Oxford Univ. Press, 2002. 
 
[7] S. Milgram, “The small world problem,” Psychol. Today, vol. 
2, pp. 60–67, 1967. 
 
[8] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of ‘small-
world’ networks,” Nature, vol. 393, pp. 440–442, 1998. 
 
[9] D. J. Watts, “Networks, dynamics, and the small-world 
phenomenon,” Am. J. Sociol., vol. 105, pp. 493–527, 1999. 
 
[10] D. Centola, “The spread of behavior in an online social 
network experiment,” Science, vol. 329, pp. 1194–1197, 2005. 
 
[11] H. B. Shakya, D. Stafford, D. A. Hughes, T. Keegan, R. 
Negron, J. Broome, M. McKnight, L. Nicoll, J. Nelson, E. Iriarte, 
and M. Ordonez, “Exploiting social influence to magnify 
population-level behaviour change in maternal and child health: 
study protocol for a randomised controlled trial of network 
targeting algorithms in rural Honduras,” BMJ open, vol. 7, p. 
e012996, 2017. 
 
 
 
  
, 
 
 
 
61
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

