Modelling Employee Resilience Using Wearables and Apps: A Conceptual Framework and 
Research Design 
Herman de Vries, 1,2,3,7, Wim Kamphuis2,8, Hilbrand Oldenhuis1,9, Cees van der Schans3,4,5,10  
& Robbert Sanderman3,6,11 
1 Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Professorship Personalised Digital Health, Groningen, The Netherlands 
2 TNO, Department of Human Behaviour & Organisational Innovation, Soesterberg, The Netherlands 
3 Department of Health Psychology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands  
4 Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands 
5 Hanze University of Applied Sciences, research group Healthy Ageing Allied Health Care and Nursing, Groningen, 
The Netherlands  
6 Deptartment of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
E-mail: 7 h.j.de.vries@pl.hanze.nl; 8 wim.kamphuis@tno.nl; 9 h.k.e.oldenhuis@pl.hanze.nl;  
10 c.p.van.der.schans@pl.hanze.nl; 11 r.sanderman@umcg.nl 
 
Abstract – Occupational stress can cause health problems, 
productivity loss or absenteeism. Resilience interventions that 
help employees positively adapt to adversity can help prevent the 
negative consequences of occupational stress. Due to advances in 
sensor technology and smartphone applications, relatively 
unobtrusive self-monitoring of resilience-related outcomes is 
possible. With models that can recognize intra-individual 
changes in these outcomes and relate them to causal factors 
within the employee’s context, an automated resilience 
intervention that gives personalized, just-in-time feedback can 
be developed. This paper presents the conceptual framework 
and methods behind the WearMe project, which aims to develop 
such models. A cyclical conceptual framework based on existing 
theories of stress and resilience is presented as the basis for the 
WearMe project. The operationalization of the concepts and the 
daily measurement cycle are described, including the use of 
wearable sensor technology (e.g., sleep tracking and heart rate 
variability 
measurements) 
and 
Ecological 
Momentary 
Assessment (mobile app). Analyses target the development of 
within-subject (n=1) and between-subjects models and include 
repeated measures correlation, multilevel modelling, time series 
analysis and Bayesian network statistics. Future work will focus 
on further developing these models and eventually explore the 
effectiveness of the envisioned personalized resilience system.  
Keywords – Occupational Stress; Personalized eHealth; 
Sensors; Wearables; Virtual Coaching. 
I.  
INTRODUCTION 
The Wearables and app-based resilience Modelling in 
employees (WearMe) project focuses on the mental resilience 
of employees with a stressful occupation [1]. Occupational 
stress can cause health problems, such as musculoskeletal 
disease, cardiovascular disease, depression and burnout [2].  
Consequently, it can also lead to financial burdens due to 
treatment costs, productivity loss and absenteeism [3]. The 
cumulative wear and tear on bodily systems caused by stress 
is particularly detrimental for health and well-being [4]; this 
so-called ‘allostatic load’ increases the brain’s sensitivity to 
appraise stimuli as threats and reduces resources to cope, 
which can result in a loss spiral [5].  
Resilience can be defined as the process of positively 
adapting to adverse events [6]. It entails the use of individual 
(e.g., personality) and contextual (e.g., social support) 
resources to cope with adversity [7]. By utilizing these 
resources, resilient individuals are able to recover from the 
negative impact of stress relatively quickly and thus decrease 
their risk of negative long-term consequences.  
Companies and institutions may offer resilience 
interventions to their employees to promote their health and 
employability and prevent stress-related problems. These 
interventions often target a broad population which 
unfortunately disregards the variability between employees. 
More personalized approaches might monitor for early signs 
of stress-related outcomes, link these to causal factors in the 
employee’s own context, and provide personalized advice to 
sustain 
relevant 
resources 
that 
may 
prevent 
the 
aforementioned loss spiral. Due to advances in sensor 
technology 
and 
smartphone 
applications, 
relatively 
unobtrusive self-monitoring of changes in resilience related 
outcomes is increasingly possible [8]. While these advances 
open up the possibility of personalized monitoring in 
resilience interventions, models are needed to recognize intra-
individual changes in these outcomes and relate these to 
causal factors and future consequences; this would allow for 
the opportunity to create automated resilience interventions 
that give personalized, just-in-time feedback, for employees 
to utilize in workplace applications.  
In this paper, we present the conceptual framework and 
the study protocol of the ongoing WearMe project. After 
introducing the rationale behind the WearMe project in 
Section I, Section II describes a cyclical conceptual 
framework that is based on existing theories on stress and 
resilience. This framework represents the concepts and 
interrelations between concepts that we predict are necessary 
to model employee resilience. In Section III, we elaborate on 
how these concepts are operationalized in the WearMe 
Project, including the use of consumer-available wearables 
and an Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) app. 
Afterwards, we describe in Section IV the methods of the first 
WearMe study. Finally, Section V discusses possible 
directions for future work that can help develop predictive 
employee resilience models and personalized interventions.  
110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II.  
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
The conceptual framework of the WearMe project is 
presented in Figure 1. It illustrates our hypotheses on how the 
accumulation of the negative consequences of stress has a 
cyclical nature and how it can contribute to a loss spiral. This 
framework is based on the Transactional Model of Stress and 
Coping [9], the Job Demands-Resources Model of Burnout 
[10], the Effort-Recovery Model [11] and the Conservation of 
Resources Theory [5].  
Stress accumulates when (job) demands, such as time 
pressure or physical workload, are appraised as threats due to 
inefficient available resources to adaptively cope with them 
[9]. Afterwards, an individual’s need for recovery, 
characterized by feelings of exhaustion and reduced vigor to 
undertake new activities, depends on the individual’s ability 
to utilize the available resources to adaptively cope with the 
demands [9][10]. A high need for recovery (i.e., little vigor to 
undertake activities), has a negative impact on an individual’s 
resources to appraise and cope with new demands – unless 
there is sufficient recovery to alleviate this effect [11]. Aside 
from causing a perceived need for recovery, stress can also 
decrease sleep quality [12] and psychological detachment 
[13], which are aspects of recovery [14]. 
This framework’s cyclical nature is supported by the 
Conservation of Resources theory [5], which states that initial 
loss of resources increases one’s vulnerability to stress. Since 
additional resources are necessary to battle stress, this may 
lead to a depletion of resources or a loss spiral.  
III.  OPERATIONALIZATION 
Based on the conceptual framework described above, we 
developed a measurement cycle to operationalize concepts 
using consumer-available wearables and an EMA smartphone 
application. All concepts are measured daily except adaptive 
coping—due to its highly context-specific nature which 
makes it difficult to quantify. In this section, we will first 
briefly present our daily measurement cycle. Following this, 
we will describe each concept and its operationalization. 
The presented conceptual framework is not bounded by a 
specific timeframe. However, since the WearMe study 
particularly aims to investigate day-to-day and multi-day 
trends, we operationalized the concepts in a daily 
measurement cycle (Figure 2). For the daily measures, the 
WearMe study protocol utilizes: (1) a wrist-worn tracker for 
unobtrusive, continuous measurements throughout the day 
and night, (2) a Bluetooth chest strap and a smartphone 
application for a physiological measurement taken upon 
awakening and (3) a smartphone application for EMA 
questionnaires taken upon awakening and before bedtime. 
A. Demands 
Demands refer to the physical, social or organizational 
aspects that require sustained physical or mental effort and are 
therefore associated with certain physiological costs [15]. 
Participants’ perceived daily demands are scored with the 
evening EMA questionnaire and is based on the self-
composed diary question “How demanding was your day?”; 
Figure 2. Measurement cycle of the WearMe study. 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework for the WearMe study. 
111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

this is scored on an 11-point Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) that 
ranges from 0 (“Not at all”) to 10 (“Extremely”).  
B. Stress 
Participants’ perceived total daily stress is scored in the 
evening EMA questionnaire with a validated single-item 
scale [16]: “How much stress did you perceive today?”. The 
question was rephrased to be applicable for daily use and the 
NRS that ranged from 1 (“No stress”) to 6 (“Extreme stress”) 
was adjusted to range from 0-10 for consistency.  
C. Need for recovery 
Need for recovery can be defined as a conscious emotional 
state and is connected with a temporal reluctance to continue 
with the present demands or to accept new demands; it is 
related to the depletion of resources following effort to meet 
certain demands [17]. The concept is characterized by a 
combination of perceiving high fatigue, as well as low vigor 
to undertake new activities. Participants’ perceived fatigue is 
questioned in both the morning and evening EMA 
questionnaires to allow the calculation of within-day changes, 
while mental exhaustion is only measured during the evening. 
For fatigue, a validated single-item scale (“How fatigued do 
you currently feel?”) is used [18]. Item 3 of the Need For 
Recovery Scale is used to inquire mental exhaustion [19]: “I 
felt mentally exhausted as a result of my activities”. All items 
are scored on an 11-point NRS ranging from 0 (“Not at all” 
for fatigue and “Strongly disagree” for exhaustion) to 10 
(“Extremely” for fatigue and “Strongly agree” for 
exhaustion).  
D. Resources 
According to the Job Demands-Resources model, job 
resources refer to physical, psychological, social or 
organizational aspects of a job that: (1) are functional in 
achieving work goals, (2) reduce job demands and the 
associated physiological and psychological costs and (3) 
stimulate personal growth, learning and development [10]. 
The resources in our conceptual framework can be seen as 
personal resources that enable an individual to better deal with 
stress. These resources include vigor, fitness, general self-
efficacy (GSE), happiness, work engagement, and heart rate 
variability (HRV). Items for vigor, fitness, general self-
efficacy (GSE) and happiness are included in both the 
morning and evening EMA questionnaires, and are all scored 
on an 11-point NRS ranging from 0 (“Not at all”) to 10 
(“Extremely”). Below, the measured resources are described 
in more detail. 
Vigor can be characterized by high levels of energy and 
mental resilience, the willingness to invest effort in one’s 
work and persistence even in the face of difficulties [20]. 
Having high perceived vigor can therefore be seen as an 
individual resource during the appraisal of and coping with 
high demands. The item for vigor (measured in the morning 
and the evening) is based on an item of the vigor subscale of 
the Utrecht Work Engagement Scale (UWES) and rephrased 
for daily use in a neutral setting (“Do you feel like 
undertaking activities?”) [21]. Additionally, one item from 
the dedication subscale of the UWES is only included in the 
evening EMA questionnaire (“Today, my activities were full 
of meaning and purpose.”) [21].  
Fitness is also an individual resource for the appraisal of 
and coping with high demands; it is scored with a self-
composed item that is similarly phrased to the fatigue item: 
“How fit do you currently feel?”. The item on fitness is 
included due to its more physical characteristics in 
comparison to the other items.  
GSE is the belief in one’s competence to tackle novel 
tasks and cope with adversity in a broad range of stressful or 
challenging encounters [22]. High GSE is associated with 
high optimism, self-regulation and self-esteem, and low 
depression and anxiety [22]; it can therefore be seen as an 
individual resource that is addressed during the appraisal of a 
stressor. The EMA item for GSE is based on the item with the 
highest factor loading (item 6) of the Generalized Self-
Efficacy Scale and is rephrased for daily use: “Do you feel 
capable of solving problems today?”. During the evening, 
“today” is replaced with “tomorrow”. 
Happiness is a state of well-being and contentment, 
characterized by frequent positive affect, high life satisfaction 
and infrequent negative affect [23]. Happiness has an inverse 
correlation with stress [24] and contributes to the 
psychological capital (resources) that may be key in better 
understanding the variation in perceived symptoms of stress 
[25]. Positive emotions like happiness can also predict 
increases in (trait) resilience and life satisfaction [26]. 
Participants’ perceived happiness is scored using a validated 
single-item scale (“Do you feel happy?”) [27].  
HRV refers to the variation in the inter-beat-intervals 
between heartbeats and is considered a proxy for autonomous 
nervous system functioning [28]. While HRV mostly serves 
as a parameter that illustrates physiological changes during 
acute stress, the resting HRV can remain decreased during 
and after acute stress [15][16]. In addition, having a lower 
resting HRV has been associated with increased sensitivity 
for stress [31], decreased emotion-regulation [32], decreased 
physical performance [33] and an increased risk of long-term 
physical or mental health problems [34]. In the WearMe 
study, resting HRV is therefore considered to be a potential 
indicator for the accumulation of stress, as well as an 
individual resource used in the appraisal of and coping with 
upcoming demands. Participants measure their resting HRV 
in the morning after waking up and before getting out of bed 
for 2 minutes in a supine position using the Elite HRV 
smartphone application [35] and a Polar H7 chest strap [36]. 
This aligns with existing standards that suggest a duration of 
1-5 minutes under consistent circumstances with as little 
influence of circadian rhythms, meals, smoking, posture 
changes and significant mental or physical exertion [36][37]. 
We chose not to apply guided breathing, as respiratory rate 
influences HRV [38][39], and we intend to measure the 
natural resting state of the participant. The exported inter-
beat-interval data are analysed using Kubios Premium 
software, version 3.1.0 [41]. Our analyses will focus on a 
time-domain outcome called Root Mean Square of the 
Successive Differences (RMSSD).  
 
112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

E. Recovery 
Recovery refers to the recuperation from potential load 
effects after the exposure to certain demands [11]. The 
concept of recovery consists of two components that are 
known to limit the spillover of a perceived need for recovery 
from the previous day to the next day: (1) sleep and (2) being 
able to psychologically detach from work during leisure time 
[42]. Since stress is known to have a negative effect on sleep 
quality [12] and psychological detachment [13], deteriorated 
sleep and psychological detachment are also considered to be 
potential indicators for the accumulation of the negative 
consequences of stress. Sleep deprivation contributes to the 
accumulation of allostatic load [42][43], but also attenuates 
the relationship between negative affect experienced at work 
and negative affect in the next morning [45]. Sleep is 
therefore an important component in the recovery from 
(work-related) stress and helps limit the potential loss of 
resources.  
Detachment is measured with an item from the 
psychological detachment subscale of the Recovery 
Experience Questionnaire that had the highest average 
correlation to the other three included subscale questions [14]: 
“During my off-job time, I distanced myself from my work”. 
Additionally, the perceived availability of time to recover 
throughout the day is measured based on an item used in a 
prior study [17]: “Today I had enough time to relax and 
recover from work”. Both items are included in the evening 
EMA questionnaire and scored on an 11-point NRS ranging 
from 0 (“Strongly disagree”) to 10 (“Strongly agree”).  
The Fitbit Charge 2 wrist-worn tracker is used to 
objectively measure the total sleep time and sleep efficiency. 
Additionally, the subjective sleep quality is measured in the 
morning EMA questionnaire with a validated single-item 
[47]: “How was the quality of your sleep?” and is scored on 
an 11-point NRS ranging from 0 (“Worst possible sleep”) to 
10 (“Best possible sleep”).  
F. Other 
In order to account for potentially confounding effects and 
explain relevant variance, two other variables are included in 
the daily measures: (1) alcohol intake and (2) physical 
activity. Alcohol intake is associated with a lower resting 
HRV [48], but is sometimes also used as a strategy to cope 
with increased stress [49]. Alcohol intake is therefore 
measured during the morning EMA questionnaire by asking 
for the number of alcoholic beverages that the participant 
consumed during the previous day. While the absolute 
amount of alcohol in different types of beverages may 
deviate, asking for the number of alcoholic beverages 
consumed is both convenient for daily inquiry and consistent 
with the widely used AUDIT-C questionnaire [50]. Finally, 
physical activity (steps, sedentary minutes, minutes of 
moderate-to-vigorous 
physical 
activity) 
is 
measured 
throughout the day using the Fitbit Charge 2 [51]. Physical 
activity levels are associated with decreased stress reactivity 
[52], a higher resting HRV [53] and improved sleep [54]; 
therefore, physical is a potential confounder.  
IV.  PRESENT STUDY 
The first WearMe study aims to test the usability of the 
described measurement protocol, as well as to gather a first 
wave of data to be able to test the hypothesized relations in 
the conceptual model. Additionally, the development of both 
intra-individual and population models will be explored. The 
study protocol was approved by the ethical committee of the 
Hanze 
University 
of 
Applied 
Sciences 
Groningen 
(heac.2018.008).  
A. Population 
For the first WearMe study, students who are starting their 
first full-time internship for Social Work and Applied 
Psychology are invited to participate. We anticipate this 
population to be at risk of experiencing stress due to the 
potentially stressful nature of these disciplines and the fact 
that these are the first full-time internships in the participants’ 
curriculum. The students need to own an Android or iOS 
smartphone in order to participate. For recruitment, a message 
is placed on the school’s digital learning environment and the 
students who are scheduled for their first internships receive 
an e-mail. Participation in the study is voluntary. In order to 
facilitate recruitment and optimize adherence during 
participation, participants who collect at least 80% valid data 
points are rewarded with a €25 gift voucher. Additionally, 
participants who collect enough data to create intra-individual 
models receive individual feedback. Since this first WearMe 
study is exploring a new topic, it was impossible to perform 
an accurate power calculation based on the considered data-
analysis methods (paragraph IV.C). Due to the availability of 
materials, a maximum of 15 participants can be 
simultaneously recruited. Therefore, the recruitment and data-
collection processes are divided over two waves. The first 
recruitment wave started in September 2018, whereas the 
second waive started in September 2019.  
B. Data collection 
The total data collection period is 15 weeks, targeting a 
maximum of 105 full days of data per participant. The 
operationalization of the conceptual model and items 
included in the EMA questionnaires are described in Section 
III. The participants use a Polar H7 Bluetooth chest strap in 
combination with the Elite HRV smartphone application to 
measure their resting HRV upon awakening and used a Fitbit 
Charge 2 wrist-worn tracker to continuously measure their 
physical activity and sleep. In order to collect the subjective 
EMA questionnaire data, TNO’s self-developed “How am 
I?” smartphone application is used. Participants are instructed 
to fill in their morning EMA questionnaire (7 items) after 
measuring their resting HRV and fill in their evening EMA 
questionnaire (12 items) before going to bed. The morning 
questionnaire is available between 06:00 and 15:00 and the 
evening questionnaire is available between 21:00 and 06:00 
in order to offer participants a broad window to fill in the 
questionnaires (e.g., when potentially staying up late or 
sleeping in during weekends). Additionally, participants 
receive smartphone notifications as reminders at 06:00 for the 
morning questionnaires and at 21:00 for the evening 
questionnaires. Where available, validated Dutch versions of 
113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the questionnaires described in Section III are used. Items 
based on questionnaires that were only available in English 
were translated into Dutch. For validation of these items, 
backwards translation by a native English speaker was 
performed. No differences that significantly changed the 
meaning of the items were found during this process.  
The daily measurements described in Section II consisted 
of concepts that can vary on a day-to-day basis. However, 
some of the concepts of the conceptual framework included 
aspects that are more trait-like (e.g., personality traits as 
potential resources or preferred coping strategies) or could be 
expected to vary over a longer timeframe (e.g., burnout, 
depression). Therefore, several full questionnaires are 
administered to benefit the development of population models 
using between-subject 
analyses: 
a 
questionnaire 
on 
personality traits (the Big Five Inventory; BFI) [55], coping 
strategies (the COPE-Easy) [56], burnout (the Oldenburg 
Burnout Inventory; OLBI) [57], work engagement (the 
Utrecht Work Engagement Scale; UWES) [20] and symptoms 
of somatization, distress, depression and anxiety (the Four-
Dimensional Symptom Questionnaire; 4DSQ) [58]. The 
questionnaires on burnout, work engagement and symptoms 
of somatization, distress, depression and anxiety are also 
administered after 5, 10 and 15 weeks. Finally, after 15 
weeks, participants fill out a resources questionnaire to 
retrospectively 
assess 
the 
perceived 
personal 
and 
environmental resources throughout the internships, since 
participants are not able to accurately assess the 
environmental resources prior to or at the beginning of their 
internship. This resources questionnaire was inspired by 
resources questionnaires that were developed for other 
domain-specific work environments [58][59] and adjusted to 
better align with the participants’ internship contexts. 
Additionally, the distributed questionnaires consisted of items 
that were derived from existing validated questionnaires such 
as the Life Orientation Test [61], the Connor Davidson 
Resilience Scale [62] and the Dispositional Resilience Scale 
[63]. Figure 3 illustrates the timeline for the measurements in 
the first WearMe study.  
C. Data analysis 
Several approaches to data-analysis will be explored. 
First, the hypotheses formulated in the conceptual framework 
that were introduced in Section II will be tested using within-
day relations and, if possible, on multi-day trends. The 
repeated measures correlation technique as described by 
Bakdash and Marusich [64] will be used to analyze the 
correlation between two variables while taking into account 
that data points are repeated measures within participants. 
Random intercept, fixed slopes multilevel modelling will be 
applied when two or more variables within a specific concept 
or potential confounders are included to predict the variance 
within a single dependent variable. Both methods allow the 
scores between participants to differ (random intercepts), but 
explore a fixed effect between the two variables (fixed 
slopes). We anticipate that there will be insufficient data 
available to explore whether the effect between the included 
variables differ between participants (random slopes).  
Second, we will explore the development of intra-
individual (n=1) models for within-day and, if possible, multi-
day trends using the data of the participants with the highest 
adherence. Aside from the aforementioned techniques, the use 
of time series analysis techniques and Bayesian statistics will 
be considered for the multi-day trend analyses.  
Finally, the data of the full questionnaires will be used to 
explore (1) if trends in relevant daily outcomes like sleep, 
resting HRV and the presence of resources and need for 
recovery can be predicted based on personality traits or 
preferred coping strategies measured at baseline, (2) if these 
trends are also predictive for changes in burnout, work 
engagement and symptoms questionnaires and (3) if there is 
an association between the daily measured state-related 
variables (e.g., individual resources and perceived stress) and 
the trait-variables measured at baseline (the personality traits 
and preferred coping strategies).  
V.  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article presented the conceptual framework for the 
WearMe project and a detailed description of the 
operationalization of these concepts in the first (ongoing) 
WearMe study. Data collected with a wrist-worn wearable 
tracker, a Bluetooth chest-strap and a smartphone EMA 
questionnaire app on a daily will be used to explore if the 
hypotheses that are presented in the conceptual framework are 
indeed supported.  
When the results affirm that tracking sleep and resting 
HRV with the use of consumer wearables is feasible and can 
be useful in resilience modelling, the current models will be 
expanded. Future studies will therefore focus on the 
Figure 3. The WearMe study timeline. 
114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

development of predictive models that allow early detection 
of stress-related symptoms. In addition, expanding the current 
model by using additional consumer-available wearables or 
apps that can unobtrusively collect potentially relevant data 
(e.g., GPS location, calendar events) may be explored. When 
our conceptual framework is validated, a more inductive 
approach to data-analysis may also be explored (e.g., using 
machine learning) to increase the explained variance of the 
individual models. If successful, these models can be 
implemented in applications that create personalized 
feedback on how to cope with demands or limit the loss of 
relevant resources, which may help employees optimize their 
resilience.  
Furthermore, it is likely that the development of within-
subject models requires a long period of data collection. This 
means that in the envisioned automated resilience system, an 
individual will have to collect data for a relatively long period 
before receiving personalized feedback. The creation of a 
classification algorithm and the identification of subgroups 
with similar outcome trajectories using between-subject 
analyses of baseline and first-week data in a larger sample 
might allow for the development of a system that combines 
both methods [65]. In such a system, participants could 
receive semi-personalized feedback early on based on their 
subgroup classification and receive fully personalized 
feedback when enough within-subject data are available. 
Such a method would be a compromise between deductive 
methods that test assumptions based on existing knowledge 
and inductive methods that allow specific intra-individual 
predictors to be included in even more personalized feedback.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank Dr. Heather Young (TNO) for 
performing the backwards translations of the EMA items and 
Tamar Schaap (TNO) for proofreading the article.  
REFERENCES 
  
[1] 
H. de Vries, W. Kamphuis, H. Oldenhuis, C. van der Schans, 
and R. Sanderman, ‘Wearable and App-based Resilience 
Modelling in Employees (WearMe)’, presented at the The 
Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine (eTELEMED), Athens, 2019. 
[2] 
T. W. Colligan and E. M. Higgins, ‘Workplace stress: Etiology 
and consequences’, J. Workplace Behav. Health, vol. 21, no. 
2, pp. 89–97, 2006. 
[3] 
S. Béjean and H. Sultan-Taïeb, ‘Modeling the economic 
burden of diseases imputable to stress at work’, Eur. J. Health 
Econ., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 16–23, 2005. 
[4] 
B. S. McEwen, ‘Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and 
allostatic load’, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 840, no. 1, pp. 33–
44, 1998. 
[5] 
S. E. Hobfoll, ‘The Influence of Culture, Community, and the 
Nested-Self in the Stress Process: Advancing Conservation of 
Resources Theory’, Appl. Psychol., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 337–
421, 2001. 
[6] 
T. D. Cosco, A. Kaushal, R. Hardy, M. Richards, D. Kuh, and 
M. Stafford, ‘Operationalising resilience in longitudinal 
studies: a systematic review of methodological approaches.’, 
J. Epidemiol. Community Health, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 98–104, 
Jan. 2017. 
[7] 
T. W. Britt, W. Shen, R. R. Sinclair, M. R. Grossman, and D. 
M. Klieger, ‘How Much Do We Really Know About 
Employee Resilience?’, Ind. Organ. Psychol., vol. 9, no. 02, 
pp. 378–404, 2016. 
[8] 
R. L. Drury, ‘Wearable biosensor systems and resilience: a 
perfect storm in health care?’, Front. Psychol., vol. 5, p. 853, 
2014. 
[9] 
R. S. Lazarus and S. Folkman, ‘Transactional theory and 
research on emotions and coping’, Eur. J. Personal., vol. 1, no. 
3, pp. 141–169, 1987. 
[10] A. B. Bakker and E. Demerouti, ‘The Job Demands-Resources 
model: state of the art’, J. Manag. Psychol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 
309–328, 2007. 
[11] M. Van Veldhoven, ‘Need for recovery after work: An 
overview of construct, measurement and research’, in 
Occupational health psychology: European perspectives on 
research, education and practice, vol. 3,  de J. Houdmont and 
S. Leka, Eds. Nottingham, 2008, pp. 1–25. 
[12] E.-J. Kim and J. E. Dimsdale, ‘The effect of psychosocial 
stress on sleep: a review of polysomnographic evidence.’, 
Behav. Sleep. Med., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 256–278, 2007. 
[13] S. Sonnentag, I. Kuttler, and C. Fritz, ‘Job stressors, emotional 
exhaustion, and need for recovery: A multi-source study on the 
benefits of psychological detachment’, J. Vocat. Behav., vol. 
76, no. 3, pp. 355–365, 2010. 
[14] S. Sonnentag and C. Fritz, ‘The Recovery Experience 
Questionnaire: development and validation of a measure for 
assessing recuperation and unwinding from work.’, J. Occup. 
Health Psychol., vol. 12, no. 3, p. 204, 2007. 
[15] E. Demerouti, F. Nachreiner, A. B. Baker, and W. B. 
Schaufeli, ‘The Job Demand-Resources Model of Burnout’, J. 
Appl. Psychol., vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 499–512, 2001. 
[16] A. J. Littman, E. White, J. A. Satia, D. J. Bowen, and A. R. 
Kristal, ‘Reliability and validity of 2 single-item measures of 
psychosocial stress’, Epidemiology, pp. 398–403, 2006. 
[17] S. Sonnentag and F. R. H. Zijlstra, ‘Job characteristics and off-
job activities as predictors of need for recovery, well-being, 
and fatigue.’, J. Appl. Psychol., vol. 91, no. 2, p. 330, 2006. 
[18] M. L. M. Van Hooff, S. A. E. Geurts, M. A. J. Kompier, and 
T. W. Taris, ‘“How fatigued do you currently feel?” 
Convergent and discriminant validity of a single-item fatigue 
measure’, J. Occup. Health, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 224–234, 2007. 
[19] M. Van Veldhoven and S. Broersen, ‘Measurement quality and 
validity of the “need for recovery scale”’, Occup. Environ. 
Med., vol. 60, no. suppl 1, pp. i3–i9, 2003. 
[20] W. B. Schaufeli, A. B. Bakker, and M. Salanova, ‘The 
measurement of work engagement with a short questionnaire: 
A cross-national study’, Educ. Psychol. Meas., vol. 66, no. 4, 
pp. 701–716, 2006. 
[21] W. B. Schaufeli, M. Salanova, V. González-Romá, and A. B. 
Bakker, ‘The measurement of engagement and burnout: A two 
sample confirmatory factor analytic approach’, J. Happiness 
Stud., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 71–92, 2002. 
[22] A. Luszczynska, B. Gutiérrez-Doña, and R. Schwarzer, 
‘General self-efficacy in various domains of human 
functioning: Evidence from five countries’, Int. J. Psychol., 
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 80–89, 2005. 
[23] S. Lyubomirsky, K. M. Sheldon, and D. Schkade, ‘Pursuing 
happiness: the architecture of sustainable change.’, Rev. Gen. 
Psychol., vol. 9, no. 2, p. 111, 2005. 
[24] H. H. Schiffrin and S. K. Nelson, ‘Stressed and happy? 
Investigating the relationship between happiness and 
perceived stress’, J. Happiness Stud., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 33–39, 
2010. 
[25] J. B. Avey, F. Luthans, and S. M. Jensen, ‘Psychological 
115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

capital: A positive resource for combating employee stress and 
turnover’, Hum. Resour. Manage., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 677–693, 
2009. 
[26] M. A. Cohn, B. L. Fredrickson, S. L. Brown, J. A. Mikels, and 
A. M. Conway, ‘Happiness unpacked: positive emotions 
increase life satisfaction by building resilience.’, Emotion, vol. 
9, no. 3, p. 361, 2009. 
[27] A. M. Abdel-Khalek, ‘Measuring happiness with a single-item 
scale’, Soc. Behav. Personal. Int. J., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 139–
150, 2006. 
[28] J. F. Thayer, F. Ahs, M. Fredrikson, J. J. Sollers III, and T. D. 
Wager, ‘A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and 
neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate variability as 
a marker of stress and health.’, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 
36, no. 2, pp. 747–756, Feb. 2012. 
[29] M. Hall et al., ‘Acute stress affects heart rate variability during 
sleep.’, Psychosom. Med., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 56–62, Feb. 2004. 
[30] E. Hynynen, N. Konttinen, U. Kinnunen, H. Kyrolainen, and 
H. Rusko, ‘The incidence of stress symptoms and heart rate 
variability during sleep and orthostatic test.’, Eur. J. Appl. 
Physiol., vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 733–741, May 2011. 
[31] G. Park, J. J. Van Bavel, M. W. Vasey, and J. F. Thayer, 
‘Cardiac vagal tone predicts inhibited attention to fearful 
faces.’, Emot. Wash. DC, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1292–1302, Dec. 
2012. 
[32] D. P. Williams, C. Cash, C. Rankin, A. Bernardi, J. Koenig, 
and J. F. Thayer, ‘Resting heart rate variability predicts self-
reported difficulties in emotion regulation: a focus on different 
facets of emotion regulation.’, Front. Psychol., vol. 6, p. 261, 
2015. 
[33] S. Jimenez Morgan and J. A. Molina Mora, ‘Effect of Heart 
Rate Variability Biofeedback on Sport Performance, a 
Systematic Review.’, Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback, vol. 
42, no. 3, pp. 235–245, Sep. 2017. 
[34] D. Liao, M. Carnethon, G. W. Evans, W. E. Cascio, and G. 
Heiss, ‘Lower heart rate variability is associated with the 
development of coronary heart disease in individuals with 
diabetes: the atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) 
study’, Diabetes, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 3524–3531, 2002. 
[35] A. S. Perrotta, A. T. Jeklin, B. A. Hives, L. E. Meanwell, and 
D. E. R. Warburton, ‘Validity of the Elite HRV Smartphone 
Application for Examining Heart Rate Variability in a Field-
Based Setting’, J. Strength Cond. Res., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 
2296–2302, 2017. 
[36] D. J. Plews, B. Scott, M. Altini, M. Wood, A. E. Kilding, and 
P. B. Laursen, ‘Comparison of heart-rate-variability recording 
with smartphone photoplethysmography, Polar H7 chest strap, 
and electrocardiography’, Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform., vol. 
12, no. 10, pp. 1324–1328, 2017. 
[37] D. S. Quintana, G. A. Alvares, and J. A. J. Heathers, 
‘Guidelines for Reporting Articles on Psychiatry and Heart 
rate variability (GRAPH): recommendations to advance 
research communication’, Transl. Psychiatry, vol. 6, p. e803, 
May 2016. 
[38] M. Malik et al., ‘Heart rate variability: Standards of 
measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use’, 
Eur. Heart J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 354–381, 1996. 
[39] J. W. Denver, S. F. Reed, and S. W. Porges, ‘Methodological 
issues in the quantification of respiratory sinus arrhythmia’, 
Biol. Psychol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 286–294, 2007. 
[40] D. S. Quintana and J. A. J. Heathers, ‘Considerations in the 
assessment of heart rate variability in biobehavioral research’, 
Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 5. p. 805, 2014. 
[41] M. P. Tarvainen, J.-P. Niskanen, J. A. Lipponen, P. O. Ranta-
Aho, and P. A. Karjalainen, ‘Kubios HRV--heart rate 
variability analysis software.’, Comput. Methods Programs 
Biomed., vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 210–220, 2014. 
[42] S. Sonnentag and C. Binnewies, ‘Daily affect spillover from 
work to home: Detachment from work and sleep as 
moderators’, J. Vocat. Behav., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 198–208, 
2013. 
[43] B. S. McEwen and I. N. Karatsoreos, ‘Sleep deprivation and 
circadian disruption: stress, allostasis, and allostatic load’, 
Sleep Med. Clin., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2015. 
[44] B. S. McEwen, ‘Sleep deprivation as a neurobiologic and 
physiologic 
stressor: 
allostasis 
and 
allostatic 
load’, 
Metabolism, vol. 55, pp. S20–S23, 2006. 
[45] S. Sonnentag and C. Binnewies, ‘Daily affect spillover from 
work to home: Detachment from work and sleep as 
moderators’, J. Vocat. Behav., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 198–208, 
2013. 
[46] M. de Zambotti, A. Goldstone, S. Claudatos, I. M. Colrain, and 
F. C. Baker, ‘A validation study of Fitbit Charge 2TM compared 
with polysomnography in adults’, Chronobiol. Int., vol. 35, no. 
4, pp. 465–476, 2018. 
[47] J. C. Cappelleri, A. G. Bushmakin, A. M. McDermott, A. B. 
Sadosky, C. D. Petrie, and S. Martin, ‘Psychometric properties 
of a single-item scale to assess sleep quality among individuals 
with fibromyalgia’, Health Qual. Life Outcomes, vol. 7, no. 1, 
p. 54, 2009. 
[48] D. S. Quintana, A. J. Guastella, I. S. McGregor, I. B. Hickie, 
and A. H. Kemp, ‘Moderate alcohol intake is related to 
increased heart rate variability in young adults: Implications 
for health and well-being’, Psychophysiology, vol. 50, no. 12, 
pp. 1202–1208, 2013. 
[49] M. L. Cooper, M. Russell, and W. H. George, ‘Coping, 
expectancies, and alcohol abuse: A test of social learning 
formulations.’, J. Abnorm. Psychol., vol. 97, no. 2, p. 218, 
1988. 
[50] K. Bush, D. R. Kivlahan, M. B. McDonell, S. D. Fihn, and K. 
A. Bradley, ‘The AUDIT alcohol consumption questions 
(AUDIT-C): an effective brief screening test for problem 
drinking’, Arch. Intern. Med., vol. 158, no. 16, pp. 1789–1795, 
1998. 
[51] I. A. Figueroa, N. D. Lucio, J. L. Gamez Jr, V. E. Salazar, and 
M. D. Funk, ‘Validity of Daily Physical Activity 
Measurements of Fitbit Charge 2’, in International Journal of 
Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings, 2018, vol. 2, no. 
10, p. 27. 
[52] K. R. Fox, ‘The influence of physical activity on mental well-
being’, Public Health Nutr., vol. 2, no. 3a, pp. 411–418, 1999. 
[53] K. L. Rennie, H. Hemingway, M. Kumari, E. Brunner, M. 
Malik, and M. Marmot, ‘Effects of moderate and vigorous 
physical activity on heart rate variability in a British study of 
civil servants’, Am. J. Epidemiol., vol. 158, no. 2, pp. 135–143, 
2003. 
[54] D. L. Sherrill, K. Kotchou, and S. F. Quan, ‘Association of 
physical activity and human sleep disorders’, Arch. Intern. 
Med., vol. 158, no. 17, pp. 1894–1898, 1998. 
[55] J. J. A. Denissen, R. Geenen, M. A. G. Van Aken, S. D. 
Gosling, and J. Potter, ‘Development and validation of a Dutch 
translation of the Big Five Inventory (BFI)’, J. Pers. Assess., 
vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 152–157, 2008. 
[56] W. C. Kleijn, G. L. Van Heck, and A. Van Waning, 
‘Ervaringen met een Nederlandse bewerking van de COPE 
copingvragenlijst: De COPE-Easy’, Gedrag Gezondh., vol. 28, 
pp. 213–226, 2000. 
[57] J. R. B. Halbesleben and E. Demerouti, ‘The construct validity 
of an alternative measure of burnout: Investigating the English 
translation of the Oldenburg Burnout Inventory’, Work Stress, 
116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 208–220, 2005. 
[58] B. Terluin et al., ‘The Four-Dimensional Symptom 
Questionnaire 
(4DSQ): 
a 
validation 
study 
of 
a 
multidimensional self-report questionnaire to assess distress, 
depression, anxiety and somatization’, Bmc Psychiatry, vol. 6, 
no. 1, p. 34, 2006. 
[59] R. (TNO) Delahaij, O. (TNO) Binsch, and W. (TNO) 
Kamphuis, ‘Weerbaarheidsmonitor voor de politie’, TNO, 
Soesterberg, M10280, 2012. 
[60] R. (TNO) Delahaij, W. (TNO) Kamphuis, O. (TNO) Binsch, 
and W. (TNO) Venrooij, ‘Ontwikkeling Militaire Resilience 
Monitor’, TNO, Soesterberg, R11652, 2015. 
[61] M. F. Scheier, C. S. Carver, and M. W. Bridges, 
‘Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait anxiety, 
self-mastery, and self-esteem): a reevaluation of the Life 
Orientation Test.’, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., vol. 67, no. 6, p. 
1063, 1994. 
[62] K. M. Connor and J. R. Davidson, ‘Development of a new 
resilience scale: The Connor-Davidson resilience scale (CD-
RISC)’, Depress. Anxiety, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 76–82, 2003. 
[63] P. T. Bartone, R. J. Ursano, K. M. Wright, and L. H. Ingraham, 
‘The impact of a military air disaster on the health of assistance 
workers’, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis., vol. 177, no. 6, pp. 317–328, 
1989. 
[64] J. Z. Bakdash and L. R. Marusich, ‘Repeated Measures 
Correlation’, Front. Psychol., vol. 8, pp. 456–456, Apr. 2017. 
[65] G. Spanakis, G. Weiss, B. Boh, L. Lemmens, and A. Roefs, 
‘Machine learning techniques in eating behavior e-coaching: 
Balancing between generalization and personalization’, Pers. 
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 645–659, 2017. 
 
117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

