75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Sports Medical App to Support the Health and Fitness of Workers  
 
Hilco Prins, Wasim Alsaqaf, Marike Hettinga 
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
h.prins@windesheim.nl, wha.alsaqaf@windesheim.nl, 
m.hettinga@windesheim.nl 
Sietske van Berkel, Jaap Stomphorst 
Department of Sports Medicine 
Isala 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
s.v.berkel@isala.nl, j.stomphorst@isala.nl
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the development and first 
version of an eHealth system for sports physicians who support 
employees in improving their health and fitness. Regular 
physical activity improves quality of life and has various health 
benefits. Companies have an interest in the health and fitness 
of their employees. For employers it is important to encourage 
this in a safe way. To this end, the sports physicians of Isala 
Hospital in Zwolle, The Netherlands, offer sports medical 
examination and guidance programs to companies. The sports 
physicians wanted to use smartphone technology to improve 
and expand their services. It was important for them to have 
all the client data stored confidentially in one database under 
their own supervision, e.g., to perform scientific analyses. Since 
not all details of the end product were clear at the start of the 
project, an incremental and iterative development method was 
used. In this way, a prototype online and mobile data tracking 
system is developed that makes it possible (among others) to: 
give employees access to their sports medical examinations 
results with personalized standard values; insert goals that are 
advised by the sport physicians; use a heart rate sensor and a 
smartphone application (app) for training data entry by the 
employees themselves; import data from other sports apps; 
compute individual ‘s heart rate zones and energy use of a 
training based on sports medical test results. A focus group 
session with sports physicians have been performed to evaluate 
the 
prototype 
and 
to 
discuss 
extensions. 
Important 
enhancements include periodical entry of health data and 
comparing sports activities with the Dutch Standard for 
Healthy Exercise and the Fit Standard. We present the 
approach we have chosen and the functionalities of the first 
prototype of the system, which typically make it an application 
that supports sports medical services. 
Keywords - sports medicine; employees; exercise; evidence 
based; application. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes the foundation, development and 
first version of an eHealth system for sports physicians who 
support employees of companies in improving their health 
and fitness [1]. 
Sports Medicine is the medical specialty that focuses on 
promoting, safeguarding and restoring the health of people 
who (want to) sport or exercise. It also aims to promote and 
restore the health of people with chronic conditions through 
sports or exercise. For both facets, the balance between 
specific physical load and capacity are explicitly taken into 
account [2]. 
Regular physical activity improves quality of life and has 
various health benefits [3][4]. However, about one third of 
the adult Dutch population does not meet the Dutch Standard 
for Healthy Exercise for their age group [5][6], which 
prescribes 30 minutes of moderate activity at least 5 days per 
week (for 18 – 55 years olds) [7]. This evidence-based 
standard focuses on maintaining health in the long term. 
Further, only a quarter of the Dutch population aged 19 years 
and older meets the Fit Standard [6], which prescribes 20 
minutes of vigorous activity at least 3 days per week [7]. 
This standard focuses on maintaining physical fitness in 
terms of endurance, strength and coordination. 
Companies have an interest in the health and fitness of 
employees as this may have an effect on sickness 
absenteeism and productivity. This is especially relevant 
nowadays because of the ageing of the working population. 
Besides, the increase of screen work contributes to non-
compliance with the guidelines for sufficient exercise. 
Employers may want to actively maintain or even improve 
their employees’ health and fitness. A company could 
present itself as a good employer to offer its employees 
counseling by sports physicians as part of occupational 
health care and fringe benefits. Moreover, sporting together 
can improve interaction between employees of different 
departments resulting in better cooperation and increased 
innovation. However, for employers it is important to 
encourage this in a safe and responsible way. 
The sports medicine department of Isala in Zwolle, The 
Netherlands, performs sports medical examinations and 
guidance for groups of employees of external companies 
with the aim of encouraging movement and improving the 
health of the workers. Participants are periodically examined 
and supervised regarding their training and health during a 
year. With the aid of the physician, each participant 
determines his own goal. To this end, employers can choose 
specific sporting events in which their employees can 
participate at the end of the year, such as a half marathon or 
bike ride. Participants receive an individual report with 
advice and the companies receive a general management 
report. 
Until recently, only data of the sports medical 
examinations were locally stored in individual files per 
participant. This 
had 
several 
major drawbacks: 
a) 
participants could not see their own data, b) training 

76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
activities of participants were not included, c) health 
parameters of the participants could not be followed during 
the training period, d) it was not clear whether the individual 
goals were met, and e) it was not possible to analyze data at 
group level and set up management reports. 
The method of data storage of medical examinations and 
the way of guiding participants needed renewal. The sports 
physicians wanted to use smartphone technology to improve 
and expand their services. They wanted more insight in the 
progress of health and fitness status of the participants, and 
to provide the participants themselves with meaningful and 
motivational information. It was important for them to have 
all the data stored confidentially in one database under their 
own supervision. To that end, we looked for an online data 
tracking system that should provide:  
 
1. Own, central, confidential, secure and adequate data 
storage; 
2. User-friendly and reliable data entry by the sports 
medicine staff; 
3. Appropriate authorizations for different types of 
users; 
4. Insertion of goals and training schedules by 
participant, trainer or sports physician; 
5. Use of sensors and apps for data entry by 
participants themselves; 
6. Low-threshold use by the (sometimes, at the start) 
inactive and sedentary participants; 
7. Possibility to import data collected with other sports 
apps by the (sometimes) more athletic participants.  
8. Participants meaningful insight in:  
a. 
their own sports medical examination 
results, compared to their age and sex 
adjusted standard values; 
b. their training sessions; 
c. 
progress in training and health parameters 
compared to: 
i. Dutch 
Standard 
for 
Healthy 
Exercise for their age group; 
ii. their personalized goals; 
iii. results of their (company) peers.  
9. Automatic feedback to individual participants to 
stimulate or warn; 
10. Contact between participants and sports physician or 
trainer; 
11. Automated standard analyzes and (management) 
reports; 
12. Basis for scientific sports medical research. 
 
The sport physicians searched by asking colleagues and 
on the internet for systems that met these requirements. A 
system that fully supported the sports physicians’ guidance 
model was not found. 
Therefore, the sports physicians contacted the research 
group ICT-innovations in Health Care of Windesheim 
University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands. 
Together they started a project. The primary objective was to 
build a system that met all the requirements of the sports 
physicians and made use of new technology in the field of 
monitoring and communication of sports and health 
parameters, such as web services, database servers, sensors, 
apps and smartphone technology. The secondary objective 
was to provide an appropriate model for monitoring of 
ambulatory patients by other medical specialties of the 
hospital. Furthermore, we wanted to encourage knowledge 
exchange between the hospital and the university of applied 
sciences and to stimulate the development and use of 
technology for the benefit of health and healthcare. Finally, 
we wanted to make IT students acquainted with, and train 
them for a position in the field of medical informatics. The 
project was named Hightech4SportsMedicine. 
In Section II, we will present the approach that we have 
chosen in order to develop the system. In Section III, we 
show the results of the State of the Art study and the 
functionality of the first prototype of the system. In Section 
IV, we give an overview of the results of the focus group 
session with sports physicians. In Section V, we discuss the 
work that has to be done in the future.  
II. 
APPROACH 
In this section, the approach is presented that have been 
chosen in order to develop the system. 
A. State of the Art 
We performed a brief literature review on systems that 
were available for, or can be related to sports physicians and 
athletes to share their training progress, training experiences 
and health parameters to support medical guidance. The 
findings provided input for the system to build.   
B. Integration with education 
We deploy IT students to develop the system. In this 
way, we give the students the opportunity to develop skills in 
the field of medical informatics. The school of Information 
Technology and the research group ICT-Innovations in 
Health Care have expressed the intention to give students the 
opportunity to participate in the project in the context of the 
minor App Development. Different groups of students will 
be provided this opportunity during four consecutive 
semesters. The school will provide additional and 
customized education and guidance, and contribute to the 
continuity of the project. Three IT students have developed a 
first basic version of the central database for a data-tracking 
system. Two times three other students have consecutively 
developed the system so far and worked on an app with 
sensors for the employees. 
C. Agile / Scrum 
Many things in this project were and are still unclear. 
Research to investigate the needs, desires and possibilities 
form a major part of this project. Therefore, an ease of 
communication and social integration with the stakeholders 
and end users are heavily desirable. Besides, working 
iteratively and incrementally makes it possible to quickly 
obtain the advantage of new insights because the planning 
and the priorities can be easily adjusted once new 
information becomes available. Also, good control and 
coordination mechanisms are important for delivering usable 

77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
increments. Scrum [8] provided us with the needed 
instruments to clarify the needs and manage the project. It 
also provides defined meetings and activities and gives 
structure and clarity for the team and stakeholders. 
The role of the students regarding the important elements 
of Scrum is: 
1) Product backlog 
The product backlog is basically a prioritized list of 
features that the customer wants, described using the 
customer’s terminology. The IT students together with the 
product owner (a sports physician) are responsible for setting 
up the product backlog document and managing it. 
2) Sprint planning 
A scrum sprint is a confined to a regular, repeatable work 
cycle. Sprint planning is a critical meeting. The functionality 
to be delivered in the sprint is planned at this meeting. The 
IT students plan this meeting and invite the product owner to 
attend the meeting. They discuss the product backlog and 
decide which functionality is to be delivered in the next 
sprint, taking the following factors into consideration: 
• 
The sprint length; 
• 
The available capacity and resources; 
• 
The priority and importance of the functionality; 
• 
The scope of the functionality; 
• 
The time estimate for the functionality. 
The meeting results in a sprint backlog document. The IT 
students ensure that all the privies are provided with a copy 
of the sprint backlog document. 
3) Sprint 
The sprint is the heart of Scrum. Within the sprint the 
needed functionality is implemented, tested, integrated and 
accepted. To make the feedback cycles short and effective 
enough, the sprint is limited to two weeks. The IT students 
start the sprint with making an appropriate design. The 
design should fit the overall architecture of the software. The 
IT students distribute the functionality to be implemented 
among them. Regardless who is implementing the 
functionality, all the IT students are responsible for the 
performed work. Working in this way should enhance the 
team spirit and ensure the distribution of knowledge. The 
sprint is closed with a sprint review. In the sprint review the 
IT students demonstrate the work done within the sprint and 
get the performed work accepted by the stakeholders. The 
functionality that has not been accepted by the stakeholders 
or finished by the IT students will be put back in the product 
backlog. For a delivered functionality to be accepted, it 
should satisfy a set of rules that has been defined by the IT 
students and the product owner. This set of rules is called a 
Definition of Done. After the sprint review, the IT students 
plan the next sprint planning meeting to start the scrum cycle 
again. 
D. Focus group  
After a presentation of the prototype, we conducted a 
focus group meeting with six sports physicians (in training) 
and one physician assistant to identify what enhancements 
are important to them.  
III. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we show the results of the State of the 
Art study and the functionality of the first prototype of the 
system. 
A. State of the Art 
There are information systems that support sports 
physicians in recording patient data and are thus in fact 
electronic patient records (EPRs). However, these EPRs do 
not usually give patients access to their data. Besides, there 
are no specific EPRs for sports medicine. Additionally, there 
are apps that support the physician or athlete in the diagnosis 
and treatment of a specific sports injury. Examples are the 
“Medical iRehab AnkleSprain” [9] and the “Medical iRehab 
Tennis Elbow" [10]. Furthermore, there are countless apps 
for athletes focusing on the monitoring of training and health 
parameters, whether or not equipped with training schedules 
and advice. We found, however, no systems specifically 
aimed at sports medical examination, advice and guidance 
where the main objective is to assist employees or other 
participants in safe sports practice and promoting health and 
fitness. Moreover, the systems found showed no alignment 
of data collection by the athletes and the information needs 
of the sports physicians, no fitting with the care processes of 
the physicians and no provision of an own, secure and 
insightful database for management reports and scientific 
analysis. Mosa et al. [11] searched MEDLINE to identify 
articles that discussed the design, development, evaluation, 
or use of smartphone-based software for healthcare 
professionals, medical or nursing students, or patients. There 
were no articles about applications for sports medical 
physicians or their clients. 
Researchers of the University of Florida concluded in a 
recent review that very few of popular free apps for physical 
activity were evidence-based and met the guidelines from the 
American College of Sports Medicine [12]. This makes it 
difficult, especially for beginners, to follow a safe and 
physiologically sound progression in their exercise regimen. 
Another review also demonstrated a shortage of 
evidence-based physical activity apps [13]. The authors 
underscore the need for development of evidence-informed 
mobile apps and highlight the opportunity to develop 
evidence-informed mobile apps that can be used clinically to 
enhance health outcomes. They further state that: “social 
integration features (e.g., sharing and connecting with 
others) as well as technological features (e.g., pairing with 
peripheral health devices) may offer the greatest potential to 
enhance health outcomes among clients prescribed healthy 
physical activity behaviors”. 
Kranz et al. [14] did a comparative review of smartphone 
apps for health and fitness. The authors learned that there 
was a great potential for improvement in usability, 
instruction quality and fostering long-term motivation. 
Feedback adds to long-term motivation by giving insight in 
singular exercises and in the history of training to see that 
regular training ‘pays off’. 
Powel et al. [15] state that the mHealth app industry is 
still in its infancy, but that its future looks bright. “However, 

78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the potential of apps will only be realized if patients and 
clinicians trust apps, if apps are known to be effective, and if 
apps can communicate securely and meaningfully with EHRs 
and personal health records…” 
Rabin et al. [16] recruited 15 sedentary adults to test 
three currently available physical activity smartphone apps. 
Users appeared to have specific preferences, including 
automatic tracking of physical activity, track progress toward 
physical activity goals, apps being flexible enough to be used 
with several types of physical activity, user friendly 
interfaces (e.g., a one-click main page) and goal-setting and 
problem-solving features. 
Middelweerd et al. [17] explored Dutch students’ 
preferences regarding a physical activity application for 
smartphones. Participants preferred apps that coach and 
motivate them, which provide tailored feedback toward 
personally set goals and that allow competition with friends. 
In another study, Middelweerd et al. [18] rated apps based on 
an established taxonomy of 23 behavior change techniques 
used in interventions. The study demonstrated that apps 
promoting physical activity applied on average 5 out of the 
23 possible behavior change techniques. Techniques such as 
self-monitoring, providing feedback on performance, and 
goal-setting were used most frequently. The authors 
conclude that apps can substantially be improved regarding 
the number of applied techniques. 
Bert et al. [19] underline the crucial role of physicians in 
the management of patients, and therefore, the smartphones 
should play only a complementary role in the health 
management of individual patients. 
From this extensive review can be learned that (among 
other things) it is important to provide insight into health 
status and degree of movement whereby personified standard 
values, recommendations and feedback are based on 
evidence as applied by sports physicians. 
B. The Architecture 
In order to be able to build a first version of the system 
and to be able to expand the functionality, the following 
architecture is used. This includes: 
1) Central database 
A centralized database where monitoring data and health 
measurements will be saved. No personal data will be saved 
that can be directly or indirectly linked to physical persons. 
The database will also give the possibility for retrieving data 
for management reports as well as scientific analysis. 
2) Web Services 
For achieving data quality and data security, secure web 
services are built. They are a set of functionalities, which is 
used for data entry and data retrieval. It forms the only entry 
point to the central database. 
3) User applications 
In this context, the term user applications refers to the 
applications that could be used by the end users for data 
entry and data retrieval, and for communication between 
participants and sports physicians. A web site is built for this 
goal and a native (iOS) mobile application is being 
implemented. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. App icon Isala Sportmonitor 
 
4) Sensors 
The system makes use of the GPS system of the iPhone 
in order to determine location, route, distance and speed. A 
chest strap based heart rate sensor with Bluetooth Low 
Energy (LE) connectivity is used [20]. Bluetooth LE is a 
feature of the latest Bluetooth specification, Bluetooth 4.0. 
C. Data quality 
Data quality is achieved by working with value limits for 
data entry, automatic alerts when capturing improbable 
values and automatic calculation of values from other values, 
e.g., BMI from length and weight, and body fat percentage 
from multiple skinfold measurements. 
 
D. Sports Medicine App with Sensor 
A first, but not yet complete version of the app has been 
developed for the iPhone. This version allows participants 
to see their sports medical test results like peak expiratory 

79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
flow, cholesterol level, fat percentage, orthopedic tests, 
maximum heart rate, electrocardiogram, etc. Further, 
trainings data like type of sports, duration, distance, speed, 
route, heart rate zones and energy consumption have been 
implemented. 
This paragraph demonstrates the app developed so far. 
The app for the end users is self-evident in Dutch. Figure 1 
shows the icon designed in the house style of Isala hospital. 
When the app is opened for the first time, the app is 
requesting permission to send messages. The app needs this 
permission to send reminder messages during a workout. 
Further, the user must agree with the terms of use before the 
app can be used. The app can work completely offline 
unless the app is used for the first time. In that case, or if 
obtained a new password, it is necessary to log in with an 
internet connection. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Contact information of the department of Sports Medicine after 
logging in, with email address, telephone number and link to website. 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of sports medical test results; first page. “Conclusie” = 
conclusion; “Metingen” = measures; “Geslacht” = gender; “Leeftijd”  = age; 
“Gewicht” = weight; “Lengte” = Length; BMI = Body Mass Index; grey 
circle: neutral value; orange circle: low health risk. 
 
 
To use the app, it is necessary to log in with a username 
and password. If the user is logged in, all data in the app can 
be viewed. To prevent that someone else can view the data, 
each time when viewing confidential information the user 
will have to enter the password again. In this manner, the 
further anonymous data cannot be linked to the owner of the 
phone, e.g., in case of theft or loss of the phone. 
Figure 2 shows the first page after logging in. The first 
page presents the contact information of the department of 
sports medicine of the Isala hospital. 
When 
pressing 
"Onderzoeksmetingen", 
a 
list 
is 
presented of all sports medical examinations that have been 
conducted for the user with their dates. When subsequently 
a sports medical examination is touched, the results of all 
the tests of that sports medical examination come into view 

80
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(Figure 3). At the top is the conclusion of the sports 
physician, followed by all the test values. By means of 
scrolling, the rest of the values can be seen (Figure 4). 
After each measurement with value, a colored circle is 
shown, which may indicate what the result of this 
measurement means in comparison to an evidence-based 
(and sometimes age and sex adjusted) standard that is used 
by the sports physicians. When there is no standard 
available or not relevant for a measurement, the circle is 
grey. 
When there is a standard available, a green circle means 
a ‘normal’, healthy value; an orange circle means low health 
risk and a red circle means high health risk. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of sports medical test results; second page. 
“Vetpercentage” = fat percentage based on skinfold measures; red circle: 
high health risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Insight in one’s own health data compared to standard values. 
“Bloeddruk Syst. 1e meting” = systolic blood pressure in rest, first 
measurement. Here the participant has a somewhat elevated systolic blood 
pressure. The text in the grey area says (in Dutch): “The orange icon 
indicates that you fall within the limits of the mildly abnormal standard 
values. Value between the: 130.0 and 140.0.” 
 
To see what standard values apply to a particular test 
result, the test result can be unfold, see Figure 5. All circles 
subsequently appear below the measurement. Pressing a 
circle will show the (age and sex adjusted) standard values 
that are associated with that color. In this manner a user can 
compare his own value with healthy, ‘normal’ values. 
 
The app offers the user the possibility to set a rest pulse 
and maximum pulse by himself if he believes that recent 
measurements more accurately reflect the current physical 
condition than the ones that were done earlier by the sports 
physician (Figure 6). If, later, a new medical sports 
examination will take place, the new measurements then 
contains the most recent and accurate values. If a new 
measurement recorded by sport physicians is detected, a 
popup will appear that asks the user if he wants to use the 
latest measurement by the sports physician. By clicking the 
‘OK’ button, the user’s custom measurements will be 
overwritten by the measurements from the sports physician. 
Accurate rest and maximum pulse are important since 
they are used to compute energy use of (mountain) biking 
and heart rate zones (all sports). 
 

81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6. More accurate or recent values for heart rate at rest (“Hartslag bij 
rust”) and maximum heart rate (“Maximale hartslag”) filled in by the 
participant to replace earlier measures by the sport physician. 
 
To calculate the energy usage for (mountain) biking there 
are four values necessary. These values are: 
• 
rest pulse; 
• 
max pulse; 
• 
average heart rate astrand; 
• 
power astrand. 
The average heart rate astrand and power astrand are 
inferred from the submaximal cycle test as part of the sports 
medical examination. 
 
The app has the functionality to set a goal. When the user 
decides to set a goal he needs to fill in at least the end date, 
sport and distance (Figure 7). When the goal has all the 
required values, it will be saved locally first. If the user has 
an internet connection it will also be pushed to the online 
database. Every time the users load the goal view, it will 
check for unsynced data in the local database. If any exists, it 
will try to sync this data. If the user decides to switch off his 
goal, he will be faced with a popup where the user can state 
that he achieved his goal. Behind the scenes, the system 
automatically checks whether in a training session the goal is 
met. 
 
A comprehensive summary of a training can be retrieved. 
Under "Details", various details about a training are shown 
(Figure 8), such as the start date, start time, stop time, 
duration, kind of sport, energy use, distance, average speed, 
maximum heart rate and average heart rate. There is also a 
field with the note specified after the training by the user. 
Under "Route", the route of the training will be displayed 
on a map (Figure 9). To check the start or end point, the red 
dots in the map have to be pressed. A small window will 
open in the sphere and shall indicate whether it is a start or 
end point. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Activated goal and progress evaluation. The bar under 
"Voortgang" shows the extent to which a goal is reached. “Einddatum” = 
end data; “Sport” = sport; “Hardlopen” = running; “Afstand” = distance, and 
“Tijd” = time. 

82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 8. Summary details of a training. “Startdatum” = start date; “Starttijd” 
= start time; “Eindtijd”= stop time; “Duur training” = duration; “Sport” = 
kind of sport; “Energieverbruik” = energy use; “Afstand” = distance; “Gem. 
Snelheid” = average speed; “Max. hartslag” = maximum heart rate; “Gem. 
Hartslag” = average heart rate; “Opmerking” = note (by the user about the 
training). 
 
 
The diagram shows the speed curve. When tapping a 
measuring point in the diagram, the location on the map 
corresponding with that point on the diagram is shown by 
means of the red dot. A small window will open in which the 
exact speed at that location is shown. If a heart rate sensor is 
used, also a chart for the heart rate (in beats per minute: 
bpm) is presented. Tapping a measuring point makes also the 
heart rate visible at that point (Figure 10). 
The diagram shows initially the curves of a complete 
training. By zooming in, the progress of the training can be 
viewed in more detail. Zooming in is done by putting a 
finger down and select the desired selection by rubbing to the 
left or right (see Figure 10). Zooming out is done by rubbing 
out a finger from some point. The user can also swipe (left or 
right rubbing) to move one set to the left or right. 
By tapping on the top right arrows button on the map, a 
full screen map appears. The moment the user clicks again 
on the arrow, the map reduces back to its original size. 
 
Under “Zones” the total number of minutes of the 
workout in a certain heart rate zone is given in a chart 
(Figure 11). When touching a column, the total number of 
minutes in that zone is shown. Each zone represents a certain 
training intensity. The heart rate zones are based on user’s 
heart rate at rest and maximal heart rate and are thus 
determined individually and professionally. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Detailed training overview by default. Left scale and blue line: 
speed (km/h); Right scale and orange line: heart rate (bpm). When tapping a 
measuring point in the diagram, the location at that point is shown on the 
map by the red bullet. 
 
 

83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 10. Detailed training overview zoomed in. Left scale and blue line: 
speed (km/h); Right scale and orange line: heart rate (bpm). When tapping a 
measuring point in the diagram, the location at that point is shown on the 
map by the red bullet. You can also see the speed and heart rate at that point. 
 
Figure 12 shows statistical feedback information for the 
user: totals over a chosen period and graphics with totals per 
week. Totals of duration, distance and energy use can be 
sport specific or applied to all sports combined.  
 
In order to get a complete overview, an important feature 
is the option to import data from other, popular sport apps. A 
quick inventory gave the following results: 
• 
Runkeeper: exports data, but only from the website; 
• 
Strava: exports data, but only from the website; 
• 
Endomondo: does not export data; 
• 
Runtastic: exports data, but only from the website; 
• 
Nike+: does not export data. 
The importance is reflected by the following user story: 
“As a user, I might have been using another sports app to 
track my sport activities. To get a complete picture, I would 
like to import the data from those workouts into the 
Sportmonitor website, so I have all my workouts in one 
place. Then afterwards I could import them from the website 
into the app, so I have them available there”. 
Exporting data from other sport apps (if possible) 
happens through the websites of the services. The exported 
files are of the type GPX, which stands for “GPS Exchange 
Format”. The advantage is that most services use this format, 
so only one importer had to be written to be able to import 
data from all these services into the app.  
A participant wishing to import his data into the 
Sportmonitor app, have to use the Sportmonitor website. 
Then inside the app itself, the online workouts can be 
imported into the local database of the app. 
For some sport apps (like Runkeeper and Strava), it is 
possible to export the data automatically via an API. The use 
of APIs ensures that data are automatically sent from one 
party to another party. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Heart rate zones from low intensive to high intensive of a training 
session, showing type of training and total number of minutes of workout in 
a zone when touching the corresponding column. 

84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 12. Statistics overview.”Totalen” = totals (over the complete or a 
selected period); “Activiteiten” = activities; “Duur” = duration; 
“Energieverbruik” = energy use. The graph shows total numbers per week. 
Left scale and blue line indicates duration (in hours); right scale and orange 
line indicates energy use (in kcal.). The data are based on experimental use 
during the development of the application and therefore do not always 
reflect realistic numbers. In the future, totals per week will be visual 
compared to the Dutch Standard for Healthy Exercise and the Fit Standard. 
 
IV. 
 FOCUS GROUP 
In the focus group meeting with six sports physicians (in 
training) and one physician assistant, the following 
enhancements important to them were identified:   
First of all, the for the sport physicians most important 
function of the Sportmonitor is to stimulate people to 
exercise sufficient and in a healthy and pleasant way. 
Therefore, it is important that the Sportmonitor: 
• 
Is a clear sport medical app 
o 
It incorporates sports medical test results 
with:  
 
biometry; 
 
standard values; 
 
specific advise; 
 
heart rate zones / energy use. 
• 
Forms a low threshold to use, especially for 
sedentary and inactive people. 
• 
Stimulates by means of: 
o 
Positive feedback; 
o 
Interesting, nice insight in own training 
sessions. 
• 
Gives the participants insight in their exercises in 
terms of training duration and intensity on a weekly 
basis in comparison with the Dutch Standard for 
Healthy Exercise and the Fit Standard. 
• 
Samples periodically health data in order to be able 
to signal overtraining and health issues, especially: 
o 
Sleep Quality 
 
How well did you sleep this week? 
(VAS 0-10); 
o 
Wellness 
 
How well do you feel? (Vas 0-10); 
 
Fitness / wellbeing (POMS); 
o 
Heart rate at Rest; 
o 
Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE, 6-20 
Borg Scale) 
 
after training (how strenuous was 
the training?);  
 
before training (how well are you 
recovered? ); 
o 
Weight (BMI automatically computed). 
• 
Inserts goals advised by the physicians. 
• 
Has a clear structure, and a more attractive and more 
convenient navigation. 
• 
Can support other business cases 
o 
Application to other target groups, however 
not tailored towards diseases, but to 
stimulate exercise, e.g.:  
 
Obese children; 
 
Chronically ill patients; 
 
Chronically tired patients; 
 
Elderly; 
o 
Corporation with (dependent on target 
group): 
 
Occupational health physicians; 
 
Fitness centers; 
 
Sport clubs; 
 
Trainers / Life style coaches; 
 
Other medical specialties; 
 
Health insurance companies. 

85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
No information system could be found on the market that 
supports the sports medical guidance model of the sports 
physicians of Isala in all its facets. Therefore, we started an 
innovative project. A system was built using new 
technologies. The innovation mainly concerns the integration 
of the use of apps, sensors, web services, smartphone 
technology and a database server with a feedback function to 
participants/employees, sports physicians and employers in 
one sports medical guidance program and not as separate 
parts. This makes it possible in the future to link advised 
training programs to actual training and health data in the 
course of time for large groups of participants who are 
employees and mostly recreational, non-performance-
oriented athletes. 
The system gives participants insight in their sports 
medical test results compared to their age and sex adjusted 
standard values. Test results are automatically used to 
compute personalized heart rate zones and energy use. Total 
duration and energy use of sports activities per week will be 
evaluated against the scientifically based Dutch Standard for 
Healthy Exercise and Fit Norm in future. Also, periodical 
entry of health data will be implemented. The sport 
physicians see in the system opportunities to corporate with 
fitness centers and sport clubs or trainers and to apply it to 
other target groups such as chronically tired or ill patients 
and elderly persons for whom it can also be very beneficial 
to sport. Since the Sportmonitor is a tailored business 
application, management and maintenance of the application 
is an important issue for the hospital. 
An evaluation study is planned in which we want to 
evaluate the value of the system in terms of routine use of the 
system, satisfaction of end users and compliance to training 
programs. Once the database is filled with sufficient data, we 
hope to scientifically evaluate the effectiveness in terms of 
health, fitness and goal achievement of several sport medical 
advices and do subgroup analyses. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Tech For Future, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM (http://www.techforfuture.nl/?lang=eng) 
for its financial support. The centre is an initiative of Saxion 
and Windesheim, universities of applied sciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel, 
The Netherlands.  
We also thank IT students Kay van Bree, Joep 
Kemperman and Patrick Wobben for the development of the 
first version of the central database of the Sport Monitor in 
the context of their mid-internship, and Wisam Bahnam, 
Maikel Gommans, Thomas Visch, Samuel Fonseca, Trinco 
Ingels and Ron Jonkers for their work on the apps and 
sensors in the context of the minor App Development.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Prins, M. Hettinga, W. Alsaqaf, and S. van Berkel, “High 
Tech for Sports Medicine; Supporting Employees improving 
their Health and Fitness,” Proc. eTELEMED 2015, pp. 224 – 
227.   
[2] Vereniging voor Sportgeneeskunde, “Professional Profile 
Sport Physician” (in Dutch: “Beroepsprofiel Sportarts”), 
Bilthoven, 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.sportgeneeskunde.com/files/Beroepsprofiel_van_
de_sportarts.pdf [retrieved: December, 2015]. 
[3] US DHHS, “Physical activity and health: a report of the 
Surgeon General”. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 1996. 
[4] G. C. W. Wendel-Vos, “What are the possible health effects 
of physical (in)activity?” (in Dutch: “Wat zijn de mogelijke 
gezondheidsgevolgen van lichamelijke (in)activiteit?”) In: 
Volksgezondheid Toekomst Verkenning, Nationaal Kompas 
Volksgezondheid. Bilthoven: RIVM, June 2014 [Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.nationaalkompas.nl/gezondheidsdeterminanten/le
efstijl/lichamelijke-activiteit/ [retrieved: December, 2015]. 
[5] H. G. C. Kemper, W. T. M. Ooijendijk, and M. Stiggelbout, 
“Consensus about the Dutch Standard for healthy Excercise.” 
(in Dutch: “Consensus over de Nederlandse Norm voor 
Gezond Bewegen.”) Tijdschr Soc Gezondheidsz., 78, 2000, 
pp. 180-183. 
[6] G. C. W. Wendel-Vos, “How many people are sufficiently 
physically active?” (in Dutch: “Hoeveel mensen zijn 
voldoende 
lichamelijk 
actief?”) 
In: 
Volksgezondheid 
Toekomst Verkenning, Nationaal Kompas Volksgezondheid. 
Bilthoven: RIVM, June 2014 [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.nationaalkompas.nl/gezondheidsdeterminanten/le
efstijl/lichamelijke-activiteit/hoeveel-mensen-zijn-voldoende-
lichamelijk-actief/ [retrieved: December, 2015].  
[7] G. C. W. Wendel-Vos, “Standards of physical (in) activity.” 
(in Dutch: “Normen van lichamelijke (in)activiteit.”) In: 
Volksgezondheid Toekomst Verkenning, Nationaal Kompas 
Volksgezondheid. Bilthoven: RIVM, June 2014 [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.nationaalkompas.nl/gezondheidsdeterminanten/le
efstijl/lichamelijke-activiteit/normen-van-lichamelijke-in-
activiteit/ [retrieved: December, 2015]. 
[8] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “Scrum Guide”, 2014 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v1/Scrum-
Guide-US.pdf#zoom=100 [retrieved: September, 2015].  
[9] Medical iRehab AnkleSprain [Online]. Available from: 
http://appcrawlr.com/ipad/medical-irehab-anklesprain-for 
[retrieved: December, 2015]. 
[10] Medical iRehab Tennis Elbow [Online]. Available from: 
http://appcrawlr.com/ios/medical-irehab-tennis-elbow 
[retrieved: December, 2015].  
[11] A. S. M. Mosa, I. Yoo, and L. Sheets, “Systematic Review of 
Healthcare Applications for Smartphones,” BMC Medical 
Informatics 
and 
Decision 
Making 
2012 
12:67. 
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-12-67. 
[12] F. Modave, J. Bian, T. Leavitt, J. Bromwell, C. Harris, and H. 
Vincent, “Low Quality of Free Coaching Apps With Respect 
to the American College of Sports Medicine Guidelines: A 
Review of Current Mobile Apps,” JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 
2015 July 24;3(3):e77. doi: 10.2196/mhealth.4669. 
[13] E. Knight, M. I. Stuckey, H. Prapavessis, and R. J. Petrella, 
“Public Health Guidelines for Physical Activity: Is There an 
App for That? A Review of Android and Apple App Stores,” 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2015 Apr.-June; 3(2): e43. doi:  
10.2196/mhealth.4003. 
[14] M. Kranz, A. Möller, N. Hammerla, S. Diewald, T. Plötz, P. 
Olivier, and L. Roalter, “The mobile fitness coach: Towards 
individualized skill assessment using personalized mobile 
devices,” 
Pervasive 
and 
Mobile 
Computing, 
2012. 
doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2012.06.002. 

86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[15] A. C. Powell, A. B. Landman, and D. W. Bates, “In Search of 
a Few Good Apps,” JAMA May 14, 2014 Volume 311, 
Number 18, pp. 1851 – 1852. doi:10.1001/jama.2014.2564. 
[16] C. Rabin and B. Bock, “Desired Features of Smartphone 
Applications Promoting Physical Activity,” Telemedicine and 
e-Health, 2011, vol. 17(10). doi 10.1089/tmj.2011.0055.  
[17] A. Middelweerd, D. M. van der Laan, M. M. van Stralen, J. S. 
Mollee, M. Stuij, S. J. te Velde, and J. Brug, “What features 
do Dutch university students prefer in a smartphone 
application for promotion of physical activity? A qualitative 
approach,“ International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and 
Physical Activity, 2015, 12:31. doi 10.1186/s12966-015-
0189-1. 
[18] A. Middelweerd, J. S. Mollee, C. N. van der Wal, J. Brug, and 
S. J. te Velde, “Apps to promote physical activity among 
adults: a review and content analysis,” International Journal 
of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 2014, 11:97. 
doi:10.1186/s12966-014-0097-9. 
[19] F. Bert, M. Giacometti, M. R. Gualano, and R. Siliquini, 
“Smartphones and Health Promotion: A Review of the 
Evidence,” J Med Syst, 2014, 38:9995. doi 10.1007/s10916-
013-9995-7. 
[20] Bluetooth 
light: 
BTLE 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_low_energy  
[retrieved: December, 2015]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

