112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Comparability, Availability and Use  
of Medication eHealth Services in the Nordic Countries 
 
 
Heidi Gilstad, Berit Brattheim and Arild Faxvaag 
Health Informatics Research Group, Dept. of Neuroscience 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU  
Trondheim, Norway 
heidi.gilstad@ntnu.no, berit.j.brattheim@ntnu.no and arild.faxvaag@ntnu.no 
Christian Nøhr and Sidsel Villumsen 
Dept. of Development and Planning 
Aalborg University  
Aalborg, Denmark  
cn@plan.aau.dk and sidvil@plan.aau.dk 
Jarmo Reponen 
FinnTelemedicum, Research Unit of Medical Imaging, 
Physics and Technology (MIPT) 
University of Oulu. and 
Raahe Hospital  
Oulu, Finland 
jarmo.reponen@oulu.fi 
Hege Andreassen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care & Telemedicine    
Tromsø, Norway  
hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
Maarit Kangas 
FinnTelemedicum, Research Unit of Medical Imaging, 
Physics and Technology (MIPT) 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
maarit.kangas@oulu.fi 
 Guðrún Audur Harðardóttir 
Dept. of Health Information Management 
 Directorate of Health 
Reykjavik, Iceland  
audur@landlaeknir.is 
Sabine Koch 
Health Informatics Centre, Dept. of Learning, Informatics, 
Management and Ethics 
Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm, Sweden 
                                 sabine.koch@ki.se
Hannele Hypponen 
Dept. of Information  
National Institute for Health and Welfare  
Helsinki, Finland 
hannele.hypponen@thl.fi
Abstract— A prescription and medication service that is 
optimised to protect against unnecessary harm is an essential 
component of a safer healthcare system. To this means, the 
Nordic countries have put considerable efforts in digitizing 
their prescription and dispensing processes and making 
medication related eHealth services available for clinicians, 
pharmacists and patients. As these e-services are being 
established and applied, there is a need to monitor and learn 
from their use. This paper reports from a sub-study of a larger 
activity on developing indicators for monitoring eHealth 
services in the Nordic countries. We describe different 
medication eHealth services and compare their availability to 
professionals and patients in the Nordic countries and the 
usage rates. We found that an ePrescription service is available 
for clinicians and patients in all Nordic countries, but services 
that enable renewal or viewing of prescriptions by patients are 
not commonly available yet. The usage rate of the e-services 
was not systematically registered in all the Nordic countries at 
the time of the study, so a comparison between the countries 
was 
impossible. 
A 
major 
challenge 
when 
comparing 
medication eHealth services is the fact that definitions of the 
service itself as well as the indicators used to monitor it vary 
between countries. The main output is a knowledge-based 
discussion from the Nordic context on indicators for 
monitoring eHealth services, evaluated by the potential 
outcome in terms of comparability and benchmarking. 

113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Keywords- medication eHealth services; medication data; 
ePrescription; 
medication 
list; 
indicators; 
monitoring; 
comparability, availability and use. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Elaborating on the paper “Challenges of Comparing 
Medication eHealth Services in the Nordic Countries” [1]  
from the IARIA conference “GLOBAL HEALTH 2015, 
The Fourth International Conference on Global Health 
Challenges”, this paper offers a discussion on the 
availability and use of medication related  eHealth services 
in the Nordic countries.  
Most nations now devote large resources in digitizing 
their healthcare systems and in building eHealth services for 
healthcare professionals and patients. These technological 
solutions allow better quality and exchange of information 
between health professionals as well as between health 
professionals and patients. The assumption is that a better 
flow of information will consequently lead to better health 
outcome. As such services have been built and taken into 
use, there is a need for monitoring and assessing the use of 
these services for mutual learning and improvement [2]. 
Although it is acknowledged that eHealth solutions are 
key measures to handle the challenges in modern healthcare 
[3][4][5][6][7] 
acquisition, 
implementation 
and 
development of eHealth has not been systematically based 
on evaluations and monitoring of the everyday ehealth 
communication practices in the healthcare services or the 
health communication of the citizens. Assessments of 
existing eHealth services’ availability, use and usability can 
contribute to improve healthcare services. In a meta-review 
of eHealth implementation studies, Mair et al. [8] showed 
that while some eHealth evaluation studies are used to 
influence utilization and future eHealth implementations, 
other studies deal with patient safety and efforts made to 
avoid clinical errors. Sound eHealth evaluation studies can 
inform strategic planning and improve eHealth activities and 
communication for different stakeholders [3][9][10]. 
What characterizes eHealth services that are available at a 
national level in the Nordic countries and how are these 
being used? These are some of the questions that the Nordic 
eHealth Research Network (NeRN) has posed in an inter-
Nordic 
collaboration 
on 
developing 
indicators 
for 
monitoring eHealth. NeRN is a research group [11] 
reporting to the eHealth group of the Nordic Council of 
Ministers, and is working with development, testing and 
assessment of a common set of indicators for monitoring 
eHealth in the Nordic countries (Finland, Sweden, Norway, 
Iceland and Denmark), plus Greenland, the Faroe Islands 
and Åland. The focus has been on developing and 
subsequently testing indicators for monitoring eHealth, and 
the test results have been evaluated by potential outcome in 
terms of comparability and benchmarking. This kind of 
benchmarking work can support political decision-making 
in healthcare as well as the development of existing and  
new eHealth services.  
The data referred to in this paper are based on the study 
Nordic eHealth Benchmarking - Status 2014 [12] conducted 
by NeRN and reported to the eHealth Group of the Nordic 
Council of Ministers. The focus is on the comparability of 
indicators across different healthcare systems.  
This paper addresses the issue of availability and use of 
ePrescription related eHealth services and offers a 
comparison of the availability and use for patients and 
healthcare professionals in the Nordic countries. The 
following research question guides the work presented in 
this paper: 
What are the availability and usage rates of ePrescription 
and eMedication list services in the Nordic countries?  
The research question encompasses information from 
indicators identified by NeRN. The indicators relevant for 
this paper are: 1) Availability of a national ePrescription 
service, 2) Availability of a national electronic medication 
list of prescribed and dispensed medication, 3) Availability 
of electronic medication renewal, 4) Availability of 
electronic viewing of patient’s own medication data.  
The research question is seperated into the following 
sub-questions: 
• 
Is an ePrescription service available?  
• 
Is a national electronic medication list comprising 
prescribed and dispensed medication available?  
• 
Is it possible for patients to renew their 
prescriptions electronically?  
• 
Is 
it 
possible 
for 
patients 
to 
view 
their 
ePrescriptions? 
• 
Given that the eHealth service is available, what is 
the usage rate? 
The subsequent part of Section I discusses notions 
concerning Medication eHealth Services. Section II 
describes the methods used in the project. Section III offers 
a presentation of the results, and Section IV includes the 
discussion. Section V comprises concluding remarks. 
 
Medication eHealth Services 
Medication eHealth services include a variety of 
different systems and e-services related to medication 
management for patients, pharmacists and healthcare 
professionals. In this paper we cover the national 
ePrescription service.  We have not included the closed-loop 
for medication management processes in hospitals. Access 
to information about medication is crucial for high quality 
healthcare and patient safety [13]. Viewing an up-to-date list 
of current medications is a prerequisite when prescribing a 
new drug, administering medications or assessing potential 

114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
side effects, decreasing errors when dispensing medications, 
for preventing medication errors and adverse drug events in 
the healthcare system [14], as well as for control of financial 
aspects for prescription products. From the patient’s 
perspective, having an updated list of their medications is an 
effective means of ensuring that the healthcare professionals 
they encounter on their path through the health system are 
kept aware of some of the most important aspects of their 
health. 
A central element of medication eHealth services is the 
electronic recording of prescriptions. The representations of 
prescriptions can be described as involving four different 
characteristics: Prescription as the decision to medicate, 
Prescription as assigning a right to collect a medication 
(Prescribe), Prescription as a collection action (Dispensing 
of a medication) and Prescription as an administered action. 
Administering medication includes several actions: The 
doctor decides whether the medication should be injections 
(i.e., intramuscular, depot etc), tablets, etc., and the nurse or 
the patient (if self-care) administers in line with the 
prescribed 
instruction. 
For 
health 
professionals 
the 
administering also comprises the task of documentation. As 
such, the decision to medicate, prescribing, dispensing and 
administering medicine, are different aspects of a 
Medication eHealth service in form of an ePrescription 
service, as suggested in Figure 1.  
The decision to medicate is the first step, where the 
healthcare professional decides when and how the patient 
should be medicated. ePrescribing is the electronic 
prescribing of medicine by a healthcare professional to a 
patient and making it electronically available to a pharmacy, 
where the medicine can be dispensed and picked up by the 
patient. The prescription is a signed artifact (document) that 
describes the medication and how it shall be taken. It gives 
the patient the right to pick up the medication at the 
pharmacy and use it according to the description. In a 
hospital, the healthcare professional does not need to send 
the prescription to an external server and can proceed 
directly from deciding to medicate to dispensing of the 
medicine, thus passing by one step shown in the general 
process in Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the process of a prescription from decision to medicate to administration of the medicine and local and national 
repositories where the data is stored during different phases of the project. 
 
 

115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Dispensing is the retrieval of a prescription and the 
dispensing of the medicine to the patient. The patient 
consequently administers the medication, when consuming 
it, or in the case of intravenous medication being 
administered by healthcare professionals, the administration 
lies upon the healthcare professional. A prescription list is 
an overview of the prescription artefacts (the right to collect 
the medication) of the patient, whereas the medication list is 
the overview of the medications that are prescribed and 
dispensed to the patient. An eMedication list service allows 
for both patients and professionals to access it. However, the 
medication list is not a complete list of all medications of 
the patient since over the counter medication will not be 
included in this list. The medication list completeness is one 
indicator, and only when over-the-counter and herbal 
medications are included, can it be said to be complete. 
Figure 1 illustrates worktasks related to medication, and 
the storage of data related to each task. The decision of 
medication is noted by the healthcare professional in a 
Medication Management System (MMS), which is the 
Medication section in the EPR-system. In most Nordic 
countries, the vast majority are sent as an electronic order. 
Outside hospitals a  prescription can be issued on a sheet of 
paper, telephoned to a pharmacy or sent as an electronic 
order to a prescription server, where it can be accessed by 
pharmacies. When a drug is dispensed at a hospital it will be 
documented in the MMS, if it is dispensed at a pharmacy it 
will be documented in a pharmacy system – in some 
countries at a national level. Health care professionals at 
hospitals, in clinics and long term care facilities store 
information about the administration of drugs in a MMS, 
where the system has been implemented. Information on 
administration performed by the patient himself outside the 
clinical setting is not recorded in any official health 
information system in the Nordic countries. Only health care 
administered (or observed administered) medication will be 
noted, 
whereas 
self-administered 
medication 
outside 
hospitals, clinics etc. are usually not noted anywhere. 
Although there are some recent emerging mHealth tools, 
which can follow the act of self-administration [15], it is not 
possible to register systematically whether dispensed 
medications are actually administered at home. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The 
indicators 
used 
in 
“The 
Nordic 
eHealth 
Benchmarking. Status 2014.”- study [12] were derived from 
a rating survey performed in 2013, constructed on the basis 
of national survey questionnaires in the Nordic countries, an 
OECD model survey developed in 2012 [16], eHealth policy 
analysis performed in 2013 and variables presented in the 
eHealth evaluation literature [17].   
Data about the indicators for ePrescription and 
eMedication list services arose from discussions in a series 
of workshops with participants from all the Nordic countries 
arranged by the NeRN and a summary of the national 
survey questionnaires in the Nordic countries performed 
from 2010-2014 [12]. The results are presented as 
proportion of public healthcare organisations having the 
functionality within each of the Nordic countries. 
The study was conducted through four main tasks: 
Task 1: Prioritizing functionalities, for which common 
indicators 
are 
needed, 
and 
defining 
measures 
for 
availability, usage rate and usability (Responsibility: 
National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Finland, 
main authors Hannele Hyppönen and Sabine Koch). 
Task 2:  Collection and  reporting of results of eHealth 
functionality availability, usability and benefit-­‐variables 
from national surveys (Responsibility: University 
of 
Oulu, Finland, main authors Maarit Kangas and Jarmo 
Reponen). 
Task 3:  Defining the availability of common usage rate 
variables from log 
 files (Responsibility: University 
of 
Aalborg, Denmark, main authors Christian Nøhr 
and Sidsel Villumsen). 
Task 4:  Reporting of results of Nordic eHealth access, 
usage rate, usability and benefits (Responsibility: THL, 
Finland). 
 
In the first task, three methodological approaches were 
applied: 1) content analysis of the existing national eHealth 
monitoring surveys for listing of existing measures 
(variables), 2) quantitative and qualitative analysis of rating 
survey results for key stakeholders to prioritize the measures 
and 3) analysis of the Nordic eHealth policies. The second 
task was based on the rated list of variables from the first 
task and survey data in each of the countries. The methods 
for harvesting log data for task 3 were different in the 
various countries due to different systems and practices.  
The study has methodological limitations that should be 
identified. There were some differences in the data 
collection methods of the Nordic national surveys, sampling 
and response rates. National surveys were targeted to 
different professional groups (either availability or usability 
and experienced benefits of services). Some included 
private practice while other did not. For example, the 
proportion of public health organizations where electronic 
prescription renewal was available for patients was either 
based on expert knowledge (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, 
Sweden) or data colleted from the organizational national 
survey where the Chief Medical Officers (CMO) and Chief 
Intelligence Officers (CIO´s) were the target population 
(Finland). Furthermore, there is a limitation in the 
comparability of usage rate as the availability and 
granularity of log data varied between the countries. The 
variation in methods limits comparison of the results. 
However, the availability of an ePrescription service was a 

116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
national functionality within all the Nordic countries, and 
therefore comparability was not an issue for that indicator. 
III. 
RESULTS 
When presenting the results, the sub-questions are 
addressed separately.  Each Section shows the results of the 
availability and the usage rate from the 2014 status of 
Nordic eHealth benchmarking [12]. The overall results 
indicate that the availability of electronic medication 
services varies, and there are differences between the 
countries in how systematic they are in registering usage 
rate. 
A. Availability and use of a national ePrescription service 
This Nordic indicator is identical to an OECD indicator 
(Availability 
of 
making 
prescriptions 
electronically 
available to pharmacies outside of own organization – 
answer option “Yes, any pharmacy outside of my 
organization”), but measured at a national level. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Availability of an ePrescription service. 
 
Figure 2 shows that by the end of May 2014, all the 
Nordic countries had a national ePrescription service in 
place. In Finland, Denmark, Iceland and Sweden, 
ePrescription is available at a national level, i.e., at all 
public hospitals within the country, for all GP´s, and at 
every pharmacy in the country. In Finland, the roll-out of 
ePrescription to the private sector health care providers is 
currently almost complete (including dentists), but at the 
time of the data collection in 2014, only public sector 
physicians and dentists had access to the service. In 
Norway, all pharmacies, general practitioners, private 
specialists, dentists and emergency doctors, and all (non-
hospital) doctors allowed to prescribe drugs have access to 
ePrescription. 
The professional usage of electronic list of patient 
prescriptions was measured as a proportion of viewings of 
prescriptions 
by 
professionals 
(nominator) 
by 
all 
prescriptions (paper based, telephone based or electronic 
prescriptions) made per year (denominator). This included 
both national and available regional data on electronic and 
paper-based prescriptions outside own organisation. In the 
study, there were differences in the availability of data, as 
the Nordic countries have different practices for how to log 
data. In Denmark, there is 100% viewing, in Finland 37%, 
in Iceland 6%, in Sweden 0.3%. At the time of the study 
there was no data available from Norway on this indicator.  
When looking at the proportion of viewings by 
professionals by electronic prescriptions made per year 
(denominator), we see that the results are similar. In 
Denmark, the number is 100%, in Finland 60%, in Iceland 
9%, in Sweden 0.3%. There was no data available from 
Norway on the nominator. 
The results above demonstrate that although the 
ePrescription service is available in all the Nordic countries, 
the knowledge and systematic collection about the usage 
rate vary. One needs to keep in mind that in Iceland the 
viewing of prescriptions by doctors across healthcare 
institutions was in a pilot phase at the time of the study. 
Hence, only a small portion of physicians within Iceland 
had access to this service. In Finland the national 
ePrescription had just become available for many 
organisations in the public sector and was not available for 
private practitioners. Lower availability as well as 
requirement to change work practices in order to view the 
prescriptions from the national database may account for 
lower usage rates in Finland. Denmark has had this 
functionality available on a national level to healthcare 
professionals since 2010 – excluding professionals in the 
municipalities who were fully implemented by 2014. 
B. Availability of a national electronic list of prescribed 
and dispensed medication 
The indicator is identical to the OECD indicator 
(Availability of information on dispensing status by the 
pharmacist, answer option “Yes, for most or all of my 
patients”). It measures the availability of information about 
medication that has been previously prescribed and 
dispensed (including prescriptions from other institutions). 
 However, the contents of this indicator vary in the 
Nordic countries. A national list of prescribed and dispensed 
medication is not necessarily the same as the patient´s 
current medication list, since for example, the medication 
dispensed while admitted to a hospital or purchased without 
a prescription may not be included. 
Figure 3 shows the availability of national electronic 
lists of prescriptions and dispensings in the Nordic 
countries. In Denmark, the medication list has been 100% 
available since 2010, including all types of prescriptions 
made outside hospitals as well as all medications prescribed 
on discharge from the hospital.  

117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Availability of a national level list of prescrptions and 
dispensings in public sector. 
 
In Finland, the national prescription database shows 
prescribed and dispensed medication, which in public sector 
was 100% in 2014, but not those administered during 
hospital stay. Patients can preclude health professionals 
from accessing the data. The national list of prescriptions 
does not include prescriptions on paper or prescriptions that 
have been made by phone, nor prescriptions related to social 
care. From 2015, the national KANTA-system generates a 
comprehensive list of current medication for the patient 
from the prescription database and data from individual 
electronic 
patient 
record 
(EPR) 
systems, 
including 
medication administered during hospital stay and all types 
of prescriptions. 
In Iceland, the availability of the national list of 
prescribed and dispensed medicine is 100%, since 2014, and 
includes all ePrescriptions, both prescribed and dispensed, 
as well as some paper and telephone prescriptions. All paper 
and telephone prescriptions are available in 2015. As in 
Finland, the medication list does not include the medication 
administered during hospital stay. By law the medication is 
made viewable for the past three years within the national 
pharmaceutical database. Patients cannot opt out of this 
service, meaning that the doctor treating the patient does not 
need the patient´s permission to access his/her medical 
history. 
In Norway, the availability of list of prescriptions and 
dispensings in primary care is 100 %.  A national 
medication list is to be found in the “Kjernejournal” 
(Summary care record), and it may also be accessed via the 
national portal “helsenorge.no”. “Kjernejournal” is running 
as (in 2014) a pilot implementation in two regions. 
“Kjernejournal” contains a list of the medicines the patient 
has been prescribed (both ePrescriptions and paper 
prescriptions) in Norwegian pharmacies. Medicines the 
patient purchased without a prescription, received at an 
emergency department, hospital / nursing home or 
purchased abroad will not appear. Prescriptions that have 
been dispensed are stored in the “Kjernejournal” for three 
years.  
In Sweden, the list of medications that have been 
dispensed to the patient has been available since 2012. The 
patient decides if the doctor is allowed to see the 
information in the database. A consent is needed from the 
patient. Very few patients i.e., 3-4.000 patients out of 9 
million actually choose to hide their information. 
In the NeRN Status Report, the frequency of use of 
electronic prescriptions is not monitored. However, NeRN 
suggests that the indicators “proportion of dispensed 
prescriptions of electronic prescriptions made” and 
“proportion of dispensing list viewings by professionals 
(excluding pharmacists) of electronic prescriptions made” 
could be additional indicators for monitoring usage rate of 
electronic prescriptions. 
C. Availability of electronic medication renewal 
This indicator shows the availability of services that 
enable electronic medication renewal for patients at the 
national level. The indicator is identical to the OECD 
indicator. Some countries have data for local functionality 
while other countries have data for the national 
functionality. 
 
 
   Figure 4.  Availability of electronic medication renewal.  
 
Figure 4 shows the availability of electronic 
medication renewal services in the Nordic countries. In 
Denmark, there is 100% availability of electronic 
medication renewal in primary care at a national level.  
In Finland, this was an organizational activity in 2014, 
but currently this functionality is available for citizens via 
the national patient portal. In 2014, the patient needed to 
contact the pharmacy or primary health care centre to ask 
for a renewal, although some organizations provide an 
electronic web portal to mediate the request as depicted in 
Figure 4.   

118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In Iceland, only a few healthcare institutions offered 
this service in 2014. The functionality was in the form of 
patients 
sending 
an 
e-mail 
from 
the 
healthcare 
organization´s web site that offered these services for their 
patients and requesting the medication renewal. However, 
this is currently being implemented via a national patient 
portal and is expected to be at a national level before end of 
2015. 
In Norway, this service has not been established at the 
national level. General practitioners can offer service 
functionalities for patients depending on what portal 
provider they have chosen.   
In Sweden, electronic medication renewal has been 
available since 2012 in the national service "My healthcare 
contacts (MVK)". MVK is a citizen web portal that enables 
secure communication between patient/ consumer/ customer 
and healthcare and long-term care. The patient can book and 
rebook appointments, renew prescriptions, order a copy of 
his patient record and in some county councils also access it. 
The usage rate of electronic medication renewal is based 
on the OECD variable “frequency of use of electronic 
prescription renewal requests by patients”. The results show 
that none of the Nordic countries have a systematic 
overview, in log data, of electronic renewal requests made 
by patients. 
D. Availability of electronic viewing of patient’s own 
prescription  
This indicator concerns electronic services that enable 
patients to view their own medication data. We present data 
for services at a national level. The indicator is not 
completely identical to the OECD indicator (Availability for 
patients to remotely access the Medication lists from their 
provider-maintained 
electronic 
record): 
The 
OECD 
indicator focuses on local level availability of a medication 
list, the Nordic indicator on a national level availability of a 
list of prescriptions and dispensed medication. 
 
 
  
Figure 5.  Availability of patients’ viewing electronically of own 
medication data 
Figure 5 shows the availability of patients` viewing 
electronically of own medication (prescriptions and 
dispensings, where available) data. In Denmark, patients 
have had the opportunity to view their own medication data 
covering the past two years since 2009. In the beginning, it 
only enabled viewing of prescriptions made outside 
hospitals. Since 2013, viewings of prescriptions made by 
hospital personnel have been included.  
In Finland, all patients have since 2013 had access to all 
prescriptions that are in the prescription database. This 
service did not exist in Iceland until October 2014 via the 
national patient portal.  Currently in Iceland, it only includes 
ePrescribed medications. However, plans are already 
underway to enhance these services to include also paper- 
and telephone prescribed medication.  
Norway established this service in 2012-2013 via “My 
prescriptions” in helsenorge.no [18]. The service currently 
enables viewing of the most recent prescriptions made by 
general practitioners.  
In Sweden, this service has been available since 2012 as 
a national service through “My healthcare contacts” (MVK). 
Availability for patients viewing of medication data that 
(public/private sector) professionals have prescribed is a 
feature of national health information systems in the Nordic 
countries.  
The usage rate of electronic viewing of patients own 
prescriptions, i.e., active list of patients current medication 
via the national information system, was not benchmarked 
within the Nordic countires. However, OECD covers this in 
the model survey (“Availability for patients to remotely 
access the Medication lists from their provider-maintained 
electronic record – usage rate”). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The Nordic countries seem relatively homogeneous and 
comparable in terms of political systems, infrastructure, 
culture, and educational, social- and healthcare systems; 
however providing comparable eHealth indicators from 
surveys across the Nordic countries involves a number of 
challenges. The eHealth functionalities, albeit spoken of in 
same terms (e.g., ePrescription service), were not identical 
in different Nordic countries. The samples of the survey 
varied: in Denmark, a representative sample of clinical end 
users participated whereas in the other countries leaders in 
health care institutions were approached. The survey 
questions were formulated in the language of the respective 
countries, and the time and frequency of the surveys varied. 
Detailed discussions of these differences settled most of the 
variance they introduced, and the results obtained on the 
medication issues were quite comparable.  
Comparable e-services regarding the ePrescription 
include availability of the prescriptions for pharmacies and 

119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patients on national level, and availability of the list of 
medicines prescribed to the patient on national level, i.e., the 
proportion of public and/or private organizations where 
prescribed medicine outside their own organization, are 
available in all the Nordic countries. Although ePrescription 
is available, it is still possible to issue prescriptions on paper 
or by telephoning the pharmacy. This proportion has not 
been measured, but it is assumed that it is neglectable given 
the high number of prescriptions made electronically. 
The ePrescription services are well established and 
mature in all of the Nordic countries. However, the 
availability of viewing the prescriptions on a national level  
is still in a pilot phase in some of the countries.  
The availability of a national list of prescribed and 
dispensed medication has also, by 2014, reached a level of 
saturation. In Denmark, this service has been available for 
some years. Although the service is available in all the 
countries, the architecture of the systems behind the services 
differ significantly, but a detailed analysis of these 
differences has not been targeted in this study. A special 
feature for patients to hide specific medications is available 
in all countries for similar ethical reasons.  
An e-service to renew medication is not available in all of 
the Nordic countries. In Denmark and Sweden the service 
has been available for some years; however it is 
implemented in different ways. In Denmark, this service 
was implemented for all patients to use as part of the 
agreement between the general practitioners and the regions 
who pay them fee for service. In Sweden, the service is 
available to all citizens through a national portal. In other 
countries this service was available only through dedicated 
organizations. 
The service that enables patients to view their own 
prescriptions has been implemented in all of the Nordic 
countries.  
However, when going into detail about the content of the 
indicators, the NeRN group realized that characteristics of 
the eHealth functionalities as well as the monitoring data 
provided in national surveys and logs varied somewhat 
between the respective countries. 
The availability of a national ePrescription service was 
saturated, but the content measured was different between 
the Nordic countries. In the definitions of the indicators, the 
fact whether the medication was prescribed, dispensed or 
administered was not clearly specified, or the data were not 
available because the question was not asked specifically in 
the surveys. It became apparent that the content of 
ePrescriptions and the measurements of them varied 
between the countries making detailed explanation in the 
presentation of the results necessary for each indicator and 
each country. 
Another point, which makes comparison difficult, is the 
fact that ePrescription does not cover paper-based 
prescriptions per se, which are regulated in another way 
than electronic prescriptions. It has different consequences 
in the respective countries. In Denmark, for instance the 
paper-based prescriptions will be synchronized with the 
electronic overview of the patient’s own prescriptions once 
the medicine has been dispensed in a pharmacy. A related 
issue is that while ePrescriptions are 1-1 prescribed and 
dispensed medication, where the paper based prescription 
can hold prescriptions of several different medicines on the 
same piece of paper.  
The e-services in this paper more specifically referred to 
as the medication eHealth service, may have different 
scopes, i.e., intended coverage area. While some e-services 
are accessible at a national level, others are either limited 
geographically to a regional level, administratively to the 
hospitals or the organizations, or to specific roles, for 
example to healthcare professionals and not to patients. The 
focus in this study was the availability of medication 
eHealth services at a national level and availability at a 
more granular level was therefore not presented. 
 
The study also showed that there are different practices in 
the Nordic countries whether they are systematically 
logging usage rate of the electronic medication services. It 
was possible to retrieve log data about use of ePrescription 
viewing in Denmark, Finland, and Iceland but due to 
different systems in the countries, the definitions of the 
denominators varied slightly. Furthermore, as this service 
was in a pilot phase in Iceland at the time of the study, 
comparability was an issue. There were no systematic log 
data available on the usage of the other e-medication 
services discussed here, i.e., viewing by patients and 
electronic renewal requests by patients. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The study showed that the availability of patients’ 
prescription information and ePrescriptions made available 
to any pharmacy is acknowledged via the national 
ePrescription systems in each Nordic country. Moreover, the 
availability of medication renewal requests as well as the 
availability of electronic viewing of patients’ own 
prescriptions is comprehensive on national level in some 
countries (Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Iceland). 
Patients’ access to view their prescription data electronically 
is also broad. However, the NeRN findings demonstrated 
that the services are carried out differently in the respective 
countries and also definitions of indicators vary between 
countries hampering comparison. The implementation of 
eHealth services within healthcare is expected to enhance 
patient 
safety 
and 
quality 
of 
healthcare 
delivery. 
Prerequisites to access this goal are that the complete list of 
patient’s current medication is available and systematically 
used to inform clinical decision-making. The results of this 

120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
study provide valuable information to guide decision 
making at the healthcare and eHealth policy level with 
regard to development, acquisition, implementation and 
assessment of eHealth services. Furthermore, it highlights 
the need for implementation of standardized, accessible 
systems for monitoring and benchmarking eHealth services.  
Benchmarking is important in order to detect possible 
benefits in use of the eHealth service and to identify best 
practise in the respective countries that consequently could 
inform the development in other countries. Benchmarking is 
also important for detecting possible problems and risks. 
Despite of the limitations of the work, NERN succeeded in 
benchmarking availability and use of several Health 
Information Exchange (HIE) and Patient Health Record 
(PHR) functionalities, including the eHealth services related 
to medication. The results show that the Nordic countries 
advances in eHealth services for healthcare professionals 
and for citizens. The results and the experiences from the 
study generate the following recommendations [12]:  
1)   The Nordic countries should agree on common 
indicators, in order to monitor the same aspects and 
consequently exchange  knowledge and “best practise” in 
eHealth service provision; 2) The Nordic countries should 
provide access to log data for monitoring and research (and 
not only key numbers or forecasts); 3) Since there are great 
differences in the national architectures, there is a need for 
more detailed comparison of the data retrieval processes and 
outcomes in the respective countries; 4) As the utilities 
health record systems in Iceland shows, usability and 
expected utility is not just about high eHealth budgets, but 
about wise practices; 5) One anticipated impact of 
ePrescription /comprehensive medication list is the 
reduction of medication errors. Although the results from 
Denmark showed the opposite (the patient safety reporting 
system is more comprehensive than in the other countries, 
and is thus detecting more medication errors and near-
misses), it is assumed that if a systematic and coordinated 
practice with registration of prescriptions and medication 
lists is introduced, the proportion of medication errors will 
fall. 
The data in this paper are based on the results from the 
Nordic eHealth Benchmarking status 2014. It must be noted 
that 
the 
eHealth 
services 
are 
continuously 
under 
development in the Nordic countries. This study would 
assumingly have different results if conducted in 2016. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Our gratitude goes to the eHealth Group of the Nordic 
Ministry of Health who supports the work of the Nordic 
eHealth Research Network in our efforts to define common 
indicators for monitoring eHealth in the Nordic countries. 
Thanks also to Lars Jervall and Thomas Pehrsson for 
support during the indicator work and data collection. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Gilstad, A. Faxvaag, C. Nøhr, S.Villumsen, J. Reponen, H. 
Andreassen, L. Jervall, T. Pehrsson, M. Kangas, G.A. 
Hardardottir, 
S. 
Koch, 
and 
H. 
Hypponen,  
“Challenges of Comparing Medication eHealth Services in the 
Nordic Countries,” GLOBAL HEALTH 2015, The Fourth 
International Conference on Global Health Challenges. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://toc.proceedings.com/27226webtoc.pdf 2016.05.30 
[2] The European Federation of Medical Informatics “Working 
Group Proposal, adopted by the EFMI board,” [Online]. 
Available from http://iig.umit.at/efmi/ 2016.05.30 
[3] WHO National eHealth Strategy Toolkit, 2012. [Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.who.int/ehealth/publications/overview.pdf 
2016.05.30 
[4] OECD. “Improving Health Sector Efficiency. The Role of 
Information and Communication Technologies,” [Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-
Management/oecd/social-issues-migrationhealth/improving-
health-sector-efficiency_9789264084612-en#page2 
[5] EU-European Union. “eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/docs/com_2012_736_en.pd  
[6] H. Hyppönen, A. Faxvaag, H. Gilstad, G.A. Hardardottir, L. 
Jerlvall, M. Kangas, S. Koch, C. Nøhr, T. Pehrsson, J. 
Reponen, Å. Walldius and V. Vimarlund, “Nordic eHealth 
Indicators: Organisation of Research, First Results and Plan for 
the Future,” MEDINFO 2013C.U. Lehmann et al. (Eds.) © 
IMIA and IOS Press. 
[7] The Norwegian Ministry of Health, ”White Paper no 9 (2012-
2013),” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dokumenter/meld-st-9-
20122013/id708609/  2016.05.30 
[8] FS. Mair, C. May, C. O’Donnell, T. Finch, F. Sullivan and E. 
Murray “Factors that promote or inhibit the implementation of 
eHealth systems: an explanatory systematic review,” Bull 
World Health Organ. 2012 May 1; 90(5):357-64. 
[9] C. Codagnone and F. Lupiañez-Villanueva, “Benchmarking 
Deployment of eHealth among General Practitioners–Final 
report.” 
European 
Commission. 
Directorate-General 
of 
Communications Networks. Content & Technology, [Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
agenda/en/news/benchmarking-deployment-ehealth-among-
general-practitioners-2013-smart-20110033 2016.05.30 
[10]H. Gilstad, A. Faxvaag, H. Hypponen, S. Koch, C. Nøhr and 
K. Skauli, “Multinational surveys for monitoring eHealth  
policy implementations - usefulness and pitfalls,” Studies in 
health technology and informatics, 01/2014. 
[11] H. Hyppönen, A. Faxvaag, H. Gilstad, G.A. Hardardottir, L. 
Jerlvall, M. Kangas, S. Koch, C. Nøhr, T. Pehrsson, J. 
Reponen, A. Walldius and V. Vimarlund. “Nordic eHealth 
Indicators. Organization of Research, First Results and Plan for 
the Future,” Stud Health Technol Inform 192:273-7. 
[12] H. Hyppönen, M. Kangas, J. Reponen, C. Nøhr, S. 
Villumsen, S. Koch, G.A. Hardardottir, H. Gilstad, L. Jerlvall, 
T. Pehrsson, A. Faxvaag, H. Andreassen, B. Brattheim V. 
Vimarlund and J. Kaipio, “Nordic eHealth Benchmarking: 
Status 2014,” TemaNord 2015:539, Nordic Council of 

121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Ministers, Copenhagen, Denmark. [Online]. Available from 
www.norden.org/en/publications 2016.05.30 
[13] D. M. Benjamin, “Reducing Medication Errors and 
Increasing 
Patient 
Safety: 
Case 
Studies 
in 
Clinical 
Pharmacology,” The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2013. 
[14] G.E. Karagiannis, L. Tzachani, B. R. M. Manning, V. G. 
Stamatopoulos, M. Roughton, A. A. Lazakidou, M. Petridou, 
D. Iliopoulou and M. L Rigby, “Patient-Generated EHR Input 
System Trials: An Analysis of Perceived Benefits Across a 
Range of Disease Groups,” in eds D.D. Koutsouris and A.A. 
Lazakidou R, “Concepts and Trends in Healthcare Information 
Systems”. Springer Link, 2014. 
[15] “Proteus Ingestible Sensor for Tracking Medication Intake 
Receives 
FDA 
Clearance,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.medgadget.com/2012/07/proteus-ingestible-sensor-
for-tracking-medication-intake-receives-fda-clearance.html 
[16]OECD Directorate for Employment, Labour, and Social 
Affairs and Directorate for Science, Technology, and Industry, 
“Draft OECD Guide for Measuring ICTs in the Health Sector, 
Paris: OECD. COM/DELSA/DSTI(2013)3/FINAL”, [Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.oecd.org/health/health-
systems/Draft-oecd-guide-to-measuring-icts-in-the-health-
sector.pdf 2016.05.30 
[17] J. Adler-Milstein, E. Ronchi,
 
G. R. Cohen,
 
L.A. Pannella 
Winn, and A. K. Jha, “Benchmarking health IT among OECD 
countries: better data for better policy,” J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 2014;21:111–116. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001710 
[18]The Norwegian Directorate for eHealth, “helsenorge.no 
patient portal,” [Online]. Available from https://helsenorge.no/ 
2016.05.30 
 
 
 

