Human Behaviour Analysis Using Data Collected from Mobile Devices 
1Muhammad Awais Azam, 1Jonathan Loo, 1Sardar Kashif Ashraf Khan, 2Muhammad Adeel, 3Waleed Ejaz 
1School of Engineering and Information sciences, Middlesex University, London, UK 
2School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University, London, UK 
3Department of Information and Communication Engineering, Sejong University, Republic of Korea 
*Corresponding Author {m.azam@mdx.ac.uk}  
 
Abstract- Human behaviours are multifarious and myriad in 
nature. It is a challenging task to envisage and learn the 
human behaviour from daily routine activities. The profusion 
of wireless enabled mobile devices in daily life routine and 
advancement in pervasive computing has opened new horizons 
to analyse and model the contextual information. The aim of 
this research work is to infer the behaviour of low entropy 
mobile people using contextual data collected from mobile 
devices such as GSM location patterns (cell tower ID data) and 
Bluetooth proximity data. Both the GSM and Bluetooth data 
itself do not reveal much information about the behaviour of 
the users. Therefore, the challenge is to find out whether such 
data can infer human behaviour to understand and aid the 
unusual activities and routines of low entropy people such as 
elderly people and early stages of dementia patients. In this 
paper, a framework is created to analyse the contextual data 
for behaviour detection. There are four different steps in this 
framework to achieve the objective of the research work. In 
the first step, the contextual data is first classifies into different 
locations to obtain the movement patterns of the users. In the 
second and third step, a probability matrix and training data 
is obtained respectively, depending upon the user’s movement 
on daily and hourly basis. In the fourth step, a decision engine 
i.e. Neural Network (NN) and Decision Trees (DT) is used to 
detect the behaviour of the low entropy user. Results have 
shown that cell tower ID data gives behaviour of the user on 
high level scale for example movement patterns in GSM cells 
that does not help to identify any lower level activities such as 
attending the lecture, traveling in a bus. Whereas, Bluetooth 
data gives us more information about the lower level activities 
depending on the social relations and close proximity of other 
users.    
Keywords – Behaviour, Cell Tower ID, Bluetooth Proximity, 
Neural Networks, Jaccard Index, Decision Trees 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Detection and prediction of human behaviour from daily 
life activities is a challenging task. People can have both 
regular and varying daily life routines that make it a burning 
topic nowadays in social research circles. Modelling human 
behaviour such as individual routines from proximity data 
and social relations with gathered data of daily life activity 
patterns is an emerging realm in Ubiquitous Computing. 
Computers are becoming more and more pervasive and are 
embedded in everyday objects, such as cameras, music 
players, cars, clothing etc. There can be different sensing 
devices e.g., Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), motion 
sensors, GPS enabled tracking devices, and other context 
aware devices that can be used for real time proximity 
detection and daily life data gathering purposes. In 
particular, devices such as mobile phones provide a rich 
platform for various forms of data gathering by using its 
integrated sensors such as Bluetooth ID, digital camera, 
microphones and GPS transceivers. These sensors can give 
an 
individual’s 
location, 
movement 
and 
proximity 
information for the whole period of cell phone usage. 
Specifically, Bluetooth radios are frequently incorporated 
into mobile devices [2]. 
This new generation of “smart devices” has created new 
ways to utilise the capability of computers and enhanced the 
area of Ubiquitous Computing by providing rich and detailed 
information about the context of the user. Context-aware 
computing, which is part of Ubiquitous Computing, uses 
sensors either in the environment or carried / worn by the 
users to extract and interpret the user’s context, for example 
what resources are available, who is in close user’s 
proximity. This contextual information can help to recognise 
different tasks and activities perform by the user.  
Different researchers have worked on routine and 
activity classification using mobile phone data [2] [3] [13] 
[14]. They have tried to analyse the social relationships and 
daily life routine patterns of individuals using their cell 
phone data. They classified the cell tower ID data into 
different locations such as Home, Office, Elsewhere and No-
signals and analyses the movement patterns. They have also 
used Bluetooth proximity data to differentiate between 
weekday or weekend activities. In our research work, we 
want to go a step further in behaviour analysis. As cell tower 
ID information can only give patterns of movement and 
location information. It cannot tell us about low level 
activities. For example, cell tower ID data can tell whether 
the user is at home or in office/campus, but it cannot tell in 
which activity such as attending the lecture or sitting in 
cafeteria, user is participating. On the other hand, proximity 
data can give information about the people and other devices 
that are in close vicinity of the user but it does not tell exact 
information about the user’s location. If this proximity data 
can be classified into different locations, then proximity 
information can provide a good idea about the nature of 
activity that user is performing and this will help in 
analysing and understanding an individual’s behaviour.  
The aim and focus of this research work is on the 
detection of behaviour of the people who live low entropy 
lives that means they follow somewhat regular routines and 
exhibit less change in their behaviours as discussed in [3]. 
According to [3], if the user in his daily life, repeat the 
activities and routines with less change, it will be known as 
‘low entropy’ behaviour. While a more change in daily 
routine patterns is considered as ‘high entropy’ behaviour. 
For example, a working person who follows the routine of 
going to the office and coming back home every day using 
the same means of the transport, or an elderly person with 
1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

regular routines [4] (e.g., an early stage of dementia patient) 
can be the examples of the people with more regular routines 
and hence less change in the behaviour. The motivation of 
this research work is to help elderly people and early stages 
of dementia patients to live their lives more independently 
by understanding their behaviour from wireless proximity 
data.  
This work is an extension of [1] and [5], in which 
repeated patterns and behaviour of an individual was 
detected by using n-gram technique and considering only 
Bluetooth proximity data and the behaviour was detected by 
using only NN. The research work in [5] proves the concept 
that daily life traces of Bluetooth proximity data of a low 
entropy individual can give us enough repeated patterns in 
the data that can be further used for activity or behaviour 
detection. In [1], the unusual routines in the daily life of the 
user were detected by using the NN only.  
In this research paper, we have used two different types 
of contextual data (GSM cell tower ID and wireless 
proximity data), that are rather collected independently, to 
analyse the behaviour of low entropy mobile people. 
Wireless proximity data that is used in this research work is 
of Bluetooth. The data set used in this paper is the reality 
mining dataset [3] collected at MIT for the year 2004-2005. 
Nokia 6600 cell phones were used to record the data of 100 
users over the duration of 9 months. Different types of 
information were collected including phone status i.e. 
whether it is in use or charging or off, ID’s of Bluetooth 
proximate devices, usage of mobile applications, cell tower 
ID data, call and SMS logs 
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section-II contains 
related work on unusual activity detection and usage of 
Bluetooth as a sensing device. Section-III and Section-IV 
discusses the research objectives and the behaviour analyses 
framework respectively. Section-V discusses the behaviour 
analysis results using cell tower ID data and Section-VI 
contains the results of behaviour detection using Bluetooth 
proximity data. Summary of the work and notes on the 
direction planned for the future work is in Section-7. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Detection of abnormality in human behaviour is very 
intricate and has been a challenging task in the past. Though, 
recent advancements in information technology had made it 
quite simpler. In last few years a lot of efforts have been 
made to observe the abnormal routines and daily life patterns 
of an individual [6] [7]. In [6], the author has presented a 
framework for the detection of unusual human behaviour 
inside an intelligent house. The author used motion sensors 
to detect the activities and unusual human behaviour patterns 
based on Markov Chain. Vector quantization is employed to 
reduce the sensor states and the transition between states is 
represented by probabilistic model. The above mentioned 
technique detects the unusual human behaviour either by 
computing the distance between the state transition 
probabilities or by the likelihood of human action. The 
distance between the state transition probabilities was 
calculated by using either Kullback-Leiber distance or 
Euclidian distance. Limitation of this work is that they only 
consider the indoor activities that can only happen inside the 
home. To analyse human behaviours and activities, some 
authors have also used devices other than motion sensors 
such as, accelerometers, digital cameras and microphones.  
In literature some techniques has also been presented to 
analyse the accumulative behaviour of multiple individuals 
instead of one single individual. For example, in [8] the 
author proposed a framework based on identification of 
close proximity social behaviours. This work also focused 
on the movements inside a building.  Similarly other 
multiple individual behaviour detection schemes such as 
group actions in meetings [9] and audio visual perception of 
a lecture in smart environment [10] are presented. However, 
majority of work in above mentioned studies have focused 
on indoor environment; as it is based on sensing devices 
which have several limitations such as short range of 
detection, less battery power and storage, or may not be very 
common that every person can use it without extra hardware, 
which is not feasible for outdoor environment.  
The 
enormous 
penetration 
ability 
of 
Bluetooth 
technology have made it more suitable candidate to be used 
as a personal identifier. This capability can be exploited by 
using the mobile phone having Bluetooth technology as a 
sensing device. Nowadays the mobile phone is an 
indispensable part of our society with many types of 
embedded sensors. These sensors have been used in many 
worth mentioning applications such as social proximity 
sensing [11] [12], social behavioural modelling and routine 
classification [2] [3] [13] [14] and movement prediction [15] 
[16]. The significance of aforementioned studies is that these 
techniques have focused on how to recognize an individual’s 
behavioural patterns and social routines but no one of them 
has classified the Bluetooth proximity data into different 
locations and predicts the behaviour by using the machine 
learning techniques. 
In [13] and [14], researchers have presented a framework 
for daily life activity recognition based on the user’s location 
and group affiliation. They used Author Topic Model 
(ATM) and hierarchical Bayesian topic models like Latent 
Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) for routine classification. The 
routines they classified are whether it is a weekday or a 
weekend depending upon the location of the user or the 
proximity information and whether the experimental subject 
is an engineering student or a business student. The 
proximity data is only classified depending upon the number 
of proximate devices. There classification of proximity data 
does not give any information about the location of the user.  
In [15] and [16], NN are used to detect and predict user 
movement based only on cell tower IDs. They utilised the 
probability of user being at different locations. Our work is 
similar in one aspect with their work and that is; we have 
also utilized the probabilities of user being in different 
locations. Difference between our work and the work 
presented in [15] and [16] is that we have used real time data 
for our experiments and have used both cell tower ID and 
Bluetooth proximity data. In [17], researchers proposed a 
relaxing minimum description length (MDL) principle in 
order to build compatible decision trees that are suitable for 
novel behaviour detection. This relaxing MDL principle is to 
exploit additional tests/features in order to discriminate 
between normal and abnormal behaviours.   
In [7], researchers detect abnormal event in solitary 
elder’s daily life by mining the related data gained by 
sensors. They employ the association rules finding algorithm 
2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with time cluster to analyse the elder’s activities. In first 
step, they cluster each item of elder activity with time and 
then in the second step, all frequent item sets were found and 
strong association rules were created. Researchers in [18] 
work on the recognition of abnormal activities based on the 
Hierarchical Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model (HDP-
HMM). They incorporate a Fisher Kernel into the One-Class 
Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) to filter out the most 
likely normal activities. Then from those normal activities, 
they derive a model to detect abnormal activities and tried to 
reduce false positives.  In [19], researchers have presented a 
model for abnormal behaviour detection. That model 
considers user’s location based on the cell tower ID and used 
Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBN) to predict user’s 
location. They proposed an X-Factor model, which is a DBN 
with a hidden variable. User’s location according to this 
model not only depends on the hour of the day and day of 
the week but also this latent variable that represents the 
abnormal behaviour.   
Most of the researchers as discussed above have focussed 
on routines and activity detection in closed and indoor 
environments and have used short range sensors that can 
work only in very close vicinity and have short battery life. 
This type of sensors cannot be used for outdoor 
environment. Our research work is not constrained of short 
range sensors and short battery lives. We explored the 
concept of mobile phone as a sensing device. Many other 
researchers as discussed above have also used mobile phones 
to get the proximity data and user’s location from cell tower 
ID information. To the best of our knowledge, no one has 
classified the Bluetooth proximity data into different 
locations and obtained the user’s movement patterns. In this 
paper, we address this concept and analysed the behaviour 
from cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity data and found 
out that Bluetooth proximity data alone can be used to detect 
the behaviour of the low entropy mobile user. Results have 
shown that patterns in wireless proximity data can give us 
enough information about the routines of the user and 
unlikely cell tower ID data that can only give indications of 
user movement patterns at different locations, it can also 
give information about user’s activities while staying at one 
particular location which is not possible to get from cell 
tower ID data.  
III. RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
The primary aim of this research work is to find any 
anomalies in the behavioural patterns or routine activities of 
low entropy mobile people in order to aid in the detection of 
any unusual behaviours in elderly people or patients such as 
early stages of dementia patients. First objective is to utilize 
the contextual data (such as, cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data) available around us that can be obtained 
through different sensing devices, especially mobile phones, 
for behaviour detection. A framework is designed to analyse 
the behaviour of the low entropy users by using this 
contextual data.  
The nature of Cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity 
data is different from one another. Figure-1(a) shows the 
movement of a user in between different GSM cell towers. 
When a user is in the range of any GSM cell tower, ID of the 
cell tower is detected. This cell tower ID data only gives 
information about the user’s movement in broad overview 
and cannot tell what type of activities user is performing 
within the range of detected cell towers. For example in 
Figure-1(a), user was in cell ‘J’, then moved to the cells ‘F’, 
‘C’, ‘G’, ‘D’ and ‘E’ respectively. This information can only 
tell about the user’s movement patterns and cannot give any 
idea about the activities that user is performing while at 
these locations. The purpose is to utilise this cell tower ID 
data to analyse behaviour of low entropy mobile people from 
the ‘location data’. In order to detect the behaviour, two 
different machine learning algorithms have been used in the 
framework. The detection accuracy of both algorithms is 
also studied.  
On the other hand, Figure-1(b) shows the detection of 
Bluetooth proximate devices. Cell tower ID data only can 
give user’s location information, which in this case is cell 
‘X’, whereas Bluetooth proximity data gives information 
about the people and other Bluetooth devices that are within 
the range of user’s Bluetooth mobile device. Social 
relationship and group activities can be detected with this 
proximity data which is not possible to detect from the cell 
tower ID data. A weakness of Bluetooth proximity data is 
that it does not give any direct information about the location 
of the user. Location information is important to know in 
order to analyse the behaviour from daily routines and 
activities of the low entropy users. To obtain the location 
information from the Bluetooth proximity data is a 
challenging task and is also an objective of this research 
work. To get the location information from Bluetooth 
proximity data, we classify the Bluetooth detected devices 
into different groups that belong to locations such as Home, 
office and inferred the location of the user depending upon 
the detected devices. Another objective is to find out 
whether only Bluetooth proximity data can be used for 
behaviour and activity analyses and whether it can add more 
information about activities and daily routines of the user if 
we consider both cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity data 
together. 
 
 
(a)                                                       (b) 
Figure 1. Scenario of GSM Cell Tower and Bluetooth Proximate Devices 
Detection 
IV. BEHAVIOUR ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK 
Figure-2 shows the overall framework which is going to 
be used to analyse the behaviour of low entropy mobile 
people from cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity data. As 
aforementioned, real time traces of GSM cell tower ID and 
Bluetooth proximity data of low entropy people used for this 
3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

research work is obtained from the Reality Mining dataset. 
There are four steps in this framework that are followed to 
achieve the objective.  
 
Figure 2. Behaviour Analysis Framework 
Step-1 is to classify the cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data into different locations to find the activity and 
routine patterns of the user. The cell tower ID data which is 
obtained from the Reality Mining dataset is already 
classified into four different locations; i.e., Home (H), Work 
(W), Elsewhere (E) and NoSignal (N); whereas Bluetooth 
proximity data is in the form of list of detected proximate 
devices by the target user. Classification of Bluetooth 
proximity data into different locations is a great challenge 
and the classification procedure of Bluetooth proximate 
devices into different locations is explained in detail in 
Section-6. 
Step-2 is to obtain a probability matrix predicting the 
location conditional on the hour of the day and day of the 
week from the classified information. This means, every 
entry of this matrix depends upon the specific hour of the 
day and whether it was a week day or a week end. Figure-3 
shows the structure of the probability matrix for H, W, E and 
N for all twenty four hours. Each row in this matrix shows 
the hour of the day and each column shows the probability 
of H, W, E and N for that hour of the day. Depending upon 
this calculated probability; behaviour is divided into four 
different levels, shown in Table 1. Every entry of the 
probability matrix depends upon the specific hour of the day 
and whether it is a weekday or a weekend. 
 
 
Figure 3. Probability Matrix for H, W, E and N 
TABLE 1. BEHAVIOURAL LEVELS 
 
 
Step-3 is to utilise the probability matrix obtained in the 
setp-2 for preparing training data for the decision engine that 
is used for the detection of level of abnormality in the user’s 
behaviour.  
In step-4, the decision engine will use the training data 
obtained in the step-3, the probability matrix from step-2 and 
the classified data from setp-1 with a machine learning 
algorithm (NN or DT) to detect the behaviour of the user 
that deviates from the normal routines.   
Next section discusses the behaviour analysis from cell 
tower ID data by using the above mentioned framework.  
V. BEHAVIOUR ANALYSIS FROM CELL TOWER ID DATA 
This section uses only the cell tower ID data of a low 
entropy user obtained from the reality mining dataset with 
the entropy level 23.06, calculated by using the Shannon’s 
entropy equation shown in Equation-1, to find any anomalies 
in the daily life routines and behaviour of the user. 




n
i
p i
p i
x
H
1
2
( )
( )log
( )
 
(1) 
Cell tower ID gives information about the user’s location 
and movement patterns. Step-1 is to classify the cell tower 
ID data into different locations to obtain the movement 
patterns of the user. As already discussed, the cell tower ID 
data that is used in this study is already classified into four 
different locations; i.e., H, W, E, N. This data is divided into 
twenty four time slots. Each time slot is represented by the 
associated presence information of the user (H, W, E, and N) 
during the one hour period as shown in Figure 4. The 
presence of user at specific location depends on the hour of 
the day and day of the week. For example, if the user has a 
regular routine of going to the office, then location of the 
user at 10a.m on Saturday morning cannot be the same at 
10a.m on Monday morning. The daily life activities of an 
individual depend on the entropy level of the user as 
discussed in [3]. If the user is a low entropy user, his 
routines do not change much as compared to high entropy 
users, whose routines and activity patterns change 
continuously.  
Step-2 is to obtain a probability matrix, which is 
generated depending on the hour of the day and day of the 
week from the classified information obtained in step-1 and 
then this probability matrix is used for the preparation of the 
training data in step-3.  
 
4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4. Format of cell tower ID Data 
In step-4 decision engine detects the behaviour of the 
user. Two machine learning algorithms (NN and DT) are 
used for behaviour detection at this stage. The accuracy in 
terms of number of detections of both algorithms will be 
calculated and compared. The one, with the highest 
percentage accuracy will be used in the Section-6 with 
Bluetooth proximity data. Next section explains the 
behaviour analysis from cell tower ID data using NN. 
A. Behaviour Analysis from Cell Tower ID Data Using 
Neural Networks 
Figure-5 shows the basic architecture used to get the 
behaviour of an individual using NN. The neural network 
used here is Multi-layered Perceptron (MLP). Multi-layered 
Perceptrons have been created to try to solve the problem of 
non-linear classification of input instances by Rumelhart et 
al. [21]. A multi-layer neural network system consists of a 
large number of neurons connected with each other in a 
specific pattern. These neurons are normally divided into 
three classes; input layer neurons, hidden layer neurons and 
output layer neurons. The MLP used in this research work 
has four inputs and one output. Inputs are {Location, Hour, 
Day and Behavioural_Level}, where ‘Location’ gives the 
location of the user i.e., H, W, E, N, ‘Hour’ gives the hour of 
the day i.e., between 1 and 24, ‘Day’ gives the day of the 
week, i.e., between 1 and 7 and ‘Behavioural_Level’ gives 
the behavioural levels. Output of this neural network will 
give the level of abnormality of an individual for each hour 
of the day.  
This gives twenty four samples of training data for one 
day. For each user, total training samples are (24 x numbers 
of days). 70% of these training data/samples are used for 
training the neural network whilst the remaining is used for 
cross validation and testing purposes. Training of the neural 
network is done till the cross validation error becomes less 
than 0.02, by using Mini-Batch training process [22]. The 
advantage of using Mini-Batch training is that it is a 
compromise between batch and incremental training. Back 
Propagation (BP) algorithm is used to estimate the weights 
of the neural network that includes the following steps: 
 
Provide a sample of training data to the NN. 
 
Calculate the error by comparing the desired 
output with the NN output. 
 
Adjust the weights of each neuron in order to 
lower the error value and again calculate the 
error. 
 
Repeat the steps unless reach the desired level.  
 
Figure 5. Behaviour Analysis from Cell Tower ID Data Using NN 
Out of nine months of data available for this specific 
user; about 70% is used for training the neural network, one 
month data is used for behaviour detection and remaining is 
used for the cross validation purposes. Figure-6 shows the 
daily distributions of (H, W, E and N) transitions based on 
cell tower ID data of one month that is further used as a 
ground truth to detect the behaviour of the user and to 
calculate the accuracy of the NN in this specific scenario.  
 
 
Figure 6. Distribution of (H, W, E and N) Transitions of Cell Tower ID 
Data 
5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

For understanding purposes, behaviour detection of the 
user for only two different days is discussed first. Figure-7 
shows the comparison of behaviour of the user for Day-1 
and Day-10. The trained neural network provides the 
behavioural levels for twenty four hours. First part of the 
figure shows the distribution of twenty four hours for Day-1 
and Day-10 for the specific user in the form of H, W, E and 
N, whereas second part shows the inferred behaviour of the 
user. As the entropy level of the user is quite low, this figure 
shows that most of the time the behaviour of the user is 
average normal. Now if we look at day-10 in Figure-4, there 
is an unusual detection of ‘Elsewhere’ during 5-6am in the 
morning, which doesn’t happen normally in usual daily 
routine of the user. Figure-6 also shows the detection of that 
unusual behaviour for day-10 in that specific time duration.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of Two Days of Behaviour Detected from Cell 
Tower ID Data Using NN 
Figure-8 and Figure-9 show the behaviour of the user for 
one month time duration. Behaviour is divided into four 
levels as mentioned in Table-1. According to these levels, if 
the predicted behavioural value is near the ‘0’, it means the 
users routine is more deviated from the normal routine 
activities and if it is near the ‘1’, it is more normal. Figure-8 
shows the first fifteen days and the Figure-9 shows the last 
fifteen days of the month. In Figure-8, the behaviour of the 
user for first nine days remains average normal as most of 
the predicted behavioural value lies between behavioural 
range of ‘0.5 - 0.7’. This can be verified from Figure-6 as 
well that shows the regularity in the distributions of ‘Home’ 
and ‘Work’ patterns and shows that user did not make any 
unusual movements. However, on 10th and 12th day of the 
month, between 5a.m – 7a.m and 10a.m – 12p.m 
respectively there is a change in behaviour when the user’s 
(H, W, E and N) distributions in Figure-6 show an irregular 
routine activity. NN detects this behavioural change and is 
shown in the Figure-8 with two sharp low peaks on 10th and 
12th day of the month. 
 
Figure 8. First Fifteen Days Behaviour Detected from Cell Tower ID Data 
Using NN 
In Figure-9, last fifteen days of the month also show 
some routines that deviate from the normal behavior of the 
user. These routines are shown by sharp low peaks on 17th, 
24th, 27th and 30th day of the month. These unusual routines 
are mostly detected on the week days in the morning before 
the office hours and some times during the office hours. As 
the user in these experiments belongs to academia, these 
results may show that, he or she most likely attending some 
seminar or a social function that is not part of the normal 
routine or due to health or traffic reasons, user sometimes 
comes late in the campus.  
 
 
Figure 9. Last Fifteen Days Behaviour Detected from Cell 
Tower ID Data Using NN 
B. Behaviour Analysis from Cell Tower ID Data Using 
Decision Trees 
Figure-10 shows the basic architecture used to get the 
behaviour of an individual using DT algorithm. According to 
[20], DT classifies the instances by sorting them based on 
their feature values. Features are represented by different 
nodes in the DT’s, and the value of the nodes is represented 
by the branches. Starting at the root node, each instance is 
classified and sorted depending upon the feature values. 
Root node is the feature value that best separates the data. 
The most well-known algorithm to build a DT is the C4.5 
[23] and is used in this research work. The training and test 
data used for this algorithm is only the cell tower ID data of 
the same user as is considered in the previous section with 
NN. As already mentioned, this cell tower ID data is already 
divided into Home (H), Work (W), Elsewhere (E) and 
NoSignal (N) locations.  
6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 10. Data Processing Design Using C4.5 Algorithm 
Figure-11 shows the behaviour detection of the user for 
the first fifteen days of the data using DT (C4.5 algorithm). 
These results show that the detections made by the DT are 
uniform as compared to NN, which are irregular. A DT 
consists of nodes and branches. Depending upon the four 
different behavioural levels, each node on DT represents a 
single behavioural level unlike NN that gives a predicted 
value that can be in between two different levels. The 
unusual routine activities are represented by the sharp low 
peaks in Figure-9. Another observation made is that all the 
unusual routines detected by DT lie in the range of 
‘Low_Abnormal’ behavioural level and none of these are in 
‘Abnormal’ level, unlike NN. A reason can be the biasing 
nature of the DT.  
 
 
Figure 11. First Fifteen Days Behaviour Detected from Cell Tower ID Data 
using DT 
C. Accuracy Comparison between NN and DT  in detecting 
behaviour from cell tower 
The comparison criteria for both NN and DT used here 
are the time required for learning and the percentage 
accuracy P = Nc / Nt , where ‘Nc’ is total number of correct 
detections and ‘Nt’ is the total number of detections. The 
results show that DT has some advantages over NN. The 
first advantage of induction of DT is its easy use and second 
advantage is that it requires fewer amounts of training data 
to train the classifier.  The training time required for DT is 
also less as compared to the NN. For 3024 samples of 
training data and on a Pentium-IV 2.4GHz – processor with 
2GB RAM, it takes only a few seconds until a decision tree 
has been trained. Whereas on the same system, NN takes 
about 13 minutes for complete training. However; the most 
important point for the specific problem here is, how 
accurate is the detection of behaviour by using DT as 
compared to the NN. For this purpose, percentage accuracy 
of both NN and DT is calculated. For 720 detections, the 
percentage accuracy of NN is 93% whereas DT gives the 
percentage accuracy of 86.3%.  The bench data used for the 
calculation of percentage accuracy is the original data set of 
cell tower ID that was already classified into H, W, E and N. 
The reason behind the difference in the accuracy can be the 
biasing limitation of decision trees. As NN gives more 
accurate results in terms of percentage accuracy, for further 
processing and behaviour detection using Bluetooth 
proximity data, only NN will be used. 
VI. BEHAVIOUR ANALYSIS FROM BLUETOOTH 
PROXIMITY DATA 
Bluetooth proximity data is available in the form of 
detected devices as a result of a scanning performed by the 
user’s cell phone after every five minutes. Each scanning 
results a list of devices present within the range of 5-10m. 
The first aim is to classify this list of detected proximate 
Bluetooth devices into different locations, i.e. ‘Home’, 
‘Office’, ‘Other Devices’ and ‘No Devices Found’. List of 
Bluetooth proximate devices does not give any direct 
information about the location of the user. The reason for 
classification of Bluetooth devices is to obtain the user’s 
movement patterns on daily and hourly basis. By doing so, 
the Bluetooth data format will become same as of cell tower 
ID data as shown in Figure-4 and the methodology applied 
on cell tower ID data can be used with the Bluetooth data as 
well.  
Another reason is that the results obtained from cell 
tower ID data and the Bluetooth proximity data can be 
compared at the end to see if we could get some interesting 
anomalies in behaviour of the user.  
After analysing the Bluetooth proximity data, user’s 
home computer device was given the name ‘Home’ (H). 
That means all those time slots in which user detect his 
home computer device, considered as ‘H’ because it shows 
user’s presence in the home. For office, there are many 
devices that user detects during office hours. To obtain a 
group of devices that belong to the office, we remove the 
weekends from one month data and use Jaccard index [24], 
to detect how similar the detected devices are throughout the 
office hours for all remaining weekdays. Jaccard similarity 
equation is:  
 
|
|
|
|
( , )
B
A
B
A
J A B



 
(2) 
where, ‘A’ and ‘B’ are sets of detected devices in two 
consecutive days. At the start, ‘A’ and ‘B’ represent day-1 
7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and day-2, then day-2 and day-3 and so on up to the all 
remaining weekdays that left after removing the weekends 
from one month of Bluetooth data.  
 
 
Figure 12. Jaccard Vertex Similarity 
Figure-12 gives the similarity of detected Bluetooth 
proximate devices during the office hours between the pairs 
of consecutive days. The average similarity between the 
detected devices is above 0.5. This means there are many 
devices that user detects repeatedly during his office hours. 
All those devices that user detects for at least 70% of the 
days during office hours goes in ‘Office’ group. All other 
devices go in ‘Other Devices’ class.  
After classifying the devices, a new data matrix is 
generated that contains twenty four time slots for each day as 
were in the case of cell tower ID data. Each time slot is 
assigned one of these classes (i.e., Home, Office, Other 
Devices, No Devices Found) depending upon the number of 
detections of the devices belonging to a specific class. 
Behaviour analysis frame work discussed in Section-4 is 
used to analyse the behaviour of low entropy user with 
Bluetooth proximity data using NN.   
Figure-13 shows the Home/Work distribution of 
locations depending on the presence of user at different 
locations obtained from the Bluetooth data classes. The 
whole day is divided into twenty four time slots and each 
slot only represents one of the four classes depending upon 
the devices with which user spent most of his time. 
 
 
Figure 13. Distribution of Home/Work Transitions of Bluetooth Data 
 Figure-14 shows the fifteen days behaviour of the user 
detected from Bluetooth proximity data. An interesting 
observation can be made by analysing the behaviour 
detection results of both cell tower ID data in Figure-8 and 
Bluetooth ID data in Figure-14. It is observed that 
sometimes when behaviour detected from cell tower ID data 
is normal and no unusual pattern is detected, a change in 
behaviour or an unusual routine is detected from Bluetooth 
proximity data.  For example on day-3, cell tower ID data 
shows normal behaviour in Figure-8, whereas an unusual 
routine is detected from Bluetooth proximity data on the 
same day shown in Figure-14. It can be said that it is more 
likely to be detecting unusual behaviour because during a 
regular routine of office hours of a weekday, user is 
supposed to detect ‘Office Devices’. Cell tower ID data 
shows this as a normal behaviour because the user is in 
‘Office’ where he should be normally. Whereas Bluetooth 
proximity data can be pointing towards some gathering or 
meeting of students or staff that is not part of the regular 
routine. Behaviour detected from Bluetooth proximity data 
can be pointing towards that activity.  
 
 
Figure 14. Fifteen Days Behaviour Using Bluetooth Proximity Data 
VII. FURTHER ANALYSIS 
So far, behaviour analysis obtained from contextual 
information of both GSM cell tower and Bluetooth 
proximity data have been presented. It is observed that the 
cell tower ID data gives high level behaviour of low entropy 
mobile people depending upon user’s location and 
movement in different GSM cells. Unusual behaviour in 
these movement patterns can be obtained from the cell tower 
ID data. As GSM cells cover large physical area, it can only 
give user’s location and does not give information about the 
low level activities such as attending the lecture, sitting in 
office with colleagues, going for shopping. On the other 
hand, Bluetooth proximity data gives information about 
other people and Bluetooth devices that are present in the 
close proximity of the user. It also gives information about 
the social relationships and most likely low level activities 
depending upon the detection of other proximate devices.  
As the nature of contextual information obtained from 
cell tower and Bluetooth proximity data is different, it is 
interesting to analyse the difference of behaviour detected 
through this data statistically. For this purpose, we have used 
Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence [25], Kernel Density 
Estimation Function and Empirical Cumulative Distribution 
Function (ECDF). KL Divergence has been calculated and it 
gives the value of 0.4568.  KL is a non-symmetric measure 
of the difference between two probability distributions as 
shown in Equation 3.  
 
8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

  
 
KLሺܲ||ܳሻ ൌ ෍ ܲሺ݅ሻlog ܲሺ݅ሻ
ܳሺ݅ሻ
௜
 
(3) 
where P(i) and Q(i) is the value obtained by taking the 
histogram of cell tower ID data and Bluetooth proximity 
data respectively. The value obtained from KL shows that 
there is difference in the behaviour detected by cell tower ID 
data and Bluetooth proximity data. This supports the 
argument that it is possible to use only Bluetooth proximity 
data to detect some behaviour of low entropy people that 
deviates from the normal routine, although Bluetooth doesn’t 
give strong information about the location of the user.  
 
 
Figure 15. Kernel Density Estimation of Behaviour Detected from Cell 
Tower ID and Bluetooth Proximity Data 
Figure-15 shows the Kernel Density Estimation [26] of 
two weeks of behaviour detected by both cell tower ID data 
and Bluetooth proximity data. Kernel Density Estimation is 
a non-parametric way of estimating the probability density 
function of a random variable. In our case, it estimates the 
probability density function of the behavioural values 
obtained by using both cell tower ID data and Bluetooth 
proximity data. The results in Figure-15 show that the 
Bluetooth proximity data show more unusual activities and 
routines. The peak shown around the behavioural value ‘0.5’ 
in the Kernel Destiny Function of the Bluetooth data means 
that there are most likely many patterns in which users 
behaviour seems to be ‘Low_Abnormal’ means a little 
deviated from the normal routine. This shows that different 
routines and behaviour that deviate from the normal daily 
life routines of a low entropy user can be detected by using 
the Bluetooth proximity data. 
In order to analyse difference of behaviour detected by 
using cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity data in more 
detail, ECDF is also applied on the behavioural data. 
Empirical CDF is the cumulative distribution function 
associated with the empirical measure of the sample. Figure-
16 shows the empirical distribution function applied on the 
behavioural data obtained using cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data. X-Axis shows the behavioural levels and Y-
Axis gives the probability of exceeding the corresponding 
value on X-axis (Behavioural Levels). It shows the 
difference between the behaviour detected by cell tower ID 
and Bluetooth proximity data.  
 
 
Figure 16. Empirical Cumulative Distribution Funtionc of Behaviour 
Detected from cell Tower ID and Bluetooth Proximity Data 
Above mentioned results show that data collected from 
mobile devices such as cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data can be used for behaviour and routine 
activities detection. Bluetooth proximity data itself does not 
give much information about the location of the user but if 
this data is classified into different locations and user’s 
movement patterns are obtained, then this data can give 
more insight into the behaviour of low entropy people. 
Proximity data gives information about the social 
relationship and activities that require social interaction of 
the users. If this data is used with the cell tower ID data, it 
can give extra information about the routines that deviates 
from the normal routine patterns. These results show that for 
low entropy users, the detection of unusual routines and 
behaviours by using only Bluetooth data is also possible. 
Low entropy users follow specific routines as compared to 
high entropy individuals, who live more diverse lives; 
therefor chances of detection of regular routines of low 
entropy users become more. This study aims to aid elderly 
people and patients to detect abnormal and unusual 
behaviours to avoid any accidents. Normally patients and 
elderly people have fixed and limited routines to follow that 
can likely be detected using Bluetooth devices by classifying 
the Bluetooth Proximity data into different activities or 
communities. 
VIII. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, real time Bluetooth proximity and cell 
tower ID data is used to detect activities and routines of an 
individual that deviates from the normal daily life routines 
by using NN and DT. A low entropy user was selected for 
experiments due to the regularity and constancy in his 
routines. A successful detection of abnormal behaviour in 
this user’s routines is done by using cell tower ID’s and 
Bluetooth proximity data. NN and DT are used as decision 
engines to detect the behaviour of the user by using cell 
tower ID data. NN are found more accurate as compared to 
9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the DT in detection. However; DT requires less data and 
takes less time for training.  
Bluetooth proximity data is classified into four different 
categories by using Jaccard Index. To detect anomalies in 
more specific and lower level activities and routines, we 
need to classify the Bluetooth proximity data into temporal 
clusters. In future work, we will try to classify the Bluetooth 
proximity data on temporal scale to cover the minute details 
of the user’s behaviour and will also try to predict the 
behaviour based on these classes and communities detection 
using pervasive computing`. This will provide one step 
further in the identification of unusual routines and activities 
by using only Bluetooth proximity data. This will help us to 
facilitate elderly people and patients who need more care 
and concern about their behaviour and unusual routines that 
can cause serious accidents.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work is funded by the Higher Education 
Commission of Pakistan under Faculty Development 
Program through University of Engineering & Technology 
Taxila, Pakistan.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Azam, M. A.  Tokarchuk, L.  Adeel, M. “Human Behaviour 
detection Using GSM Location Patterns and Bluetooth 
Proximity Data”. The Fourth International Conference on 
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Services and Technologies, 
pp. 428-433, Florence, Italy, 2010. 
[2] Hermersdorf, M. Nyholm, H. Perkio, J.  Tuulos, V. “Sensing 
in 
Rich 
Bluetooth 
Environments”- 
Workshop 
on 
WorldSensorWeb, in Proc. SenSys, 2006 - sensorplanet.org 
[3] Eagle, N. Pentland, A. “Reality mining: sensing complex 
social systems”. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 2006 – 
Springer, Vol. 10, # 4, 255-268 
[4] Gill, T. M. Desal, M.M. Evelyne, A. Holford, T. R. Williams, 
C. S. “Restricted-Activity among Community-Living Older 
Persons: 
Incidence, 
Participants, 
and 
Health 
Care 
Utilization”, 
Annals 
of 
Internal 
Medicine.  
http://www.annals.org/content/135/5/313.full.pdf+html 
[5] Azam, M. A.  Laurissa, T. (2009). “Behaviour Detection 
Using 
Bluetooth 
Proximity 
Data”;. 
Proceedings 
of 
Networking & Electronic Commerce Research Conference, 
pp. 46-52 (NAEC 2009). 
[6]  Hara, K. Omori, T. Ueno, R. “Detection of unusual human 
behaviour in intelligent house”; Proceedings of the 2002 12th 
IEEE workshop on Neural Networks for Signal Processing, 
pp. 697-706, 2002. 
[7] Yiping, T.  Zhiying, Z. Hui, G.  Huiqiang, L. Wei, W.  Gang, 
X.  “Elder Abnormal Activity Detection by Data Mining”, 
SICE Annual Conference in Sapporo, August 4-6, 2004, vol. 
1, pp. 837–840 (2004) Japan 
[8] Wren, C. Ivanov, Y. Kaur, I. Leigh, D. Westhues, J.  
“SocialMotion: Measuring the Hidden Social Life of a 
Building”. In: J. Hightower, B. Schiele, and T. Strang, (eds.) 
LoCA 2007. LNCS, vol. 4718, pp. 85–102. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2007) 
[9] McCowan, I.  Gatica-Perez, D. Bengio, S.  Lathoud, G. 
“Automatic Analysis of Multimodal Group Actions in 
Meetings”. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence (T-PAMI) 27(3), 305–317 (2005) 
[10] Stiefelhagen, R. Bernardin, K. Ekenel, H.K. McDonough, J. 
Nickel, K.  Voit, M. Woelfel, M. “Audio-Visual Perception 
of a Lecturer in a Smart Seminar Room”. In: Signal 
Processing - Special Issue on Multimodal Interfaces, vol. 86 
(12). Elsevier, Amsterdam (2006) 
[11] Eagle, N. “Machine Perception and Learning of Complex 
Social Systems”, Ph.D. Thesis, Program in Media Arts and 
Sciences,  MIT, June 2005 
[12] Nicolai, T. Behrens, N. Yoneki, E. “Wireless Rope: 
Experiment in social proximity sensing with Bluetooth”. In 
fourth annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing, LNCS 4277, 2006 
[13] Farrahi, K. Gatica-Perez, D.  “Daily Routine Classification 
from 
Mobile 
Phone 
Data”. 
In: 
Popescu-Belis, 
A., 
Stiefelhagen, R. (eds.) MLMI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5237, pp. 
173–184. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
[14] Farrahi, K. Gatica-Perez, D.  “What did you do today? 
Discovering daily routines from Large-Scale Mobile Data”. 
In: MM 2008: Proceeding of the 16th ACM International 
Conference on Multimedia, pp. 849–852. ACM, New York 
(2008) 
[15] Vukovic, M. Vujnovic, G. Grubisic, D. “Adaptive User 
Movement 
Prediction 
for 
Advanced 
Location-aware 
Services”, Proceedings of the 17th international conference 
on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks, 
pp. 343-347 (2009)  
[16] Vukovic, M. Lovrek, I. Jevtic, D. “Predicting user movement 
for advanced location-aware services”. In 15th International    
Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer 
Networks, pp. 1–5. SoftCOM 2007, 2007. 
[17] Tabia, K. Benferhat, S. “On the Use of Decision Trees as 
behavioural Approaches in Intrusion Detection”. In Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Machine 
Learning 
and 
Applications, 2008. ICMLA’08. 
[18] Hu, D. H. Zhang, X.  Yin, J. Zheng, V.W.  Yang, Q.  
“Abnormal Activity Recognition Based on HDP-HMM 
Models”, AAAI Publications, 21st International Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence,  pp. 1715–1720, 2009  
[19] Eagle, N.  Clauset, A. Quinn, J. A.  “Location Segmentaion, 
Inference and Prediction for Anticipatory Computing”, 
AAAI Spring Symposium, 2009 
[20] Kotsiantis, S. “Supervised Machine Learning: A Review of 
Classification Techniques”, Informatica Journal 31, pp. 249-
268, 2007. 
[21] Rumelhart, D. E. Hinton, G. E. Williams, R. J. “Learning 
Internal Representations by Error Propapgation”. In: 
Rumelhart D. E., McClelland J L et. al. (eds) Parallel 
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of 
Cognition. MIT press, Cambridge, MA, Vol. 1, pp. 318-362. 
[22] Linear Neural Networks, retrieved on 03-09-2011, retrieved 
from http://www.idsia.ch/NNcourse/linear2.html 
[23] Quinlan, J. R. “C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning”. 
Morgan Kaufmann San Francisco. 
[24] Jaccard Index, retrieved on 03-09-2011, retrieved from 
http://www.statemaster.com/encyclopedia/Jaccard-index 
[25] Kullback, S. Leibler, R. A. (1951). “On Information and 
Sufficiency”. Annals of Methematical Statistics 22(1): 79-86. 
[26] Rosenblatt, M.  (1956). "Remarks on some nonparametric 
estimates of a density function". Annals of Mathematical 
Statistics 27: 832–837. 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

