A Virtual Patient Simulator Based on Human Connectome and 7 T MRI for Deep 
Brain Stimulation 
Giorgio Bonmassar 
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for 
Biomedical Imaging 
Department of Radiology 
Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, 
Charlestown, MA 
Giorgio.bonmassar@mgh.harvard.edu 
Leonardo M. Angelone 
Office of Science and Engineering 
Laboratories, 
Center for Devices and Radiological 
Health, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration,  
Silver Spring, MD 
Leonardo.angelone@fda.hhs.gov 
Nikos Makris 
Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurology 
Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, 
Charlestown, MA 
nikos@cma.mgh.harvard.edu 
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents a virtual model of patients with 
Deep Brain Stimulation implants. The model is based on 
Human Connectome and 7 Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) data.  We envision that the proposed virtual patient 
simulator will enable radio frequency power dosimetry on 
patients with deep brain stimulation implants undergoing 
MRI. Results from the proposed virtual patient study may 
facilitate the use of clinical MRI instead of computed 
tomography scans.  The virtual patient will be flexible and 
morphable to relate to patient-specific neurological and 
psychiatric conditions such as Obsessive Compulsive Disorder, 
which benefit from deep brain stimulation. 
Keywords - VPS; DBS; OCD; MRI; CT; safety; specific 
absorption rate; SAR; heating. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Many deep brain stimulation (DBS) patients may require 
regular MRI examinations throughout the course of their 
lives since MRI is often the diagnostic tool of choice for 
monitoring structural changes in the brain [1]. Whole-body 
MRI examination is used in many common injuries 
following accidents and comorbidities. Moreover, functional 
MRI could be potentially useful to assess the effects of 
electrical stimulation of the basal ganglia [2].  Because of 
safety concerns more than 300,000 per year patients with 
implanted leads (e.g., pacemakers, DBS, and catheters) are 
denied MRI [3].  One of the main concerns regarding use of 
MRI for DBS implants is related to potential radio 
frequency (RF) – induced heating [4][7].  The RF waves 
used in MRI to elicit signal from the tissue interact with the 
conductive leads generating potentially high induced 
currents along the leads (“antenna effect”) and increased RF 
power deposition near the distal tip of the leads [8].  
Unfortunately two cases of serious, permanent neurological 
injury related to the antenna effect of DBS leads during MRI 
were reported [9][10].  In one case, one patient with two 
bilateral implants underwent a routine MRI of the lumbar 
spine and reported a hemiplegia.  The authors of the report 
associate the injury to the RF-induced currents generated by 
the body coil on the DBS implants, which produced an 
edema near one of the implants with the consequent 
paralysis [10]. Additionally, a case of neurological deficit 
(i.e., 
double-vision 
and 
severe 
right-sided 
motor 
contractions) in a patient with bilateral DBS leads who 
 
Figure 1: (I) Coronal section at the C.A.P. (Caudate-Accumbens-Putamen) level of a 7T high-resolution (100 m3 isotropic) ex-vivo 
human dataset showing detailed anatomy of the VC/VS target area (cross-hair in red) within the anterior limb of the internal capsule. (II) 
DSI connectome data set. The Connectome MRI data (voxel size: 2 × 2 × 2 mm3) could be reliable in identifying the fiber tracks for 
connecting OCD targets, (III) electrode placement in the VC/VS target area traversed by fibers (yellow fibers) of the ventromedial 
prefrontal-basal ganglia tract at the C.A.P. coronal slice. The latter fibers stem from the ventromedial prefrontal area (yellow block). 
(A=nucleus accumbens, C=caudate nucleus, P=putamen), (IV) Model of the implanted DBS electrode. 
364
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

underwent diathermy was also reported [11]. Recently 
Shrivastava et al. reported temperature increases up to 30C 
in the tissue near DBS electrodes implanted in suine 
undergoing high field MRI (i.e., 9.4 Tesla) [12].  Based on 
guidelines approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), in the US MRI can be used in DBS 
patients with very specific conditions [13]. For example, it 
is possible to scan patients with DBS implants only with a 
transmit head coil.  Also, the use of 3T MRI systems, 
including the state-of-the-art MRI multichannel transmit 
coils, is contraindicated.   
 Computational models have been used as a supporting 
tool to evaluate RF-dosimetry in MRI. Numerical DBS 
models are based on a wire or set of wires, which represents 
the virtual DBS implant, superimposed to healthy human 
brain models [8][14].  Several numerical models for 
electromagnetic analysis of DBS have been proposed 
[15][20]. Recently, anatomically precise head models with 
implanted DBS leads with a multiscale resolution up to 
0.2mm3 isotropic were also developed [8][21]. The models 
were based on Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) 
simulations. FDTD models have been validated in the past 
against temperature measurements, showing an accuracy of 
20% as predicted by the bioheat equation [22] with respect 
to whole-body specific absorption rate (SAR).  The DBS 
models described above allowed for accurate geometrical 
modeling of implanted leads as well as precise computation 
of 1g- and 10g-averaged SAR. Nevertheless, the models 
were characterized by a limited precision with respect to 
anatomical modeling of the structures involved in the 
stimulation, anisotropic dielectric constants, information 
about head perfusion, and the tissue scar from the surgery.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the significance of the different tools used for the 
modeling. Section III describes the methods used. Section IV 
presents the results. Section V includes the discussion.  The 
acknowledgement and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE 
A. Importance of structural MRI-based modeling 
Neurocircuitry 
models 
of 
Obsessive-Compulsive 
Disorder (OCD) pathophysiology are currently supported by 
neuroimaging studies indicating the critical role of abnormal 
frontal-basal 
ganglia–thalamic 
circuits 
(cortico-striato-
thalamo-cortical or CSTC circuitry). The most relevant 
anatomical structures involved are the orbital frontal cortex 
(OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the ventral striatum 
and medial thalamus. It has been reported that in OCD fiber 
tracts connecting these centers may be abnormal [23] and 
that ablating or modulating these white matter pathways 
(e.g., in anterior cinglulotomy or anterior capsulotomy) as 
well as DBS on the Ventral Capsule/Ventral Striatum 
(VC/VS) may be associated with therapeutic improvement 
[24]. The VC/VS in the Anterior Limb of the Internal 
Capsule (ALIC, which is approximately 20 mm long in its 
dorsoventral extension and 2-5 mm wide mediolaterally at 
the coronal sections where the nucleus accumbens is 
present) is currently a target for DBS in OCD (Medtronic, 
Minneapolis, MN) (Fig.1). More specifically, a small fiber 
tract connecting the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) 
with the medial thalamus, basal ganglia and brainstem 
(vmPFC-BG) is thought to be a central to OCD 
pathophysiology and treatment response. The latter is a 
relatively small fiber bundle, of about 2 mm in diameter, 
which courses approximately 4-5 mm above the nucleus 
accumbens septi interconnecting ventral prefrontal cortex 
with basal ganglia, thalamus and the brainstem [24]. Given 
the increased clinical practice and efficacy of DBS in OCD, 
the accurate anatomical characterization of this surgical 
target in terms of its precise location, relative topography 
with surrounding structures (in particular with the nucleus 
accumbens septi and the anterior commissure) and size 
represents an important goal for numerical models – such as 
the Virtual Patient Simulator described herein– for DBS 
modeling.  
Figure 2: (A-C) Images of CTA acquired at the Radiology Department at MGH with 600µm in plane resolution, (B,C) 3D reconstruction with 
bone subtraction using dual energy CTA. (D) Illustration of how vasculature may wrap around an electrode.  
365
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Importance of Connectome-based modeling 
 
Anisotropy of electrical properties of tissue arises in 
nerve and muscle fibers which consist of bundles of long, 
parallel myelinated elements.  The VPS model described 
here will include Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) data, to 
model tissue anisotropic conductivity [25]. To generate the 
model, the acquired diffusion tensor D will be converted 
into a complex relative permittivity tensor *
ε
 using a 
simple linear transform 
D
ε*


d
 *
, where *

 is the 
tissue complex relative permittivity [26] and d is the 
diffusivity.   
Preliminary data (Fig. 1.B) show that Connectome MRI 
data (voxel size: 2 × 2 × 2 mm3) may be reliable in 
identifying the fiber tracks connecting vmPFC and BG.  The 
gradient strength determines the sensitivity, accuracy, and 
resolution of diffusion imaging.  Data were acquired with a 
new Connectome scanner, installed at the A. A. Martinos 
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, purpose-built for 
diffusion MRI with ultra-high gradients of 300 mT m-1.  As 
shown by a recent study [27] this technology allows for 
enhanced sensitivity and resolution of white matter imaging 
and MRI tractography of 5-10 fold over any other human 
DTI or High-Angular Resolution Diffusion Imaging 
(HARDI) such as the Diffusion Spectrum Imaging (DSI) 
technology.  Fiber tracks were generated by using spatial 
information derived from high spatial resolution ex-vivo 
diffusion imaging (voxel size: 100 µm isotropic).  . 
C.  Importance of Computed Tomography Angiography 
(CTA)-based modeling 
Heat transport in biological tissues, which is usually 
expressed by the Pennes bio-heat equation, is a complex 
process that involves thermal conduction in tissues, 
convection and perfusion of blood (delivery of the arterial 
blood to a capillary bed in tissues).  The underlying 
assumption of lack of perfusion used for many in vitro 
studies is often considered as a worst-case scenario for 
temperature changes at the distal tip and related tissue 
injury. However, a more accurate solution may be computed 
by solving the partial differential bioheat equation [28]: 
 
 
Figure 3: 3D reconstructions of ventromedial prefrontal (vmPFC) fibers and the anterior commissure (AC) from DSI connectome data 
of an individual subject (same as Fig. 1). Frontal (I., II, III, and IV) and lateral (IV and V) views showing vmPFC fibers connecting 
different regions of the orbital frontal cortex (lateral L_OFC, medial M_OFC and central C_OFC orbital frontal cortex) with the 
thalamus (Th). The vmPFC fibers are located dorsal to AC as shown in zoomed views (II and IV). Other abbreviations: C = caudate 
nucleus and P=putamen. 
366
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

࣋࡯࢖
డ்
డ௧ െ ׏ ∙ ሺ࢑׏ܶሻ െࡹሺܶሻ ൅ࡼሺܶሻሺܶ െ ܶ஻ሻ ൅
ࡾࡸሺܶሻ ൌ 2  ࡿ࡭ࡾ    (2) 
 
Where ρ is the mass density [kg/m3], ࡯࢖  is the heat 
capacity [J/(kg C)], ׏ܶ the gradient of temperature [C], k 
is the thermal conductivity [W/(m C)], M is the metabolic 
heat production [J/(s m3)], P is perfusion parameter [J/(s C 
m3)] which becomes the heat loss when multiplied by the 
difference between the tissue temperature (T) and the blood 
temperature (TB), RL is the respiratory heat loss [J/(s m3)], 
and ࡿ࡭ࡾ is the local specific absorption rate [W/kg] in the 
tissue generating the Joule heating. Bold symbols indicate 
vector fields or space dependent quantities (e.g., mass 
density is spatially variant, as it depends on the particular 
tissue [29]. The anatomical head model can be improved by 
including a realistic vascular structure and studying its 
thermal effect of perfusion and estimation of perfusion 
parameter (P) in the bioheat equation (eq.2).  The realistic 
vasculature can be extracted from CTA images (Fig. 2).   
 
D. Importance of Tissue Scaring around the DBS Electrode 
Chronically implanted recording electrodes provoke an 
immune reaction against them.  The histopathological 
finding is that of gliosis and spongiosis around the electrode 
track, which forms an encapsulation layer referred to as the 
“glial scar”.  This reactive glial tissue which surrounds the 
implanted electrodes is approximately 200 m thick and 
progressively isolated the electrode from surrounding 
neurons modifying the electric field and acts as a natural 
neuro protector against heating of the electrode tips. The 
conductivity and permittivity of the scar tissue can be 
modelled at the frequency of interest (e.g., 128 MHz for a 
3T MRI system) as a ring around the electrodes. The scar 
tissue will affect the bio-heat modeling behaving as a 
thermal insulating shield, thus improving the accuracy of the 
model. 
E. Impact of the new RF pulse 
The issue of heating of implants during MRI has been 
studied for several years [30] and analytical solutions (e.g., 
Green’s function) to the problem have been proposed for 
simple geometries. Modifications of the implant leads and 
wires for reducing the RF-induced heating have been 
proposed introducing chokes or special geometrical paths of 
the wire. However, design modifications may be not 
appropriate for patients who already have DBS implants, 
since replacing the original leads with new leads requires 
major brain surgery. Because RF heating depends on the 
MRI RF transmit field, recent studies have focused on the 
modification of the transmit field in order to minimize the 
electric field in and around the implant and thus reducing 
the RF-induced heating near the implant.   
III. 
METHODS 
The study is based on ex-vivo analysis of collected 7 
Tesla (7T) T2* and Connectome diffusion MRI data.  
 
A. Overview of study design, data acquisition and analysis. 
(a) Structural T2* 7 Tesla MRI data The model is 
generated by segmenting 21 different brain structural 
entities on the ex-vivo structural MRI, as well as 28 non-
brain structural entities following the approach described in 
Makris and colleagues [29]. The new head model now 
contains both the PD and the OCD targets found using 
tractographic methods.  This ex-vivo brain consisted of MRI 
data 
of 
a 
hemisphere 
fixed 
in 
Periodate-Lysine-
Paraformaldehyde (PLP) using the following parameters: 
T2*-W, 
100 
m3 
isotropic 
resolution, 
Figure 4: (A) Human head model with prototype of RTS and PEC implant (B) Computed SAR for the head model and the two 
implants. The 1mm3 SAR at the tip of the RTS lead (P1) was five –order of magnitude lower compared to SAR at the tip of PEC lead 
(P2) (C) Results of electromagnetic simulations showing a high energy deposition near the distal tip of a monolateral metallic DBS lead. 
C
367
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TR/TE/flip=40ms/20ms/20°, 
1600×1100×896 
matrix.  
Segmentation 
of 
OCD-DBS 
target-related 
cerebral 
structures – specifically the  putamen, caudate nucleus, 
nucleus accumbens and anterior limb of the internal capsule 
– were manually outlined (on a re-sampled dataset at 1 mm 
isotropic spatial resolution of the original ex-vivo high-
resolution – 100 m3 isotropic resolution – dataset acquired 
at 7 Tesla) using the segmentation methods by Filipek [31] 
and Makris [32], which have been developed and validated 
at the MGH Center for Morphometric Analysis, and have 
been implemented in several clinical studies. 
The VC/VS in the ALIC is currently a target for DBS for 
OCD. It was approved in 2009 by the FDA with a 
Humanitarian Device Exemption (HDE) [33]. Importantly, a 
structure within this large territory, namely the vmPFC-BG 
tract is thought to be a more specific target for this 
procedure in OCD. Even though this is a relatively small 
fiber bundle, the ALIC/VS was segmented as follows by 
reaping the benefits of the high-resolution dataset.  
(a) The anterior limb of the internal capsule is delimited 
medially by the head of the caudate nucleus, laterally by the 
putamen and ventrally by the nucleus accumbens. These 
structures were delineated by direct visualization using 
intensity-based contours in the Cardviews software 
system. 
 (b) Connectome DSI data were acquired on the 
Connectome 3T scanner using Gmax = 300 mT/m. This data 
acquisition was done on a 64-channel coil array using a 
single refocused spin echo sequence with the following 
features: TR = 2800 ms, TE = 56 ms, 63 axial slices, FOV = 
220 mm, R = 3 GRAPPA, 2.0 mm isotropic resolution (BW 
= 2390 Hz/px), b = 15,000 s/mm2.  These data were 
Figure 5: Anatomically fine-grained head model with a co-registered intracranial implant (white) and insulation (yellow). The coronal view
show the 29 tissues manually segmented. The corresponding color code for each tissue is to the left of the image.  (Bottom Left) 3D view of 
the head model and DBS implant, where external tissues (epidermis and subcutaneous tissue) have been removed for illustrative purposes.  
368
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

transformed into DTI data to estimate complex relative 
permittivity tensor introduced in eq. (1). The vmPFC-BG 
tract was delineated using diffusion Connectome data as 
shown in Fig. 1.II. DTI/DSI data were visually validated by 
comparing the computed fiber tracks with anatomical atlases 
giving particular emphasis to the basal ganglia region as 
shown in Fig. 1.I. Furthermore, DTI/DSI data provided 
detailed information on the fiber tract connectivity between 
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, basal ganglia, and 
thalamus. The latter is useful for DBS programming [35] 
and basic neuroscience research. 
B. Numerical Model of Deep Brain Stimulation implant 
A high-resolution model was generated based on the 
MRI data by distinguishing twenty-one brain [31] and 
twenty-eight non-brain anatomical structural entities.  Each 
of the anatomical structural entities was associated to an 
electrical structural entity with electrical properties defined 
according to the literature [36][37]. The overall head 
dimensions were 170 mm in width, 217 mm in depth, and 
238 mm in height and the total volume of the head model 
was 4,642,730 mm3. The model was used for RF dosimetry 
studies of clinical significance [8], including preliminary 
studies with DBS implants. Two bilateral implants were 
modeled as insulated wires connected to the left and/or right 
targets in the head [10]. The wires were modeled as a 
perfect electric conductor (PEC) and the dielectric was 
modeled as Teflon. A four-electrode connection [35] was 
also modeled in full detail reaping the benefits of the high 
spatial resolution (Fig. 1). 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In the model preliminary developed, the OCD target 
structures for DBS were identified and segmented using 
high-resolution T2*-W, diffusion spectrum MRI data, and 
electromagnetic simulations for MRI safety.  
Fig. 3.I and 3.II show data from a manual segmentation 
procedure to outline the different anatomical structures 
related to the VC/VS target area derived from a high-
resolution 7 Tesla dataset and DSI-based tractography. 
Furthermore, the fiber connections between the orbital 
frontal cortex and the thalamus were reconstructed 
tractographically, visualizing them in relation to the anterior 
commissure (AC) to elucidate the spatial relationships 
between these fiber tracts. Fig. 3 shows that the vmPFC 
fibers – connecting different regions of the orbital frontal 
cortex (lateral L_OFC, medial M_OFC and central C_OFC 
orbital frontal cortex) with the thalamus (Th) – follow a 
pattern of spatial organization. Specifically, in the orbital 
frontal region within the anterior limb of the internal capsule 
they verticalize from a lateral to medial horizontal 
deployment showing the following spatial distribution above 
the nucleus accumbens. The L_OFC fibers are more dorsal, 
the M_OFC ones are more ventral and the C_OFC fibers are 
in-between. With respect to the AC, vmPFC fibers are 
located dorsal to AC as shown in zoomed views (Fig 3.II 
and 3.IV).  
Fig. 4 shows an example of the numerical head model 
with implanted DBS leads modeled as resistive tapered 
stripline (RTS) [38] or metallic (PEC) wires. The model 
allowed simulating the high local SAR near the PEC lead as 
well as the lower local SAR near the tip of the RTS lead. 
Figure 6: Geometrical model of the coil array and our model [29] with examples of null (A) and uniform (B) eight-channel transmit phase 
array vectors [34].  . 
369
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Values were normalized to obtain a whole-head averaged 
SAR of 3.2 W/kg [10][39][40].  
Additionally, dual energy CTA images with bone 
subtraction (Fig. 2.B and 2.C) were performed using 
standard contrast agents.  Segmentation was obtained by 
standard thresholding [41] from the images containing 
enhanced vascular information validated by comparison 
with vascular atlases [42][44]. These data may be used to 
inform more precise thermal analysis and prediction of 
thermal response of target nuclei surrounding the DBS 
electrode exposed to RF energy (Fig. 2.D).   
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Clinical work in OCD indicates that several compulsive 
behaviors in this disorder are related to avoidance of 
putative dangerous situations.  The neural system that 
mediates avoidance is the same one that also underlies 
reward-seeking and comprises anterior cingulate/orbital 
frontal connections. Currently, neurosurgical procedures 
such as anterior cingulotomy, subcaudate tractotomy (SCT) 
and DBS are offered as an option to reduce symptom 
severity and increase quality of life in cases of medically 
intractable OCD. Given that 40-60% of patients with OCD 
do not have satisfactory response to optimal management 
[45], these procedures have been used for therapeutic 
benefit 
with 
very 
positive 
outcomes 
[46][49]. 
At 
Massachusetts General Hospital it has been recently shown 
that in 73% of these patients symptomatology was improved 
[50][51]. DBS is a therapeutic procedure aiming to change 
activity in fronto-basal ganglia circuits by injecting 
electrical stimulation in the Ventral Anterior Internal 
Capsule (VA-ALIC) and adjacent Ventral Striatum (VS), 
(i.e., nucleus accumbens septi). Given the efficacy of DBS 
and CST in cases of medically intractable OCD, an 
understanding of the disrupted connectivity is important to 
elucidate OCD psychopathology and provide guidance in 
making the SCT lesion or the DBS target more effective. 
Current Connectome and 7 Tesla MRI technology allows for 
more precise characterization of these targets for therapeutic 
intervention and of their relative topography.  
There have been reports of serious accidents associated 
with MRI-related heating [10]. However, OCD patients with 
DBS would benefit from regular MRI examinations, as MRI 
is often the diagnostic tool of choice to diagnose injury due 
to trauma or evaluate comorbidities. There are over 75,000 
patients with DBS implants worldwide and approximately 
only one patient over twenty is assessed with MRI.  In this 
pilot study the use of VPS in patients with DBS implants is 
investigated gathering preliminary results on the anatomical 
characterization of the OCD target structures for DBS. 
Within the study high-resolution 7 Tesla and Connectome 
MRI data were used and electromagnetic simulations for 
MRI safety were performed.  The surgical procedure may 
introduce structural changes that maybe seen with the MRI 
once it is found to be safe using the precautionary principle 
or precautionary approach to risk management states, which 
is adopted by all safety organizations including the FDA. 
Using VPN offers an avenue for showing that MRI may be 
performed conditionally safe, since VPN allows the 
estimation of safety parameters such as the Specific 
absorption rate, etc. Furthermore, the proposed new OCD 
VPS may allow for improved RF power dosimetry on 
patients with DBS implants undergoing MRI. For example, 
the proposed VPS could help evaluating the effect of 
different lead pathway (e.g., use of loops) (Fig. 5). Note that 
DBS electrodes/leads are very poor receiving coils, since are 
not tuned coils connected through coaxial cables [52]. 
Additionally, the VPS could help evaluate safety of patients 
with DBS implants undergoing MRI when using novel 
technologies, such as transmit array [34] (Fig. 6). Future 
OCD patients with DBS implants may profit from the 
proposed VPS by allowing for a MRI investigation instead 
of CT.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Funding provided by the National Institute of Health, 
National 
Institute 
of 
Biomedical 
Imaging 
and 
Bioengineering 1R21EB016449-01A1. he mention of 
commercial products, their sources, or their use in 
connection with material reported herein is not to be 
construed as either an actual or implied endorsement of such 
products by the Department of Health and Human Services. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
G. Bonmassar and N. Makris, "The Virtual Patient Simulator of Deep 
Brain Stimulation in the Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Based on 
Connectome and 7 Tesla MRI Data" in  - COGNITIVE 2014, The 
Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies 
and Applications, Venice, Italy, vol.10, pp.235-238, 2014. 
[2] 
P. R. Arantes, E. F. Cardoso, M. A. Barreiros, M. J. Teixeira, M. R. 
Goncalves, E. R. Barbosa, et al., "Performing functional magnetic 
resonance imaging in patients with Parkinson's disease treated with 
deep brain stimulation," Mov Disord, vol. 21, pp. 1154-62, Aug 2006. 
[3] 
F. G. Shellock and A. Spinazzi, "MRI safety update 2008: part 2, 
screening patients for MRI," AJR Am J Roentgenol, vol. 191, pp. 
1140-9, Oct 2008. 
[4] 
B. Stevenson, W. Dabney, and C. Frysz, "Issues and design solutions 
associated with performing MRI scans on patients with active 
implantable medical devices," Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 
vol. 2007, pp. 6167-70, 2007. 
[5] 
K. B. Baker, J. A. Tkach, M. D. Phillips, and A. R. Rezai, "Variability 
in RF-induced heating of a deep brain stimulation implant across MR 
systems," J Magn Reson Imaging, vol. 24, pp. 1236-42, Dec 2006. 
[6] 
R. Buchli, P. Boesiger, and D. Meier, "Heating effects of metallic 
implants by MRI examinations," Magn Reson Med, vol. 7, pp. 255-
61, Jul 1988. 
[7] 
C. K. Chou, J. A. McDougall, and K. W. Chan, "RF heating of 
implanted spinal fusion stimulator during magnetic resonance 
imaging," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 44, pp. 367-73, May 1997. 
[8] 
L. M. Angelone, J. Ahveninen, J. W. Belliveau, and G. Bonmassar, 
"Analysis of the role of lead resistivity in specific absorption rate for 
deep brain stimulator leads at 3T MRI," IEEE Trans Med Imaging, 
vol. 29, pp. 1029-38, Apr 2010. 
[9] 
J. Spiegel, G. Fuss, M. Backens, W. Reith, T. Magnus, G. Becker, et 
al., "Transient dystonia following magnetic resonance imaging in a 
patient with deep brain stimulation electrodes for the treatment of 
Parkinson disease. Case report," J Neurosurg, vol. 99, pp. 772-4, Oct 
2003. 
370
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10] J. M. Henderson, J. Tkach, M. Phillips, K. Baker, F. G. Shellock, and 
A. R. Rezai, "Permanent neurological deficit related to magnetic 
resonance imaging in a patient with implanted deep brain stimulation 
electrodes for Parkinson's disease: case report," Neurosurgery, vol. 
57, p. E1063; discussion E1063, Nov 2005. 
[11] C. Roark, S. Whicher, and A. Abosch, "Reversible neurological 
symptoms caused by diathermy in a patient with deep brain 
stimulators: case report," Neurosurgery, vol. 62, p. E256; discussion 
E256, Jan 2008. 
[12] D. Shrivastava, A. Abosch, T. Hanson, J. Tian, A. Gupte, P. A. 
Iaizzo, et al., "Effect of the extracranial deep brain stimulation lead 
on radiofrequency heating at 9.4 Tesla (400.2 MHz)," J Magn Reson 
Imaging, vol. 32, pp. 600-7, Sep 2010. 
[13] Medtronic, "MRI guidelines for Medtronic Deep Brain Stimulation 
Systems.," 2008. 
[14] E. Cabot, T. Lloyd, A. Christ, W. Kainz, M. Douglas, G. Stenzel, et 
al., "Evaluation of the RF heating of a generic deep brain stimulator 
exposed in 1.5 T magnetic resonance scanners," Bioelectromagnetics, 
vol. 34, pp. 104-13, Feb 2013. 
[15] M. Oliveri, G. Koch, S. Torriero, and C. Caltagirone, "Increased 
facilitation of the primary motor cortex following 1 Hz repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation of the contralateral cerebellum in 
normal humans," Neurosci Lett, vol. 376, pp. 188-93, Mar 16 2005. 
[16] C. R. Merritt, H. T. Nagle, and E. Grant, "Fabric-Based Active 
Electrode Design and Fabrication for Health Monitoring Clothing," 
Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 
13, pp. 274-280, 2009. 
[17] C. R. Butson, S. E. Cooper, J. M. Henderson, and C. C. McIntyre, 
"Patient-specific analysis of the volume of tissue activated during 
deep brain stimulation," Neuroimage, vol. 34, pp. 661-70, Jan 15 
2007. 
[18] M. Seyal, A. J. Shatzel, and S. P. Richardson, "Crossed inhibition of 
sensory cortex by 0.3 Hz transcranial magnetic stimulation of motor 
cortex," J Clin Neurophysiol, vol. 22, pp. 418-21, Dec 2005. 
[19] F. Tyc, A. Boyadjian, and H. Devanne, "Motor cortex plasticity 
induced by extensive training revealed by transcranial magnetic 
stimulation in human," Eur J Neurosci, vol. 21, pp. 259-66, Jan 2005. 
[20] M. M. Elwassif, A. Datta, A. Rahman, and M. Bikson, "Temperature 
control at DBS electrodes using a heat sink: experimentally validated 
FEM model of DBS lead architecture," J Neural Eng, vol. 9, p. 
046009, Aug 2012. 
[21] M. I. Iacono, N. Makris, L. Mainardi, L. M. Angelone, and G. 
Bonmassar, "MRI-based multiscale model for electromagnetic 
analysis in the human head with implanted DBS," Comput Math 
Methods Med, vol. 2013, p. 694171, 2013. 
[22] P. Gajsek, T. J. Walters, W. D. Hurt, J. M. Ziriax, D. A. Nelson, and 
P. A. Mason, "Empirical validation of SAR values predicted by 
FDTD modeling," Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 23, pp. 37-48, Jan 2002. 
[23] P. A. Cannistraro, N. Makris, J. D. Howard, M. M. Wedig, S. M. 
Hodge, S. Wilhelm, et al., "A diffusion tensor imaging study of white 
matter in obsessive-compulsive disorder," Depress Anxiety, vol. 24, 
pp. 440-6, 2007. 
[24] J. F. Lehman, B. D. Greenberg, C. C. McIntyre, S. A. Rasmussen, and 
S. N. Haber, "Rules ventral prefrontal cortical axons use to reach their 
targets: implications for diffusion tensor imaging tractography and 
deep brain stimulation for psychiatric illness," J Neurosci, vol. 31, pp. 
10392-402, Jul 13 2011. 
[25] D. S. Tuch, V. J. Wedeen, A. M. Dale, J. S. George, and J. W. 
Belliveau, "Conductivity mapping of biological tissue using diffusion 
MRI," Ann NY Acad Sci, vol. 888, pp. 314-316, 1999. 
[26] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, "The dielectric properties of 
biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum 
of tissues," Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2271–2293, 1996. 
[27] J. A. McNab, B. L. Edlow, T. Witzel, S. Y. Huang, H. Bhat, K. 
Heberlein, et al., "The Human Connectome Project and beyond: 
initial applications of 300 mT/m gradients," Neuroimage, vol. 80, pp. 
234-45, Oct 15 2013. 
[28] P. Bernardi, M. Cavagnaro, S. Pisa, and E. Piuzzi, "Specific 
absorption rate and temperature elevation in a subject exposed in the 
far-field of radio-frequency sources operating in the 10-900-MHz 
range," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 50, pp. 295-304, Mar 2003. 
[29] N. Makris, L. Angelone, S. Tulloch, S. Sorg, J. Kaiser, D. Kennedy, 
et al., "MRI-based anatomical model of the human head for specific 
absorption rate mapping," Med Biol Eng Comput, vol. 46, pp. 1239-
51, Dec 2008. 
[30] C. K. Chou, H. Bassen, J. Osepchuk, Q. Balzano, R. Petersen, M. 
Meltz, et al., "Radio frequency electromagnetic exposure: tutorial 
review on experimental dosimetry," Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 17, pp. 
195-208, 1996. 
[31] P. A. Filipek, C. Richelme, D. N. Kennedy, and V. S. Caviness, Jr., 
"The young adult human brain: an MRI-based morphometric 
analysis," Cereb Cortex, vol. 4, pp. 344-60, Jul-Aug 1994. 
[32] N. Makris, J. W. Meyer, J. F. Bates, E. H. Yeterian, D. N. Kennedy, 
and V. S. Caviness, "MRI-Based topographic parcellation of human 
cerebral white matter and nuclei II. Rationale and applications with 
systematics of cerebral connectivity," Neuroimage, vol. 9, pp. 18-45, 
1999. 
[33] Available: 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/
DeviceApprovalsandClearances/Recently-
ApprovedDevices/ucm125520.htm 
[34] L. M. Angelone, N. Makris, C. E. Vasios, L. Wald, and G. 
Bonmassar, "Effect of transmit array phase relationship on local 
Specific Absorption Rate (SAR)." in ISMRM Fourteenth Scientific 
Meeting, Seattle, USA, 2006. 
[35] T. Eichele, S. Debener, V. D. Calhoun, K. Specht, A. K. Engel, K. 
Hugdahl, et al., "Prediction of human errors by maladaptive changes 
in event-related brain networks," Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, vol. 105, 
pp. 6173-8, Apr 22 2008. 
[36] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, "The dielectric properties of 
biological tissues: I. Literature survey," Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 
2231–2249, 1996. 
[37] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, "The dielectric properties of 
biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 
20 GHz," Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996. 
[38] L. M. Angelone, E. Eskandar, and G. Bonmassar, "Resistive tapered 
stripline for deep brain stimulation (DBS) leads at 7 T MRI: Specific 
absorption rate analysis with high-resolution head model.," in The 
24th Progress in Electromagnetics Research Symposium (PIERS), 
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2008. 
[39] W. R. Nitz, G. Brinker, D. Diehl, and G. Frese, "Specific absorption 
rate as a poor indicator of magnetic resonance-related implant 
heating," Invest Radiol, vol. 40, pp. 773-6, Dec 2005. 
[40] IEC, "International Standard, medical equipment - 60601-2-33: 
Particular requirements for the safety of the magnetic resonance 
equipment for medical diagnosis, 2nd revision," Geneva2010. 
[41] H. M. Duvernoy, Human brain stem vessels : including the pineal 
gland and information on brain stem infarction, 2nd completely rev. 
and expanded ed. Berlin ; New York: Springer, 1999. 
[42] H. M. Duvernoy, The human brain stem and cerebellum. surface, 
structure, vascularization, and three-dimensional sectional anatomy 
with MRI. New York, 1995. 
[43] H. M. Duvernoy, S. Delon, and J. L. Vannson, "Cortical blood vessels 
of the human brain," Brain Res Bull, vol. 7, pp. 519-79, Nov 1981. 
[44] G. Schaltenbrand and P. Bailey, Einführung in die stereotaktischen 
Operationen, mit einem Atlas des menschlichen Gehirns. Introduction 
to stereotaxis, with an atlas of the human brain. Stuttgart,: G. Thieme, 
1959. 
[45] S. Pallanti and L. Quercioli, "Treatment-refractory obsessive-
compulsive disorder: methodological issues, operational definitions 
and therapeutic lines," Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 
vol. 30, pp. 400-12, May 2006. 
[46] D. D. Dougherty, L. Baer, G. R. Cosgrove, E. H. Cassem, B. H. Price, 
A. A. Nierenberg, et al., "Prospective long-term follow-up of 44 
patients who received cingulotomy for treatment-refractory obsessive-
compulsive disorder," Am J Psychiatry, vol. 159, pp. 269-75, Feb 
2002. 
[47] H. H. Jung, C. H. Kim, J. H. Chang, Y. G. Park, S. S. Chung, and J. 
W. Chang, "Bilateral anterior cingulotomy for refractory obsessive-
371
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

compulsive disorder: Long-term follow-up results," Stereotact Funct 
Neurosurg, vol. 84, pp. 184-9, 2006. 
[48] P. K. Bridges, J. R. Bartlett, A. S. Hale, A. M. Poynton, A. L. 
Malizia, and A. D. Hodgkiss, "Psychosurgery: stereotactic subcaudate 
tractomy. An indispensable treatment," Br J Psychiatry, vol. 165, pp. 
599-611; discussion 612-3, Nov 1994. 
[49] A. D. Hodgkiss, A. L. Malizia, J. R. Bartlett, and P. K. Bridges, 
"Outcome after the psychosurgical operation of stereotactic 
subcaudate 
tractotomy, 
1979-1991," 
J 
Neuropsychiatry 
Clin 
Neurosci, vol. 7, pp. 230-4, Spring 1995. 
[50] S. K. Bourne, A. Conrad, J. S. Neimat, and T. L. Davis, "Linear 
measurements of the cerebral ventricles are correlated with adult 
ventricular volume," J Clin Neurosci, vol. 20, pp. 763-4, May 2013. 
[51] L. Yang, A. V. Sycheva, D. M. Black, and R. Eastell, "Site-specific 
differential effects of once-yearly zoledronic acid on the hip assessed 
with quantitative computed tomography: results from the HORIZON 
Pivotal Fracture Trial," Osteoporos Int, vol. 24, pp. 329-38, Jan 2013. 
[52] E. Atalar, "Catheter Coils," in eMagRes, ed: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
2007. 
 
372
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

