177
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A New Biodiversity Composite Indicator Based on Anthropentropy and Forest 
Quality Assessment 
Framework, Theory, and Case Studies of Italian Territory
Silvia Assini  
Dept. of Earth and Environment Sciences 
University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
silviapaola.assini@unipv.it 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a new environmental 
composite indicator, which is based on two previously defined 
single indicators, related to land use (the Anthropentropy 
Factor) and to quality of forests (the Forest Status Quality 
Indicator). The framework for the definition of the composite 
indicator 
is 
an 
innovative 
formalization 
of 
the 
multidisciplinary approach, which connects knowledge and 
expertise of two different scientific fields: vegetation science 
and computer science. The proposed method for the indicator 
computation combines the classical algorithms of computer 
vision, to process data from Geographic Information Systems, 
and the phytosociological approach, to assess the floristic 
composition of the forests. The goal is to build a deep 
knowledge about the impact of land use and forest quality, at a 
landscape level, on biodiversity conservation, by studying the 
impact of anthropic activities, both inside (urban and rural 
areas) and outside (forests) the areas occupied by human 
activities. The knowledge is expressed by a single composite 
indicator and its assessment can be used for environmental 
preservation policy actions, to guide local government 
decisions for a biodiversity conservation in the landscape. The 
new indicator and the methodological approach is validated by 
presenting experimental results on two case studies in the 
North-West of Italy.  
Keywords - biodiversity; land use; environmental indicator; 
forest 
status 
quality; 
Anthropentropy 
Factor; 
composite 
indicator. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper describes the continuation and the extension 
of the research project reported in [1]: theory have been 
improved and the number of case studies has been 
increased, in order to validate the original ideas and to 
enlarge the scope of applications of the proposed approach. 
The target is still the same: to propose and measure 
indicators related to some specific aspects of biodiversity, 
within a given territory. Biological diversity means the 
variability among living organisms from all sources 
including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine, and other aquatic 
ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are 
part: this includes diversity within species, between species 
and of ecosystems [2]. Actually, the habitat loss and 
fragmentation due to agriculture and urbanization, the 
introduction of alien species and the climatic changes are 
among the most important causes of biodiversity loss. Thus, 
the recent Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets [3] include, among the others, 
two important goals: to reduce the direct pressures on 
biodiversity and to improve the status of biodiversity by 
safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity. The 
vision of this Strategic Plan is a world of “living in harmony 
with nature,” where “by 2050, biodiversity is valued, 
conserved, restored and wisely used, maintaining ecosystem 
services, sustaining a healthy planet and delivering benefits 
essential for all people.” The goal of this work is not only to 
give a quantitative description of the biodiversity, but also 
to identify the sub-areas, within the territory under 
investigation, where the application of policy actions for its 
conservation is a more serious and pressing issue. In 
particular, 
two 
specific 
aspects 
of 
environmental 
preservation have been considered in [1]: land use and forest 
quality. In order to motivate this fundamental choice, it is 
important to understand the relationships between these two 
aspects and biodiversity conservation. 
Land use can be defined in different ways, and for this 
reason its meaning is often a source of misunderstanding. In 
our research, we adopt its broadest sense: the definition and 
classification, within a limited territory, of the areas of 
anthropic places, i.e., places occupied by human activities 
(for every-day life, economic and productive activities), and 
of the areas of wild nature. According to this definition, the 
territory under investigation is de facto partitioned into two 
classes: the areas of anthropic activities, where the human 
presence is fairly continuous and has ousted the wild, and the 
“wild areas”, where the opposite occurs. A correlated term is 
land take: it expresses the variation of the land use over time, 
(e.g., one year for annual land take). 
The limitation of land use against the threat of an 
exceeding, out of control, urban sprawl and the mitigation of 
the loss of wild habitats are very important for biodiversity 
conservation. This is evidenced by the fact that the European 
Environment Agency considers land use and biodiversity in 
the same target and objective for the policy actions of 2010-
2050 decades [4]. The relationship between land use and 
biodiversity conservation can be motivated also referring to 
the well-known DPSIR framework [5], which describes the 
impact of human activities on the environment as a chain of 
causes-effects. The chain connects five rings: the Driving 
forces (D), the Pressures (P), the State (S), the Impacts (I), 
and Responses (R).  If we use this framework to investigate  

178
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1.  
The DPSIR framework and the relationships between land 
take and biodiversity loss (D: driving forces, P: pressures, S: state, I: 
impacts, R: responses). 
 
the possible relationships between land use changes and 
biodiversity loss (see Fig. 1), we can identify examples in 
which the driving forces, which are the starting point of the 
chain, are the same for both the phenomena, or, at least, are 
closely related. For example, social motivations (D), such as 
demographic 
expansions, 
generate 
pressures 
on 
the 
environment in order to increase the areas occupied by new 
settlements, roads, and services (P). As a consequence, the 
environment enters in a new state S, where land use changes 
over time, with an increase of anthropic areas, at the expense 
of natural, wild areas. In turn, this state change has two 
possible negative impacts on biodiversity: (a) the loss of the 
territory, both for vegetal and animal species, and (b) the 
territory fragmentation, which is considered as one of the 
most dangerous threats to biodiversity [6], [7]. Demographic 
expansion is one of the most simple and intuitive examples 
of pressures that can act as a strong motivation for both land 
use changes/land take and biodiversity loss. There are plenty 
of examples that lead to the loss of wild natural areas: urban 
and rural expansion, new roads and communication lines, 
settlements for industries, tourism and services, intensive 
farming. Moreover, processes that cause land use change are 
specific for the different parts of Europe [8]: forest 
management affects the Boreal and Alpine regions, 
abandonment and intensification are mainly encountered in 
the Mediterranean areas, urbanization and drainage are 
typical of the Continental and Atlantic regions. Concerning 
Italy, further studies [9], [10], [11] identified a distinction 
between the planar belt, where urbanization and agricultural 
intensification are the main pressures of biodiversity loss, 
and the hilly-montane belt, which is more affected by 
abandonment and the consequent forest re-colonization. 
If we consider the problem of land use from a 
quantitative point of view, the most complete research 
regarding Europe is the Corine Land Cover Project [12]; the 
artificial areas (intended as soil sealed territories) cover only 
the 4% of the land in Europe, as compared to a 34% of 
forests. However, this percentage rises to a global value of 
51%, if we consider the areas that support all the anthropic 
activities, the economic growth and food production 
(agriculture, crops, pasture and semi-natural vegetation). The 
situation is particularly dramatic if we consider the 
phenomenon of land take over the past years. For example, 
in Italy, the most recent report on land take [13] shows an 
annual value of 7.3%, equal to 21.890 square kilometers, the 
equivalent of 70 ha/day, or 8 square meters/s. 
The second aspect of environmental preservation 
considered in [1] is the presence, in a given territory, of 
forests, and their quality, expressed by some quantitative 
measure. This is consistent with the chosen definition of land 
use: as the territory is partitioned into two areas, i.e., 
anthropic places vs. natural, wild areas, we are interested into 
the study of one aspect (at least) referring to each of the 
partitions: land use is related to the first one (anthropic 
places), the presence of forests to the second one (wild 
areas). We have chosen the forests for their importance and 
benefits for the human well-being (the so-called ecosystem 
services), such as flood prevention, erosion control, CO2 
absorption, climate regulation, refugium function for wild 
plants and animals, recreation, science and education. 
Moreover, even if this partition is clearly visible on the 
territory, the two worlds are far to be completely separated. 
In particular, the quality of the forest can be influenced by 
human activities, such as pollutions, climate changes, use of 
pests and the introduction of invasive species. In other term, 
it is important not only the quantitative presence of forests, 
but also their quality [14], [15]. Indeed, in the “wild area”, 
due to the sporadic presence of humans (for example, for 
agriculture), old-growth forests, with a high degree of 
biological richness, are sometimes replaced by young forests 
with poor species. 
Also, intensive forests and plantations are far to be “true 
wildness”, even if they are clearly outside the anthrophized 
areas. For all these reasons, it is important to give a 
quantitative measure of the quality of the forests, as the 
simple measure of the area percentage is a too simplistic 
parameter to understand the actual contribution the forests 
give to the biodiversity of the territory. 
A. Novelties of this contribution 
In previous researches, we have proposed new indicators, 
both for land use measurement [16], [17], i.e., the 
Anthropentropy Factor (AF), and for the forest quality 
assessment [1], i.e., the Forest Quality Status Indicator 
(FSQ). In addition, a first attempt to study the correlation 
between the two indicators [1], with regard to a precise area 
of the North-West of Italy, the Province of Pavia, has 
become our first case study. However, it is evident that the 
distinct computation of the two indicators, although 
promising and interesting, does not provide an overall view 
of the impact of the two critical aspects on the biodiversity of 
a given territory. Therefore, the research continued with the 
challenging goal to define a new composite indicator, based 
on both AF and FSQ, in order to give a more significant 
measure of the state of the biodiversity inside a given 

179
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
territory, at least for the two major phenomena, i.e., land use 
and forest quality. This can be considered a relevant 
improvement on the state of the art; in fact, biodiversity can 
be measured [18] by considering different parameters 
(composition, structure or function) and at different levels of 
biological 
organization 
(genetic, 
population-species, 
community-ecosystem, landscape). Usually, the produced 
indicators in literature refer only to one of such organization 
levels. On the contrary, the composite indicator here built 
relates, at the same time, to two organization levels: 
landscape (considering urban and forest patches) and 
community-ecosystem level (considering forests and their 
quality). 
Moreover, the main novelties carried out with this new 
research activity, if compared to the previous one [1], can be 
summarized as follows:  
1. The definition of a new composite indicator, called 
Biodiversity Composite Indicator (BCI). It is based 
on the two “simple” indicators, i.e., AF and FSQ that 
become, in turn, the two sets of variables on which 
the composite indicator is built on. Building a 
composite indicator is not a simple matter of 
crunching numbers, but a clear stated and well-
defined method has to be followed [19]. For this 
purpose, it is very important to define a theoretical 
framework (see point 2). 
2. The formalization of multidisciplinary approach, 
which is the core of the theoretical framework. The 
goal of the formalization is to describe how the two 
sciences, vegetation science and computer science, 
can cooperate and under what constraints. 
3. A new case study has been proposed, and the 
comparison with the first one [1] has been fully 
investigated, by considering the two indicators AF 
and FSQ.  
4. The new BCI indicator has been calculated for both 
the two case studies, in order to give a global 
assessment 
on 
the 
environmental 
issue 
of 
biodiversity conservation for the two target areas.  
 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the multidisciplinary approach and the new conceptual 
framework for the definition of the composite indicator. 
Section III summarizes the theory about the two indicators 
and presents the results for the two case studies. Section IV 
describes the fundamental steps for the definition of the 
composite indicator and shows the experimental results on 
the two case studies on the Italian territory. Conclusion and 
considerations about future work in Section V close the 
article. 
II. 
THE MULTIDISCIPINARY APPROACH 
One of the most important and distinctive characteristics 
of our research is its highly multidisciplinary approach, 
which bridges across two important fields of our modern 
scientific research: vegetation science and computer science. 
Both of them have knowledge, tools and paradigms that are 
able to assess the impact of human activities for a sustainable  
 
Figure 2.  
The formalisation of the framework of cooperation between 
computer science and vegetation science.  
future. In particular, we have identified three hierarchical 
levels of “integration”: knowledge, methods (or paradigms) 
and data (see Fig. 2) . 
At the first level, we find the concepts, approaches and 
algorithms useful to process data and information at the 
lower levels. In particular we have, for computer science, the 
mathematical morphological operators applied in 2D digital 
images processing of computer vision [20]. They have been 
used for the computation of the AF indicator. Concerning 
vegetation science, we use the Braun-Blanquet approach 
[21], [22], [23], [24] to determine in the FSQ definition the 
floristic composition of the forests and to assess their quality 
from the authenticity perspective [14]. Authenticity is a 
measure of the health and integrity of the ecosystems; it can 
be assessed considering different aspects, and we have 
chosen the composition (number of layers, presence and 
percentage of alien and protected species) and the continuity 
(in particular, we have considered the areas occupied by the 
forests.) 
At the second level of the hierarchy of our framework, 
we find the methods and the paradigms used to translate the 
“knowledge” level in practical tools, in order to process the 
lower levels (data). For vegetation science, we used the 
phytosociological tables [25] and, in some cases, information 
have been integrated by bibliographic references and 
phytosociological relevés, collected in the area where the 
forest type occurs. For computer science, we have used 
Quantum GIS [26], an open source Geographic Information 
System (GIS), and its primitives to compute areas and 
intersect boundaries in the territories of the case studies. 
At the lowest, third level of the hierarchy, we find the 
raw data, expressed in a visual form (maps of GIS systems). 
It consists of three databases: the ERSAF (Ente Regionale 
Servizi Agricoltura e Foreste) database [27], the Corine Land 
Cover database [12], and the ISTAT (Istituto Nazionale di 
Statistica) database of Italian administrative boundaries [28]. 
We consider the portion of these databases, which refers to 
the same territory, i.e., the region Lombardia in the North-
West of Italy. The first two databases are used to represent 
the presence of forests and the land use classification, 
respectively. The third one is used to focus the attention on 
the two case studies, namely two of the twelve provinces of 

180
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
region Lombardia, i.e., the provinces named “Pavia” and 
“Lodi”. Some interesting characteristics of the territory of 
Lombardia and of the two case studies are reported in Table 
I. The level of GIS databases is the conceptual bridge, which 
connects vegetation science and computer science, the 
channel through which the two disciplines can communicate 
and exchange information and knowledge. In order to assure 
that this communication is valid and generate useful and 
meaningful information, some constraints are to be 
respected. We have defined five constraints, described as 
follows. 
Format constraint: data are expressed in a common 
format: in this way, the visual maps of the same territory 
(geodata) can be processed by GIS tools. To adhere to this 
constraint, the ERSAF database (raster GIS data) has been 
vectorized, in order to be consistent to the other vector 
geodata. 
Temporal constraint: data stored in the databases have to 
be referred to equal or very close temporal periods. In our 
case, data of Lombardia refer to the period 2007-2011. 
Granularity constraint: the different databases has to 
consider the same data granularity as reference in the 
different computations. As our databases refer to a 
geographical territory, adopting the same data granularity 
means that both the indicator computations refer to the same 
geographical unit. In our research, we have chosen the 
municipality as common data granularity. This choice is 
motivated by the fact that, in Italy, the municipality is the 
administrative division, which is in charge of adopting local 
policy on the territory for land use and/or environmental 
requalification. Therefore, it is important to consider this 
granularity if we want to use the indicators to support 
decision-makers.  
Precision constraint: in all the indicator computations 
and geometrical transformations (vectorization, change of 
coordinates), we have a maximum error less of 50 meters, 
which is consistent to the definition of the most important 
aspect of the AF indicator computation, the dilation step (see 
Section III). 
Availability constraint: all the GIS databases are public 
and available according to the open access paradigm. This 
choice is particularly important in the construction of the 
composite indicator, as underlined in Section V. 
Once we have formalized the framework, we can use it to 
explain how to create the composite indicator, starting from 
the two “simple” ones, i.e., AF and FSQ. The framework and 
the method here proposed are quite general, and can be 
applied also adding more than two simple indicators. In the 
following sections, a brief recall of the theory of the two 
indicators is summarized. Moreover, data of the two case 
studies are reported and compared. 
III. 
THE SIMPLE INDICATORS 
In this section, the two simple indicators are presented, 
for land use and forest quality evaluation, respectively. In 
Section II.A, the flow chart of the algorithm for land use 
estimation 
is 
described, 
with 
some 
fundamental 
considerations about the computer science paradigms and 
tools, and their innovative aspects in this research field. 
TABLE I.  
REPRESENTATIVE DATA FOR THE TERRITORY UNDER 
INVESTIGATION: THE REGION OF LOMBARDIA, NORTH WESTERN ITALY, 
AND THE TWO CASE STUDIES, PAVIA AND LODI. 
Territory 
Main characteristics 
Region 
Lombardia 
Area 
23.844 square km 
 
Minimun Altitude 
above sea level 
11 m 
 
Maximum 
Altitude above sea 
level 
4.021 m 
Case study °1: 
Province of Pavia 
Area 
2.965 square km 
 
Number of 
municipalities 
190 
 
Average Minimun 
Altitude 
above sea level 
53 m 
 
Average 
Maximum altitude 
above sea level 
951 m 
Case study °2: 
Province of Lodi 
Area 
782 square km 
 
Number of 
municipalities 
61 
 
Average Minimun 
Altitude 
above sea level 
40 m 
 
Average 
Maximum 
Altitude 
above sea level 
101 m 
 
 
In Section II.B, the forest quality indicator is defined by 
following the same theoretical framework. 
A. Land use indicator 
The 
Anthropentropy 
Factor 
[16], 
[17] 
is 
an 
environmental indicator of type B, using the standard 
European Environmental Agency taxonomy [5]. The AF 
expresses in an absolute, continuous scale, from 0 to 1, the 
degree of the impact of anthropic human activities due to the 
land use. Furthermore, it is a performance indicator; in fact, 
besides its definition, also a metric is given, which describes 
a table of reference to assess the environmental situation, in 
an optimum or near-optimum condition. 
The metric maps the AF values to five intervals (class of 
land use), where only the first one is very desirable, the 
second one is near-optimum, until the last one, which refers 
to the worst situation of irreversible environmental 
degradation. In Table II, the metric of the AF indicator is 
described. For a reasoned treatment of the metric and its 
relationship with a possible policy making for a sustainable 
development, see [17]. Here, we recall the basic definition 
and concepts that are essential to understand the metric and 
analogies and differences between this indicator and the 
Forest Status Quality Indicator (see Section III.B).  
Anthropentropy is a neologism, from the ancient Greek 
term Anthropos (Άνθρωπος) = “man”, and entropy, that, in 
turn, derives from the ancient Greek terms en (ἐν) = "inner", 
and tropé (τροπή) = "transformation". 

181
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
THE METRIC ON THE AF INDICATOR FOR LAND USE. 
Class of 
land use 
and map 
color 
Evaluation of Land Use  
Intervals of AF 
Meaning 
1 
light green 
0 <= AF <= 0.2 
 
Very low level of anthropentropy, 
ideal situation for nature and human 
beings 
2 
green 
0.2 < AF <= 0.4 
 
A 
first 
worrying 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, but the situation is 
still good 
3 
yellow 
0.4 < AF <= 0.6 
 
A serious level of anthropentropy, 
with a beginning negative impact of 
anthopization on the environment. 
4 
red, light 
violet 
0.6 < AF <= 0.8 
 
A 
very 
serious 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, 
with 
a 
great 
negative impact of anthopization on 
the environment. 
5 
violet, 
black 
0.8 < AF <= 1 
 
The 
worst 
situation, 
with 
an 
irreversible 
environmental 
degradation. 
 
In fact, the AF indicator means to express the 
transformations and the consequent “disorder” introduced in 
natural ecosystems by the presence and disturbance of 
human beings. The algorithm for AF computation is 
described in the block-diagram in Fig. 3. The first step of the 
algorithm is the identification of a delimited part of a 
geographic territory under consideration and the computation 
of its area S, in squared kilometers. As previously discussed 
in the general framework, data granularity refer to the Italian 
municipalities; thus, in our computation, S is the area of a 
given municipality the indicator refers to. 
The second step for the AF computation algorithm is the 
identification of all the land parcels occupied by anthropic 
places, such as human settlements, factories, roads, and so on 
(for a complete taxonomy of the anthropic places, see [15]). 
We call these parcels anthropic sub-regions. This is 
performed by using the Corine Land Cover database [10] and 
primitives of GIS software to extract, intersect and subtract 
areas that are identified by the 44 classes of land use of 
Corine Land Cover project.  
The third step takes into consideration the shapes and the 
contiguity of the anthropic sub-regions. In fact, each sub-
region is geometrically enlarged by the morphological 
operator of dilation [20] (along both the two Cartesian 
dimensions X and Y) with a factor of "buffering" (radius of 
the circular dilation) of 50 meters, to give rise to anthropic 
sub-regions. The choice of a 50 meters distance/limit has 
been discussed in [16], and it seems a good compromise 
between a too restrictive and a too permissive limit. After 
performing the dilation on each of the anthropic sub-regions 
of the municipality, the union of all of them is taken and it 
corresponds to the Death Zone. Let define DA as the area (in 
square kilometers) of the Death Zone. We think that this step 
of the algorithm makes the AF indicator a “true” naturalistic 
evaluation of land use, because it not only compute the 
percentage of land occupied by human activities, but also 
takes into consideration the shape of the areas subtracted to 
nature, and their relative positions, thus incorporating the 
important aspect of land fragmentation and its impact on 
biodiversity. 
 
Figure 3.  
The flow chart of the algorithm for the AF computation: in 
blue the computational steps, in red the outputs. Shadowed green arrows 
show where data sources are used. 
In order to understand the importance of the dilation, a 
simple example can be useful: in Fig. 4, the situation for the 
municipality of Monte Cremasco (Lombardia, latitude 
45°22'31"80 N, longitude 09°34'20"64 E) is shown. The 
anthropic sub-regions are depicted in red. This example is 
particularly meaningful, as the anthropic sub-regions are 
scattered in different part of the territory, with a lot of “hole” 
and unconnected areas, thus the territory has a high degree of 
fragmentation. In Fig. 5, the result of the dilation on the red 
areas is shown. The new areas, which have been added by 
the dilation of the original ones, are shown in violet. The 
dilation causes the phenomena of filling the little “holes” and 
connect unconnected regions that are not so far. In fact, the 
dilation is performed with a radius of 50 meters, but in our 
example this has relevant effects, because the original 
anthropic area was highly fragmented. A little hole in an 
anthropic sub-regions is not a “wild” area, because the 
influence of anthropic activity on the nature is still very high. 
By filling holes and enlarging the outside perimeter of the 
anthropic sub-regions, the algorithm actually rises the areas 
occupied by humans, by taking into account the bad side 
effect of fragmentation of the territory on animal and plant 
species. In this example, the effect of the dilation is a gain of 

182
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the Death Zone of about 18%, if compared to the case of 
simply measuring the area of the anthropic sub-regions 
(without dilation). 
The third step of the algorithm excludes the regions 
where human settlements are not possible, i.e., the part of the 
municipality, if any, occupied by inland waters (e.g., lakes or 
lagoons) or lands located more than 3,000 m above sea level. 
We define all these sub-regions as neutral sub-regions. The 
union of all the neutral sub-regions (if present), corresponds 
to the Neutral Zone. Let define NA as the area (in square 
kilometers) of the Neutral Zone. 
After the computation of S, DA, and NA, we can define 
the Anthropentropy Factor AF [16] as the ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA)  
(1) 
We have computed the AF indicator for all the 
municipalities of the two case studies. 
 
 
Figure 4.  
The anthropic sub-regions for the municipality of Monte 
Cremasco (Lombardia): in red, the anthropic regions are superimposed on 
the standard Google Earth map of the municipality, in white the boundaries 
of the municipality.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  
The anthropic sub-regions after the dilation: in red, the 
original sub-regions, in violet the added area. The Death Zone is the union 
of red and violet regions.  
 
The first one is the province of Pavia, which is located 
around its chief town, Pavia (latitude, longitude: 45°11'7"44 
N, 09°9'45"00 E), in the North-West of Italy. The province 
consists of 190 municipalities. In Fig. 6, the map of the area 
of the province of Pavia is shown: for each municipality, its 
territory is depicted in a color related to the class of land use, 
as specified in Table II (from green, yellow, red and black). 
In Fig. 7, the equivalent map is shown for the second case 
study, the province of Lodi, which is located around its chief 
town, Lodi (latitude, longitude: 45°18'52"20 N, 09°30'14"04 
E). The province consists of 61 municipalities. The first case 
study has been already investigated in [1]. We have chosen 
the province of Lodi, as second case study, because it is 
close to the province of Pavia along the Po river (the longest 
and most important Italian river); therefore, it includes a 
territory very similar, for geomorphology and climate, to a 
great part of the province of Pavia. However, differences are 
notable, as the province of Pavia includes also a montane 
territory in the South part, which is completely missing in the 
province of Lodi. In the discussion of the results (See 
Section IV.B), it will be interesting to discover how 
differences and analogies on the geomorphology and altitude 
of the municipalities can affect the composite indicator. For 
all these reasons, we consider the second case study a good 
term of comparison to the first one. 
The novelties of this algorithm, from the computer 
science side of the multidisciplinary approach, are the 
application of the mathematical morphology operator of 
dilation, for the computation of the Death Zone, to GIS data, 
and the application of the constraints of our framework in 
each of the computational steps of the algorithm. In 
particular, mathematical morphology have been widely use 
in computer vision theory as useful spatial data analysis [29]. 
However, morphological operators have been used on GIS 
data mainly for preprocessing and filtering in data 
acquisition phases [30], for extracting simple information on 
the spatial disposition of primitives (such as roads lines [31]) 
or to better detect areas that have to be categorized [32]. In 
our approach, the mathematical operator is used to generate 
new knowledge about the territory, as it is related to the 
definition of the concept of Death Zone, with its impact on 
the fragmentation of the territory and, consequently, on the 
biodiversity. The second aspect is that, without a careful 
study or precision and granularity of data, the application of 
mathematical morphology operators on GIS maps cannot 
give reliable and significant results. Therefore, the joint use 
of the operator dilation with the constraints of our framework 
(in particular, granularity and precision constraints in 
computational steps of Fig. 3) is a new and distinctive 
contribution of algorithms and tools of computer science, in 
particular in the computational sustainability field [33]. 
Even if the AF indicator is able to take into 
considerations quantitative extensions, shapes and relative 
positions of the anthrophized areas of a territory, it does not 
give any hints on the state of the green areas outside the 
anthropic areas, which is the goal of the second indicator 
here described. 
 
 

183
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 6.  
The visual map for the AF land use indicator for the 
municipalities of the first case study (Pavia Province, Lombardia, North 
Western Italy); the meaning of the colors is explained in Table II. 
 
 
Figure 7.  
The visual map for the AF land use indicator for the 
municipalities of the second case study (Province of Lodi, Lombardia, 
North Western Italy) ); the meaning of the colors is explained in Table II. 
B. Forest quality indicator  
The assessment of forest quality differs according to the 
different components that can be evaluated (ecological, 
social and/or economic components associated to forests). In 
many assessment systems, environment has been relegated to 
a relatively unimportant element, if compared with other 
issues such as economic importance, although there are now 
also some specialized indicator sets relating to the 
environment, such as WWF’s Living Planet Index [34]. 
Other examples include: the IUCN well-being index [35], 
that divides indicators into two classes, the first relating to 
human well-being (socio-economic) and the second to the 
environment (ecological, environmental services etc.) and 
the Montreal Process criteria and indicators [34], for 
temperate and boreal species outside Europe, which uses 
seven criteria (and 67 indicators) including the conservation 
of biological diversity. For our purposes, the FSQ indicator 
[1] expresses the forest quality status as the value of its 
ecological components, with particularly reference to the 
biodiversity conservation. We have chosen the following 
components: 
 
the number of forest layers: more layers correspond 
to higher biodiversity; 
 
the presence of protected species according to the 
Lombardia regional law [L.R. 10/2008]: more 
protected 
species 
mean 
higher 
and 
better 
biodiversity; 
 
the presence of alien species: a lower number of 
alien species mean higher and better biodiversity. 
For the target area of region Lombardia, in Figs. 8a and 
8b, examples of protected and alien species are shown, 
respectively. We have imposed some limitation on the GIS 
data, following two important constraints: 
 
In the FSQ computation, only natural forests have 
been considered, i.e., plantations were excluded. 
 
Only forests occurring on areas greater than 10.000 
square meters have been considered. In fact, floristic 
richness, in forest patches smaller than 1 ha, is 
generally very low [36]. 
Following the theoretical framework, in particular the 
granularity constraint, also the FSQ indicator is computed for 
each municipality of the target territories. We define a set of 
sub-regions occupied by natural forest Fi (i = 1, 2, n). Each 
of Fi may have one or more occurrences, denoted by the 
index k, in the territory (k = 1, 2, max(i)). Each k-th 
occurrence is characterizes by: (a) an area Ak
i, expressed in 
square meters, for i= 1,2,,…n and k = 1, 2,… max(i) and (b) 
a type of Ti, derived from the GIS ERSAF Database “Map of 
the Forest Types of Lombardia” [27], which classifies forests 
on the basis of their physiognomy (dominant woody species) 
and the ecological characteristics of the site where they occur 
(geological substrate, type of soil, etc.) [37]. As for the AF 
computation, we take into consideration the same two target 
territories: the province of Pavia and the province of Lodi. In 
the first one, there are 66 different forest types, but only 32 
of them have occurrences whose areas are greater than 
10.000 square meters. Therefore, for the FSQ computation of 
the province of Pavia, n = 32. In the second case, the 
province of Lodi, only 11 forest types survive the area 
constraints. Therefore, for the province of Lodi, n = 11. As 
described before, the province of Pavia includes a portion of 
montane territory, which is not present in the province of 
Lodi. For this reason, the province of Pavia is characterized 
by a higher number of forest types. In Table III, a list of the 
types Ti and the relative reference syntaxa is provided, 
referring to the types, which are present in both the two 
provinces. The two provinces have ten forest types in 
common, therefore, the Ti are listed for i=1, 2,. 10. In Table 
IV, the forest types for the province of Pavia are listed. The 
province of Pavia has twelve forest types, which are not 
present in the province of Lodi, therefore, the Ti are listed for 
i=11, 12,. 32. There is only one forest type in the province of 
Lodi, which is not in the province of Pavia (labeled T33, see 
Table V). The Type Lab field in the tables is a data label, 
which refers to the database [27] used as input source.  
Moreover, the difference between the two case studies is 
related not only to the number of forest types, but also to the  

184
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 8.  
Examples of protected (a) and alien (b) species, according to 
the regional law of Lombardia: (a) Convallaria majalis (b) Parthenocissus 
quinquefolia. Photos have been acquired during the relevés in the target 
territories.  
 
 
Figure 9.  
 The two provinces of Pavia and Lodi: the areas of the forests 
are depicted in green. 
 
TABLE III.  
FOREST TYPES IN COMMON BETWEEN THE TWO CASE 
STUDIES, THE PROVINCE OF PAVIA AND THE PROVINCE OF LODI. 
Type 
Laba 
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
1 
T1: Oak-Hornbeam wood of the lowlands  
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
carpinetosum and anemonetosum Sartori 1984; Quercus robur, 
Carpinus betulus and Physospermum cornubiense community; 
Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus and Holcus mollis community 
12 
T2: Oak wood of inland sand dunes 
Syntaxa: Quercus robur community 
13 
T3: Oak wood of stony river beds  
Syntaxa: Quercus robur and Brachypodium rupestre community 
14-
15 
T4, T5: Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder variant) 
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
ulmetosum Sartori 1984 
173 T6: Typical Black Alder wood 
Syntaxa: Osmundo regalis-Alnetum glutinosae Vanden Berghen 
1971; Carici elongatae-Alnetum glutinosae W. Koch 1926 et R. 
Tx. 1931; Carici acutiformis-Alnetum glutinosae Scamoni 1935 
177 T7: Willow wood of bank 
Syntaxa: Salix alba community; Salicetum albae Issler 1926 
180 T8: Salix cinerea wood 
Syntaxa: Salicetum cinereae Zolyomi 1931 
188 T9: Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa: Robinia pseudoacacia community 
189 T10: Mixed Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa:Robinia pseudoacacia, Quercus robur and Ulmus minor 
community 
a. According to ERSAF database [27] 
 
 
areas occupied by the forests, which is significantly lower in 
Lodi. This is evident by observing Fig. 9, where the two 
neighbor provinces are shown, with the forest areas depicted 
in green (without any differentiation among forest types): the 
province of Pavia has a considerably presence of forest in the 
South, where the altitude is higher. On the contrary, the 
province of Lodi has forests only near the boundaries, as the 
rest of the planar belt is occupied mainly by agricultural 
crops.  
For each forest Ti of Tables III, IV, and V, we found the 
correspondence with one or more phytosociological tables 
[25]. When this correspondence was not reported by the 
above mentioned authors, we used other bibliographic 
references or phytosociological relevés collected in the area  
the forest type occurs.  
For each forest type Ti, we defined a set of the following 
indicator components (si, ai, pi):  
 
Stratification (number of layers) of a forest type i 
(si): this component analyzes the quality of the forest 
structure. The tree and the herb layers are always 
present in a forest. The shrub layers (high-shrub 
and/or low-shrub layers) were considered valuable if 
their total cover were > of 10% of the sampled forest 
area (indicated in the phytosociological tables) or at 
least one species presented an abundance value equal 
to 2. 
 
 Percentage frequency of alien species (ai) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 

185
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
 
Percentage frequency of protected species (pi) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
The three components can assume only discrete values, 
from 0 to 3, according to an if – then – else algorithm 
described in the following of this paragraph. 
TABLE IV.  
FOREST TYPES THAT ARE PRESENT ONLY IN THE 
PROVINCE OF PAVIA. 
Type 
Laba 
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
20, 
23 
T11, T12: Quercus pubescens wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(also including the Chestnut variant) 
Syntaxa: Quercus pubescens, Euphorbia cyparissias and 
Epipactis helleborine community 
26, 
27 
T13, T14: Quercus petraea wood of the carbonatic substrates and 
mesic soils (also including the Chestnut variant) Syntaxa: 
Physospermo cornubiensis-Quercetum petraeae Oberd. et Hofm. 
1967 
28 
T15: Quercus cerris wood 
Syntaxa: Quercus cerris, Cruciata glabra and Anemone trifolia 
community 
45, 
48, 
49, 
50, 
57 
T16, T17, T18, T19, and T20: Chestnut wood on drift; Chestnut 
wood of the carbonatic substrates (mesic soils, meso-xeric soils, 
xeric soils); Chestnut wood of the siliceous substrates and mesic 
soils  
Syntaxa: 
Physospermo 
cornubiensis-Quercetum 
petraeae 
Oberd.et Hofm. 1967; Castanea sativa and Corylus avellana 
community 
63, 
64, 
65 
T21, T22, and T23 Ostrya carpinifolia and Fraxinus ornus wood 
(of layer, of cliff, typical) 
Syntaxa: Knautio drymeiae-Ostryetum Mondino et al. 1993 
84 
T24: Birch wood 
Syntaxa: Betula pendula community 
88 
T25: Primitive Beech wood 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
89, 
96, 
97, 
105 
T26, T27, T28, and T29: Beech wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(high-montane, montane, montane of xeric soils, submontane) 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
99 
T30: Beech wood of the siliceous substrates 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
172 T31: Black Alder wood of gulley 
Syntaxa: Alnus glutinosa, Populus alba and Ulmus minor 
community 
183 T32: White Poplar formation 
Syntaxa: Populus alba community  
a. 
According to ERSAF database [27] 
 
TABLE V.  
THE UNIQUE FOREST TYPE THAT IS PRESENT ONLY IN THE 
PROVINCE OF LODI. 
Type 
Laba 
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
5 
T33: Oak-Hornbeam of the hills 
Syntaxa: Castanea sativa, Carpinus betulus and Quercus petraea 
community 
 
a. According to ERSAF database [27] 
While the definition of quality of stratification is 
independent on the altitude of the forest, the definition of 
values related to the percentages of alien and protected 
species is different, according to the altitude, because usually 
the impact of human activities decreases with the altitude. 
Thus, naturalness is higher in the montane belt than in planar 
belt. We differentiate between forest types belonging to the 
class “high hilly and montane” (altitude > = 500 m) and 
forest types belonging to the class “planar and low hilly” 
(altitude < 500 m). The three components (si, ai, pi) are 
defined according to an empirical if – then – else algorithm: 
 
If the number of layers = 2, then si = 1 
 Else if number of layers = 3, then si = 2 
 Else if number of layers = 4, then si = 3 
For altitude <500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 40 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (15- 40] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (5- 15] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 5] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-3] then pi = 1 
  
Else if protected species range is (3- 6.5] then pi = 2 
  
Else if protected species range is > 6.5 then pi = 3 
For altitude > = 500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 10 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (5-10] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (2-5] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 2] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-5] then pi = 1 
Else if protected species range is (5- 10] then pi = 2 
Else if protected species range is > 10 then pi = 3 
 
For each of the forest type i of Tables III, IV, and V, we 
computed the relative value set of (si, ai, pi), according to the 
if – then – else algorithm and the phytosociological tables 
and/or relevés: the complete value set is reported in Table 
VI. 
After determining the values of the set of components for 
stratification, alien and protected species, it is now possible 
to define the Forest Status Quality Indicator (in the 
following, FSQ) of a given territory of a municipality as 
 
FSQ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S  
(2) 
where i is one of the significant forest type (significant 
means that at least one occurrence of the forest has Ak
i >= 
10.000 square meters) that is present in the territory under 
investigation (Tables III and IV for Pavia, Tables III and V 
for Lodi), Ak
i is the area of the k-th occurrence of forest type 
i, and S is the area of the municipality. The number of 
occurrences may vary, from a minimum of 1 to a maximum, 
which depends on the forest type. The FSQ definition is the 
weighted values of the components, where the weights are 
the ratios between the areas of the forests and the area of the 
territory under investigation. The wider is the area occupied 
by a forest, the higher is its contribution to the global quality 
of the territory. Besides, its contribution is weighted by the 
values of the components (stratification, alien, and protected 
species) as described in the if – then – else algorithm.  

186
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE VI.  
THE VALUE SET OF COMPONENTS FOR STRATIFICATION, 
ALIEN AND PROTECTED SPECIES, FOR EACH FOREST TYPE OF BOTH THE CASE 
STUDIES. 
Type Laba 
Components (si, ai, pi) 
 
1 
3,2,3 
5 
3,2,3 
12 
2,2,1 
13 
3,3,3 
14-15 
3,2,2 
20, 23 
3,3,1 
26, 27 
2,3,3 
28 
3,3,2 
45, 48, 49, 50, 57 
2,3,3 
63, 64, 65 
3,3,2 
84 
1,3,0 
88 
3,3,3 
89, 96, 97, 105 
3,3,3 
99 
3,3,3 
172 
3,3,1 
173 
2,3,2 
177 
1,1,0 
180 
2,2,0 
183 
3,1,0 
188 
2,1,0 
189 
3,2,0 
 
TABLE VII.  
THE METRIC ON THE FSQ INDICATOR FOR FOREST 
QUALITY. 
Class of forest 
quality 
Evaluation of Forest quality and policy  
Intervals of FSQ 
Suggested policy 
 
1 
Unsatisfactory 
 
0 <= FSQ <= 0.9 
 
Very low level forest 
quality. A high-impact 
policy 
of 
restoration 
and/or requalitication of 
forest is mandatory.  
 
2 
Satisfactory but 
improvable 
 
0.9 < FSQ <= 1.8 
 
Sufficient forest quality 
but improvable. A policy 
for 
forest 
biodiversity 
conservation 
is 
preferable. 
 
3 
Good 
 
1.8 < FSQ <= 3.6 
 
Good forest quality, the 
first level of satisfactory 
situation. A policy for the 
conservation of existing 
forests is suggested. 
 
4 
Optimum 
 
3.6 < FSQ <= 4.5 
 
The optimun situation, 
with a high quality of 
forests. A policy for the 
conservation of existing 
forests 
is 
suggested. 
Anyway, if shrublands 
and grasslands are scarse 
or absent, a policy for 
their 
biodiversity 
conservation has to be 
considered. 
 
5 
Overbalanced 
 
FSQ > 4.5 
 
The 
overbalanced 
situation, 
forests 
have 
overcome 
other 
ecosystems. A policy for 
shrubland and grassland 
biodiversity conservation 
is highly suggested. 
 
 
The summation in (2) is for all the forest types of the 
territory under investigation, and for all the occurrences of 
the forests. The FSQ value can range from 0 (no forests are 
present in the territory with at least one occurrence of A1
i> 
10.000) to a maximum of 9, which refers the “perfect”, quite 
unrealistic, situation of forests of very high quality (set of 
components (si, ai, pi) =(3,3,3)), which occupy the entire 
territory of the municipality  Ak
i = S). By using an 
approach similar to the AF metric, we have defined a set of 
ranges for the FSQ indicator. In Table VII, the metric for the 
FSQ indicator and the suggested policy actions are shown. 
C. Results for the two indicators 
By referring to the general framework of the 
multidisciplinary approach, the different knowledge of 
vegetation science and computer science has been combined, 
by following the stated rules (format, temporal, granularity 
and precision constraints), on the GIS databases, and the 
results are the values of AF and FSQ, computed for all the 
municipalities of the province of Pavia and Lodi, according 
to eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. In Figs. 10 and 11, the plot 
of AF and FSQ are reported for Pavia and Lodi, respectively. 
On the X-axis, the municipalities are listed according the 
alphabetical order on their names, and each of them is 
labeled by a numerical value (from 1 to 190 for Pavia, from 
1 to 61 for Lodi), to increase readability. On the Y-axis, the 
values of the two indicators are plotted. By comparing the 
two provinces, it is clear that the AF values are comparable 
for the two cases: on the contrary, the FSQ values are 
considerably lower for the second case (Lodi, see Fig. 11, 
blue lines) than for the first one (Pavia, see Fig. 10, blue 
line). The FSQ indicator is even considerably lower than the 
AF indicator for the second case (the red line is over the blue 
line, for most of the cases), and this is more surprising, if we 
consider that the two indicators have different scales (from 0 
to 1 for AF, from 0 to 9 for FSQ). This is evident also from 
the scatter plot, where the relations FSQ vs. AF are depicted 
(see Figs. 12 and 13, for Pavia and Lodi, respectively). From 
the scatter plot, we see a similar dependency between the 
two indicators in the two provinces, with most of the 
municipality with the FSQ values agglomerated around the 
Y-axis (FSQ = 0), but with different performance in terms of 
class of metrics. In fact, we can see that the AF indicator 
shows a comparable land use level for both the two 
provinces: almost all the AF values are below the first 
worrying level of AF = 0.4 (classes 1 and 2 of land use, see 
Table II) and few are in class 3, no one in classes 4 and 5. 
However, performance in terms of forest quality are very 
different. The FSQ values for Pavia cover all the classes (see 
Table VII), while for Lodi, the FSQ values are all in the first, 
unsatisfactory class (FSQ < = 0.9). This means that in the 
second case study, not only forests are less present in the 
landscape of Lodi (as it can be infer by simply analyzing the 
cumulative GIS image of the forests, see Fig. 9), but also that 
their quality is not so high to compensate the quantitative 
negative situation. The dispersion plots (Fig. 13 and Fig. 14) 
show that the two indicators are quite independent and this is 
a positive result, this means that the two indicators are 
related to independent and different pressures on the 

187
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
environment: land use and forest quality. This is also 
confirmed by the correlation between the AF and FSQ, 
which is very low: the correlation coefficients are equal to -
0,197651 and -0,205527, for Pavia and Lodi, respectively. 
The analysis of the dispersion plots also reveals that all the 
municipalities with serious levels of AF (> 0.4) have very 
low levels of forest quality (FSQ < 0.9), for both the 
provinces. This underlines a worrying trend to neglect the 
ecological compensations to mitigate the impact for 
increasing urbanization. This suggest the fact that in both the 
two provinces environment and biodiversity loss are scarcely 
considered in the land use policies.  
It is evident that the two indicators, AF and FSQ, express 
different pressure on the biodiversity, and that it is not 
simple to get an overall view of the situation of a territory, if 
we consider the two environmental indicators separately. 
This is due, not only to the fact that they are assessed 
according to two different metrics, but also because it is 
difficult to compare different municipalities by using a 
couple of un-normalized values, instead of only one. For this 
reason, a further step in this research has been taken in the 
direction of building a composite indicator, described in 
Section IV. 
IV. 
THE COMPOSITE INDICATOR 
After the definition of the two simple indicators and their 
computation on the case studies, it is now possible to build a 
unique, composite indicator, with the aim to give an overall 
description of the two aspects of environmental preservation: 
land use and forest quality. 
A. Theory of composing AF and FSQ indicators 
Composite indicators are increasing recognized to be 
very relevant in policy action assessment and communication 
to citizens about social, economic and environmental issues. 
They have undisputed advantages, against known or 
otherwise controllable disadvantages. In fact, a composite 
indicator is able to summarize, in a more compact and 
powerful way, multiple concepts, related to different “single” 
indicators. Moreover, it reduces the set of considered data 
and for this reason it is easier to be interpreted and to be 
communicated to the citizens. The last aspect is particularly 
important in environmental issues, where communication of 
the state of the territory is relevant, as it is the first step to 
raise awareness on the environment preservation. The main 
disadvantages of composite indicators are related to the 
accuracy of their definition: as data and dimensions are 
reduced, relevant information may be missed, if the 
construction process lacks of statistical or conceptual 
knowledge, or if it is not transparent and fully described, in 
terms of data selection and applied algorithms. Concerning 
data selection, we use the availability constraint of our 
framework, which is implemented by the open data 
paradigm: all the databases we have used are fully available 
on Internet and they can be processed by open source GIS 
software [26]. Concerning the algorithm for the composite 
indicator computation, in our research we follow a rigorous 
method [19]. The method consists of several steps, which 
can be summarized in the following paragraphs. 
Theoretical framework: in this step, the basis for the 
selection of the single indicators are to be settled. This step 
generally involves knowledge of experts and stakeholders of 
the target issue. As already discussed in Section II, the 
formalization of the multidisciplinary approach individuates 
vegetation science and computer science as the fundamental 
disciplines, and a set of constraints to assure a robust 
communication between the two sciences.  
Data selection: this step has been already described, as it 
consists of the choice of the databases and the computation 
of AF and FSQ indicators. The formulas for the definitions 
of the two environmental indicators (see (1) and (2)) and the 
data set of the two case studies (see Section IV) are the 
outputs of this step. 
Imputation of missing data: this step is relevant 
whenever the collected data are not complete, and missing 
data has to be replace in some way. In our case, Corine Land 
Cover [12] and ERSAF [27] databases are very detailed, and 
the problem of missing data is quite irrelevant, as the 
classification of land use and the forest areas are quite 
enough for the granularity and the precision adopted in the 
framework. There is only one aspect that can be reported to 
the problem of missing data: in the ERSAF databases, some 
typologies of forest cannot be assigned with the component 
of stratification, alien and protected species, because their 
description is too vague. They are two typologies of forest 
labeled as “unclassified forest areas” (ERSAF [27] Type Lab 
Fields 900 and -100). However, these data occupy an area of 
3.6% of the entire region Lombardia, therefore, it is 
reasonable to omit these data and to adopt a Complete Cases 
approach [19], where data are simply discarded, as their 
irrelevance on the entire set of data. As a rule of thumb, if a 
variable has less of 5% of missing data [38], the cases can be 
omitted and the Complete Case Analysis is a simply but 
robust choice. 
Statistical analysis: in Table VIII, the main statistical 
data measured on AF and FSQ indicators are provided for 
the two case studies.  
Normalization: this step is fundamental to compose 
indicators, which are expressed in different scales or measure 
units. In our case, AF range of definition is [0-1], while FSQ 
range is [0-9]. Moreover, the two indicators are discordant 
[39]: in fact, low values of AF expressed a positive 
assessment on the environmental issue (See Table II), while, 
on the contrary, low level of FSQ expresses a negative 
assessment (See Table V). In the general theory, a composite 
indicator X can be written in the form: 
 
X = F [N1(x1), N2(x2), …, Nj(xj)] 
(3) 
where F is a function of aggregation, xj are the single j-th 
indicator, Nj is a normalization function. In our case, j = 2 
and x1 = AFm and x2 = FSQm, where the variable AF and FSQ 
can assume m distinct values (reference data-set), 
corresponding to all the municipalities of our case studies, 
namely m = 190 + 61 = 251. There are plenty of possibility 
in choosing the normalization and aggregation functions 
[39]. In our study, we start with the simplest linear 

188
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
normalization, which reports the range of indicators from 0 
to 1: 
 
 
 
xj – min(xj) / [max(xj) – min(xj)] 
(4) 
 
For the case of AF indicator the normalization is the 
concatenation of two linear transformations: the first one 
considers the complement to 1, (1 – AF), in order to make 
the two indicators concordant, and the second is the linear 
transformation of (4). Therefore, we have: 
 
 
N1 (AFm) = [(1 – AFm ) – min(1 – AFm) ]/ [max(1 – AFm) 
– min(1 – AFm)] 
(5) 
 
N2 (FSQm) = [FSQm – min(FSQm) ]/ [max(FSQm) – 
min(FSQm) 
(6) 
 
Aggregation 
and 
Weighting 
functions: 
after 
normalization, the choice of the aggregation function is the 
final step for the definition of the composite indicator. It 
allows to merge the information of the two normalized 
indicators to give, as output, a unique value for each item of 
the reference data-set. In our case, we have chosen the 
simplest solution of the linear aggregation with equal 
weights (0.5), in order to give the same importance to the 
two phenomena, i.e., land use and forest quality. This 
operative choice is the most common in the case of a limited 
number of indicators with a low degree of correlation [19], 
as in our study. 
Therefore, we can define the Biodiversity Composite 
Indicator (BCI) as: 
 
BCIm = 0.5 * N1 (AFm) + 0.5 * N2 (FSQm) 
(7) 
where N1 and N2 are the normalized functions defined in (5) 
and (6), respectively, and the index m cover all the 
municipalities of both the provinces, i.e., m = 1,2,…251. 
B. Results for composite indicator 
The Biodiversity Composite Indicator gives a value, for 
each municipality, in the range of [0-1], where 0 means the 
worst situation and 1 the best one. Obviously, in the 
composite indicator, we lose the distinction of what factor 
influences the result (if land use or forest quality), but we 
have an overall, absolute assessment of how the two aspects 
are combined in the impact on biodiversity.  
In Fig. 14 and Fig. 15, the BCI values for the two 
provinces of Pavia and Lodi are shown, respectively. On the 
X-axis, the municipalities are listed according the 
alphabetical order of their name, and each of them is labeled 
by a numerical value (from 1 to 190 for Pavia, from 1 to 61 
for Lodi), to increase readability. On the Y-axis, the values 
of the Biodiversity Composite Indicator are plotted. If we 
define a metric for the BCI similar to the two metrics for the 
simple indicators (see Table II and Table VII), we can settle 
five classes of situations (see Table IX), of increasing 
performance in term of global impact on biodiversity of both 
the two aspects (land use and forest quality). 
TABLE VIII.  
REPRESENTATIVE STATISTICAL DATA FOR THE TWO 
INDICATORS FOR THE TWO CASE STUDIES, PAVIA AND LODI. 
Territory 
Main characteristics 
 
AF indicator 
FSQ indicator 
Range of indicator 
[0-1] 
[0-9] 
Case study °1: 
Province of Pavia 
 
 
Number of computed 
values 
190 
190 
Minimum value  
0.133 
0 
Maximum value 
0.548 
5.34978 
Average value 
0.2757 
0.4949 
Standard Deviation 
0.091 
1.01 
Case study °2: 
Province of Lodi 
 
 
Number of computed 
values 
61 
 61 
Minimum value  
0.175 
0 
Maximum value 
0.524 
0.58 
Average Value 
0.305 
0.0832 
Standard Deviation 
0.088 
0.162 
 
By comparing the values of BCI for the two case studies 
(Fig. 14 and Fig. 15), we can infer that the composite 
indicator expresses a more serious situation for the province 
of Lodi, than for Pavia. In fact, in the second case study, 
none of the municipalities shows a value greater than 0.6 of 
the composite indicator, while in the first case study, few but 
existing cases refer to good or excellent situation (BCI > 0.6, 
classes 4 and 5). 
In order to compare directly the two case studies, we can 
report on the same plot the percentage of municipalities that 
fall in each of the class of impact on biodiversity (see Fig. 
16). Also, in this analysis, the first case study (Pavia) 
outperforms the second one (Lodi). In fact, the percentages 
of the municipalities belonging to the classes 1 and 2 (see 
Table IX), which refer to the dramatic and serious impact on 
biodiversity, are always higher in the second case study 
(Lodi) than in the first one (Pavia). 
The last issue we want to discuss refers to the question if 
the altitude may influence the BCI performance. The results 
from the experiments seem to indicate that the altitude 
influences the BCI values, only if its range includes a 
significant percentage of municipalities of “high” altitude 
(previously defined as altitude > 500 m). In fact, in the first 
case study, the correlation between the BCI and altitude is 
enough good (0.584), while in the second case the 
correlation is weak and, even, negative (-0.196). This is 
visually confirmed by comparing Fig. 17 and Fig. 18. In 
these two plots, the BCI values are reported for the two 
provinces, as a function of the average altitude of the 
municipality the BCI value refers to. In the first case study, it 
is true that in the higher classes of our composite indicator 
(classes 4 and 5) we find only montane municipalities.  

189
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IX.  
THE METRIC ON THE BCI INDICATOR. 
Evaluation of the Biodiversity Composite Indicator 
Class of 
impact on 
biodiversity 
Intervals of BCI 
Meaning 
1 
0 <= BCI <= 0.2 
 
The worst situation, with a 
dramatic impact on biodiversity. 
2 
0.2 < BCI <= 0.4 
 
A very serious level of pressures 
on biodiversity. 
3 
0.4 < BCI <= 0.6 
 
A first worrying impact on 
biodiversity of the compound 
effect of land use and forest 
quality. 
4 
0.6 < BCI <= 0.8 
 
A 
good 
situation, 
with 
a 
satisfactory impact of land use 
and 
forest 
degradation 
on 
biodiversity. 
5 
0.8 < BCI <= 1 
 
The excellent situation, with a 
very low impact of land use and 
forest 
degradation 
on 
biodiversity. 
 
In the second case study, where the altitude range is very 
limited (40-101 m), the dependency between altitude and 
BCI is not significant at all. A better idea of the correlation 
between altitude and BCI could be obtained considering the 
whole region of Lombardia, where the altitude range is 
considerably wide (11-4021 m). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we presented a new composite indicator, 
which can express the pressures on biodiversity, by 
considering two distinct phenomena: land use and forest 
quality status. In order to define the composite indicator, a 
conceptual framework has been proposed, starting from the 
multidisciplinary approach used in the research. 
The framework states clearly the constraints, the 
methodologies and knowledge used by the two scientific 
fields involved in the research: vegetation science and 
computer science. We defined the composite indicator, based 
upon two simple indicators, the Anthropentropy Factor and 
the Forest Status Quality Indicator, and we analyzed two 
case studies, for a total number of 251 municipalities of the 
North-West Italian territory, i.e., region of Lombardia. 
Current and future developments of this work include the 
computation of the composite indicator for the entire region 
of Lombardia. It is an ambitious goal, as the region ranks 
first in Italy for the population and the number of local 
municipalities (1530), second for population density and the 
fourth for area. Moreover, the region is also the most invaded 
by non-native species, which represent 16.9% of the total 
vascular flora [40]. The region Lombardia is a complex 
territory with very different geological, geomorphological, 
and 
climatic, 
bioclimatic, 
and 
phytogeographical 
characteristics. As a consequence, a high floristic and 
vegetation richness is present: the vascular flora includes 
3220 entities [40], while the forest vegetation includes 174 
forest types [27], [37]. For all these reasons, the computation 
of the Biodiversity Composite Indicator on the whole region 
can give interesting hints and priorities on the biodiversity 
conservation in different environmental conditions and 
contexts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly appreciate Antonio di Gennaro for 
his collaboration, and for importing and pre-processing of 
data from GIS databases. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  The two indicators, Anthropentropy Factor (AF) and Forest Status Quality (FSQ), for all the 190 municipalities of the province of Pavia. 
 

190
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 11.  The two indicators, Anthropentropy Factor (AF) and Forest Status Quality (FSQ), for all the 61 municipalities of the province of Lodi. 
 
 
Figure 12.  The relationship between the two indicators for land use and forest quality: dispersion plot of FSQ (on the X axis) vs. AF (on the Y-axis), for all 
the municipalities of the province of Pavia. 
 
 
Figure 13.  The relationship between the two indicators for land use and forest quality: dispersion plot of FSQ (on the X axis) vs. AF (on the Y-axis), for all 
the municipalities of the province of Lodi. 
 

191
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 14.  The Biodiversity Composite Indicator for all the municipalities of the first case study, the province of Pavia. 
 
 
Figure 15.  The Biodiversity Composite Indicator for all the municipalities of the second case study, the province of Lodi. 
 
 
Figure 16.  The percentage of municipalities falling into the five classes of pressure impact expresses by the sub-ranges of the Biodiversity Composite 
Indicator, for the two case studies (Pavia and Lodi). 

192
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 17.  The relationship between the BCI and the average altitude (in meters) of the municipalities of Pavia. 
 
 
Figure 18.  The relationship between the BCI and the average altitude (in meters) of the municipalities of Lodi. 
 
m
.
. 
m
. 

193
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Assini and M. G. Albanesi, “A Naturalistic Indicator of 
the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land Use 
Anthropentropy 
Factor,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Sixth 
International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity 
and Renewable Energies (BIONATURE 2015), Rome 
(Italy), 24-29 May 2015, pp. 27-33, Copyright (©) IARIA, 
2015, ISBN 978-1-61208-410-7. 
[2] United Nations, “Convention on Biological Diversity,” 
1992, 
https://www.cbd.int/convention/text/ 
[retrieved: 
November, 2015]. 
[3] United Nations, “Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 
and 
the 
Aichi 
Biodiversity 
Targets,” 
2010. 
https://www.cbd.int/decision/cop/?id=12268 
[retrieved: 
November, 2015]. 
[4] European Environment Agency, “Towards a green 
economy in Europe - EU environmental policy targets and 
objectives 
2010–2050,” 
EEA 
Report 
n. 
8/2013, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/towards-a-green-
economy-in-europe  
[5] E. Smeets and R. Weterings, “Environmental indicators: 
typology and overview,” European Environment Agency 
Technical 
Report 
n. 
25/1999 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/TEC25 
[retrieved: 
November, 2015]. 
[6] The 
UN 
convention 
on 
biological 
diversity, 
http://enrin.grida.no/biodiv/biodiv/cbd/eeafoll.pdf 
[retrieved: November, 2014]. 
[7] European Environment Agency, “Landscape fragmentation 
in Europe,” Joint EEA-FOEN report n. 2/2011, ISSN 1725-
9177, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/landscape-
fragmentation-in-europe [retrieved: November, 2015]. 
[8] F. Gerard et al., “Land cover change in Europe between 
1950 and 2000 determined employing aerial photography,” 
Progress in Physical Geography, vol. 34 (2), pp. 183-205, 
2010. 
[9] A. Falcucci, L. Maiorno, and L. Boitani, “Changes in land-
use/land-cover patterns in Italy and their implications for 
biodiversity conservation,” Landscape Ecology, vol. 22, pp. 
617-631, 2007. 
[10] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, and F. Zucca, “Land cover changes 
in abandoned agricultural land in the Northern Apennine 
(Italy) between 1954 and 2008: spatio-temporal dynamics,” 
Plant 
Biosystems, 
in 
press, 
doi: 
10.1080/11263504.2014.983202. 
[11] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, M. Brusoni, and F. Zucca, 
“Vegetation of abandoned areas in the northern Apennines 
(Italy): 
phytosociological 
aspects 
and 
biodiversity 
analysis,” Acta Botanica Gallica: Botany Letters, vol. 161 
(4), 
pp. 
379-393, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1080/12538078.2014.948065. 
[12] Analysis of changes in European land cover from 2000 to 
2006, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/figures/land-cover-2006-and-changes-1 
[retrieved: 
November, 2015]. 
[13] ISPRA, “Land use in Italy, Report n. 195/2014,” Transl. “Il 
consumo 
di 
suolo 
in 
Italia, 
Edizione 
2014, 
http://www.isprambiente.gov.it/files/pubblicazioni/rapporti/
Rapporto_Consumo_di_Suolo_in_Italia_2014.pdf 
[retrieved: November, 2015]. 
[14] N. Dudley, R. Schlaepter, W. Jackson, J.P. Jeanrenaud, and 
S. Stolton, Forest Quality, Assessing Forests at a landscape 
Scale. Eartscan, London, Sterling VA, 2006. 
[15] N. Dudley, Forests In Trouble: A Review of the Status of 
Temperate Forests World-wide, World Wildlife Fund, 
London, 1992. 
[16] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi, “A new approach based 
on computer vision and collaborative social networking for 
environmental preservation: theory, tools and results of 
Italian ACI project,” Proc. of The Eight International 
Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology ICCGI2013, Nice (France), IARIA ed, 21-26 
July 2013, pp. 16-21, ISBN 978-1-61208-283-7. 
[17] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi, “A Decision-making 
Support System for Land Use Estimation Based on a New 
Anthropentropy Predictive Model for Environmental 
Preservation 
– 
Theory, 
Model 
and 
Web–based 
Implementation,” International Journal On Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, IARIA ed, v 7 n 1&2 2014, pp. 85-
102. 
[18] R. F. Noss, “Indicators for Monitoring Biodiversity: A 
Hierarchical Approach,” Conservation Biology, Vol. 4, n. 
4, pp. 355-364 
[19] M. Nardo, M. Saisana, A. Saltelli, S. Tarantola, A. 
Hoffman, and E. Giovannini, Handbook on Constructing 
Composite Indicators: Methodology and User Guide, 
OECD Statistics Working Papers, No. 2005/03, OECD 
Publishing, 
Paris, 
France, 
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/handbook-on-
constructing-composite-indicators_533411815016 
[retrieved: November, 2015]. 
[20] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, “Morphological 
image processing”. 
[21] J. Braun-Blanquet, Plant Sociology. New York: Mac Grew 
Hill Book Company, 1931. 
[22] E. Biondi, E. 2011. “Phytosociology today: Methodological 
and conceptual evolution,” Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 
(suppl. 1), pp. 19-29, 2001. 
[23] C. Blasi, E. Biondi, and J. Izco, “100 years of plant 
sociology: A celebration,” Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 
(Supplement), pp. 1-3, 2011. 
[24] R. Pott, “Phytosociology: A modern geobotanical method,” 
Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 (suppl. 1), pp. 9-18, 2011. 
[25] C. Andreis and F. Sartori, eds, “Forest vegetation of 
Lombardia. 
Phytosociological 
classification,” 
Transl. 
“Vegetazione forestale della Lombardia. Inquadramento 
fitosociologico,” Archivio Geobotanico, vol. 12-13, pp. 1-
215, 2011. 
[26] QuantumGIS 
software, 
http://www.qgis.org/en/site/ 
[retrieved: November, 2015]. 
[27] Regional Organization for Services in Agricolture and 
Forests, Transl. Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e 
Foreste, “Map of Forest Types of Lombardia”, Transl. 
“Carta 
dei 
tipi 
reali 
forestali 
della 
Lombardia,” 
http://www.geoportale.regione.lombardia.it/galleria-mappe, 
page 3 [retrieved: November, 2015]. 
[28] ISTAT 
shapefile 
for 
administrative 
boundaries: 
http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/24580 [retrieved: November, 
2015]. 
[29] R. M. Haralick, R. Sternberg Stanley, and Z. Xinhua, 
“Image Analysis Using Mathematical Morphology,” in 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, vol. PAMI-9, n.4, 1987, pp.532-550. 
[30] M. M. Ansoult and P. J. Soille, “Mathematical 
Morphology: a Tool for Automated GIS Data Acquisition 
from 
Scanned 
Thematic 
Maps,” 
Photogrammetric 
Engineering and Remote Sensing, vol. 56, n. 9, 1990, pp. 
1263-1271. 

194
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[31] C. Zhu, W. Shi, M. Pesaresi, L. Liu, X. Chen, and B. King, 
“The recognition of road network from high-resolution 
satellite remotely sensed data using image morphological 
characteristics,” International Journal of Remote Sensing, 
vol. 26, 2005, pp. 5493-5508. 
[32] F. Rottensteiner and C. Briese, “A new method for building 
extraction in urban areas from high-resolution LIDAR 
data,” International Archives of Photogrammetry Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. 34 (3/A), 
2002, 295-301. 
[33] C. P. Gomes, "Computational sustainability: Computational 
methods for a sustainable environment, economy, and 
society,” The Bridge, Vol. 39, N. 4, 2009, 5-13. 
[34] J. Loh, Living Planet Index 2003. WWF and the UNEP-
World Conservation Monitoring Centre,Gland, Switzerland 
and Cambridge, UK, 2003. 
[35] R. Prescott-Allen, The Well-Being of Nations: A Country-
by-Country Index of Quality of Life and the Environment. 
Island Press, Covelo, California and Washington DC, 2001. 
[36] P. Digiovinazzo, G.F. Ficetola, L. Bottoni, C. Andreis, and 
E. Padoa-Schioppa, “Ecological thresholds in herb 
communities for the management of suburban fragmented 
forests,” Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 259, pp. 
343-349, 2010. 
[37] R. Del Favero, “Forest types of Lombardia”, Transl. “I tipi 
forestali nella Regione Lombardia,” CIERRE Edizioni, 
2002. 
[38] R.J.A Little and D.B. Rubin, Statistical Analysis with 
Missing Data, Wiley Interscience, J. Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2002. 
[39] F. Aiello and M. Attanasio, "How to transform a batch of 
simple indicators to make up a unique one." Proc, of XLII 
Meeting of Italian Society of Statistics, CLEUP (Padova), 
327-338, 2004. 
[40] L. Celesti-Grapow et al., “Non-native flora of Italy. Species 
distribution and threads,” Plant Biosystems, vol. 144 (1), 
pp. 12-28, 2010. 

