The State of Video-Based Learning: A Review and Future Perspectives 
Ahmed Mohamed Fahmy Yousef, Mohamed Amine Chatti, Ulrik Schroeder 
Learning Technologies Research Group (Informatik 9), RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
{Ahmed.fahmy; Schroeder}@cil.rwth-aachen.de; Chatti@informatik.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract— The pedagogical strength of Video-Based Learning 
(VBL) is presenting knowledge in consistent and attractive 
manner. In recent years, the new forms and technologies of 
VBL such as flipped classrooms, and most prominently 
MOOCs, have had a remarkable impact on teaching and 
learning methodologies. A significant number of academic 
publications 
have 
investigated 
and 
analyzed 
VBL 
environments from different perspectives, including potential 
usage, effects on learning outcomes, satisfaction levels, and 
effectiveness. This study provides a critical analysis of the 
current research in VBL conducted from 2003 until today.  We 
aim to help educators in building deeper understanding about 
the educational benefits of VBL. In this study, 76 peer 
reviewed papers are identified through journals and academic 
databases and they are categorized into four main dimensions: 
effectiveness, teaching methods, design, and reflection. In the 
scope of this analysis, we also provide future visions and 
research opportunities in VBL that support self-organized and 
network learning.  
Keywords-Video-Based Learning; VBL; MOOC; Review of 
Research; Blended Learning; Video Design; Flipped Classroom; 
Technology-Enhanced Learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Video-based learning (VBL) is now recognized by 
Technology-Enhance Learning (TEL) researchers as a 
powerful learning resource in online teaching activities. This 
paper presents an extended and more detailed version of our 
paper presented at the sixth international conference on 
mobile, hybrid, and online learning (eLmL 2014), where we  
reviewed the existing methodologies of VBL research [1]. 
VBL has unique features that make it an effective learning 
method that can enhance and partly replace traditional 
classroom-based and teacher-led learning approaches. VBL 
can change the way we learn as well as how we teach [2]. 
Videos can help students by visualizing how something 
works [3] and show information and details difficult to 
explain by text or static photos [4]. In addition, videos can 
attract students’ attention, thus motivating them and 
engaging them to increase their collaboration. Using videos 
thus can lead to better learning outcomes [5]. Moreover, 
video can support different learning styles, specifically 
students who are ‘visual learners’ [6]. 
Indeed, VBL has a long history as a learning tool in 
educational classes. First experiments started during the 
Second World War. Soldiers were then trained with a 
combination of audio and film strips [7]. As a result, the 
static film strips helped to increase their skills while saving a 
lot of time as well. By the late 1960s, educational television 
was used as an extra tool in classrooms. Also teachers were 
confronted with videos of their own lessons to reflect on 
their teaching methods and improve their performance [8]. In 
the 1980s, VHS videotapes meant a quantum leap as it 
became much easier to use video in classrooms. But, still, 
learners were rather passive and could only watch the video. 
This changed with the rise of digital video CDs in the mid-
1990s. Teachers could now add multimedia control and 
assessment tools by using the video on a computer. Thus, 
learners became much more active than before. By the 
2000s, classrooms got connected to the internet and 
interactive digital video as well as video conferences became 
possible. Since then, new technologies such as smartphones 
and tablets in combination with social media such as 
YouTube have contributed to increasing social interaction 
and have made it easier as ever to integrate video 
applications in education [9][10]. In recent years, VBL 
publications have increased in order to discuss how VBL can 
facilitate learning and enhance learner’s outcome as well as 
teacher’s performance. Thus, there was a need to collect 
existing research, document the benefits of video in 
improving learning, and explore the design and teaching 
methods in VBL environments. In this study, we critically 
analyze the research on VBL to answer the following 
research questions: 
1. What are the educational benefits that VBL has on 
teaching and learning? 
2. How VBL technologies enhance students’ learning 
outcome?   
3. How 
educators 
and 
researchers 
design 
VBL 
environments?   
4. How is VBL used to improve teacher’s and learner’s 
reflection? 
5. What are possible applications of VBL in open and 
networked TEL environments?  
In order to answer these questions, this paper will 
discuss different angles of VBL. The remainder of this 
paper is structured as follows: Section II is a review of the 
related work dealing with the systematic review of research 
on VBL in the past ten years. Section III describes the 
research methodology, how we collected the research data, 
and how we categorized the VBL literature. In Section IV, 
we review and discuss the current research based on several 
dimensions. 
In 
Section 
V, 
we 
present 
recent 
implementations in VBL with a focus on the MOOCs and 
flipped classroom models. Finally, Section VI gives a 
summary of the main findings of this paper and highlights 
new research opportunities for future work with some 
guidelines for practitioners. 
122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section surveys the previous work most closely 
related to the current study and place our contributions in the 
proper context. 
Tuong et al. [11] conducted a systematic review of 28 
VBL studies in order to examine the effectiveness of the 
instructional videos in modifying health behaviors. The main 
findings of this review show that instructional videos 
interventions appear to be effective in the general self-care 
testing (e.g., breast self-examination, heart failure and 
treatment adherence).  
Greenberg and Zanetis [12] reported the positive impact 
of video broadcast and streaming in education. As a result of 
their study, the authors encourage teachers and educators to 
use interactive video training materials in classes especially 
with children. 
 Borgo et al. [13] conducted a study to provide an 
overview of the major advances in automated video analysis 
and investigate some techniques in the field of graphic 
design and visualization. 
Tripp and Rich [14] reviewed 63 studies in order to 
understand the ability of teachers to reflect on their teaching 
through video recording. The result of this study was that 
teachers prefer to use video recording for reflection in 
collaboration with colleagues than reflecting individually. 
Also, teachers report that the use of a guiding framework 
(e.g., rubric, checklist, teaching principles) helps to focus on 
their reflection by focusing their attention on certain tasks. 
Although these studies asserted that the video is a 
powerful tool in TEL and that videos enable teachers to 
reflect on their teaching, they do not take into account the 
teaching methodologies, design approaches, and the impact 
of teachers’ reflections on their students’ learning outcomes. 
As compared to the above studies, our study adds a wide 
range of peer-reviewed studies that have been conducted 
between 2003 and 2014 and provides a quantitative as well 
as qualitative analysis of the VBL literature. Moreover, we 
apply a cognitive mapping approach to categorize the VBL 
publication into several dimensions. The study further 
provides critical discussion according to each dimension and 
suggests new opportunities for future work. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research methodology was carried out in two main 
phases including identification of eligible studies followed 
by a cognitive mapping approach to categorize the VBL 
literature into several dimensions. 
A. Identification of Eligible Studies 
The significant research method of identifying papers 
from Internet resources was applied to collect data in this 
study [15]. This method was carried out in three rounds. 
Firstly, we conducted a search in 7 major refereed academic 
databases. These include Education Resources Information 
Center (ERIC), JSTOR, ALT Open Access Repository, 
Google Scholar, PsychInfo, ACM publication, IEEEXplorer, 
and Wiley Online Library.  
Secondly, we searched 23 academic journals in the field 
of educational technology and TEL indexed by Journal 
Citation Reports (JCR) including Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, British Journal of Educational 
Technology, Canadian journal of learning and technology, 
CITE Journal, Computers in Human Behavior, The 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning (EJEL), European Journal 
of Open, Distance and E-Learning (EURODL), Instructional 
Science, Interactions Journal, The International Journal of 
Instructional 
Technology 
and 
Distance 
Learning, 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning (IRRODL), Journal of Asynchronous Learning 
Networks, Journal of computer assisted learning (JCAL), 
Journal of Computing in Higher Education, Journal of 
distance education, Journal of Interactive Media in 
Education, Journal of Interactive Online Learning, Journal of 
Learning Design, Journal of Online Learning and Teaching 
(JOLT), Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment , 
Learning, Media and Technology, and Turkish Online 
Journal of Distance Education (TOJDE), using the keywords 
(and their plurals) “Video-based learning”, “VBL”, “teaching 
with interactive video”, and “Video Instruction”. As a result, 
127 peer-reviewed papers were found. 
Thirdly, a set of selection criteria were identified as 
follows: 
1. Studies 
must 
focus 
on 
VBL 
in 
educational 
development. Studies on video coding and semantic 
retrieval of video were excluded. 
2. Experimental or empirical case studies on how learners 
learn with and from videos were included. Studies of 
video recording strategies were excluded. 
3. Studies that focus on ability of teachers to reflect on 
their teaching via video recording were included.  
4. Studies evaluating the VBL activities and effectiveness 
in education were included. Studies that focused on 
video-games and video conferencing tools were 
excluded. 
This resulted in a final set of 76 peer-reviewed studies, 
which met the selection criteria above. Fig. 1 shows the 
number of VBL publications between 2003 and 2014, which 
were found to be relevant for this study. 
 
 
Fig. 1. VBL studies by publication year. 
123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Cognitive Mapping Approach 
Cognitive mapping approach is a method enabling the 
researchers to clarify and categorize the research literature 
conceptions into several dimensions regarding to the 
research questions. These dimensions are recorded in graphic 
flowchart to show the hierarchy of VBL terms [16].  We 
applied the cognitive mapping approach as a classification 
technique for dividing the VBL literature into four 
dimensions relevant to the research questions, namely 
effectiveness, teaching methods, reflection, and design (see 
Fig. 2). 
 
Fig. 2. Visual representation of the VBL dimension. 
 
In order to capture the information gained from the literature 
analysis, we created a VBL field diagram (see Fig. 3), which 
has been partitioned into four categories and thirteen sub-
categories.  
 
Fig. 3. VBL cognitive map 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section, we critically discuss in details the VBL 
literature based on the cognitive map dimensions that have 
been identified in Section III, namely effectiveness, teaching 
methods, reflection, and design. For the critical discussion 
part, we apply the meta-analysis method, which aims to 
contrast and combine results from several studies into a 
single scientific work [15]. 
A. Effectiveness 
Effectiveness of VBL has received a great deal of 
attention from academic scientists. 33% of the studies 
reviewed in this paper examined the effectiveness of VBL. 
Most of the reviewed case studies asserted the efficacy and 
usefulness of VBL as a powerful medium used in education. 
We analyzed each study for the following characteristics: 
research goal, subject, target group, sample size, and 
summary of results. In the following sections, we discuss the 
effectiveness of VBL in terms of learning outcome, 
interaction, and learners’ satisfaction. 
1) Learning 
Outcome: 
A 
learning 
outcome 
(or 
achievement) can be described as knowledge, skills, and 
abilities that learners have to achieve as a result of the 
learning process [2]. Many TEL scholars believe that VBL 
has the potential to promote the learning outcome. VBL can, 
for instance, present knowledge in an attractive and 
consistent manner [5][17]. Further, Kay and Edward [18] 
and Balslev et al. [19] compared VBL supported by a 
cognitive approach with text-based learning. The results 
showed statistically significant differences in improving 
learners’ skills. Moreover, the authors reported that learners 
liked the followed cognitive approach in which knowledge 
was generated through step by step learning in video 
lectures. 
In addition, Lin and Tseng [20] and Hsu et al. [21] 
conducted two studies to investigate the effect of different 
VBL designs to improve English language skills of K-12 
pupils. The findings indicated that the groups which used 
VBL outperformed the other groups. Other studies reported 
the invaluable impact of using VBL in improving teachers’ 
performance. The results asserted that using videos as 
educational tools improved teaching methods and increased 
the learning outcome [6][8][22][23]. 
On the other hand, some studies indicated that there 
were no statistically significant differences between 
teaching with videos and other methods, thus making them 
equivalent [24][25][26]. Moreover, Chuang and Rosenbusch 
[27] stressed the importance of the pedagogical aspect for an 
effective VBL experience. The authors pointed out that only 
using videos without pedagogical approach does not make 
sense. The authors emphasized that video technology should 
go side by side with pedagogy, and provided a constructivist 
framework to engage learners to learn with videos. Equally 
important, Giannakos et al. [28] highlighted the importance 
and benefits of applying learning analytics to support 
teachers and students. Learning analytics will help in 
124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

guiding the learners to the appropriate learning materials for 
improving the use of their courses. This can be achieved by 
aggregating and analyzing learners' interactions with other 
available learners’ data. Learning analytics opens new 
research directions on VBL courses about accessing 
recommendations for future learning activities. This means, 
that issues related to data privacy, ownership, sharing, and 
access need to be resolved [29].  
In sum, the reviewed studies indicated that there were 
conflicting 
results 
of 
using 
VBL 
in 
educational 
environments as some found it valuable while others 
reported no significant results. There was, however, an 
agreement among researchers that VBL in conjunction with 
appropriate pedagogical methods has the potential to 
improve the learning outcome. 
2) Interaction: Improved interaction and communication 
among participants is another effectiveness aspect in VBL. 
DeLoache and Korac [30] reviewed some case studies of 
using videos with infants. The authors pointed out that video 
stories indeed improved communication between children. 
Hakkarainen and Vapalahti [31] investigated learning with 
video in the forum-theatre. This study showed that VBL can 
enhance interaction among learners and improve the ability 
to solve every day social problems. Recently, Shen [32] 
evaluated the effects of VBL in nursing simulation practice 
using the “experimental group and control group” method. 
The results of this investigation showed that, nurses in the 
experimental group received significantly higher scores in 
the final evaluation of catheterization, communication skills, 
and satisfaction than the nurses in the control group.  
On the contrary, Muhirwa [33] investigated VBL in TEL 
environments in Africa and pointed out that VBL had a 
lesser role in increasing interaction among learners. This 
was due to the fact of poor internet connectivity, limited 
access to computers, and lack of trained instructors in 
Africa. Additional obstacle that might prevent learners from 
Africa to actively participate in VBL is the poor technology 
infrastructure, only 25% of Africa has access to electricity 
[34]. 
3) Satisfaction: The level of learning satisfaction is 
important in evaluating the effectiveness of VBL 
environments. Zhang et al. [5] examined the level of 
satisfaction through interactive VBL in a study involving 
138 students. As a result, students who used a TEL 
environment that provides interactive instructional video 
reported higher levels of satisfaction than those in the 
control group without video.  
Moreover, it has been shown that interactive videos have 
an impact on the emotional side of the learners’ behaviour 
(e.g., real-life interaction,  incorporate the different sound 
and musical effects that can fit the emotional contents of the 
learning subject) and that videos can improve the attention 
to the subject of the lecture in addition to the positive impact 
on the learners’ motivation level [35][36][37]. 
B. Teaching Methods 
Dale’s cone of experience presents how information is 
understood, processed, transferred, and maintained as 
knowledge within the learning process [38]. Fig. 4 shows 
what learners will be able to do at each level of the cone. 
 
Fig. 4. Cone of experience.  
Adapted from E. Dale, Audiovisual Methods in Teaching, 1969, NY: 
Dryden Press [38].  
According to Dale’s cone, the most effective methods 
stand at the bottom. These methods involve direct 
experience, practical and hands-on workshops, which 
compel learners to better remember their activities. 
Interactive videos belong to this category as they enable 
learners to interact with the video materials through 
annotations, discussions, and assessment.  Educationists and 
scholars use a broad range of teaching methodologies in 
VBL environments in order to increase the value of 
interactive videos. In this literature review, collaborative 
learning is a key aspect which underlies most of the studies. 
Other 
methods 
involve 
micro 
teaching, 
video 
summarization, video assessment, hybrid learning, and 
student-centered learning. 
1) Collaborative Learning: In video-based collaborative 
learning, 
which 
focuses 
on developing, discussing, 
exploring alternatives rather than directions, learners are 
able to share responsibilities for their learning [5][39][40]. 
Most of the reviewed studies validate the efficacy and 
usefulness of collaborative VBL, where learners can 
develop their problem-solving abilities via collaboration 
with others [12]. These studies reported various educational 
benefits for learners working cooperatively in teams such as 
shared goals, ideas, resources, activities, and supporting 
125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

each other [41][42][43][44]. For instance, Pea and Lindgren 
[45] investigated which collaboration design patterns are 
used by learners when they have access to a Web-based 
video collaboration platform. Five collaboration patterns 
were identified, namely collective interpretation, distributed 
design, performance feedback, distributed data coding, and 
video-based prompting. These patterns support teacher-
centred learning by providing knowledge and allowing 
learners to discuss and find solutions. 
2) Micro Teaching: The micro teaching method was 
used in some studies as a teaching practice with a smaller 
class size and time (e.g., four to nine learners in a class that 
is held for five to ten minutes). Educators are able to give 
learners some quick and easy feedback on their learning 
performance through video podcasts [46]. Finlay et al. [47] 
reported that learners’ responses on micro teaching with 
video podcasts are very positive. The authors, however, 
noted that the video of 10 minutes length was too long for 
many learners and found that the shorter video podcasts (4-5 
minutes) have the advantage of giving greater flexibility in 
micro teaching lessons. Woodruff [48] investigates video 
lectures with a small group of students with autism in a 
series of art lessons. The main result is the following: 
Students with autism spectrum develop their artistic skills 
and retain more art content knowledge with highest grades 
than through traditional teaching classes. Other studies 
showed that micro teaching provides a friendly and 
supportive learning environment [49][50]. 
3) Video 
Summarization: 
Video 
summarization 
technique extracts important information and provides short 
but informative summary of the lecture content [51][52]. 
Chang et al. [53] designed a keyword-based video 
summarization learning platform (KVSUM) which provides 
a keyword cloud as a textual surrogate to support learners to 
organize information of videos and enhance them to follow 
the videos and reducing the learning time. 
4) Video Assessment: A video assessment is short video 
that simulates real life activities and provides possible 
responses to the several daily problems. Learners are asked 
to select which of the responses they would take in these 
circumstances. Afterwards, teachers discuss each response 
and evaluate learner’s responses [54][55].  
5) Hybrid Learning: Hybrid learning has become one 
important TEL model, by integrating online learning and 
traditional face-to-face classroom together [56][57]. Pang 
[58] conducted a study by following a hybrid learning 
approach that uses video-based learning materials in a  
Physical Education course. In this course, the trainer can 
review the learner’s actions video, pick out the wrong 
actions, and provide feedback. Then, students can reflect, 
find out mistakes. The experiment shows that 80.9% out of 
learners think that the video review indeed improved their 
physical skills. 
In other studies, Shih [59] and Kırkgöz [60] investigated a 
hybrid learning approach supported by video lectures for an 
English speaking course. The study showed that the learners 
made noticeable improvement in their oral communication 
skills, and that they were satisfied with the blended learning 
model. 
6) Student-Centred Learning: Most of the reviewed 
VBL studies followed a teacher-centred approach. Only 
15% of studies have focused on student-centred learning 
[61][62]. These studies don’t depend on teachers as content 
providers. They aimed at providing the space for students to 
be active participants in their learning environment, interact 
to build and construct knowledge, and get mutual support to 
make decisions using reflection and critical judgement. 
C. Design 
Several researchers in TEL have explored how to design 
effective VBL environments. Annotation and authoring tools 
are the most used design tools in the reviewed VBL 
literature.  
1) Annotation Tools: Annotation means adding note, 
comment, explanation, and presentational mark-up attached 
to a document, image, or video [63]. In VBL, annotation 
refers to the additional notes added to the video without 
modifying the resource itself, which help in searching, 
highlighting, analysis, retrieval, and providing feedback 
[64]. Moreover, video annotation provides an easy way for 
indexing, discussion, reflection, and conclusion of content 
[65][66]. 
Colasante [3] examined the integration of a video 
annotation tool (MAT) into the learning and assessment 
activities of a third year class “Physical Education” course 
at RMIT University. This tool allowed learners to select and 
annotate parts of a video. These annotations are then used 
by students and teachers to discuss, receive feedback, 
reflect, and evaluate their learning and teaching practice. 
The results showed that MAT was effective for receiving 
feedback form teachers and peers. But, some issues 
regarding the quality of the collaborative input from peers 
were noted. 
Moreover, feedback in VBL is recommended for several 
resons, it provides an easy way for discussion and reflection 
on the video content, provides scaffolds for learners to 
support self-reflection and self-assessment [3][29].   
2) Authoring Tools: A number of studies have 
developed a wide range of authoring tools for VBL content. 
The primary function of these authoring tool is to increase 
the interactivity with the VBL environment, thus engaging 
learners in the learning processe [67]. The following tools 
were used in various VBL environments: 
 
Synchronize lecture note: The aim of this tool is to 
synchronize a video stream with the presentation 
slide by means of video clip timing [67]. 
126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Content summarization tool: This tool is able to 
extract summary information from lecture videos and 
provide it to the learners automatically [68] [69]. 
 
Digital Video Library: This tool uses indexing to 
enable 
content-based 
search 
for 
a 
particular 
information of a video lecture [70]. 
 
Discussion forum: A space integrated in the VBL 
environment where learners can discuss and share 
common interests or goals on a learning topic 
[71][72]. 
As an illustration, the College of Engineering at the 
University of California, Berkeley has launched an online 
Master’s program in integrated circuits. This project embeds 
VBL modules for library research methods. In this program, 
the library plays a significant role in providing the teaching 
resources and instruction to help learners succeed in their 
studies. The results manifested a positive impact on the 
university library and encouraged the development of 
facilities and services, such as using digital video library to 
enhance personalized interaction with learners [73].   
D. Reflection 
There is a general interest among researchers and 
educators in using VBL to support teachers’ and students’ 
reflection on their teaching and learning activities 
[14][74][75]. 
1) Teacher Reflection: Video recording of the classroom 
lessons enables teachers to reflect on their teaching [76]. 
Teachers can record their own teaching, watch what they 
did in the classroom, think about it, and reflect on the 
performance using both individual and collaborative 
reflection [77][78]. 
Studies examined both individual and collaborative 
reflection. 85% of the studies on reflection in VBL noted 
that teachers prefer to reflect on their teaching performance 
with colleagues [4][76][78]. Similarly, Calandra et al. [78] 
and Calandra et al. [79] stressed that the teacher’s reflective 
process should be collaborative where groups of teachers 
provide comments or feedback to each other. Several 
reflection methods were used, e.g., daily reflection, weekly 
reflection, and end of semester reflection [80][81]. 
Only 15% of studies examined self-reflection where 
teachers reflected individually on their teaching. Teachers 
used video-taped lesson analysis and wrote comments for 
self-reflection [82]. Likewise, Gainsburg, [61] implemented 
video annotation tools to scaffold, structure, and transform 
teacher reflection. 
Recently, video reflection has been used for pre-service 
teacher education.  Blomberg et al., [83] explored the use of 
two VBL courses, on to determine pre-service teachers’ 
ability to reflect on classroom video. The study found that 
the video recording distinctly impacts on the pre-service 
teachers’ reflection patterns. On the contrary, Cho and 
Huang [84] investigated the mutual relationships between 
pre-service teachers’ beliefs and video-based reflection 
activities in wiki. The authors found that cognitive beliefs 
partially influenced reflective writing and questioning 
activities in wikis.  
2) Learner Reflection: Recording classroom activities is 
also important for learners to reflect on their own learning 
experience, evaluate their performance, and get a clearer 
overview of their learning progress. Video recordings 
further help learners in revision prior to exams [75][85]. 
Dalgarno 
et 
al., 
[86] 
discussed 
three 
common 
methodologies in which learners are helped to reflect and 
make connections between their academic learning and their 
own practical learning. These methodologies are work-
integrated 
learning 
programs, 
inquiry-based 
learning 
designs, and simulation. The authors recognized the role of 
rich media technologies such as videoconferencing, web 
conferencing and mobile videos in learners’ self-reflecting 
and connect university classrooms to sites of professional 
practice. 
V. 
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
In this section, we present the future perspectives carried 
out from the critical analysis of the VBL literature. In the last 
few years, the expansion of new open VBL models, such as 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and flipped 
classrooms has changed the TEL landscape by providing 
more opportunities for learners than ever before. 
A. MOOCs 
The term ”openness” has received a great deal of 
attention from the higher education institutions, due to the 
growing demand for lifelong learning opportunities. Open 
Educational 
Resources 
(OER) 
represent 
a 
first 
implementation of openness in higher education. The 
concept of OER describes any educational materials that can 
be used and re-used in teaching and learning. These 
materials are openly available and free of charge [87]. They 
have been widely used by educators and students as rich and 
powerful learning resources. OER, however, have two main 
limitations: they lack human interaction and do not reach 
massive numbers of learners.   
In 2001 the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
introduced the term of Open CourseWare (OCW) as a TEL 
platform in order to provide their curricula material for 
everyone at no cost. The key difference between OCW and 
OER is that OCW are more specific and structured as 
courses than the public OER library. OCW succeeded in 
assisting self-organized learners who do not meet the MIT 
admission requirement but are interested in an OCW course. 
[29][88]. The criticism against OCW mainly focuses on the 
customization necessary to match each institute curriculum 
requirements and the lack of direct feedback due to the one-
way design of interaction. 
In 2008, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have 
offered a whole new perspective for openness by providing 
unlimited 
learning 
opportunities 
for 
a 
large-scale 
127
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

participation for free. MOOCs represent an evolution of the 
OER and OCW movements.   
1) MOOC Definition: MOOCs are leading the new 
revolution of TEL by providing new opportunities to a 
massive number of learners to attend free online courses 
from anywhere all over the world [89]. Fig. 5 describes the 
characteristics of the four words included in the MOOC 
acronym. 
 
Fig. 5. MOOCs ideation 
 
Massive refers to the necessary size of course 
participants. But what is massive? Regarding to 
university campus courses 1000 learners is really a 
huge amount of participants. Many MOOCs have 
less than a hundred users, while some courses 
reached over 150,000 registrations. Basically, any 
online class that has a higher number of students 
than regular university courses (+100 participants) 
can be considered as a MOOC [34]. 
 
Open refers to the academic freedom to expand 
access to participant regardless of their ideological, 
political, and cultural background [88]. Moreover, 
open is used in the sense of free reuse, revise, 
remix, and redistribute of the learning material e.g., 
learning objects, video lectures, quizzes, textbooks, 
any other tools [34], [89]. 
 
Online requires the MOOC environment to be 
accessible and carried out over the internet. The 
hybrid MOOCs model (i.e., blended with face-to-
face 
interaction 
and 
support) 
encourages 
participants to meet physically and work together 
on their studying projects [34]. 
 
Courses 
are 
related 
to 
the 
structure 
and 
organization of the learning curriculum. A MOOC 
includes OER, learning objectives, collaboration 
tools, assessments, and learning analytics features 
[34]. 
Due to the nature of MOOCs environment, we strongly 
believe that the original definition of MOOCs will change as 
a result of the various challenges and rapid developments in 
this field. 
2) MOOC Categories 
Different forms of MOOCs have been introduced in the 
MOOC literature. Siemens [90] characterize MOOCs into 
cMOOCs based on the theory of connectivism, and 
xMOOCs by virtue of behaviorism and cognitivist theories 
with 
some 
social 
constructivism 
aspects 
as 
more 
institutional model, e.g., Coursera, edX, and Udacity. Hills 
offers a diagram of the evolution of MOOCs over the last 
few years [91]. 
 
Fig. 6. The evolution of MOOCs [91] 
The first design of cMOOCs was established in 2008, 
based on the connnectivist pedagogy approach. That enables 
learners to build their own networks via blogs, wikis, 
Google groups, Twitter, Facebook, and other social 
networking tools outside the learning platform without any 
restrictions from the teacher [92]. In xMOOCs, by contrast, 
learning objectives are pre-defined by teachers who impart 
their knowledge through short video lectures, often followed 
by simple e-assessment tasks (e.g., quiz, eTest) [93]. 
Recently, new forms of MOOCs have emerged. These 
include smOOCs as open online courses with a relatively 
small number of participants and blended MOOCs 
(bMOOCs) as hybrid MOOCs including in-class and online 
video-based learning activities [34]. The key characteristics 
of MOOC forms are summarized in Table I [34][94]. 
The majority of existing MOOCs that have been delivered 
at higher education institutions are xMOOCs. These 
university style platforms were developed by different elite 
institutions and usually delivered via a third party platform 
provider. For example, Coursera has been developed by 
Stanford University and currently partnered with top 
universities and organizations worldwide. In addition, edX 
was founded by the MIT and Harvard University in May 
2012. There are more than 40 high ranked universities co-
operated and offered courses on the edX platform [94].  
 
128
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table I. Characteristics of MOOCs 
Compare Item 
cMOOCs 
xMOOCs 
bMOOCs 
smOOCs 
Learning theory 
Connectivism 
√ 
- 
- 
- 
Behaviorism 
- 
√ 
- 
- 
Cognitivist 
- 
√ 
- 
- 
Social constructivism 
- 
(√) 
√ 
√ 
Structure 
Pre-determined 
- 
√ 
√ 
√ 
weekly sequences 
structure 
- 
√ 
(√) 
√ 
Self-organized  
√ 
- 
(√) 
- 
Short video lectures  
(√) 
√ 
√ 
(√) 
Fluid structure 
√ 
- 
- 
- 
Teacher role 
Teacher-Based 
- 
√ 
- 
√ 
Facilitator 
√ 
- 
(√) 
- 
Co-organizer with course 
participants 
√ 
- 
√ 
(√) 
Interaction 
Open network via social 
tools e.g., Blogs, forums, 
live chat, social media 
√ 
(√) 
√ 
- 
Face-to-Face 
- 
- 
√ 
- 
Daily or weekly meeting 
- 
- 
- 
√ 
Limited interaction 
among participants and 
course teacher 
- 
√ 
- 
- 
Assessment 
E-Assessment i.e., 
automatically grading  
- 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Self-Assessment i.e., 
short quizzes to help 
participants formatively 
assess their own learning  
- 
√ 
√ 
- 
Peer-Assessment 
√ 
(√) 
√ 
(√) 
Open Assessment 
√ 
- 
- 
- 
√Completely (√) Partly - Not supported 
3) MOOC Goals 
The question is how and why are higher education 
institutions engaging with MOOCs. Through interviews 
with administrators, faculty members and researchers from 
29 different institutions that were already offering or using 
MOOCs, Hollands and Tirthali [94] identified six major 
goals for MOOC initiatives:  
 
Massiveness: to extend the reach and access of 
education to a wider audience. 
 
Building and maintaining brand. 
 
Improving economics by reducing the costs of 
education or using MOOCs as a potential source of 
revenue i.e., business models. 
 
Improving learning outcomes. 
 
Innovation in teaching and learning. 
 
Research purpose i.e., conducting studies on 
MOOC design and methodologies.  
4) MOOC challenges 
Much has been written on MOOCs about their design, 
effectiveness, case studies, and the ability to provide 
opportunities for exploring new pedagogical stategies and 
business models in higher education [34][89]. MOOCs are 
still in a pilot form till now. A variety of concerns and 
criticisms in the use of MOOCs have been raised [29][94]. 
In this 
part 
we discuss several pedagogical and 
technological crucial challenges that should be considered in 
the development of the future MOOC environments. 
a) Free against business models: The original idea of 
MOOCs is to offer learning content to a massive 
number of participants for free. In reality, however, 
some providers view MOOCs as a potential source 
of revenue and offer certificates and teaching 
assistance for additional fees [29][34]. 
b) Openness against licensing: Although MOOCs are 
open for massive number of participants without 
any entry requirements, they are not open from a 
copyright perspective. For instance, Coursera does 
not 
permit 
users 
to 
reproduce, 
retransmit, 
distribute, or publish any material from its 
platform1. 
c) Massiveness against drop-out rates: MOOCs have 
reached thousands of learners at a time. However, 
only few of them have completed the courses [33]. 
A possible reason for high drop-out rates is the lack 
of academic guidance for participants to select 
courses which are suitable for their interest as well 
as their knowledge level [95]. 
d) Lack of human interaction: The lack of human 
interaction is a critical issue in MOOCs, both for 
learners and professors. In MOOCs, It is not easy 
to provide direct feedback to a massive number of 
participants [95]. Moreover, learners in these open 
courses come from all over the world. They speak 
English in different levels and have different 
cultural believes. To address this challenge, 
integrating social media tools to increase the 
interaction among MOOC participants can be 
helpful [96]. 
                                                           
1 https://www.coursera.org/about/terms 
129
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

e) Certificates: Another important challenge is how to 
assess the learners and certify their activities. In 
fact, many learners enrolling in MOOCs are 
looking for certification to promote their career or 
complete post-graduate studies. Some MOOC 
providers already provide certification possibilities, 
e.g., through test centres. 
f) 
Plagiarism: Scientific integrity is an important 
factor for the success of online learning, especially 
MOOCs. The main challenge is how to validate 
participants’ original work and prevent plagiarism? 
A technical solution can be a plagiarism-detection 
software but this can be expensive and time- 
consuming. Peer-reviews can be an option to solve 
this problem but still quality criteria and indicators 
are needed to ensure the effectiveness of the peer-
review [29][34].  
In general, the future of higher education and the 
potential role of MOOCs require key stakeholders to 
address these challenges, including questions about the lack 
of human interaction, plagiarism, certification, completion 
rates, and innovation beyond traditional learning models. 
These challenges need to be addressed as the understanding 
of the technical and pedagogical issues surrounding MOOCs 
evolve. 
B. Flipped Classrooms 
The flipped classroom is an instance of the VBL model 
that enables teachers to spend  more time in discussing only 
difficulties, problems, and practical aspects of the learning 
course [35][97]. In flipped classrooms, learners watch video 
lectures as homework. Each video lecture comes with a short 
online quiz as a formative feedback. The class is then an 
active learning session where the teacher use case studies, 
labs, games, simulations, or experiments to discuss the 
concepts presented in the video lecture [6].  
Bishop and Verleger [98] define the flipped classroom as 
interactive learning technique that includes: a) Group 
learning activities inside the classroom time and b) 
computer-based learning outside the classroom, as presented 
in Fig. 7.  
 
 
Fig. 7. The Flipped Classroom [98] 
 
We define the flipped classroom as a pedagogical 
strategy which encompasses several teaching and learning 
practices split into homework and on-campus activities. 
Some practices, such as watching video lectures, fall into the 
home activities. On campus, learners are supposed to 
conduct their collaborative project or laboratory work and 
engage in discussions with their peers and teaching staff. On 
the other hand, teachers plan learning activities, give 
feedback, and evaluate learners’ work. Fig. 8 illustrates the 
activities in the flipped classroom in more detail. 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Flipped classroom activities 
1) The flipped classroom in action 
The flipped classroom model has been successfully 
applied in the higher education context. This section 
outlines two case studies that investigated the impact of 
flipped classrooms on student achievement and engagement. 
a) The University of Western Sydney: The flipped 
classroom has been examined in the first year 
management accounting unit at the University of 
Western Sydney in autumn semester 2013. It 
consists of two main parts: individual instruction 
outside of the classroom by assigning learners 
weekly reading of selected chapters (offline) and a 
variety of online activities which are developed to 
assist students in better understanding the learning 
topic (online learning). The in-class time was 
devoted to in-depth discussions, problem solving, 
demonstration, tutorials, and mastering the material 
through collaborative learning exercises and direct 
feedback (face-to-face). This course had 259 
formal learners who were enrolled and have 
completed 
the 
learning 
course. 
The 
most 
interesting finding was that the majority of learners 
reported that they have received sufficient 
instructions and feedback. In addition, they 
appreciated the quality of the learning material, 
flexibility, time saving and online activities with 
the formative feedback. However, the unexpected 
finding was that some learners did not like the 
course design because it required learners to 
complete too many assignments, which was time-
consuming [99]. This study, however, did not 
report on the impact of flipped classroom on 
learning outcomes. 
130
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

b) Capital University: Wilson [100] investigated the 
potential of the flipped classroom model for 
enhancing learning outcomes in an undergraduate 
statistics course for social science majors at Capital 
University in Ohio. The author designed a flipped 
classroom environment, in which the majority of 
learning materials were moved out of the 
classroom and lectures focusing on real-world 
practices of statistics were given during in-class 
time. Quizzes were used to measure the learning 
outcome. 
 
The quizzes accounted 10% of a learner’s 
overall grade.  
 
In-class assessments constituted 15% of a 
learner’s grade and were conducted daily.  
 
Collaborative learning in form of group 
homework to be completed outside the class 
accounted 20% of the final grade. 
 
Final exam accounted 55% of a learner’s 
overall grade. 
Learners were asked to evaluate the learning 
activities that are most helpful for their learning 
objectives. The students’ evaluations of these 
activities fell into the “somewhat helpful” to “very 
helpful” categories and resulted in 48% for reading 
quizzes, 96% for in-class activities, and 91% for 
group homework. Moreover, the study showed that 
learners’ performance was better in the flipped 
classroom compared to the traditional class from 
the previous year. Furthermore, the participants 
had a higher level of satisfaction with the flipped 
classroom approach [100]. The limitation of this 
experiment is that, the number of course 
participants was only 25 learners.  
2) Flipped classroom pros and cons 
The flipped classroom approach involves a range of 
advantages for learners including: 
 
Flexibility: The flipped classroom helps learners to 
meet a diverse range of their needs by doing several 
activities outside the classroom [100][101]. 
 
Student-centred learning: This learning model 
provides a variety of opportunities for learners to be 
self-organized and self-independent [8]. Teachers are 
no longer the only source of knowledge. 
 
Scaffolding: In flipped classrooms, learning occurs 
in small learning groups. The teacher’s role has been 
shifting towards facilitating the learning experience 
by supporting learners in discovering the tools that 
they need for learning and providing them with the 
needed guidance and feedback [98][101]. 
The flipped classroom model, however, suffers from 
several limitations. These include: 
 
Lack of motivation: Learners with low motivation or 
bad learning habits do not pay full attention to out-
class activities, such as watching videos, reading 
materials, or completing assignments at home [102]. 
As a solution, educators recommended assigning a 
pre-class quiz on the video material in order to 
increase the learners’ motivation. 
 
Class structure: Most of the studies that examined 
flipped classrooms mentioned that the separation 
between in-class and out-of-class activities is not 
clearly understood by the learners.  Bishop and 
Verleger [98] recommended that the various learning 
activities in a flipped classroom should be clearly 
described at the beginning of the learning process. 
 
Assessment and feedback: The flipped classroom 
model emphasizes the role of problem-based learning 
and project-based learning. This requires creative 
assessment methods beyond traditional multiple-
choice examinations in order to effectively gauge the 
learner’s performance in both individual tasks and 
group projects [98][100]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In the past few years, there has been an increasing 
interest in video-based learning (VBL) as a result of popular 
forms of online education, such as Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOCs) and flipped classrooms. VBL is a rich 
and powerful model used in TEL to improve learning 
outcomes as well as learner satisfaction. In this paper, we 
analysed the research on VBL published in 2003-2014. 76 
peer reviewed papers were selected in this review. A 
cognitive mapping approach was used to map the conducted 
research on VBL into four main dimensions namely, 
effectiveness, teaching methods, design, and reflection. 
Most of the reviewed VBL studies still follow a 
conventional learning approach where the teacher is as the 
centre of the learning process. Moreover, there is a focus on 
traditional assessment methods, such as eTests and quizzes.  
The following is a summary of the main findings in our 
study as well as aspects of VBL that need further research, 
according to each dimension.  
A. Effectivness 
The analysis of the VBL research showed mixed results 
in terms of learning outcomes in VBL environments. There 
is, however, a tendency that users of VBL environments rate 
interaction and learner satisfaction significantly higher than 
in traditional classroom environments. Despite these 
possible 
advantages, 
several 
aspects 
concerning 
effectiveness in VBL need further investigation: (1) What 
are the positive and negative attitudes towards using video 
lectures? (2) How can VBL motivate learners? (3) How can 
a MOOC as VBL environment personalize the learning 
experience for learners? This would enable learners to select 
the educational resources and the learning style that meet 
131
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

their characteristics best, thus increasing the effectiveness of 
the learning experience. 
B. Teaching Methods  
 Educators use a broad range of teaching methodologies 
in VBL environments. These include collaborative learning, 
micro teaching, video summarization, video assessment, 
hybrid learning, and student-centered learning. Most of 
VBL implementations so far still follow a top-down, 
controlled, teacher-centered, and centralized learning model. 
Only, 15% of the reviewed research papers describe 
attempts 
to 
implement 
bottom-up, 
student-cantered 
approaches. Additional research is needed to investigate the 
benefits of new ways of VBL based on new learning 
concepts such as personal learning environments [103] and 
network learning [104].  
C. Design 
Several tools were used in VBL to increase interactivity, 
collaboration, and learners’ satisfaction with the VBL 
environment. Annotation tools are utilized in searching, 
highlighting, analysis, retrieval, and providing feedback. To 
increase interactivity a number of authoring tools were used. 
These include lecture note synchronization and content 
summarization tools as well as video libraries and forums. 
Future research needs to find out how to design more open 
models of VBL such as MOOCs and flipped classrooms.  
D. Reflection 
VBL facilitates teachers’ as well as learners’ reflection. 
Our study showed that teachers prefer to reflect on their 
teaching 
performance 
with 
colleagues 
rather 
than 
individually. And, learners think that videos have the 
potential to be used as a reflection tool. Future research is 
needed to investigate how learning analytics can help to 
better understand and improve reflection and awareness in 
VBL environments, such as MOOCs. 
MOOCs and flipped classrooms represent promising 
implementations of the VBL model. Further work is still 
needed to investigate how to personalize the learning 
activities in these environments [103]. Learners are learning 
at different paces and have different aptitudes. Thus, 
curriculum, 
pedagogy, 
and 
assessment 
should 
be 
customized in order to fit each learner needs and 
perspectives [104].      
REFERENCES 
[1] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, and U. Schroeder, “Video-
Based Learning: A Critical Analysis of The Research 
Published in 2003-2013 and Future Visions”, in eLmL 2014, 
The Sixth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 
On-line Learning 2014, pp. 112-119. 
[2] M. Merkt, S. Weigand, A. Heier, and S. Schwan, (2011). 
Learning with videos vs. learning with print: The role of 
interactive features. Learning and Instruction, 21, pp. 687-
704. 
[3] M. Colasante, “Using video annotation to reflect on and 
evaluate physical education pre-service teaching practice,” 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 27(1), 2011, 
pp.66-88. 
[4] M. G. Sherin, and E. A. van Es, “Effects of video club 
participation on teachers' professional vision,” Journal of 
Teacher Education, 60(1), 2009, pp. 20-37. 
[5] D. Zhang, L. Zhou, R. O. Briggs, and J. F. Nunamaker Jr, 
“Instructional video in e-learning: Assessing the impact of 
interactive video on learning effectiveness,” Information & 
Management, 43, 2006, pp. 15-27. 
[6] B. Calandra, L. Brantley-Dias, and M. Dias, “Using digital 
video for professional development in urban schools: A 
preservice teacher's experience with reflection,” Journal of 
Computing in Teacher Education, 22(4), 2006, 137. 
[7] C. I. Hovland, A. A. Lumsdaine, and F. D. Sheffield, 
Experiments on mass communication. Studies in social 
psychology in World War II, 3, 1949. 
[8] R. 
Santagata, 
“Designing 
Video-Based 
Professional 
Development for Mathematics Teachers in Low-Performing 
Schools,” Journal of Teacher Education, 60 (1), 2009, pp. 38-
51. 
[9] C. Snelson, K. Rice, and C. Wyzard, “Research priorities for 
YouTube and video-sharing technologies: A Delphi study,” 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 43 (1), 2012, pp. 
119-129. 
[10] J. McCarthy, “Blended learning environments: Using social 
networking sites to enhance the first year experience,” 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26(6), 2010, 
pp.729-740. 
[11] W. Tuong, E. R. Larsen, and A. W. Armstrong, “Videos to 
influence: a systematic review of effectiveness of video-based 
education in modifying health behaviors” Journal of 
behavioral medicine, 37(2), 2014, pp. 218-233. 
[12] A. D. Greenberg, and J. Zanetis, “The impact of broadcast 
and streaming video in education,” Ainhouse Research, 
CISCO, 2012. 
[13] R. Borgo, et al., “State of the art report on video-based 
graphics and video visualization,” Computer Graphics Forum, 
31(8), 2012, pp. 2450–2477. 
[14] T. Tripp, and P. Rich, “Using video to analyze one’s own 
teaching,” British Journal of Educational Technology, 43(4), 
2012, pp. 678-704. 
[15] A. Fink, Conducting research literature reviews: from the 
internet to paper (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage 
Publications, 2005. 
[16] S. McDonald, K. Daniels, and C. Harris, “Cognitive mapping 
in organizational research,” In C.Cassell and G.Symon (Eds.), 
Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational 
Research, Sage Publications, 2004, pp. 73–85. 
[17] N. Fearing, S. Bachman, M. Holzman, D. Scott, and M. 
Brunt, “Evaluation of a video-based curriculum for 
laparoscopic biliary surgery: a pilot study from the SAGES 
MIS Web Learning Center,” Surgical Endoscopy, 24, 2010, 
pp. 3141-3143. 
[18] R. Kay, and J. Edward, “Examining the Use of Worked 
Example Video Podcasts in Middle School Mathematics 
Classrooms: A Formative Analysis,” Canadian Journal of 
Learning and Technology, 38 (2), 2012. 
[19] T. Balslev, W. S. de Grave, A. M. M. Muijtjens, and A. J. J. 
Scherpbier, “Comparison of a text and video case in a 
postgraduate problem-based learning format,” Medical 
Education, Vol. 39(11), 2005, pp. 1086-1092. 
132
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[20] C. C. Lin, and Y. F. Tseng, “Videos and animations for 
vocabulary learning a study on difficult words. Turkish 
Online Journal of Educational Technology, 11 (4), 2012, pp. 
346-355 
[21] C. K. Hsu, G. J. Hwang, Y. T. Chang, and C. K. Chang, 
“Effects of Video Caption Modes on English Listening 
Comprehension and Vocabulary Acquisition Using Handheld 
Devices,” Educational Technology & Society, 16 (1), 2013, 
pp. 403–414. 
[22] N. B. Kersting, K. B. Givvin, B. J. Thompson, R. Santagata, 
and J. W. Stigler, “Measuring Usable Knowledge: Teachers’ 
Analyses of Mathematics Classroom Videos Predict Teaching 
Quality and Student Learning,” American Educational 
Research Journal, 49 (3), 2012, pp. 568-589. 
[23] S. Kuter, G. Z. Altinay, and A. F. Altinay, “Examination of 
Co-construction of Knowledge in Videotaped Simulated 
Instruction,” Educational Technology & Society, 15 (1), 
2012, pp. 174–184. 
[24] F. Donkor, “The Comparative Instructional Effectiveness of 
Print-Based and Video-Based Instructional Materials for 
Teaching Practical Skills at a Distance” International Review 
of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 11(1), 2010. 
[25] K. R. Comeaux, Cognitive Memory Effects on Non-Linear 
Video-Based Learning. Louisiana State University, Master 
thesis, 2005. 
[26] R. Lindgren, R. Pea, S. Lewis, and J. Rosen, “Learning from 
digital video: An exploration of how interactions affect 
outcome. CSCL, 2007, pp. 447-449. 
[27] H. H. Chuang, and M. H. Rosenbusch, “Use of digital video 
technology in an elementary school foreign language methods 
course,” British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(5), 
2005, pp. 869-880. 
[28] M. Giannakos, K. Chorianopoulos, M. Ronchetti, P. Szegedi, 
and S. Teasley, “Video-Based Learning and Open Online 
Courses” International Journal of Emerging Technologies in 
Learning (iJET), 9(1), pp 4-7. 
[29] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and M. 
Wosnitza “What Drives a Successful MOOC? An Empirical 
Examination of Criteria to Assure Design Quality of 
MOOCs” in ICALT 2014, The 14th IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2014, pp. 
44-48. 
[30] J. S. DeLoache, and Korac, N., “Special Section: children and 
television Video-based learning by very young children,” 
Developmental Science, 6(3), 2003, pp. 245-246. 
[31] P. Hakkarainen, and K. Vapalahti, “Meaningful Learning 
through 
Video-Supported 
Forum-Theater,” 
International 
Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 23 
(3), 2011, pp. 314-328. 
[32] W. Shen, “Using Video Recording System to Improve 
Student Performance in High-Fidelity Simulation” In Frontier 
and Future Development of Information Technology in 
Medicine and Education, 2014, pp. 1753-1757. Springer 
Netherlands. 
[33] J. M. Muhirwa, “Teaching and Learning Against all Odds: A 
Video-Based Study of Learner-to-Instructor Interaction in 
International Distance Education,” International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning, 10 (4), 2009. 
[34] A. M. F. Yousef, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, M. Wosnitza 
and H. Jakobs, “MOOCs - A Review of the State-of-the-Art” 
in CSEDU 2014, The Sixth International Conference on 
Computer Supported Education, 2014, Vol. 3, pp. 9-20. 
[35] A. R. Montazemi, “The Effect of Video Presentation in a 
CBT Environment,” Educational Technology & Society, 9 
(4), 2006, pp. 123-138. 
[36] P. N., Smyrni, and C. Nikopoulos, “Evaluating the impact of 
video-based versus traditional lectures on student learning,” 
Educational Research, 1(8), 2010, pp. 304-311. 
[37] R. Verleur, A. Heuvelman, and P. W. Verhagen, “Trigger 
videos on the Web: Impact of audiovisual design,” British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 42 (4), 2011, pp. 573-
582. 
[38] E. Dale, Audiovisual Methods in Teaching, 1969, NY: 
Dryden Press. 
[39] C. Zahn, F. Hesse, M. Finke, R. Pea, M. Mills, and J. Rosen, 
“Advanced video  technologies  to  support collaborative  
learning  in  school  education  and beyond," In D. Suthers & 
T. Koschmann (Eds.), Proceedings of the International CSCL-
05 Conference, Taipei, Taiwan. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum 
Associates, 2005. 
[40] J. Goulah, “Village Voices, Global Visions: Digital Video as 
a Transformative Foreign Language Learning Tool,” Foreign 
Language Annals, 40 (1), 2007, pp. 62-76. 
[41] D. Hung, S. C. Tan, W. S. Cheung, and C. Hu, “Supporting 
Problem Solving with Case-Stories Learning Scenario and 
Video-based 
Collaborative 
Learning 
Technology,” 
Educational Technology & Society, 7 (2), 2004, pp. 120-128. 
[42] D. Petko, K. Reusser, C. Noetzli, K. Krammer, and I. 
Hugener, “Collaborative video based teacher training in a 
virtual learning environment,” 10th European Conference for 
Research on Learning and Instruction, 2003. 
[43] H. j. Choi, and S. D. Johnson, “The Effect of Context-Based 
Video Instruction on Learning and Motivation in Online 
Courses,” The American Journal of distance education, 19(4), 
2005, pp. 215–227. 
[44] J. M. Wiecha, R. Gramling, P. Joachim, and H. 
Vanderschmidt, “Collaborative e-learning using streaming 
video and asynchronous discussion boards to teach the 
cognitive foundation of medical interviewing: a case study,” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 5(2), 2003. 
[45] R. Pea, and R. Lindgren, “Video Collaboratories for Research 
and Education: An Analysis of Collaboration Design 
Patterns,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 1, 
(4), 2008. 
[46] E. H. van Zee, “Using Web-Based" Snapshots of Practice" to 
Explore Science Learning and Teaching in a Course for 
Prospective Teachers Issues,” Teacher Education, 14(1), 
2005, pp.63-79. 
[47] J. Finlay, et al., “Video-based learning objects for teaching 
human-computer interaction at different levels” 9th Annual 
Conference of the Subject Centre for Information and 
Computer Sciences, 2008,  pp. 194-198. 
[48] A. W. Woodruff, “Using video based instruction to teach art 
to students with autism spectrum disorder” Theses and 
Dissertations, Art & Visual Studies. Paper 5, 2014, 
http://uknowledge.uky.edu/art_etds/5 
[49] L. B. Dias, M. Dias, J. K. Frisch, and G. Rushton, “The role 
of digital video and critical incident analysis in learning to 
teach science,” American Educational Research Association. 
New York City, Annual, Meeting, 2008, pp. 24-28. 
[50] T. Seidel, G. Blomberg, and A. Renkl, “Instructional 
strategies for using video in teacher education,” Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 34, 2013, pp. 56-65. 
133
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[51] C. H. Fu, K. T. Wang, S. C. Cheng, and T. W. Hou, “Building 
Video Concordancer Supported English Online Learning 
Exemplification,” In Y.-M.R. Huang et al. (Eds.): PCM  
LNCS 5353, 2008, pp. 731-737. 
[52] W. H. Chang, Y. C. Wu, and J. C. Yang, “Webpage-based 
and video summarization-based learning platform for online 
multimedia 
learning,” 
In 
Edutainment 
Technologies. 
Educational Games and Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality 
Applications, 2011, pp. 355-362. 
[53] W. H. Chang, J. C. Yang, and Y.C. Wu, “A Keyword-based 
Video Summarization Learning Platform with Multimodal 
Surrogates,” 
11th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced Learning Technologies, 2011, pp. 37-41. 
[54] F. 
Donkor, 
“Assessment 
of 
learner 
acceptance 
and 
satisfaction with video-based instructional materials for 
teaching practical skills at a distance,” The International 
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 12(5), 
2011, pp.74-92. 
[55] Q. Qiao, and P. A. Beling, “Classroom Video Assessment and 
Retrieval via Multiple Instance Learning,” In G. Biswas et al. 
(Eds.): AIED 2011, pp. 272–279. 
[56] G. Karlsen, “From thumbs to fingertips: introducing 
networked digital video to online learning,” journal of 
distance education, 20(2), 2005, pp. 85-87. 
[57] R. J. Chenail, “YouTube as a qualitative research asset: 
Reviewing user generated videos as learning resources,” The 
Qualitative Report, 16(1), 2011, pp. 229-235. 
[58] Y. Pang, “Improving hybrid learning of physical education by 
video review,” In Advances in Web-Based Learning–ICWL, 
2010, pp. 230-239. 
[59] R. C. Shih, “Blended learning using video-based blogs: Public 
speaking for English as a second language student,” 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26(6), 2010, 
pp.883-897. 
[60] Y. Kırkgöz, “A Blended Learning Study on Implementing 
Video Recorded Speaking Tasks in Task-Based Classroom 
Instruction,” TOJET, 10(4), 2011. 
[61] J. Gainsburg, “Creating Effective Video to Promote Student-
Centered Teaching,” Teacher Education Quarterly, 2009, pp. 
163-178. 
[62] R. Smyth, “Enhancing learner–learner interaction using video 
communications in higher education: Implications from 
theorising about a new model,” British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 42(1), 2011, pp. 113-127. 
[63] P. J. Rich, and M. Hannafin, “Video Annotation Tools 
Technologies to Scaffold, Structure, and Transform Teacher 
Reflection,” Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 2009, pp. 
52-67. 
[64] K. Khurana, and M. B. Chandak, “Study of Various Video 
Annotation Techniques,” International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, 2(1), 
2013. 
[65] M. Wang, X. S. Hue, Y. Song, R. Hong, and L. R. Dai, “Lazy 
Learning Based Efficient Video Annotation,” In Multimedia 
and Expo, 2007 IEEE International Conference, 2007, pp. 
607-610. 
[66] R. Schroeter, J. Hunter, and D. Kosovic, “Vannotea: A 
collaborative video indexing, annotation and discussion 
system for broadband networks,” In Knowledge capture ACM 
Press Association for Computing Machinery, 2003, pp. 1-8. 
[67] S., Chunwijitra, A. J. Berena, H. Okada, and H. Ueno, 
“Authoring tool for video-based content on WebELS learning 
system to support higher education,” In Computer Science 
and Software Engineering (JCSSE), 2012 International Joint 
Conference, 2012, pp. 317-322. 
[68] J. C. Yang, Y. T. Huang, C. C. Tsai, C. I. Chung, and Y. C. 
Wu, “An automatic multimedia content summarization 
system for video recommendation,” Educational Technology 
& Society, 12 (1), 2009, pp. 49–61. 
[69] P. Wouters, H. K. Tabbers, and F. Paas, “Interactivity in 
video-based models,” Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 
2007, pp. 327-342. 
[70] M. Milrad, P. Rossmanith, and M. Scholz, “Implementing an 
educational digital video library using MPEG-4, SMIL and 
Web Technologies,” Educational Technology & Society, 8 
(4), 2005, pp. 120-127. 
[71] H. J. So, H. Lossman, W. Y. Lim, and M. J.  Jacobson, 
“Designing an online video based platform for teacher 
learning in Singapore,” Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 25(3), 2009, pp. 440-457. 
[72] H. T. D. Huang, and S. T. A. Hung, “Exploring the utility of a 
video‐based online EFL discussion forum,” British Journal 
of Educational Technology, 44(3), 2013, pp. 90-94. 
[73] J. L. Loo, L. T. Ngo, C. K. Hennesy, B. D. Quigley, and J. 
McKenzie, “Embedding Video-based Learning Modules for 
Library Research Methods in an Online Graduate Engineering 
Degree Program. In 121st ASEE Annual Conference & 
Exposition Proceedings, 2014. 
[74] H. Borko, J. Jacobs, N. Seago, and C. Mangram, “Facilitating 
video-based 
professional 
development: 
Planning 
and 
orchestrating 
productive 
discussions” 
In 
Transforming 
Mathematics Instruction, 2014, pp. 259-281. Springer 
International Publishing. 
[75] S. C. Kong, R. H. Shroff, and H. K. Hung, “A web enabled 
video system for self-reflection by student teachers using a 
guiding framework,” Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 25(4), 2009, pp. 544-558. 
[76] E. A. van Es, and M. G. Sherin, “How different video club 
designs support Teachers in learning to notice,” Journal of 
computing in teacher education, 22(4), 2006, pp.125-135. 
[77] B. Calandra, L. Brantley-Dias, J. K Lee, and D. L. Fox, 
“Using video editing to cultivate novice teachers’ practice,” 
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 42(1), 2009, 
pp. 73–94. 
[78] C. C. Wu, and H.C. Kao, “Streaming Videos in Peer 
Assessment to Support Training Pre-service Teachers,” 
Educational Technology & Society, 11 (1), 2008, pp. 45-55. 
[79] B. Calandra, R. Gurvitch, and J. Lund, “An Exploratory Study 
of Digital Video Editing as a Tool for Teacher Preparation,” 
Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 16(2), 2008, 
pp. 137-153. 
[80] R. Santagata, and G. Angelici, “Studying the impact of the 
lesson analysis framework on preservice teachers’ abilities to 
reflect on videos of classroom teaching,” Journal of Teacher 
Education, 61(4), 2010, pp. 339-349. 
[81] R. Santagata, and J. Guarino, “Using video to teach future 
teachers to learn from teaching,” Zdm, 43(1), 2011, pp. 133-
145. 
[82] C. P. Halter, “The reflective lens: The effects of video 
analysis on preservice teacher development,” Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 67, 03, 2006, (UMI No. 3211280). 
[83] G. Blomberg, M. G. Sherin, A. Renkl, I. Glogger, and T. 
Seidel, “Understanding video as a tool for teacher education: 
134
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

investigating instructional strategies to promote reflection” 
Instructional Science, 42(3), 2014, pp. 443-463. 
[84] Y. H. Cho, and Y. Huang, “Exploring the links between pre-
service teachers’ beliefs and video-based reflection in wikis” 
Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 2014, pp. 39-53. 
[85] H. Odhabi, and L. N. McCaleb, “Video recording lectures: 
Student and professor perspectives,” British Journal of 
Educational Technology, 42(2), 2011, pp.327-336. 
[86] B. Dalgarno, G. Kennedy, and A. Merritt, “Connecting 
student learning at university with professional practice using 
rich media in practice-based curricula” In Curriculum models 
for the 21st century, 2014, pp. 213-233. Springer New York. 
[87] R. Schuwer,  and B. Janssen, “Trends in business models for 
open educational resources and open education” In Trend 
report: open educational resources 2013, pp. 60-66. 
[88] S. Brown, “Back to the future with MOOCs?” in ICICTE 
2013 Proceedings, pp. 237-246. 
[89] T. R. Liyanagunawardena, S., Williams, and A. Adams, “The 
impact and reach of MOOCs: A developing countries’ 
perspective. eLearning Papers, ISSN: 1887-1542, Issue 33, 
2013. 
[90] G. Siemens, “MOOCs are really a platform. eLearnspace. 
Retrieved 
March 
15, 
2013 
from 
http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2012/07/25/moocs-are-
really-a-platform/ 
[91] P. Hill, “Four Barriers That MOOCs Must Overcome To 
Build a Sustainable Model” Retrieved 1st August, 2014 from 
http://mfeldstein.com/four-barriers-that-moocs-must-
overcome-to-become-sustainable-model/ 
[92] G. Siemens, “Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital 
age,” International Journal of Instructional Technology and 
Distance Learning, 2(1), 2005, pp. 3-10. 
[93] S. J. Daniel, “Making Sense of MOOCs: Musings in a Maze 
of Myth, Paradox and Possibility,” Journal of Interactive 
Media in Education (JIME). 
[94] F. M. Hollands, and D. Tirthali, “MOOCs: expectations and 
reality”, Center for Benefit-Cost Studies of Education 
Teachers College, Columbia University, 2014. 
[95] B. Dasarathy, K. Sullivan, D. C. Schmidt, D. H. Fisher, and 
A. Porter, “The past, present, and future of MOOCs and their 
relevance to software engineering” In Proceedings of the on 
Future of Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 212-224. ACM. 
[96] A. M. F. Yousef and G. Rößling, “How to Design Good 
Educational Blogs in LMS?” in CSEDU 2013, The Sixth 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education, 
2013, pp. 70-75. 
[97] B. Tucker, “The flipped classroom,” Education Next, 12(1), 
2012, pp.82-83. 
[98] J. L. Bishop, and M. A. Verleger, “The flipped classroom: A 
survey of the research” In ASEE National Conference 
Proceedings, Atlanta, GA, 2013. 
[99] X. Du, and S. Taylor, “Flipped classroom in first year 
management accounting unit – a case study” In H. Carter, M. 
Gosper and J. Hedberg (Eds.), Electric Dreams. Proceedings 
30th ascilite 2013 Sydney, pp.252-256. 
[100] S. G. Wilson, “The flipped classroom: A method to address 
the challenges of an undergraduate statistics course”. 
Teaching of Psychology, 2013, 40, 193-199. 
[101] C. F. Herreid, and N. A. Schiller, “Case studies and the 
flipped classroom,” Journal of College Science Teaching, 
42(5), 2013, pp.62-66. 
[102] A. Wallace, “Social learning platforms and the flipped 
classroom” In ICEEE, 2013 Second International Conference 
on e-Learning and e-Technologies in Education, 2013, pp. 
198-200. IEEE. 
[103] G. Attwell, “Personal Learning Environments - the future of 
eLearning?,” eLearning Papers, vol. 2, (1) 2007. 
[104] M. A. Chatti, Personalization in Technology Enhanced 
Learning: A Social Software Perspective. Shaker Verlag, 
November 2010, Dissertation, RWTH Aachen University. 
 
 
 
135
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

