20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Economic Model of Remote Specialist Consultations using Videoconferencing 
Trine Strand Bergmo 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: trine.bergmo@telemed.no     
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
- 
Remote 
specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing have the potential to reduce costs and 
improve access to health care services. The University 
Hospital of North Norway now plans to replace some 
outpatient consultations with videoconferencing. As part of 
this initiative, a project assessing the use of models to 
analyse the economic impact of videoconferencing has been 
initiated. In this project, existing evidence found in the peer-
reviewed literature and local cost data were used to build a 
model that illustrates the decision problem associated with 
investing in videoconferencing. This paper proposes a 
generic model that can be used as a template for more 
specific videoconferencing models. This work also presents a 
specific model illustrating the expected outcomes in the field 
of urology. Both of these models can be used to clarify the 
options under consideration, to assess potential costs and 
benefits, and to determine whether further analysis is need 
to enable informed decision making in the field. This paper 
also presents a threshold analysis and shows values for when 
a conclusion changes in favour of one of the options.  
 
Keywords – remote care; telemedicine; videoconferencing; 
randomised trial; literature review; economic modelling; cost-
effectiveness analysis. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The current paper provides an extended version of the 
work presented at The Sixth International Conference on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, 
and 
Social 
Medicine 
(eTELEMED) in 2014 [1]. 
Telemedicine has been around for almost two decades, 
but it is still viewed as outside of the mainstream of most 
health care services [2]. Implementing telemedicine 
technologies as part of routine health care delivery 
requires evidence of its technical feasibility, practicality in 
a clinical setting, and its being worthwhile (i.e., the 
additional costs are met with savings or improvements in 
health outcomes) [3, 4]. The main arguments for 
introducing telemedicine services have been to decrease 
costs, improve efficiency, and increase access to health 
care services. These cost savings and efficiency potentials 
make economic evaluation of central importance to 
telemedicine evaluations. To be able to make well-
informed resource decisions, information on costs and 
consequences associated with these decisions must be 
available. Information on costs and consequences can be 
collected in two ways: alongside trials and observational 
studies (primary data), and from the existing literature 
(secondary data) [5].    
       
A.     Economic data 
New primary economic data can be collected alongside 
randomised 
controlled 
trials, 
non-randomised 
interventions, and observational studies (issues in 
economic evaluations are common to all of these) [5]. 
Randomised trials are designed to investigate the 
relative effectiveness of different medical interventions 
[6]. The most important advantage of randomisation is that 
it minimises allocation bias and balances other factors that 
might affect the result, both known and unknown. Strictly 
controlled trials are not very common in telemedicine 
research for practical reasons, nor are they well suited for 
economic evaluations. The more controlled a trial is, the 
less that can be concluded about how much the 
intervention costs and how well it works for normal 
caseloads in everyday practice. The trial context is often 
very different from real-world decisions, and conditions 
that will improve internal validity in randomised 
controlled trials will undermine the economic evaluation 
[7]. Clinical trials in the real-world setting are in many 
telemedicine situations time consuming, difficult to 
conduct (too few participants), and expensive to run. 
These obstacles leave decision makers without information 
about the clinical and economic consequences of different 
telemedicine interventions.  
Another way to inform decision makers is to use the 
best available evidence from existing sources and decision 
models. Secondary data can come from clinical trials, 
observational studies, meta-analysis, and case reports 
found in the literature. Data can also be found in databases 
and administrative records. Decision models provide a 
means of collating this evidence in a systematic way. 
 
B. When to model 
A well-designed model is essentially a tool that can 
simulate or mimic a clinical trial [8]. Models can simulate 
different scenarios by making explicit assumptions about 
the incidence, prognosis, duration, benefits, quality of life 
and costs. A model allows one to investigate how cost and 
benefits might change if the values of key parameters in 
the model change. The purpose of modelling is not to 

21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
make unconditional claims about the consequences of an 
intervention, but rather to reveal the relationship between 
assumptions and outcomes [9]. 
The decision of whether to use new trial-based data or 
existing data and decision models in an economic 
evaluation of telemedicine should be considered in relation 
to the study’s objective and role and the perspective of 
those who are expected to use the results [7]. A 
randomised trial focuses on particular measurements for 
specific patients in a given setting. These trials are 
essential as a first stage in developing telemedicine 
applications 
by 
establishing 
safety 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness. The evidence base for decision making 
should be based on the best available measurements of 
clinical and economic outcomes and these come from 
trials. Decision models are useful in situations where more 
evidence is required than can be obtained in a single trial. 
When a decision has to be made without evidence from 
trials, modelling can help structure the problem, assess 
potential pathways, and identify the level of uncertainty. 
Such models are valued for their simplicity and 
transparency and can be an excellent way to clarify the 
options of interest [10]. 
In this paper, a combination of existing evidence found 
in the peer-reviewed literature and local cost data are used 
to build a model for the provision of specialist 
consultations through videoconferencing. The main aim is 
to build a general model that structures the decision 
problem and forms the basis for assessing economic 
consequences in more specific models. This paper is 
structured as follows: Section II describes the background 
including an overview of the local context, the use of 
clinical videoconferencing, and the rationale and aim of 
this project. Section III outlines the materials and methods 
including an overview of the modelling study, the 
literature review, and the model parameters. Section IV 
reports the results and proposes two models. Section V 
discusses implications and limitations. Conclusions and 
future work are discussed in Section VI.  
  
II. 
BACKGROUND   
The University Hospital of North Norway (UNN) 
plans to replace some of its outpatient consultations with 
real-time telemedicine consultations. The UNN is the 
leading healthcare provider and health trust in the 
northernmost region in Norway. The UNN also serves as 
the local hospital for residents of Troms County and parts 
of Nordland, providing the full range of hospital functions 
(see Fig. 1). Troms County includes many isolated areas 
with long distances to the hospital. The county has a 
scattered population of 162,050 in an area of 26,000 
square meters and consists of 24 municipalities. 
In May 2011, the management at UNN decided to 
invest in videoconferencing equipment at scale to provide 
specialist services to patients at local health centres and 
general practice clinics in the region.  
 
Figure 1. Troms County and the northern part of Nordland     
County (inserted). 
 
A committee report from 2011 estimated that 7,000 patient 
consultations annually could be handled by video 
consultations, saving both hospital visits and travel costs 
(unpublished but available from the author on request). 
The implementation has been postponed, awaiting further 
investigation 
into 
conditions 
for 
and 
potential 
consequences of a large-scale videoconferencing network.  
The reason for the videoconferencing initiative is 
twofold: First, it has been recognised that high-quality 
services for patients cannot be provided by one health care 
discipline alone or by a single sector [11]. Using 
videoconferencing can contribute to more personalised and 
integrated care pathways: it will give patients the 
opportunity to obtain treatment locally, they might avoid 
burdensome travel, and this could improve the quality of 
care through better coordinated and integrated health 
service delivery. Second, the management at UNN wants 
to lower costs by reducing hospitalisation and outpatient 
visits and to save on travel costs (the health authorities 
cover travel costs in Norway).  
      
A. Clinical videoconferencing  
The use of videoconferencing to examine and treat 
patients from a distance can be used in most medical 
specialties and settings [3, 12]. In a remote specialist 
consultation, the patient, usually accompanied by a health 
care worker, meets the specialist in real time via 
videoconferencing. This type of telemedicine consultation 
has been used in psychiatry [13-15], dermatology [16, 17], 
oncology [18], cardiology [19], in diabetes, asthma, 
epilepsy [20, 21], to support renal dialysis [22], and for 
group counselling [23]. There is now a range of evidence 
demonstrating that videoconferencing for a variety of 
conditions produces similar health outcomes to treatment 
delivered in person [12, 24, 25]. However, there is no 
robust evidence that remote video consultations are cost 
effective compared to conventional health care delivery. 
Wade (2010) reviewed the literature on real-time video 
communication and found it to be cost effective for home 
care and access to on-call hospital specialists; whereas, for 
rural service delivery, video communication showed 
mixed results, and it was not cost effective for local 

22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
delivery of services between hospitals and primary care 
[26]. 
It 
is 
not 
realistic 
to 
make 
one 
general 
recommendation for cost effectiveness across services and 
settings. The local context will determine important cost 
parameters, such as travel costs, the need for investment in 
infrastructure and technologies, and the opportunity costs 
of health professionals, all of which make it difficult to 
compare results across evaluations. Most reviewers, 
however, report that the evidence of cost effectiveness is 
scarce and more research on resource allocation and costs 
is still needed [27, 28]. 
 
B. Aim 
In this project, a combination of existing evidence 
found in the peer-reviewed literature and local cost data 
are used to build a model of specialist consultation 
provided via videoconferencing. The model is used to 
structure and simulate patient pathways with and without 
videoconferencing, to identify the expected outcomes of 
different strategies, and to explore the costs and benefits of 
various scenarios under different assumptions. The main 
aim is to develop a general model that can be used as a 
template to assess the potential economic consequences of 
investing in videoconferencing in more specific models. 
This work consists of three related phases: 
1. To develop the structure of the model and 
identify key parameters relevant to the decision 
problem;  
2. To identify local setting parameters such as the 
medical field, investment and technical support 
costs, and personnel and travel costs;   
3. To populate the model and analyse the economic 
impact of remote specialist consultations using 
videoconferencing in the hospital’s catchment 
area.  
 
This paper describes the economic modelling study, 
presents results, and discusses the rationale for using 
economic models to support health care managers in 
deciding whether to invest in videoconferencing or not.  
 
III. 
METHODS  
The following section provides a description of the 
materials and methods used in this project. This section 
outlines the model framework, the design of and processes 
used in the literature review, the model probabilities 
found, and the local cost parameters used in the models. 
For more details on the systematic review see [1].  
 
A. Model overview 
This paper constructs an economic model to analyse 
the economic consequences of providing specialist 
consultations through videoconferencing. In the model, 
remote specialist consultation refers to situations in which 
the patient, usually accompanied by a health care worker 
at one location, consults with the specialist at the hospital 
using videoconferencing. Usual care refers to situations in 
which the patient sees the specialist in a face-to-face 
consultation at the hospital.  
The primary outcomes in the economic model are costs 
and effectiveness measured as episodes of care or number 
of patients managed. The measure of quality-adjusted life-
years (QALYs) was initially planned as an outcome 
measure, but no existing studies have collected QALYs in 
randomised trials of videoconferencing. Therefore, a net 
cost (or net benefit) per episode of care (patient 
consultation) was used as a pathway outcome. The model 
assesses short-term alternative branches or events defined 
as consultations. One-way sensitivity analyses were 
conducted to assess the robustness of the results. 
Parameters have been varied one at the time to assess the 
effect of the model and to determine threshold values. 
The model was populated with parameters collected 
from the peer-reviewed literature in combination with 
local cost data. The evaluation takes a health provider 
perspective, that is, only costs within the health care 
budget have been included; travel costs are included since 
these are covered in the health care budget in Norway.  
The data was collected in two steps. The first step was 
to conduct a systematic literature search to identify 
existing studies analysing the effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of videoconferencing alongside randomised 
trials. The literature provided information on structural 
assumptions, parameter inputs, and areas of uncertainty. 
The second step was to collect local cost parameters 
including equipment costs, technical support costs, 
personnel costs, travel costs, and other health care costs 
from the health clinics involved.  
The models were built and analysed using the software 
program TreeAge Pro 2015.  
 
B. Overview of the literature review 
A systematic literature search was conducted to collect 
information on a) previous cost-effectiveness analyses and 
decision modelling studies in real-time telemedicine 
studies; and, b) to collect data on structural assumptions, 
probabilities, and clinical effectiveness from randomised 
controlled trials on the use of videoconferencing.   
The following databases were searched: PubMed, 
PsycINFO and ISI Web of Knowledge, CINAHL, Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry, and the NHS Economic 
Evaluation Database (NHS-EED). Reference lists in the 
retrieved articles and existing reviews were also screened. 
The Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Registry and the NHS 
Economic 
Evaluation 
Database 
(NHS-EED) 
were 
searched using videoconferencing, video-consultation, or 
video-link as search words. Only articles published in 
peer-reviewed journals were included. The search was 
limited to English language texts and a publication date in 
the range of 1990 to 2013. A subsequent search was 
conducted to include papers from 2014. No additional 
studies were found. 

23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The articles included in the review covered remote 
specialist consultations using real-time audio and visual 
telemedicine technologies (videoconferencing) and only 
included aspects in which the patients were directly 
involved and present at the general practice office, local 
health centre, or rural hospitals. Studies analysing video 
contact from home, store-and-forward transmissions of 
data, e-mail consultations, or structured telephone support 
were excluded. To ensure the quality of the data on clinical 
process or patient flow through the health system and the 
clinical 
effectiveness 
of 
videoconferencing, 
only 
randomised trials were included.  
The search strategy included two main search terms:  
1. Real-time telemedicine or videoconferencing or 
video-link 
or 
video-communication 
or 
videophones or video-consultation or hub and 
spoke or remote teleconsultation or real-time 
consultation and 
2. a) Economic modelling or economic model or 
decision model or decision analytic model or 
decision modelling or cost-effectiveness or cost-
utility or 
b) Randomised or randomised  
 
Selection of relevant publications was based on 
information found in the abstracts. Full-text articles were 
retrieved when the abstract indicated that the article would 
include a cost-effectiveness analysis and an assessment of 
effectiveness and patient flow through the health system. 
The full text was retrieved for closer inspection if the 
abstract did not provide clear indication of the content. 
The literature search identified 1265 records. These 
were found by searching PubMed (n = 618), ISI Web of 
Knowledge (n = 532), CHINAL (n = 81) PsycINFO (n = 
21) and NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) 
(n = 13). No articles were found by searching the Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry. From these records, 46 
full-text articles were retrieved for further inspection. Two 
more articles were identified by screening reference lists. 
See Bergmo (2014) for details [1].  
The literature search found ten articles that met the 
inclusion criteria. These were randomised trials and 
included information on the structural assumptions, 
probabilities, 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness 
of 
using 
videoconferencing [29-38]. Six non-randomised studies 
were included. These analysed clinical effectiveness or 
cost-effectiveness and included information on the clinical 
process. These studies used case-crossover design [39-41] 
and retrospective pre-post design [42], and two of the 
studies presented models based on data from the literature 
[43, 44]. Reliable parameter data from these studies have 
also been used to support parameter values from the 
randomised trials. The studies included data on the 
following parameters:  
 
The 
proportion 
of 
patients 
for 
which 
videoconferencing is a suitable and reliable 
option compared to face-to-face consultations.  
 
The proportion of patients in need of a second 
consultation (follow-up). 
 
Time use for the different alternatives. 
 
C.  Model assumptions and probabilities  
Data on patient management and patient flow found in 
the literature suggest that videoconferencing is acceptable 
for approximately 70% of patients [38, 40, 41]. This 
indicates that not all patients can be seen via video, 
suggesting that patients have been pre-selected or self-
selected. Videoconferencing can be less suitable for 
patients with a hearing problem and patients with dementia 
or other communication barriers, for example. Some 
patients may need a physical examination, while others 
prefer to meet the specialist in person, which varies 
between medical specialities. Videoconferencing is more 
suitable in psychiatry than orthopaedics, for example [37, 
40].  
The studies reported a higher follow-up rate for 
patients utilizing telemedicine [29, 31, 32]. For example, 
one large telemedicine trial found that the follow-up visits 
for video consultations compared to usual care in general 
practice had an odds ratio of 1.52, 95% CI 1.27 to 1.82. 
[29]. The difference in the follow-up rate also differs 
between specialties [29, 31, 32, 39], with less difference in 
dermatology [36]. 
None of the studies used QALYs to measure the 
clinical effectiveness of videoconferencing. Most studies 
took a cost per patient approach. Therefore, a net cost (or 
net benefit) per episode of care (patient consultation) was 
used as a pathway outcome in the present study.   
The time health professionals spend to complete a 
video consultation and an outpatient consultation was 
assessed in Jacklin et al. (2003) [30]. These time 
measurements included the total time spent by the 
specialist and the general practitioner, who were both 
present during one video session. These time estimates 
were based on observations of a small sample of 
consultations [30]. Details on the model inputs are shown 
in Table I.  
 
D. The local cost parameters 
Only provider costs have been included in this 
modelling study. These include health care costs and travel 
costs. Regional health authorities cover all travel costs 
except for a small user fee. 
The cost of a video consultation includes investment 
costs, technical support, the costs of using the network 
(line rental), and the time costs for the health providers. 
Investment costs have been collected from suppliers and 
from the IT and accounting departments at the hospital and 
local health clinics 
In 
the 
current 
project, 
a 
health 
professional 
accompanies the patient during the videoconferencing 
session, which assumes that the clinics have invested in a 
standard standalone videoconferencing unit placed in a 
dedicated office or studio.  

24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                          TABLE I. MODEL INPUTS 
Definition 
Value 
Source 
Proportion of patients 
seen 
 
[38, 40, 45] 
 
Videoconferencing 
0.71 (0.64-0.75) 
 
Outpatient 
1* 
 
Proportion of follow-
up 
 
[29, 31, 32, 
36] 
Videoconferencing 
0.36 (0.26-0.52) 
 
Outpatient 
0.29 (0.22-0.41) 
 
Professional time per 
consultation 
 
[30] 
Videoconferencing 
 
 
 
Local Physician 
26 min (158 NOK§, €18.9) 
       SSB 
 
Specialist 
20 min (140 NOK§, €16.7) 
 
Outpatient 
 
 
 
Specialist 
11.8 min (83 NOK§, €9.9) 
 
Costs per episode of 
care 
 
Local costs 
Videoconferencing 
 
 
 
VC units# 
311 NOK (€37.2) 
 
 
Network rental 
43 NOK (€5.2) 
 
 
Time costs 
298 NOK (€35.7) 
 
Outpatient 
 
 
 
Specialist costs 
83 NOK (€9.9) 
 
 
Travel cost 
823 NOK (€98.5) 
       [46] 
€1 = 8.41 Norwegian Kroner (NOK) 15 May 2015 
* Assuming that all patients receive treatment if referred by GP 
§ SSB Statistics Norway 2014 https://www.ssb.no 
# Includes equipment, installation, and annual support costs. 
Total annual cost 85 850 NOK (assuming 3% discount rate and 5-year equipment lifetime). 
 
 
This is the most commonly used equipment for video 
consultations and meetings in the region. The cost 
calculation is based on investing in videoconferencing 
equipment from Cisco TelePresence MX300 G2. 
The total investment costs including equipment and 
installation costs were annuitized into an equivalent annual 
cost assuming a 3% discount rate and a 5-year lifespan for 
the equipment. The unit costs (i.e., cost per patient 
consultation) were calculated assuming six consultations a 
week for 46 weeks (276 patient consultations annually). 
This annual workload was estimated by a medical expert 
and is based on a videoconferencing service in the 
orthopaedic unit at the hospital.  
The cost of an outpatient consultation at the hospital 
includes time costs for the specialist and travel costs for 
the patients. The average travel cost estimate for the region 
was found in Augestad et al. 2013 [46]. This estimate was 
calculated by dividing the total travel costs for the region 
by the total number of trips. Time costs for the medical 
professionals were estimated based on the national average 
for the monthly wage of specialists working at the 
hospitals and for locally employed physicians at health 
centres (see Table I for cost details). Overhead costs are 
not included because these are assumed to be small and to 
not affect the results. All costs are in Norwegian Kroner 
(NOK).  
 
E. Other assumptions  
The model includes a second consultation after the 
initial video consultation to account for the higher follow-
up rate of videoconferencing. It has also been assumed that 
a small proportion of the second consultations in the 
videoconferencing option are outpatient consultations at 
the hospital.   
 
IV. 
    RESULTS 
The data found in the literature suggest a model with 
two main options, one with videoconferencing and one 
without. This model assumes a screening process to select 
the patients suited for remote consultations beforehand. 
The studies also suggest that more patients will be 
scheduled 
for 
a 
follow-up 
consultation 
in 
the 
videoconferencing option compared to the outpatient 
option. 
The model is shown in Fig. 2 and illustrates the 
different options that are present in the decision problem. 
The model calculations are based on the model 
specification, technical equipment, and local cost estimates 
described above (Section III, C and D). Whether or not to 
invest in videoconferencing based solely on cost 
effectiveness can be viewed as a decision problem with 
two options. The costs of the videoconferencing option 
will also include the costs of treating the patients when 
videoconferencing is not suitable (the branch labelled 
outpatient consultation in Fig. 2). The net costs will also 
depend on the different follow-up rates included in the 
model. 
This 
model 
shows 
that 
the 
‘invest 
in 
videoconferencing’ option has the lowest net costs (see 
Fig. 2 for details).  
This model includes average values, making it less 
useful for decision making in specific areas. However, a 
generic model can be used as a template for more specific 
models adapted to one defined clinical field in a particular 
local practice or health clinic. The model input can easily 
be altered to fit any setting in which the decision problem 
is whether to invest in videoconferencing or not. 
Fig. 3 illustrates the use of the generic model adapted 
to the same decision problem in the clinical field of 
urology. In this model, the decision problem is whether to 
set up videoconferencing in the field of urology at a local 
health centre 67 km from the specialist hospital. In the 
literature, 46% of the urology patients in the telemedicine 
option were offered a follow-up consultation compared to 
35% in the outpatient option [29]. In this context, the 
travel cost to the hospital was NOK 300, assuming that all 
patients travelled by bus. 
Assuming similar patient workloads and costs as in the 
generic model, the least costly alternative in the field of 
urology is outpatient consultation at the hospital (see Fig. 
3 for details).  
The parameters most sensitive to the model results are 
the unit costs of the videoconferencing option, as either 
equipment prices or as the number of patient consultations 
(annual workload), and the distance from the local health 
centre to the specialist hospital.

25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 2. The videoconferencing model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The model adapted to urology. 
 
 
 
 

26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Halving the number of patient consultations in the 
videoconferencing option in the generic model (from six 
consultations each week to six consultations every two 
weeks), alters the results in favour of the ‘no investment’ 
option (model not shown). Another example is to analyse 
the use of video consultation in urology at a different 
location where the travel cost is twice the amount used in 
the urology model shown in Fig. 3. This changes the 
results and makes the ‘invest in videoconferencing’ the 
least costly option (model not shown). 
One-way sensitivity analyses were conducted on the 
data in the generic model. The analyses show that for 
videoconferencing cost estimates above NOK 853 (e.g., a 
service with less than 167 video consultations per year or 
less than 4 per week), or for travel costs that equal less 
than 610 NOK per patient, the results change in favour of 
the ‘no investment’ alternative (see Figs. 4 and 5). The 
results are not sensitive to changes in the other model 
parameters.  
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper developed an economic model describing the 
decision 
problem 
associated 
with 
investing 
in 
videoconferencing 
to 
provide 
remote 
specialist 
consultations. The results show that the decision to invest 
in videoconferencing depends on more than the cost 
difference between the two modes of consultations. The 
total cost of investing in videoconferencing must also 
consider the costs of those patients who are not suited for 
videoconferencing and a higher follow-up rate for the 
patients who participated in videoconferencing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis showing the net costs (expected values) 
with different VC-cost estimates ranging from 475 NOK (3 patient 
consultations per week) to 1006 NOK (9 patient consultations per week) 
in total (from €56.9 to €120.4).  
 
Figure 5. Sensitivity analysis showing the net unit costs (expected 
values) with different outpatient cost estimates ranging from 350 to 1500 
NOK (€41.9 to €179.6).  
 
    
This generic model is intended to be used as a template 
for more specific models that analyse the economic impact 
of providing specialist care to patients living in remote 
areas. The model can also be used as a framework for 
indicating whether a more detailed analysis is needed. 
Decision modelling is increasingly being used to assess the 
need for and value of additional research [10]. The generic 
model can also be further developed to include other 
technologies in a home-based setting, for example.  
There are valid concerns about using models to assess 
the economic consequences of new interventions [47]. The 
most important concern is the quality of the data used. The 
quality and validity of the results from modelling studies 
are not any better than the data used in the models. 
Telemedicine research has in general been criticised for 
being full of demonstration projects, anecdotal evidence, 
and poor study design [48]. One way to ensure quality data 
in this study has been to limit the data sources to include 
only randomised trials.  
The literature on telemedicine is extensive. A search in 
PubMed in March 2015 found over 18,000 papers on the 
topic. There are, however, a relatively small number of 
randomised trials in telemedicine research and even fewer 
analysing the effect of using videoconferencing. A review 
from 2012 identified 141 randomised controlled trials in 
telemedicine [49]. These studies analysed interventions in 
chronic disease management and the majority analysed 
home monitoring and telephone support. Few studies 
examined 
the 
use 
of 
videoconferencing. 
Recent 
telemedicine research seems to focus more on home-based 
services using monitoring and telephone contact with less 
focus 
on 
remote 
specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing. 
None of the studies found in the literature used QALYs 
to measure clinical effectiveness. One reason for this may 
be that videoconferencing is used as a substitute for a face-
to-face consultation, and therefore has little or no effect on 

27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a patient’s health. The benefit for the patients is most 
likely the avoidance of burdensome travel. However, 
QALYs have been used as outcome measures in 
monitoring and other home-based telehealth studies [50]. 
Because no QALYs were found, a net cost per episode of 
care was used as a pathway outcome (assuming similar 
health outcomes).    
The main purpose of the literature search was to 
identify randomised trials that analysed the effect of 
remote specialist consultations. Consequently, the scope of 
the review study is narrow. Another limitation is that only 
articles written in English and published in peer-reviewed 
journals were included to provide some basic quality 
control. The search strategy used might have missed some 
evaluations, partly because the term remote specialist 
consultation is not easily defined. Some analysts might 
have used terms to describe the provision of specialist 
treatment from a distance that differed from the search 
terms used in this review. 
The proposed model structure can be seen as a 
hypothetical trial with two arms. In some contexts, the 
model might include a third option in which the specialist 
travels to the remote health centres or clinics. None of the 
reviewed studies included this option, but the generic 
model can easily be adapted to include a third option.  
Some of the model inputs were not available in the 
literature and have been estimated. A medical expert 
working with remote consultations in orthopaedics 
estimated the annual workload used to calculate the unit 
cost of videoconferencing. An expert also estimated the 
probability of additional follow-up after a video 
consultation as an outpatient referral. Using expert 
opinions to estimate model input is acknowledged as a 
limitation.     
The costs included in the real-time telemedicine option 
were based on the purchase of standard standalone 
videoconferencing equipment. Leasing can be more 
suitable in some settings. Any change in equipment types 
and prices will influence the investment cost. For example, 
a desktop computer could be sufficient in some settings 
where only two persons (specialist and patient) are present 
in the consultation. The type of equipment that the clinics 
choose to purchase is one of the main cost drivers in the 
model. The choice of equipment will depend on what the 
specialist deems appropriate for the patients involved in 
the video sessions.  
The assumed number of patient consultations per year 
used to calculate the annual costs is another uncertain 
parameter. A change in annual workload will alter the 
result, and if the equipment is used for multiple purposes, 
then the cost must be shared between all users. Sensitivity 
analysis can be used to illustrate different threshold values 
when a conclusion changes in favour of one of the options. 
This allows decision makers to determine whether 
videoconferencing is a potential cost effective solution in 
their designated area or whether a more detailed analysis 
of cost and benefits is needed.  
The cost of outpatient consultations has been 
simplified to include only the costs of the health 
professionals involved and travel costs for the patients. 
Only costs assumed to differ between the alternatives and 
costs that have the potential to affect the outcomes have 
been included. More detailed cost estimates will increase 
the precision of the model and allow the calculation of 
more accurate potential cost savings. 
Another limitation is the perspective chosen for this 
study. A health provider perspective only includes costs 
borne by the health provider and excludes private costs 
and costs to employers in the form of production losses. A 
societal perspective that considers all costs regardless of 
who incurs them is recommended in the literature [5]. 
However, there is no consensus on whether productivity 
costs should be included in cost-effectiveness analyses. 
Nor is there any consensus on how such costs should be 
valued if they are included [51, 52]. The reason for 
choosing a provider perspective in this study was that the 
provider covers most of the costs including travel costs. 
Another argument is that shorter health visits might not 
represent production losses at all. Some types of work can 
be postponed until the patient returns or the work can be 
handled by a colleague, for example [5].  
To use episode of care as an effectiveness measure 
assumes that there is no difference in health outcomes for 
the patients, which seems to be a reasonable assumption. A 
range 
of 
evidence 
has 
demonstrated 
that 
videoconferencing for a variety of conditions produces 
similar health outcomes to treatment delivered in person 
[12, 24, 25]. However, using episode of care as an 
effectiveness 
measure 
when 
analysing 
the 
cost 
effectiveness of an intervention can miss important 
benefits such as easier access to medical care, avoidance 
of burdensome travel, and a feeling of improved continuity 
of care.  
Another challenge of economic analyses in the 
telemedicine field is generalisability. High diversity in 
terms of specialty, technology, applications, objectives, 
context, and stakeholders can be a major challenge for 
economic evaluations [12, 53]. The local setting will 
decide the most important cost parameters in an evaluation 
such as travel costs, the need for investment in 
infrastructure and technologies, prices, and the opportunity 
costs of health professionals. The evaluation result of a 
particular telemedicine and e-health service is of most 
value in the setting where the evaluation was conducted. In 
this modelling study, data from the literature were used to 
establish the structure of the decision problem, making the 
result more transferable to similar clinical settings. The 
model is designed to be transparent and includes relatively 
few assumptions that can be easily tested. This modelling 
study is also transparent in terms of the model inputs, 
making it easy to change the medical specialty and the 
local cost parameters.  
This modelling study lacks a probabilistic sensitivity 
analysis because the data inputs were only available as 
point estimates. Future models of other telemedicine 
applications might benefit from a formal test of the 
uncertainties in a full probabilistic sensitivity analysis.  
 

28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper proposes a generic economic model 
describing the decision problem associated with investing 
in videoconferencing as part of providing specialist 
consultations. The generic model can be useful as a 
template for more specific models assessing real-time 
telemedicine in designated areas in the Helse Nord region. 
This work presents one such specific model illustrating the 
expected outcomes in the field of urology. The models 
presented can be used to clarify the options of interest, to 
assess potential costs and benefits, and to determine 
whether further analysis is needed to enable informed 
decision making in the field. Future work should develop a 
broader model that includes the use of telehealth and e-
health services in a home care setting.    
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I thank Elin Anne Breivik for useful comments and 
good discussions. I also thank Astrid Buvik for sharing her 
clinical expertise, Stig Karoliussen for his support in 
collecting the data, Jarl-Stian Olsen for designing Fig. 1, 
and Conceicao Granja for technical help. The project was 
funded by the Regional Health Authorities: Helse Nord 
RHF Research Grant ID9185/HST1124-13.  
 
COMPETING INTEREST  
The author declares no competing interest. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. S. Bergmo, "Economic Impact of Remote Specialist 
Consultations using Videoconferencing: an Economic 
Model Based on Data from Randomised Controlled Trials," 
in eTELEMED 2014, The Sixth International Conference 
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 
285-291. 
[2] N. A. Brown, "Information on telemedicine," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 117-26, 2005. 
[3] P. Taylor, "Evaluating telemedicine systems and services," 
J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 167-77, 2005. 
[4] S. Ruckdaschel, M. Reiher, R. Rohrbacher, and E. Nagel, 
"The Role of Health Economics in Telemedicine," Disease 
Mgt Health Outcomes, vol. 14, pp. 3-7, 2006. 
[5] M. F. Drummond, M. J. Sculpher, G. W. Torrance, B. J. 
O'Brien, and G. L. Stoddart, Methods for the Economic 
Evaluation of Health Care Programmes, 3rd ed. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[6] P. Laake, H. B. Benestad, and B. R. Olsen, Research 
methodology in the medical and biological sciences: 
Academic Press, 2007. 
[7] T. S. Bergmo, "Approaches to economic evaluation in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 181-4, Jun. 
2012. 
[8] K. Kuntz and M. Weinstein, "Modelling in economic 
evaluation," in Economic evaluation in health care: 
merging theory with practice, M. Drummond and A. 
McGuire, Eds., ed Oxford Oxford University Press, 2001, 
pp. 141–171. 
[9] M. C. Weinstein, B. O'Brien, J. Hornberger, J. Jackson, M. 
Johannesson, C. McCabe, et al., "Principles of Good 
Practice for Decision Analytic Modeling in Health Care 
Evaluation: Report of the ISPOR Task Force on Good 
Research Practices—Modeling Studies," Value in Health, 
vol. 6, pp. 9-17, 2003. 
[10] S. Petrou and A. Gray, "Economic evaluation using 
decision analytical modelling: design, conduct, analysis, 
and reporting," BMJ, vol. 342, p. d1766, 2011. 
[11] "Ministery of Health and Care Services. Report no. 47 to 
the Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper treatment - 
at the right place at the right time," Ministery of Health and 
Care Services, Oslo, 2009. 
[12] T. Reardon, "Research findings and strategies for assessing 
telemedicine costs," Telemed J E Health, vol. 11, pp. 348-
69, Jun. 2005. 
[13] D. Hailey, R. Roine, and A. Ohinmaa, "The effectiveness 
of telemental health applications: a review," Can J 
Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp. 769-78, Nov. 2008. 
[14] I. R. Sharp, K. A. Kobak, and D. A. Osman, "The use of 
videoconferencing with patients with psychosis: a review 
of the literature," Ann Gen Psychiatry, vol. 10, p. 14, 2011. 
[15] D. Savin, D. A. Glueck, J. Chardavoyne, J. Yager, and D. 
K. Novins, "Bridging cultures: child psychiatry via 
videoconferencing," Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am, 
vol. 20, pp. 125-34, Jan. 2011. 
[16] G. 
R. 
Kanthraj, 
"Classification 
and 
design 
of 
teledermatology 
practice: 
what 
dermatoses? 
Which 
technology to apply?," J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol, vol. 
23, pp. 865-75, Aug. 2009. 
[17] M. N. Johnson and A. W. Armstrong, "Technologies in 
dermatology: teledermatology review," G Ital Dermatol 
Venereol, vol. 146, pp. 143-53, Apr. 2011. 
[18] S. Sabesan, K. Simcox, and I. Marr, "Medical oncology 
clinics via videoconferencing: An acceptable tele health 
model for rural patients and health workers," Intern Med J, 
Jun. 1 2011. 
[19] G. J. Morgan, B. Craig, B. Grant, A. Sands, N. Doherty, 
and F. Casey, "Home videoconferencing for patients with 
severe congential heart disease following discharge," 
Congenit Heart Dis, vol. 3, pp. 317-24, Sep-Oct. 2008. 
[20] S. N. Ahmed, S. Wiebe, C. Mann, and A. Ohinmaa, 
"Telemedicine and epilepsy care - a Canada wide survey," 
Can J Neurol Sci, vol. 37, pp. 814-8, Nov. 2010. 
[21] S. McLean, D. Protti, and A. Sheikh, "Telehealthcare for 
long term conditions," BMJ, vol. 342, p. d120, 2011. 
[22] M. Rumpsfeld, E. Arild, J. Norum, and E. Breivik, 
"Telemedicine in haemodialysis: a university department 
and two remote satellites linked together as one common 
workplace," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 251-5, 2005. 
[23] J. Laitinen, E. Korkiakangas, M. Alahuhta, S. Keinanen-
Kiukaanniemi, U. Rajala, O. Timonen, et al., "Feasibility of 
videoconferencing in lifestyle group counselling," Int J 
Circumpolar Health, vol. 69, pp. 500-11, Dec. 2010. 
[24] K. 
Steel, 
D. 
Cox, 
and 
H. 
Garry, 
"Therapeutic 
videoconferencing interventions for the treatment of long-
term conditions," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 17, pp. 109-17, 
2011. 
[25] G. Pare, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, "Systematic review of 
home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the evidence 
base," J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 14, pp. 269-77, May-
Jun. 2007. 
[26] V. A. Wade, J. Karnon, A. G. Elshaug, and J. E. Hiller, "A 
systematic review of economic analyses of telehealth 
services using real time video communication," BMC 
Health Serv Res, vol. 10, p. 233, 2010. 

29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[27] D. Kairy, P. Lehoux, C. Vincent, and M. Visintin, "A 
systematic review of clinical outcomes, clinical process, 
healthcare 
utilization 
and 
costs 
associated 
with 
telerehabilitation," Disabil Rehabil, vol. 31, pp. 427-47, 
2009. 
[28] D. Hailey, "The need for cost-effectiveness studies in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 379-83, 
2005. 
[29] P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. Harrison, J. Barber, S. 
Thompson, P. Jacklin, et al., "Joint teleconsultations 
(virtual outreach) versus standard outpatient appointments 
for patients referred by their general practitioner for a 
specialist opinion: a randomised trial," Lancet, vol. 359, pp. 
1961-8, Jun. 8 2002. 
[30] P. Jacklin, J. Roberts, P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. Harrison, 
J. Barber, et al., "Virtual outreach: economic evaluation of 
joint teleconsultations for patients referred by their general 
practitioner for a specialist opinion," BMJ, vol. 327, p. 84, 
2003. 
[31] J. R. Benger, S. M. Noble, J. Coast, and J. M. Kendall, 
"The 
safety 
and 
effectiveness 
of 
minor 
injuries 
telemedicine," Emerg Med J, vol. 21, pp. 438-45, Jul. 2004. 
[32] R. Chua, J. Craig, R. Wootton, and V. Patterson, 
"Randomised controlled trial of telemedicine for new 
neurological outpatient referrals," J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry, vol. 71, pp. 63-6, Jul. 2001. 
[33] R. Wootton, S. E. Bloomer, R. Corbett, D. J. Eedy, N. 
Hicks, H. E. Lotery, et al., "Multicentre randomised control 
trial 
comparing 
real 
time 
teledermatology 
with 
conventional outpatient dermatological care: societal cost-
benefit analysis," BMJ, vol. 320, pp. 1252-6, May. 2000. 
[34] J. C. Fortney, J. M. Pyne, S. B. Mouden, D. Mittal, T. J. 
Hudson, G. W. Schroeder, et al., "Practice-based versus 
telemedicine-based collaborative care for depression in 
rural federally qualified health centers: a pragmatic 
randomized comparative effectiveness trial," American 
Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 170, pp. 414-425, 2013. 
[35] P. E. Ruskin, M. Silver-Aylaian, M. A. Kling, S. A. Reed, 
D. D. Bradham, J. R. Hebel, et al., "Treatment outcomes in 
depression: comparison of remote treatment through 
telepsychiatry to in-person treatment," Am J Psychiatry, 
vol. 161, pp. 1471-6, Aug. 2004. 
[36] A. M. Oakley, P. Kerr, M. Duffill, M. Rademaker, P. 
Fleischl, N. Bradford, et al., "Patient cost-benefits of 
realtime teledermatology--a comparison of data from 
Northern Ireland and New Zealand," J Telemed Telecare, 
vol. 6, pp. 97-101, 2000. 
[37] R. O'Reilly, J. Bishop, K. Maddox, L. Hutchinson, M. 
Fisman, and J. Takhar, "Is telepsychiatry equivalent to 
face-to-face psychiatry? Results from a randomized 
controlled equivalence trial," Psychiatric Services, vol. 58, 
pp. 836-843, 2007. 
[38] O. Timonen, "The teleconsultation in general practice. A 
randomized, controlled study of a remote consultation 
experiment 
using 
a 
videoconferencing 
system," 
International journal of circumpolar health, vol. 63, 2004. 
[39] E. Gilmour, S. M. Campbell, M. A. Loane, A. Esmail, C. E. 
Griffiths, M. O. Roland, et al., "Comparison of 
teleconsultations 
and 
face-to-face 
consultations: 
preliminary results of a United Kingdom multicentre 
teledermatology study," Br J Dermatol, vol. 139, pp. 81-7, 
Jul. 1998. 
[40] K. Harno, E. Arajarvi, T. Paavola, C. Carlson, and P. 
Viikinkoski, "Clinical effectiveness and cost analysis of 
patient referral by videoconferencing in orthopaedics," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 7, pp. 219-25, 2001. 
[41] M. A. Loane, R. Corbett, S. E. Bloomer, D. J. Eedy, H. E. 
Gore, C. Mathews, et al., "Diagnostic accuracy and clinical 
management by realtime teledermatology. Results from the 
Northern 
Ireland 
arms 
of 
the 
UK 
Multicentre 
Teledermatology Trial," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 4, pp. 95-
100, 1998. 
[42] D. Buckley and S. Weisser, "Videoconferencing could 
reduce the number of mental health patients transferred 
from outlying facilities to a regional mental health unit," 
Aust N Z J Public Health, vol. 36, pp. 478-82, Oct. 2012. 
[43] Z. Agha, R. M. Schapira, and A. H. Maker, "Cost 
effectiveness of telemedicine for the delivery of outpatient 
pulmonary care to a rural population," Telemed J E Health, 
vol. 8, pp. 281-91, Fall 2002. 
[44] R. Wootton, K. Bahaadinbeigy, and D. Hailey, "Estimating 
travel reduction associated with the use of telemedicine by 
patients and healthcare professionals: proposal for 
quantitative synthesis in a systematic review," BMC Health 
Serv Res, vol. 11, p. 185, Aug.  2011. 
[45] M. A. Loane, S. E. Bloomer, R. Corbett, D. J. Eedy, H. E. 
Gore, N. Hicks, et al., "Patient cost-benefit analysis of 
teledermatology measured in a randomized control trial," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 5 Suppl 1, pp. S1-3, 1999. 
[46] K. M. Augestad, J. Norum, S. Dehof, R. Aspevik, U. 
Ringberg, T. Nestvold, et al., "Cost-effectiveness and 
quality of life in surgeon versus general practitioner-
organised colon cancer surveillance: a randomised 
controlled trial," BMJ Open, vol. 3, 2013. 
[47] M. J. Buxton, M. F. Drummond, B. A. Van Hout, R. L. 
Prince, T. A. Sheldon, T. Szucs, et al., "Modelling in 
economic evaluation: an unavoidable fact of life," Health 
Econ, vol. 6, pp. 217-27, May-Jun. 1997. 
[48] J. D. Whited, "The quality of telemedicine research," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 271-3, 2006. 
[49] R. Wootton, "Twenty years of telemedicine in chronic 
disease management--an evidence synthesis," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 211-20, Jun. 2012. 
[50] T. S. Bergmo, "Using QALYs in telehealth evaluations: a 
systematic review of methodology and transparency," BMC 
Health Serv Res, vol. 14, p. 332, 2014. 
[51] M. Sculpher, "The role and estimation of productivity costs 
in economic evaluation " in Economic evaluation in health 
care: merging theory with practice, M. Drummond and A. 
McGuire, Eds., ed Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. 
[52] A. M. Gray, P. M. Clarke, J. L. Wolstenholme, and S. 
Wordsworth, Applied Methods of Cost-effectiveness 
Analysis in Healthcare. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2011. 
[53] M. E. Davalos, M. T. French, A. E. Burdick, and S. C. 
Simmons, "Economic evaluation of telemedicine: review of 
the literature and research guidelines for benefit-cost 
analysis," Telemed J E Health, vol. 15, pp. 933-48, Dec. 
2009. 
 
 
 
 

