 
 
Managing Language Diversity Across Cultures: the English-Mongolian Case Study 
 
Amarsanaa Ganbold 
School of Information Technology 
National University of Mongolia 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia 
amarsanaag@disi.unitn.it  
Feroz Farazi  
DISI 
University of Trento  
Trento, Italy 
farazi@disi.unitn.it   
Moaz Reyad  
DISI 
University of Trento  
Trento, Italy 
reyad@disi.unitn.it  
 
Oyundari Nyamdavaa 
School of Information Technology 
National University of Mongolia 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia 
oyundari.n@gmail.com 
  
 
 
Fausto Giunchiglia  
DISI 
University of Trento  
Trento, Italy 
fausto@disi.unitn.it  
Abstract—Developing ontologies from scratch appears to be 
very expensive in terms of cost and time required and often 
such efforts remain unfinished for decades. Ontology 
localization through translation seems to be a promising 
approach towards addressing this issue as it enables the 
greater reuse of the ontological (backbone) structure. 
However, during ontology localization, managing language 
diversity across cultures remains as a challenge that has to be 
taken into account and dealt with the right level of attention 
and expertise. Furthermore, reliability of the provided 
knowledge in the localized ontology is appearing as a non-
trivial issue to be addressed. In this paper, we report the result 
of our experiment, performed on approximately 1000 concepts 
taken from the space ontology originally developed in English, 
consisted in providing their translation into Mongolian. 
Keywords: Ontology localization, space ontology, space 
domain, ontology, Semantic Web, knowledge, provenance  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is a long version of [1], in which it is described 
that building a true, flourishing and successful Semantic 
Web [2] should involve the participation from all cultures 
and languages across the world. In the development of the 
traditional Web, this participation was spontaneous and has 
been made possible as the necessary tools and resources 
were available. In the Semantic Web one crucial feature is 
the capacity to assign precise meaning to words, for instance 
in order to diminish the impact of polysemy. Still for many 
languages, one example being Mongolian, such resources are 
not developed at all and for some others what is out there 
cannot be used effectively as they could not achieve critical 
mass. However, for English much progress has been made 
and the WordNet (http://www.princeton.edu) developed at 
Princeton is one of the well-known and most widely used 
resources in the field. Yet its coverage is often unsatisfactory 
when dealing with domain specific tasks [3]. 
Towards solving the issue of the lack of coverage and to 
gain a critical mass of concepts, some domain ontologies 
have already been developed. A prominent example is the 
space ontology [4] developed in English with comparatively 
very large coverage of geo-spatial features and entities 
around the globe. Domain ontologies can also deal with the 
specificity of an area of knowledge, for example, by 
providing relations and attributes specific to the domain. By 
reducing polysemy (the amount of words with same 
meaning), they can enable better semantic interoperability. 
Ontologies that are developed to perform NLP tasks in one 
language can hardly be used with their full potential for 
another. Representing an existing ontology in a new 
language, taking into account cultural and linguistic 
diversities, is defined as ontology localization. 
In this paper, we describe the development of the space 
ontology in Mongolian starting from its English counterpart 
as it is contained in the Universal Knowledge Core (UKC), 
as described below. Building an ontology without human-
level accuracy is a potential obstacle in developing 
applications (e.g., word sense disambiguation and document 
classification). 
Synset 
base 
resources 
(linguistic 
representation of ontologies) such as WordNet and 
FinnWordNet [5] are built manually to obtain better quality.  
Knowledge is created to be consumed by others in a 
multitude of activities including daily life, education, 
research and development for the advancement of our 
society. Through ontology development and ontology 
localization we create new knowledge. Trustworthiness and 
reliability of the produced knowledge are crucial measures 
that if comprehended, modelled and communicated properly 
would make consumers lives comparatively easier. 
Being concerned about the quality and giving utmost 
importance to it, we followed a manual approach. The 
contributions of our paper include: 
i) 
The development of an ontology localization 
methodology that is domain and language 
independent and seems to achieve very high  
quality 
ii) The development of a methodology for dealing 
with diversity (e.g., lexical gaps) across cultures 
and languages 
iii) The lessons learned from the execution of the whole 
process in the generation of the space ontology in 
Mongolian 
iv) The development of the provenance model that 
manages information about various contributors to 
the ontology localization process for ensuring 
quality and credibility of the knowledge produced. 
167
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
provide detailed description of the UKC. Section 3 gives an 
overview of the space ontology. In Section 4, we describe the 
macro-steps of the translation process. In Section 5, we 
present the provenance model. In Section 6, we describe the 
diversity across English and Mongolian cultures in terms of 
space related features. Section 7 reports the experimental 
results. Section 8 discusses the lessons learned while Section 
9 describes the related work. Finally, in Section 10, we 
provide the concluding remarks. 
II. 
THE UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE CORE 
The UKC [4] is a large-scale ontology, under development 
at the University of Trento, which includes hundreds of 
thousands of concepts (e.g., lake, mountain chain) of the real 
world entities (e.g., Lake Garda, Alps). It consists of three 
main components: domain core, concept core and natural 
language core (See Fig. 1). 
Domain core: As described in [4], the domain core consists 
of various domains, where each of them represents an area 
of knowledge or field of study that we are interested in or 
that we are communicating about [6]. In other words, a 
domain can be a conventional subject of study (e.g., 
mathematics, physics), an application of pure disciplines 
(e.g., engineering, mining), the aggregation of such fields 
(e.g., physical science, social science) or a daily life topic  
(also called Internet domains, e.g., sport, music). Each 
domain is organized in facets, where a facet can be defined 
as a hierarchy of homogeneous concepts describing the 
different aspects of meaning [7]. According to our 
methodology [8], called DERA, where D stands for 
Domain, facets are classified into three categories: Entity 
class (E), Relation (R) and Attribute (A). For example, in 
the space ontology, country and continent are entity classes. 
Relations describe relations between entities; examples of 
spatial relations are near, above, far etc. An attribute is a 
property of an entity, e.g., depth of a lake. 
Concept core: The concept core consists of concepts and 
semantic relations between them. The concepts in the 
concept core form a directed acyclic graph, which provides 
the terms and the structure from which facets are defined. 
Entity class, relations and attributes are all codified as 
concepts. 
A 
concept 
is 
a 
language 
independent 
representation of a set of words (synset), which are synonym 
of a given word in natural language. For example, country, 
city, etc. The concept city can be represented as city in 
English, città (chit’a) in Italian, хот (khot) in Mongolian. 
A semantic relation is a relation that holds between two 
concepts. Some examples of semantic relation are is-a (or 
hyponym-of), part-of (part-meronym-of) and value-of. An 
instantiation of the is-a relation can be given as city is-a 
populated place. 
 
Figure 1. Knowledge Organization in the UKC
 
 
 
part-of 
part-of 
instance-of 
instance-of 
instance-of 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
populated place 
 
body of water 
city 
Italy 
country 
A 
b 
d 
river 
Trento 
lake  
B 
C 
e 
f 
g 
 
location 
Garda Lake 
is-a 
c 
depth  
value-of  
value-of  
depth  
shallow  
deep 
h 
 
i 
is-a 
is-a 
north  
south 
k 
m 
direction  
l 
antonym 
(adj) shallow -- 
lacking physical depth; 
(adj) deep -- having 
great spatial extension… 
(adj) profondo -- alto che 
presenta una notevole 
distanza tra il limite 
superiore e il fondo; 
antonym 
(adj) гүйхэн (guikhen), 
гүехэн (guekhen) -- 
гүйхэн устай гол; 
 
(adj) гүнзгий (gunzgii) 
-- гүн; оломгүй гүнзгий ус; 
DOMAIN CORE 
CONCEPT CORE 
NATURAL LANGUAGE CORE 
   it-IT 
en-US 
mn-MN 
  
 
Entity class  
Instance 
 
Attribute name  
  
Attribute value  
LEGENDS 
 
Relation name  
Relations of the 
knowledge level 
Synset 
Lexical relation 
Relations of the formal 
language level 
 
Relations between 
knowledge and language 
level 
168
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Natural language core: The natural language core 
consists of a set of languages, each representing a set of 
linguistic objects and relations between them. The objects of 
this core are words, senses, synsets and exceptional forms. A 
word is the basic lexical unit of the natural language core 
represented as a lemma. It can be multiword, phrase, 
collocation, etc. The words in the natural language core 
provide, for any given language, the translation of the 
concepts stored in the concept core. 
Word senses are organized into four part-of-speeches -- 
noun, verb, adjective and adverb. One word may have more 
than one part-of-speech, and synonym word senses with the 
same part-of-speech are grouped into a synset. A sense is a 
possible meaning for a word. A word can have one or more 
senses each having a part-of-speech tag. Each sense 
corresponds to and belongs to only one synset. All senses of 
a given word are ranked according to most preferred usage. 
A synset is a set of words, which share the same meaning. In 
fact, words in a synset have semantically equivalent 
relations. Each synset might be accompanied by a gloss 
consisting of a definition and optionally example sentences. 
Relations of the language core are of type lexical and 
semantic lexical. This kind of relations holds between the 
objects of the same language.  
A lexical relation is a relation that holds between the 
words of different synsets. Antonym, derivationally-related-
form and also-see are examples of such relation. An 
example of the antonym relation can be provided as lowland 
is an antonym of highland. Note that hereinafter we 
represent synsets with double hyphens distinguishing words 
(comma separated) from glosses, which are formatted in 
Italics. 
(a) lowland -- low level country 
(b) highland, upland -- elevated (e.g., mountainous) 
land 
The word highland of the synset reported in (b) is in 
antonymy relation with the word lowland of the synset (a). 
Notice that the same relation does not hold between the 
other word upland of the synset (b) and lowland. 
A semantic-lexical relation is a relation that holds 
between two synsets. Some examples of this kind of relation 
are similar-to, troponymy and verb-group. An example of the 
semantic-lexical relation can be adjacent is similar-to near. 
(c) adjacent -- near or close to but not necessarily 
touching 
(d) near, close, nigh -- not far distant in time or space 
or degree or circumstance 
In this case the synset (c) that consists of only one word is 
in similar-to relation with the synset (d) that consists of three 
words. This means that the very same relation can be applied 
between any word of the synset (c) and any word of the 
synset (d). 
The natural language core is built with the complete 
integration of hierarchically organized synset bases, as it is 
the case, for instance, for WordNet and the Italian part of 
MultiWordNet (http://multiwordnet.fbk.eu).  
III. 
THE SPACE DOMAIN 
The space domain [4], [6] is a large-scale geospatial 
ontology built using the faceted approach. It was developed 
as the result of the complete integration of GeoNames 
(http://www.geonames.org) and WordNet. It is also known 
as space ontology and in this paper, we refer to it with any of 
these names. It currently consists of nearly 17 facets, around 
980 concepts and 8.5 million entities. The ontology 
(excluding entities) is integrated into the UKC. Some 
examples of facet are land formation (e.g., mountain, hill), 
body of water (e.g., sea, lake), administration division (e.g., 
state, province) and facility (e.g., university, industry). 
In Fig. 2, we provide a partial bird’s eye view of the whole 
set of facets. Note that facets are not connected to each other 
and they do not have concept overlap across or within them. 
 
Figure 2. A subset of the facets of the Space domain 
Fig. 3 shows a small portion of the facet geological 
formation in which the second level represents natural 
elevation, natural depression and the level below the natural 
elevation is organized into oceanic and continental elevation, 
and so forth. 
 
Figure 3. An entity class (E) category facet (partial view) 
geological 
formation 
body of  
water 
administrative 
division 
facility 
agricultural 
land 
land 
relation 
populated  
place 
attribute 
geological formation 
natural  elevation 
natural depression 
oceanic elevation 
continental elevation 
hill 
mountain 
volcano 
mountain peak 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
part-of 
antonym 
169
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Note that, within a facet with double circled node we 
distinguish the root concept from the rest of the concepts that 
are represented with single circle. 
In the Space domain, the relation category contains around 
10 facets such as spatial relation and primary outflow. A 
partial representation of the spatial relation facet is shown in 
Fig. 4. 
The spatial relation is the spatial property between 
geological physical objects or the way in which something is 
located. Leaf nodes of this facet represent relations between 
entities. For instance, Mongolia is south of Russia and north 
of China. The relation primary outflow connects two bodies 
of water. 
 
 
Figure 4. A relation (R) facet (partial view) 
 
Within the domain the attribute category consists of 
around 20 facets such as rain and temperature. 
 
 
Figure 5. An attribute (A) facet (partial view) 
 
As shown in Fig. 5 the facet rain includes among others 
rainstorm, downpour, drizzle and shower. With rain we 
mean falling of water in drops from vapor condensed in the 
atmosphere. The temperature indicates the degree of hotness 
or coldness of an object or environment. 
IV. 
TRANSLATION APPROACH 
In the following subsections we describe the general 
process for translation and its instantiations both for 
translating and creating a concept in the target language. 
A. General process 
The main idea of the translation process is to take the 
objects of the domain of interest from a source language, in 
this case English, and to produce the corresponding 
representation in a target language, e.g., Mongolian in order 
to extend the UKC with translations. The process includes 
the translation of the synset words and glosses. A direct 
translation of them is provided whenever possible. However, 
the world is full of diversity and people of a particular 
culture might not be aware of some concepts. For instance, 
Mongolia is a landlocked country, thus some terms (e.g., dry 
dock, quay, pier, etc.) related to seaport are not known to the 
community or are rarely used and are often a source of 
lexical gaps for Mongolian. Lexical gaps are those concepts 
that do not have a succinct representation in a given 
language. However, they can be expressed as a free 
combination of words [10]. 
We select English as a master source language for all 
localization activity since the language is the second most 
widespread language and will be a common language to use 
in scientific and research oriented discussions. For executing 
the translation process, English language representation of 
the concept core is copied to an LKC (Local Knowledge 
Core) repository, which contains translations in the target 
language. 
In order to provide the most suitable translation for a 
synset, we follow the macro-steps described below and 
represented in Fig. 6. 
1(a) A language translator takes a synset provided in 
the source language and gets a clear understanding 
of its meaning. In case of difficulty, he/she finds the 
corresponding images or videos of the synset 
word(s) on the Web to perceive the concept through 
visualization. 
 
 
1(b) The language translator provides a suitable 
translation of the word(s) in the target language. 
spatial relation 
direction 
internal spatial 
relation 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
relative level 
external 
spatial 
relation 
orientation 
east 
west 
south 
north 
vertical 
horizontal 
above 
below 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
is-a 
adjacent 
near 
rain 
downpour 
shower 
is-a 
is-a 
part-of 
is-a 
rain drop 
rain storm 
line storm 
thundershower 
is-a 
is-a 
drizzle 
is-a 
resolve conflicts; 
provide feedbacks 
validate; 
give feedbacks 
produce 
request importing  
UKC  
Manager 
import translations 
resolve conflicts 
UKC 
 
 
Concept 
Core 
 
Domain  
Core 
Natural  
Language  
Core 
LKC English 
Validator 
 
Language  
Translators 
Language  
Validators 
UKC 
Validator 
 
 
Translations 
LKC 
 
 
New 
concepts 
take new concepts 
validate 
validate; 
translate back 
Figure 6. Translation phases of UKC 
170
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
With suitable we mean word, multiword, co-
occurrence and phrasal representation as we do not 
allow a free combination of words as translation of a 
word. In case of unavailability of the word(s) for the 
given meaning, the translator can mark it as a lexical 
gap. However, the translator always provides the 
translation of the gloss. 
1(c) A language validator evaluates the translation of 
the word(s) and the gloss of the synset. In case the 
concept is marked as a gap, the validator either 
confirms the gap or suggests a translation for the 
word(s). 
1(d) Upon receiving feedback on the synset, the 
language translator goes through the comments 
and updates the translation when necessary. In case 
of disagreement, the language translator provides 
comments including mostly the rationale about the 
disagreement. 
1(e) The language validator reevaluates the updated 
translation. In case of disagreement, the validator 
generates further feedback and sends it back to the 
language translator (step 5). Even if after a few 
iterations a disagreement is not resolved, a second 
language validator is consulted. If agreed upon, the 
validation for the given synset is over. 
2 In the cases where the language translator finds out 
a new concept that might be a lexical gap or a 
missing concept in the source language, she suggests 
a suitable synset for this concept in the target 
language and if possible also the corresponding 
synset in the source language. The LKC English 
validator evaluates the source language synset (if 
suggested) for the new concept coming from the 
target language. Otherwise, she translates back this 
target language synset into English.  
3 A UKC validator takes the translations resulting 
from steps 1 and 2 to evaluate their correctness from 
both the language and UKC perspectives. The 
validator corrects the mistakes and resolves the 
issues (if any) communicating with the language 
validator and LKC English validator (if necessary), 
possibly in a few iterations. Finally, she asks a UKC 
manager for importing the translation to the UKC. 
4 The UKC manager runs an automatic validation 
tool to evaluate if the provided input is compliant 
with the UKC. In case of errors are found, they are 
corrected with the help of the UKC validator (if 
needed) possibly iterating a few times. The manager 
also decides new concepts originating from the target 
language whether to accept or reject them. Once all 
the issues are resolved, the UKC manager imports 
the translations to the UKC. 
Following these steps we translated the space ontology 
into Mongolian end-to-end, evaluated and finally imported 
the translations to the UKC.   
To achieve optimal quality while executing the whole 
process depicted in Fig. 6, we set the criteria that translators 
and various validators must possess the competences 
necessary for the task. The language translator should be a 
native speaker from the country of origin of the target 
language with a good command of the source language. The 
language validator should be a linguist possessing the 
necessary language competences. The LKC English validator 
should be as close as possible to an English native speaker 
who should understand well the target language. The UKC 
validator is a native speaker of the target language with 
knowledge of the UKC. Both the UKC validator and LKC 
English validator are in charge of the language dependent 
tasks in the translation process. The UKC manager is an 
expert on the UKC with no specific competence on the 
language. 
From a geographical point of view we expect that, in most 
cases, the language core will be developed in the countries 
where that language is spoken, while the UKC is and will be 
developed centrally. The UKC validator, whenever possible, 
should operate centrally where the UKC manager is. This 
spatial distribution of operations and operators has been 
designed as an attempt to preserve local diversity and, at the 
same time, to deal with the need for central coordination 
required because of existence of a unique, single UKC. The 
underlying model is that there is a single world, represented 
by the UKC, and many different views of the world, each 
represented by a different natural language. The diversity of 
the world is therefore captured, as it will be described in 
detail in the next section, in the mapping from the informal 
natural languages and the unique UKC formal concept 
language. 
B. Translating a concept 
Here we instantiate the general translation process 
described in section A by taking the concept subtree, rooted 
at “mountain”, shown in Fig. 3, Translation is performed 
from English to Mongolian. All three concepts of the subtree 
are provided as follows: 
mountain, mount -- a land mass that projects well 
above its surroundings; higher than a hill 
volcano -- a mountain formed by volcanic material 
peak, crown, crest, top, tip, summit -- the top point of a 
mountain or hill 
Note that the subtree should normally get translated 
according to the macro steps 1, 3 and 4, whose executions 
are marked with prime (') and described below.  
1(a)' The language translator perceives the meaning of 
the concept mountain by reading its gloss. The 
translator could understand the concept as a massive 
land that is highly raised than surrounding 
geological formations and it is more elevated than 
the hills. She checks whether there is at least a term 
to refer to this notion in Mongolian culture. In case 
of dilemma in understanding its availability, she 
also visualizes the meaning by consulting resources 
(e.g., images, videos) on the web. 
1(b)' The language translator represents mountain as 
уул (uul) in Mongolian. In this case, the  Mongolian 
representation is a lexical unit, therefore the concept 
is not marked as a lexical gap. The gloss is 
translated as эргэн тойрон буюу хүрээлэн буй 
171
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
орчноосоо дээш өргөгдөн гарсан өндөрлөг газар; 
толгодоос өндөр (a high land raised above and 
elevated from its surroundings and all-around; 
higher than hills).  
1(c)' The language validator agrees with the term 
provided as the name (or label) of the concept, but 
she suggests an improved translation of the gloss as 
эргэн 
тойрны 
орчноосоо 
дээш 
өргөгдсөн 
өндөрлөг газар; дов толгодоос өндөр; (a high 
land raised above from its surroundings; higher than 
hills). Here, the language validator removes the 
words эргэн тойрон (all-around) and гарсан 
(elevated) from the gloss developed by the language 
translator because from her point of view without 
these terms in the gloss, the concept can clearly be 
understood by the native speakers. 
1(d)' The language translator receives the validation 
feedback on the translation of the concept mountain. 
She accepts the validated result and updates the 
translation according to the language validator’s 
comments. 
1(e)' As 
the 
language 
translator 
accepts 
the 
modifications proposed by the language validator, 
no conflict is left to be resolved and the validator 
proceeds with the next steps.  
3' 
The UKC validator checks the translation of the 
terms and glosses of the concept. Since there are no 
disagreements from both the language and UKC 
perspectives, she asks a UKC Manager to import the 
translations into the UKC. 
4' 
Finally, the UKC Manager runs an automatic import 
function to integrate the translation into the UKC. 
Similarly, the other two concepts volcano and peak are 
translated and then integrated into the UKC. 
C. Adding a new concept 
New concepts can be added executing macro steps 2, 3 
and 4 of the general process of translations. The 
instantiations of these steps are marked with prime ((') and 
described below. 
2' 
The language translator realizes that in the given 
subtree a concept, which is part-of the concept 
mountain, is missing. Therefore she proposes to 
create a concept and develops a synset for this in 
Mongolain as follows: 
         гэзэг (gezeg) -- уул толгодын ар шил 
The LKC English validator recognizes that this 
concept is a gap in English and translates its gloss 
back to English as follows: 
        GAP -- northern ridge of a mountain 
3' 
The UKC validator verifies the translation of the 
gloss, confirms that it is a gap in English and 
evaluates the correctness of the added relation of the 
concept in the subtree. As she conceded with the 
produced knowledge from linguistic and UKC 
viewpoints, she proceeds through asking the UKC 
Manager to incorporate the translations into the 
UKC. 
4' 
The UKC Manager takes the necessary steps for the 
integration of the new knowledge to the UKC. 
Note that, the UKC infrastructure was developed taking into 
account the fact that new knowledge can come to the system 
at any point in time. Therefore, it supports integration of 
new objects (e.g., concepts and relations). UKC manages 
the lifecycle and evolution of the objects by exploiting the 
timestamp attached to them. 
V. 
HANDLING PROVENANCE 
Provenance can be defined as the source of a piece of 
knowledge. In the context of this work, we assign fine 
grained provenance in terms of knowledge objects and their 
contributors. 
For ensuring trustworthiness and reliability, we employ a 
provenance model that is defined and then instantiated with 
the use cases -- concept translation and concept addition -- in 
the following subsections.  
A. Representing provenance 
In this section, we present the data structure that we use to 
represent the provenance. Our provenance model is designed 
to maintain information about the elements that can be 
created in the knowledge base during the ontology 
localization process. These elements are concepts, lexical 
gaps, lexical relations, semantic lexical relations, synsets, 
senses, words and sense ranks.  
Provenance
elementID : long
modificationDate : date
source : UserReference[]
validator1 : UserReference[]
validator2 : UserReference
note : String[]
UserReference
-userName : String
-userRole : String
 
Figure 7. UML Diagram for provenance 
 
Fig. 7 shows the UML diagram of our provenance model, 
which consists of two classes – Provenance and 
UserReference. Provenance represents information about the 
source of an element and UserReference represents a human 
user who is involved in the localization process. 
Provenance is a 5-tuple <elementID, modificationDate, 
source, validator1, validator2, noteop>, where elementID is 
the unique identifier of the knowledge base element to which 
the provenance is applied, modificationDate is a timestamp 
specifying the latest date of modification of the provenance, 
source refers to a list of contributors who are language 
translators responsible mainly for translating an element and 
also for proposing a missing concept in the target language, 
validator1 refers to a list of contributors who are language 
validators responsible for validating translations, validator2 
is the UKC validator and noteop refers to the additional 
remarks that can optionally be provided by LKC developers/ 
validators or UKC validator/manager.  
UserReference is a pair <userName, userRole>, where 
userName represents the name and email address of a human 
172
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
user and userRole indicates one of the following editorial 
roles: LKC_Developer, LKC_Validator and UKC_Validator, 
UKC manager. 
Note that, in this provenance model, for the translation 
tasks, there are references to at least three human 
contributors – source, validator1 and validator2. That means 
each manually translated element is validated by one or more 
user, who can also be communicated via email to discuss the 
rationale behind the translations and concepts developed by 
them. This we believe is the main strength of our provenance 
modelling and that helps increase the reliability of the 
ontologies localized in any target language following our 
approach. 
 
B. Provenance in concept translation 
In the concept translation macro-steps, we create and 
update provenance in the following cases. 
 
a. 
If a language translator develops a word, a synset, a 
lexical gap or a concept in Steps 1(a)-1(b) or Step 2, 
for each element created, a new provenance will be 
generated with the source referring to the translator.  
b. If a language validator confirms an already 
developed element in Step 1(c) and 1(e), the 
provenance of that element is updated by linking 
validator1 to the instance of the UserReference, 
which corresponds to the name and email and the 
role of the language validator that is LKC_Validator. 
This marks the element as validated.  
c. 
As soon as the UKC validator confirms an element in 
Step 3, the provenance of that element is updated 
with the instantiation of the attribute validator2 
referring to the name and email and role of the 
validator (i.e., UKC_Validator) of the given context. 
This marks the element as completely validated and 
accepted.  
Note that the modification date changes whenever a new 
operation is performed on the provenance. In (a) it refers to 
the date of translation, in (b) it is updated with the date of 
the language validation and in (c) it is replaced with the date 
of the UKC validation.  
C. Provenance in concept addition 
While adding concept, we create and update provenance 
in the following possible scenarios.  
a. 
In the concept addition phase in Step 2, the language 
translator may create a new concept and its related 
lexical components such as synset, word, etc. in the 
target language and optionally in the source language 
In this case the provenance source for each of the 
objects will be instantiated with the translator for her 
LKC developer role. 
b. Again in Step 2, (i) if the LKC English validator 
evaluates the source language synset provided by the 
language translator, the provenance validator1 is 
instantiated with her LKC Validator role (ii) if it 
happens that the LKC English validator translates 
back the new concept into the source language, in 
this case the source is filled in with her role as LKC 
Developer and the validator1 is left un-instantiated.  
c. 
Similarly to the concept translation, a UKC validator 
checks the correctness of the concept addition and 
she becomes validator2 with the corresponding role. 
VI. 
TYPES OF DIVERSITY 
The translation or localization is the adaptation of a piece 
of knowledge to a particular language and culture [9]. This is 
nontrivial and linguistic experts might help in this task. 
Moreover, the localization should be based on the perception 
of the concepts and entities in the real world within the local 
communities and not on the literal translation. 
A. Concepts 
We assume concepts to be universal. However, their 
representation in the different natural languages changes. 
Within the same language a concept might be referred with 
multiple terms (known as synonymy) and multiple concepts 
might be referred with the same term (known as polysemy). 
The concepts valley, dale and hollow are represented 
with the same term in Mongolian. 
valley – (a long depression in the surface of the land 
that usually contains a river) 
dale – (an open river valley (in a hilly area)) 
hollow – (a small valley between mountains; "he built 
himself a cabin in a hollow high up in the 
Appalachians") 
Moreover, in the UKC dale and hollow are subordinate 
concepts of valley. In this case, translating them into the 
target language increases polysemy. However, we translate 
them because within the Mongolian culture people can 
classify their (real world) entities under the specific concept. 
Moreover, a concept might not have a name in a target 
language the fact that it can be a lexical gap. For example, 
the concept parish - (the local subdivision of a diocese 
committed to one pastor) is a lexical gap in Mongolian. The 
variation in the concept lexicalization from the source 
language (S) to the target language (T) is depicted in Fig. 
8(a). 
 
Figure 8. Variations of concept localization 
As the lexical gap is a feature of the languages, it does 
happen with all of them. There can be a gap also from the 
target to source language. For instance, the Mongolian 
words бууц (buuts) and буйр (buir) are gaps in English. 
The word buuts can be represented in English as an area of 
dried and accumulated manure where a nomadic family was 
living and the word buir can be represented in English as a 
round shaped spot where a nomadic yurt was built. Note 
S 
T 
a) Gap in the Target language 
S 
T 
b) Gap in the source language 
173
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
that these words lack a succinct representation in English. 
Therefore we consider them as gaps. This phenomenon is 
drawn in Fig. 8(b). 
The nomadic lifestyle of Mongolians is the source of 
these concepts that are not used in the English speaking 
cultures across the globe. 
Words pointing to lexical-gap concepts might appear also 
in the glosses. For instance, the term piers appearing in the 
gloss of Romanesque architecture is a lexical gap in 
Mongolian. In such cases, the translation is produced with a 
free combination of words. 
Romanesque architecture – (...characterized by round 
arches and vaults and by the substitution of piers for 
columns and profuse ornament and arcades) 
B. Senses 
In the space ontology, some words have multiple senses 
that have subtle difference in meaning. For instance, the 
word fissure has two senses: 
[S1]:  crack, cleft, crevice, fissure, scissure – (a long 
narrow opening) 
[S2]:  fissure – (a crack associated with volcanism) 
The two concepts associated with the given word are 
hyponyms of continental depression and they can be 
represented with the same word(s) in the target language. 
This phenomenon is shown in Fig. 9(a). 
Polysemous words in the source language might 
correspond to lexical gaps for a subset of senses. For 
instance, gorge has two senses within Space ontology and 
one of them is a gap as depicted in Fig. 9(b), where ‘mn’ 
and ‘en’ denote Mongolian and English, accordingly. 
 
Figure 9. Word sense diversity 
C. Synsets 
Words in a synset can be directly translated into the target 
language. However, for some of them there might be a lack 
of translation. For example, the synset mountain peak (the 
top point of a mountain or hill) has 6 words of which 3 of 
them lack translation into Mongolian as shown below. 
1 peak 
→ оргил (ogril) 
2 crown 
 
3 crest 
 
4 top 
→ орой (oroi) 
5 tip 
 
6 summit → дээд оргил (deed orgil) 
In gloss paraphrasing, some parts of the glosses 
sometimes are obtained using words with a very close or 
similar meaning instead of exact translation. Though our 
first preference is to provide the exact translation, in many 
cases this could not be achieved. The following example 
shows a paraphrased translation where the phrase “near a 
shore” is eliminated from Mongolian version. In this 
situation, there is no difference between bank and shore in 
Mongolian language. 
[in English] oceanic sandbank – a submerged bank of 
sand near a shore, can be exposed at low tide 
[in Mongolian] далайн элсэн эрэг (gl. oceanic bank of 
sand) – шунгаж орсон далайн элсэн эрэг, далайн 
давалгааны намхан хаялганд үзэгддэг (gl. a 
submerged sea bank of sand, visible at low tide) 
Example sentences in glosses were also paraphrased or 
added newly in order to provide a better explanation. For 
example, well-known place names are often substituted in 
the target language because famous names within a culture 
might give better understanding about a concept being 
translated. The highest mountain peak of the Alps ridge is 
Mont Blanc that is substituted with Everest as it is known to 
the most of the people in the East Asian region. Moreover, 
symbols are kept in their original forms, e.g., measurement 
unit symbol, pH. 
Date and time format, measurement unit and currency 
were converted into the ones used regionally. For example, 
5 inches is converted into 12.7 centimeters because of the 
pervasive use of MKS system in Mongolia. Note that these 
types of words appear only in glosses. However, using these 
types of word might not be suitable as fractions are less 
intuitive than whole numbers. For example, 3 feet is 
converted into 0.9144 meters. Such fractions cannot be 
mapped easily to the real world entities and most often 
become tedious to remember. 
VII. RESULTS 
In this section, we report the results of our experiment. 
We could translate 91.88% of the concepts of the space 
ontology into Mongolian and the remaining 8.12% were 
identified as lexical gaps. In Table I, we report the detailed 
statistics of the translation task and the obtained results. 
In Table I, the number of concepts per facet is shown 
separately, e.g., administrative division has 18 concepts, 
agricultural land has 19 concepts and so on. Note that for 
the sake of space, we group the statistics of all attribute 
facets as attribute and relational ones under relation. 
Language Translators provided the Mongolian translation 
for 905 concepts Language Validators provided feedback 
on each of the produced synset words and glosses separately 
that help us achieving better quality. The validation 
procedure identified 188 disagreed words and 243 disagreed 
glosses. Cases such as disagreements and modifications for 
improvement were solved in iterations (as many as needed) 
between the translators and validators until they reached to 
an agreement. The highest number of iterations was 
recorded as 4. 
a) 
b) 
[en] fissure 
S1 
S2 
[en] gorge 
S1 
S2 
[mn] эгц хавцал 
(egts khavtsal) 
[mn] GAP 
[mn] ан цав 
(an tsav) 
174
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
TABLE I. LOCALIZATION RESULT OF THE SPACE DOMAIN 
Facets 
Concepts 
Translated 
Disagreed 
words 
Disagreed 
glosses 
Translator 
Identified 
Gaps 
Finally 
accepted 
Gaps 
Finally 
Localized 
Concepts 
administrative division 
18 
18 
2 
4 
0 
0 
18 
agricultural land 
19 
19 
2 
1 
0 
0 
19 
attribute 
85 
73 
1 
23 
12 
10 
75 
barren land 
7 
7 
1 
0 
0 
0 
7 
facility 
357 
357 
54 
64 
0 
2 
355 
forest 
5 
5 
5 
4 
0 
0 
5 
geological formation 
200 
150 
73 
87 
50 
52 
148 
land 
15 
15 
2 
3 
0 
2 
13 
plain 
12 
12 
0 
0 
0 
3 
9 
rangeland 
8 
8 
1 
4 
0 
0 
8 
region 
46 
44 
6 
0 
2 
2 
44 
relation 
54 
54 
8 
32 
0 
0 
54 
wetland 
8 
8 
3 
1 
0 
0 
8 
abandoned facility 
16 
15 
4 
1 
1 
1 
15 
body of water 
116 
106 
24 
17 
10 
3 
113 
populated place 
13 
10 
2 
1 
3 
2 
11 
seat of government  
6 
4 
0 
1 
2 
2 
4 
Total number of objects 
985 
905 
188 
243 
80 
79 
906 
 
Language Validators’ evaluation of the lexical gaps 
revealed that the translators proposed 10 false positives out 
of 80. We also identified that the translators produced 9 
false positive translations of the concepts whereas they are 
gaps. In the end, we found that there are in total 79 gaps and 
906 concept translations being accepted. The UKC 
Language validator and UKC validator reported a few 
(around 5) conflicts, which were then solved with little 
effort. It is worth mentioning that Language Translators 
proposed to add 7 new concepts to the space ontology. This 
is only initial work and we expect that a few more concepts 
will be added with the evolution of the space ontology. 
VIII. LESSONS LEARNED 
Assigning word sense rank appears as a difficult task to 
accomplish since the Language Translators provide their 
the results indipendently. In the translation work, they were 
aware of the fact that concepts translated by others might 
have the same word label. But it remained obscure until the 
whole translation task was finished. This ranking could be 
defined once all the concepts are translated. This is a non-
trivial task to accomplish because deciding acceptable ranks 
might 
require 
local 
community 
agreement 
or 
the 
consultation of high quality linguistic resources that are 
often insufficient for domain specific tasks in many 
languages. 
Synonymous words within the synsets were often 
increased after translations were evaluated by the Language 
Validators. This was the case since Language Translators 
concentrate in providing the target language correspondence 
representation of the knowledge objects taken from the 
source language within a reasonable amount of time. This 
often results in the postponement of the addition of synsets. 
In the cases where an example sentence in a gloss 
contains a number that has to be converted according to 
some suitable measurement, we should freely change values 
and corresponding units since the numbers always give 
some extra information to provide glosses. For instance, 
6000 meters can be changed to 6 km (while value remains 
same) and 3 kilograms to 3 pounds (while value modifies). 
Nevertheless, in case of sensitive information found in a 
gloss, we should exactly convert the number to relevant 
measurement unit in order to preserve the meaning of the 
gloss. For example, for understandable measuring unit of 
the target users 500 feet can be converted into 152.4 meters. 
Parts of the glosses that follow the same syntactic pattern 
in the source language can be translated with little effort. 
For instance, the gloss part a facility for [verb]+ing [object] 
appeared in around one tenth of the concepts. We repeated 
the same translation for the part that matched completely. 
Moreover, we used the translation memory technique that 
provides a translation with recurrent structure in the same 
way as previous translations. 
In order to introduce foreign cultures to the community, 
we can translate lexical gaps as free combination of words. 
However, this should not always be the case. A first reason 
is computational:  the explicit marking of the lexical gaps 
could support the KB-based applications in reducing 
computation time by avoiding the management of 
(multi)words that will be very rarely or never used. A 
second, more important reason, is related to the actual 
existence of a free combination of words capable of 
capturing, in the mind of a native speaker with no 
knowledge of the original concept (as it exists in the foreign 
culture) what the concept actually means, in the real world. 
IX. 
RELATED WORK 
MultiWordNet [10] consists of several European 
language WordNets. It was developed under a model that 
reuses semantic relations from WordNet as follows:  when 
there are two synsets and a relation holding between them, 
the same relation is assumed to hold between corresponding 
synsets in the new language. There is no literal translation in 
the case of developing Italian version of MultiWordNet of 
the synsets, words and exceptional forms but the 
contributors have produced the best possible Italian 
equivalents according to their skills and experiences in 
knowledge organization and linguistics. However, a limited 
175
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
number of glosses has been provided, e.g., around 2k in 
Italian over 33k. 
The ontology localization activity described in [11] is an 
attempt to address the localization and diversity issues. They 
proposed guidelines and methodologies for enriching 
ontology with multilingual information. However, we differ 
from them with respect to the target language and the 
development approach. 
Universal Multilingual Knowledge Base also known as 
UWN [12] was developed leveraging on the Wikipedia data 
and linking multilingual terms that are connected to the 
same page. However, automatically built KB resources 
often suffer from quality issues, e.g., around 10% of the 
terms in UWN are attached to the wrong senses, whereas we 
achieved human-level accuracy. 
FinnWordNet [5] was produced from WordNet with the 
help of professional translators and the output is monitored 
by bulk validation. While producing the whole WordNet in 
Finish in 100 days, they traded off the quality for reducing 
the amount of translation time. Diversity in the languages 
such as lexical gaps is overlooked in this task. 
Concerning provenance modelling and representation, the 
PROV-O ontology [15] was developed to be used to trace 
resources belonging to any domain. Despite its richness and 
well-coverage in terms of classes and relations, it could 
fulfill our need only partially. 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed an experiment for generating 
ontologies through translation from one language into 
another. This experiment was developed to be applied 
independently of domain and language and to deal with the 
diversity across the languages. While translating the 
ontologies, we identified the various diversity features and 
their presence in a given target language by working 
together with the linguistic experts and/or native speakers 
living in the country where it is spoken. We evaluated the 
effectiveness of the methodology by performing a case 
study for translating the space ontology into Mongolian.  
Thanks to the reuse of the ontological backbone structure, 
we achieved space ontology in Mongolian that is as high 
quality as the original one in English. Though manual 
approach is usually known to be time consuming, adopting 
this methodology in a crowdsourcing setting can help 
increase throughput and make this suitable for dealing with 
large ontologies. We also have presented a provenance 
model for ontology localization tasks to keep track of the 
translators and validators the fact that it helps increase the 
reliability of each single object of the knowledge base. The 
generated ontology can be exploited to improve the 
accuracy of NLP tasks [13] and Concept Search [14] in 
space domain. The Mongolian version of space domain is 
currently in use in the School of Information Technology of 
the National University of Mongolia as background 
knowledge in their NLP pipeline. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
(partially) from the European Community's Seventh 
Framework 
Program 
(FP7/2007-2013) 
under 
grant 
agreement n. 600854 Smart Society: hybrid and diversity-
aware collective adaptive systems: where people meet 
machines to build smarter societies http://www.smart-
society-project.eu/. The experiment described in this paper is 
part of a long term project, whose goal is to create the 
Universal Knowledge Core (UKC), a worldwide multilingual 
linguistic and ontological resource. The work on provenance 
is part of the PhD thesis of the third author. We are thankful 
to Vincenzo Maltese for his valuable feedback. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ganbold, F. Farazi, and F. Giunchiglia. “An Experiment in 
Managing Language Diversity Across Cultures,” in eKNOW 
2014, pp. 51–57. 
[2]  T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic 
Web,” Scientific American, vol. 284, no. 5, 2001, pp. 34–43. 
[3] F. Giunchiglia, V. Maltese, F. Farazi, and D. Biswanath, 
“GeoWordNet: a resource for geo-spatial applications,” in 
ESWC’10, Volume Part I, 2010, no. December 2009, pp. 
121–136. 
[4] F. Giunchiglia, V. Maltese, and D. Biswanath, “Domains and 
context: 
first 
steps 
towards 
managing 
diversity 
in 
knowledge,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents 
on the World Wide Web, vol. 12–13, 2012, pp. 53–63. 
[5] K. Lindén and L. Carlson, “FinnWordNet – Finnish WordNet 
by Translation,” LexicoNordica – Nordic Journal of 
Lexicography, vol. 17, 2010, pp. 119–140. 
[6] F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, V. Maltese, and F. Farazi, “A facet-
based methodology for the construction of a large-scale 
geospatial ontology,” Journal on Data Semantics, vol. 1, no. 
1, 2012, pp. 57–73. 
[7] F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, and V. Maltese, “Faceted 
Lightweight Ontologies,” in in Conceptual Modeling 
Foundations and Applications, vol. 5600, 2009, pp. 36–51. 
[8] F. Giunchiglia, B. Dutta, and V. Maltese, “From Knowledge 
Organization to Knowledge Representation,” in ISKO UK 
Conference, 2013, pp. 44–56. 
[9] M. C. Suárez-Figueroa and A. Gómez-Pérez, “First Attempt 
towards a Standard Glossary of Ontology Engineering 
Terminology,” in TKE08, 2008, pp. 1–15. 
[10] L. Bentivogli and E. Pianta, “Looking for lexical gaps,” in 
EURALEX International Congress, 2000, pp. 663-669. 
[11] M. Espinoza, E. Montiel-Ponsoda, and A. Gómez-Pérez, 
“Ontology localization,” in K-CAP  ’09, 2009, pp. 33-40. 
[12] G. De Melo and G. Weikum, “Towards Universal 
Multilingual Knowledge Bases,” in Principles, construction, 
and applications of multilingual wordnets : proceedings of the 
Fifth Global WordNet Conference, 2010, pp. 149–156. 
[13] I. Zaihrayeu, L. Sun, F. Giunchiglia, W. Pan, Q. Ju, M. Chi, 
and X. Huang, “From Web Directories to Ontologies : Natural 
Language Processing Challenges,” in ISWC’07/ASWC'07, 
2007, no. 60673038, pp. 623–636. 
[14] F. Giunchiglia, U. Kharkevich, and I. Zaihrayeu, “Concept 
search,” The Semantic Web Research and Applications, vol. 
5554/2009, 2009, pp. 429–444. 
[15] T. Lebo, S. Sahoo, D. McGuinness, K. Belhajjame, J. Cheney, 
D. Corsar, D. Garijo, S. Soiland-Reyes, S. Zednik, and J. 
Zhao. PROV-O: The PROV Ontology, 2013, W3C 
Recommendation. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-
prov-o-20130430/.  
176
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

