65
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Gender Differences in IT Adoption & Gestural Communication 
Science Behind Stereotypes & Implications on Human Computer Interaction 
Manolya Kavakli               
Department of Computing, VISOR Research Group, VR Lab, 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
Manolya.Kavakli@mq.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract— This paper reviews gender differences in gestural 
communication and perception of Information Technology (IT) 
and investigates gender differences in basic hand gestures for 
the design of user-centric and gender-adaptive systems. If 
males and females associate themselves differently with 
technology, being masculine and feminine, then this would 
have a strong impact on their adoption of IT and would 
require 
the 
development 
of 
gender-adaptive 
gesture-
recognition systems, devices and applications. In this paper,  
we present empirical studies to demonstrate gender differences 
in the perception of technology as well as gestural 
communication. We have conducted a survey with 20 male and 
20 female participants and found differences in the perception 
of the gender of technology. Our association with IT may be 
driven by the way we identify ourselves with the gender of 
technology. If there are differences in the way we process 
information and males and females use different system 
architectures, then the development of gender-adaptive 
systems would increase the acceptance of technology. We have 
also analysed natural hand gestures to identify what type of 
gestures are used in gestural communication, using video 
analysis and annotation. We have conducted an experiment 
involving 10 male and 10 female Australian adults. We have 
asked the participants to describe an object using hand 
gestures and speech. We have found gender differences in the 
perception of IT, as well as types, frequency and occurrences of 
hand gestures. Drawing conclusions from these comparisons, 
we discuss the potential effects of gender differences in the 
design of multimodal interfaces as well as the necessity of 
developing gender-adaptive systems in Human Computer 
Interaction (HCI).  
 
Keywords- gesture analysis; gender differences; human 
computer interaction; consumer research; perception of 
technology. 
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Gender differences have long been debated in a number of 
disciplines such as education, sociology, psychology, 
neuroscience, and medicine. In this article, we provide a 
debate on this controversial issue and the science behind 
stereotypes. Our goal is to draw parallels between the 
perception of the gender of Information Technology (IT) and 
gender differences in our interest in so-called masculine and 
feminine technologies, as we believe to motivate females’ 
interest in IT, we must start developing feminine 
technologies that females feel more associated with.   
Gender differences in gestural communication [1] have 
been studied by many researchers, leaving much unclear 
regarding the implications on Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI). As shown by Nasser and Kavakli [2], culture has an 
impact on gestures, but these stereotypes may be incorrect. 
Nasser and Kavakli [2] have shown that Anglo-Saxons uses 
gestures more than Latin-Americans but since the frequency 
of gestures is higher in Latin-Americans, this gives an 
impression as if they use more gestures. In fact, Latin-
Americans use faster but less gestures.  
Our aim in this paper is to look into another stereotype 
and 
investigate 
gender 
differences 
in 
gestural 
communication between males and females in order to 
develop personalized 
interfaces. 
To identify 
gender 
differences in the perception of IT as well as gestural 
communication, we defined two hypotheses to test:  
(1) Users’ gender and their computer experience have a 
significant effect on the perception of the gender of IT.  
(2) Gender differences in gestural communication have a 
significant influence on user association and the perceived 
gender of technology and in return these may affect the 
acceptance of technology.  
Our association with IT may be driven by the way we 
identify ourselves with the gender of technology. There may 
be gender differences in the way we process information, as 
well as our perception regarding the masculinity and 
femininity of the technology. If males and females use 
different system architectures to process information, the 
development of gender-adaptive systems would increase the 
acceptance of technology.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section I presents a 
debate on the influence of gender on technology adoption 
and gestural communication in HCI. Section II reviews 
summary of related works regarding gestures and gender 
differences in gestural communication. Section III describes 
the methodologies used. Section IV addresses the survey on 
the perception of IT and the experiments on the use of hand 
gestures. Section V goes into finer details with respect to the 
analysis of the data collected. Section VI presents the 
findings. The conclusions close the article. 

66
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
GENDER DIFFERENCES  IN TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION & 
GESTURAL COMMUNICATION 
In this section, we will look into gender differences 
specifically in IT adoption and gestural communication.  
 
A. The Influence of Gender on IT Adoption 
The influence of gender on IT adoption has received a 
significant amount of attention. In USA, Internet use at 
various locations increased over time among females relative 
to males. In 1997 and 1998, females were less likely to use 
the Internet anywhere or at home than males, but they were 
more likely to do so by 2001 [3]. Among those who work, 
females remained less likely than males to use the Internet at 
work, but the gender gap narrowed over time. People who 
are employed are more likely than the non-employed to use 
the Internet at home or anywhere, else with nonworking 
females the least likely to use the Internet. What drives the 
change in the statistics? Is it the development of feminine 
technologies?  
As stated in previous studies, the uptake of technology 
and acceptance of IT has been relatively slow by female 
users until the introduction of more feminine and gesture-
based technologies such as smart-phones and tablets. Two-
thirds of U.S. consumers own smartphones today [4], with 
slightly more women owning one than men [5]. Does 
association with the gender of technology have anything to 
do with the adoption of technology? This is still an open 
research question.  
Recent statistics show that females use technology 
differently than males [6]. Females not only use social media 
more often than males, but they use it in different ways and 
to access different kinds of information and entertainment. 
For example, females use social media for staying in touch, 
blogging and sharing and researching how-to information, 
while males use social media for business and dating more 
than females do. LinkedIn is the only social platform that 
males use more than females. 
Regarding the differences between males and females on 
the usage of social networks, Tüfekçi [7] similarly found that 
females are more likely to use social networks to keep in 
touch with friends either living nearby or in other schools, 
while males are more likely to use social networks to find 
potential friends and find people with have similar interests 
[8]. However, males tend to make new relationships in social 
networks more than females do. Tüfekçi [7] suggested that 
females are more social than males and they demonstrate 
differences in communication styles. Females use social 
networks, such as Facebook for maintaining existing 
relationships, academic purposes and following agenda more 
than males, while males use Facebook for making new 
relationships at a rate higher than females. 
The gender gap is lessening as more people are exposed 
to using technology, but most researchers support the idea 
that social influences play a much stronger role in 
technology adoption for females than males [9]. Males 
appear to be more strongly influenced by their own attitudes 
toward using new technology, while female’s decisions tend 
to be driven by their perception of others’ beliefs that they 
should or should not adopt the technology [10]. These 
findings are consistent across income, education, and 
computer self-efficacy levels. Similarly, Mazman et al. [29] 
found in 300 prospective teachers (including 234 females 
and 66 males) that the social influence on females were 
significantly higher than males in the use of a technological 
innovation.  
On the other hand, the technology adoption is potentially 
influenced by the tendency of females to assess their 
technical skills lower than males [11]. Regarding the 
adoption of technology, ECAR [9] conducted a survey to 
identify early and later adopters. Mainstream adopters refer 
to the people stating that they usually use new technologies 
when most people they know do. Figure 1 shows that about 
half (49.3%) of the respondents in [9] identify themselves as 
mainstream adopters, while the percentages drop off for 
earlier 
and 
later 
adoption 
categories. 
The 
figure 
demonstrates that 57% of mainstream adopters are females. 
33% of the male respondents see themselves as early 
adopters and 18.7% as innovators (52.0% in total), while 
just a quarter of females (25.6%) choose these categories. 
 
 
Figure 1. Technology adoption by gender [9] 
 
The adoption of new technologies does not only depend 
on the gender, but also other social and cultural 
characteristics. There may be other unobserved non-gender 
differences that may impact adoption such as access and 
quality of resources for females. For example, regarding 

67
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
peanut production in Eastern Uganda, Tanellari et al. [12] 
found that female farmers are less likely to adopt technology 
than male farmers. Furthermore, they found that females 
living in female-headed households are less likely to adopt 
new varieties than females or males living in male-headed 
households. Their analysis reveals that there are different 
dynamics between female and male-headed households 
when it comes to decision making with regard to peanut 
production.  
Studies on the perception of IT show that although males 
and females in the United States have similar experiences 
with computers, females have an advantage in typing [13]. 
Workers in general state that they have more experience with 
computers than non-workers, and, in particular, working 
females have been using computers for more years than 
working men. Nonworking females state that they have less 
experience with computers than working females. However, 
there seems to be no perceived difference in the use of 
computers between nonworking and working men.  
 
B. Gestural Communication 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is a discipline 
concerned with the design, evaluation and implementation of 
interactive computing systems for human use. One of the 
primary goals of HCI is to target the design of user-centric 
and adaptive systems as well as personalization of devices 
and applications. Adaptive systems refer to interactive 
systems adapting their behavior to individual users based on 
the information acquired about them, the context of use and 
the environment. Therefore, personalization of devices and 
applications requires a careful analysis of gender differences 
to be widely accepted by anyone in the community.  
HCI systems have evolved significantly starting from the 
use of mouse input [14] to multimodal systems integrating 
speech recognition, head and eye-tracking technologies, and 
static and dynamic hand gestures. Humans have an inherent 
need to use gestures, as they complement our ideas. To such 
an extent that humans are known to gesture even when 
talking on the phone. Gestures are considered as sign 
languages to externalize human thoughts. 
The level of communication between users and their 
electronic devices has been largely limited to a pointing 
interface. 
As 
computers 
and 
technologies 
become 
increasingly integrated into our lives, the demand for 
technology has increased expanding into new sectors, as seen 
with the new apps and wider use of the smart phones and 
tablets. This brings the emphasis on the richness of 
communication conveyed by gestures as the new media of 
interaction. As a result, computer vision algorithms have 
improved, since the first VideoDesk [15], which was only 
detecting the user’s fingers and thumb. Today, it is possible 
to recognize and respond to the whole body posture [16]. 
Hand posture detection has been used to give commands to 
the computer and robotics systems [17, 18] to give mobility 
to the people in wheelchairs. Hand rotation and movement 
indicate the parameters to give commands to these systems.  
Regarding the individual diﬀerences in cognitive 
processing, controversial views exist. Herlitz et al. [19] state 
that there are gender diﬀerences in verbal, quantitative and 
visuospatial ability in human cognition. A general view is 
that males outperform females on visuospatial tasks and 
females outperform males on verbal ﬂuency. Males show 
signiﬁcantly higher mean scores on the arithmetical 
computations, arithmetical reasoning, and spatial cognition 
[20]. However, some researchers believe that although there 
are gender diﬀerences in our cognitive abilities (verbal, 
quantitative, visuospatial) these are quite small, and 
therefore, insigniﬁcant [21]. How small the gender 
differences in gestural communication and what their effects 
are on multimodal system design remain to be answered.  
It was suggested by Kramer [22] that females more often 
use facial expression and hand gestures to express their 
thoughts than males. Regarding nonverbal communication, 
there are differences between females and males. Females 
use more expressions and nonverbal behaviors than males. 
Females are more skilled at sending and receiving nonverbal 
messages [23]. Males are louder and more interruptive and 
display more nervous, deﬂuent behaviors. The diﬀerences in 
the mean use of hand gestures are also statistically signiﬁcant 
in a social bar setting [24]. Males are likely to use their 
hands to express themselves and they rely on more obvious 
gestures. Females, on the other hand, present more subtle 
gestures and they restrain and exhibit deferential gestures 
[25]. 
Regarding hand preferences, Saucier and Elias [26] 
reveal that the number of gestures made with the right hand 
during speech is signiﬁcantly higher for males, however, 
during listening, the number of gestures made with left hand 
is signiﬁcantly higher. This may imply separate parts of brain 
being employed for processing information for different 
tasks. There is no evidence regarding the females left or right 
handed gestures which are associated with right and left 
sides of brain respectively. However, some other studies 
state there are no significant diﬀerences in the degree of hand 
preference between pointing gestures produced along with 
speech and gestures produced on their own [27]. This 
implies that different parts of brain are used in information 
processing for performing different tasks.  
Cocher and Vauclair 
investigated 
the processes 
underlying gestural communication in children [27] and 
adults [28] by examining hand shapes and hand preference 
patterns associated with different types of gestures. They 
presented 
several 
communicative 
situations 
eliciting 
pointing gestures and symbolic gestures to 81 participants in 
an experiment in [27]. They found some differences in hand 
shapes depending on the function of pointing: contrary to 
results reported in children, the proportion of index-finger 
gestures was higher in imperative situations than in 
declarative situations. The distance between the gesturer and 
the referent was also found to influence hand shapes, 
proximal pointing being more frequently associated with 
index-finger gestures than distal pointing. The comparison 
of hand preferences revealed a greater right-sided 
asymmetry 
for declarative pointing than 
for non-

68
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
communicative activities, whereas there was no difference 
between imperative pointing and non-communicative 
activities, or between symbolic gestures and non-
communicative activities.  
 
Investigation of tangible HCI technologies suggests that 
it is important to be cognisant of gender with respect to the 
interactions they facilitate [30]. However, no specific 
studies address whether any gender diﬀerences are present 
in the use of gestures or hand preferences, while people 
communicate with computer systems.  
 
III. 
GESTURE CLASSIFICATION 
The most recognized classification for hand gestures is 
the one established by McNeill in [31]. McNeill classifies 
gestures as seen in Table I. Gestures have also been 
classified according to their purpose. They could be goal-
oriented (change of position, shape), indirect manipulation 
(set, stop), empty handed gestures (wave, snap, point, take), 
and haptic exploration (touch, stoke, knock).  
 
A. Gesture Types 
McNeill [31] identified the gestures types as summarized 
in Table I. 
  
TABLE I. CLASSIFICATION OF GESTURE TYPES 
 
 
Iconic. Iconic gestures are identified as actual picturing, 
as if drawing. Therefore, if a participant mentions the word 
“square” and draw a square, it is considered an iconic 
gesture. 
Beat. Beat gestures are generated by context and marked 
a gesture or transition. A beat gesture is identified, for 
example, if a person describes the back of a chair and 
stresses staying back and the hands are put a bit forwards. 
These are mainly low energy low kinetic gestures. 
Repetition. Repetition gestures are part of beat gestures, 
but are counted separately.  
 
Deictic. Deictic gestures correspond to pointing, but they 
do not include gestures performed purely with the index 
fingers. Pointing gestures are normally accompanied by 
words like “there” or “left” for example.  
Metaphoric. Metaphoric gestures represent conceptual 
subjects. They may represent an abstract concept such as 
“old” or “retro”. A user would not use these as an actual 
depiction, but they may use them to supplement a word or 
enhance the meaning of another gesture. 
Junk. Junk gestures are identified as gestures without a 
particular meaning. This could be a gesture that the user 
takes back (a “mistake”) or some transition movements.  
 
B. Gesture Segmentation 
 
      The technique mostly used for gesture analysis is gesture 
and speech alignment. In practice, gestures are identified as 
atomic parts or as a sequence of hand shape [32] (the latter 
being harder to measure). Normally, the gesture coders are 
guided by the endpoint localization to perform the 
segmentation and recognition. The reality is that the spatio-
temporal variation comes from the fact that not only do 
different people move in different ways, but also even 
repeated motions by the same subject may vary [33]. The 
issues here are speed and endpoints, making it challenging 
to know when a gesture ends and when another begins.  
Within different technologies, there are different methods 
for detecting a candidate cut. For example, in video games 
they are based on three criteria: abnormal velocity, a static 
gesture, and severe curvature [34]. Li and Greenspan [33] 
focus on how the endpoints are located asking participants 
to repeat various actions several times in order to document 
the variances. These variances, they claim, are useful for 
identifying the range of a given gesture, and therefore a 
better identification. This way, to build a gesture model, a 
gesture representation must be repeated at a single moderate 
speed.  Gesture model does not have to be perfect. 
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This 
section 
covers 
the 
explanations 
of 
the 
methodologies we used in the project. The methodology used 
for counting gesture frequency, types and occurrence is the 
same as the methodology used in [2] for addressing cultural 
stereotypes in gestural communication. Nasser and Kavakli 
[2] stated that the culture has an impact on the frequency, 
types and occurrences of certain gestures and this could be 
explained by Hofstede’s  cultural dimensions [35]. This 
methodology was also used by Kavakli and Chen [1] and Liu 
and Kavakli [36] for addressing gender differences in 
information and cognitive processing respectively. 
 
A. Survey 
The goal of the survey is to explore the gender 
differences in the perception of Information Technology 
(IT). This survey was carried out in the early stages of the 
project to help us understand the general perception of males 
and females regarding IT. 20 participants joined our survey 
on the perception of IT. The age range of participants was 
25-30 years old. They came from Asian and Australian 
backgrounds. They were either professional or university 
students.  For the purpose of this survey, we collected the 
results from the participants based on 21 questions regarding 
their perception of using electronic devices in their daily 
lives as well as internet usage. 

69
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Video Analysis 
We used the video annotation tool ANVIL [37] for video 
analysis. ANVIL offers multi-layered annotation based on a 
user-defined coding scheme (Figure 2). Special features 
offered by ANVIL are the tracks for time stamp, coding 
facilities on video footages and a project tool for managing a 
collection of annotation files. Gestures are separated by 
pauses. A pause is defined as a temporary stop in action or 
speech. The purpose of this pause is to eliminate the period 
of inactivity from the actual gesture time. This pause could 
appear at the beginning of a video, when the participant 
explains what he or she might do, or when the participant 
states that he or she has ended the action. ANVIL permits the 
creation of a track on the time line where gestures are 
segmented and coded. 
 
Figure 2. ANVIL annotation track 
 
In video analysis, we used the gesture classification 
defined by McNeill [31] as used in [1] and Table I. All 
participants used words to accompany their gestures, even if 
they were not instructed to do so. 
 
C. Experiments 
18 participants including 8 males and 10 females joined 
the experiment. The participants were divided into two 
groups. The participants were the ones who did the survey 
before the experiment. Their age range was 25-30 years old. 
They were from Australian or Asian backgrounds. The 
participants were either employed or unemployed.  We have 
chosen a group of males and females with English as their 
native language. We explained the task to the participants. 
They were asked to describe a particular object (Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3. A snapshot from the experiments 
We used a camera to record each participant. During the 
experiment, all participants were given the task to describe a 
chair, the participants were also instructed to describe the 
chair as if they were describing the object to someone who 
cannot see it as if they were in a videoconferencing session. 
They were encouraged to use both hands and as many 
gestures as possible.  
 
V. 
RESULTS 
This section covers the results of survey and experiments. 
 
A. Survey Results and Demographics 
Analysing the survey, we found that all male participants 
perceive themselves as having more experience with 
computers than female participants. According to Table II, 
80% of male participants state that they have more than 10 
years of experience in using IT, while the rest opts for 6-9 
years. The trend is reverse in females with 86% stating that 
they have 6-9 years of experience in using IT and 13% with 
more than 10 years. According to Table  II, either males start 
using technological devices perhaps earlier than females or 
they consider themselves having higher level of computer 
experience than females. 
 
TABLE II. PERCEIVED COMPUTER EXPERIENCE 
 
 
 
As seen in Table III, most females consider themselves 
as beginners in computer use (92%), which indicates that 
they use computers at a basic level, such as internet browsing, 
typing etc. However, most males (92%) consider themselves 
as intermediate or professional users of computer.  
.   
TABLE III. PERCEIVED COMPUTER SKILLS 
 
 
According to Table IV, 53.3% of males spend more than 
6 hours on a computer each day; however, none of the 
females opts for that. At most, 33.3% of females spend 4-6 
hours on a computer each day. This daily experience of using 
computers seems to have a significant influence on the 
perception of IT. Perhaps, as a result of this, males feel more 
confident in using computers than females or at least they 
state that it is the case. 

70
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE IV. COMPUTER TIME 
 
 
More interestingly, we asked participants in the survey 
what the gender of their IT device is (i.e., desktop, mobile, 
laptop or tablet, and the internet) and compared the responses 
of females to males. Table V demonsrates the perceived 
gender of IT device overall including males and females. 
According to this table, while desktop computers seem to be 
perceived as a more masculine technology (43.3%), mobile 
phones are perceived more feminine (50%). Laptops have no 
gender (68%), neither does the Internet (73%). 
 
TABLE V. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE 
 
However, when comparisons are drawn between males 
and females as in Table VI and Table VII, we found that 
there are gender differences in the perception of the gender 
of IT. We found that all male participants consider the 
internet with no gender at all. Majority of males think that 
their IT device has no gender. Still, if there is a gender 
associated with it, their desktop is masculine (40%), but 
mobile phones (20%) and laptops are feminine technologies 
(14.2%) for males. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE BY MALES 
 
 
 
More than 86.6% of females think that their desktop has 
a gender (while more than half of these think that their 
desktop is masculine, the other half think that it is feminine).  
Their perception of mobile technology is primarily feminine 
(80%), but their laptop (36.3%) and Internet (33.3%) are 
partially feminine, while majority of them think that their 
laptop and internet has no gender. 
 
 
TABLE VII. PERCEIVED GENDER OF IT DEVICE BY FEMALES 
  
 
 
These findings imply that males show a tendency to 
objectify the technology and they do not seem to see the 
personality or gender behind their IT device. For them, an IT 
device is an object and nothing more than that. Whereas a 
large proportion of females seem to perceive a personality 
and gender associated with their IT device. These differences 
between males and females may be the driving force behind 
their use of technology. 
 
B. Video Analysis Results 
We used ANVIL video annotation tool to analyse the 
video records of the experiments. We used seconds as the 
measuring unit for time. In total, we collected 8 males and 10 
females’ gestures, but only the ones with better expression 
and comprehension of the task were chosen for analysis. 
Therefore, the final selection was 5 for each gender group. 
There are a total of 157 gestures in this experiment.  
In 5 male participants, the average duration of video is 
1min 28 sec and the longest video footage is 1:50 minutes.  
The total number of gestures in the video records is 72. Male 
participants used only 4 gesture types in the description of 
the chair in our experiment. According to Figure 4, the use of 
iconic gesture type is 50%, then followed by deictic, junk 
and beat gesture types. We found higher number of deictic 
and junk gestures 17% each in males video protocols. We 
also found that male participants did not use metaphoric 
gestures during the description, and only 3 males performed 
a metaphoric gesture. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Gesture types used by males 
 
In female participants, the average duration of video is 1 
min 48 sec and the longest video is 2:10 minutes. The total 
number of gestures in the video is 84. Female participants 

71
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
used all 7 types of gestures in the description of the chair in 
our experiment. According to Figure 5, the iconic gestures 
were more than 56% in the females’ video records, followed 
by deictic, junk metaphoric, repetition and junk gestures. The 
beat gestures are used the least by females. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Gesture types used by females 
 
 
C. Comparative Analysis 
The most significant finding in both genders for a gesture 
based interface design is the ratio of iconic gestures as these 
are the most frequent gesture types in both protocols (50% 
for males and 56% for females). Both males and females use 
junk gestures but the portion of junk gestures is smaller in 
females (11% vs 17%). Comparing Figure 4 and Figure 5, 
we found that male participants only use 4 types’ gestures 
out of 7. However, females make use of all 7 types. Some 
female participants would even use metaphoric gestures. We 
found that females are more diversified compared to males in 
their gesture types. Table VIII presents comparative analysis 
results.  
 
TABLE VIII. COMPARISONS 
 
 
Analysing the results in Table VIII, we found that 
females use more gestures in a longer period (84 vs 72 
gestures and 1:48 vs 1:28 seconds on average). The 
frequency of gestures is higher in females (2.39 vs 1.78). On 
the other hand, males perform less number of gestures in a 
shorter time frame (25.6 sec vs 40.2sec). The total duration 
of video is larger in female participants. The video records 
comprise both gestures and speech. Females’ descriptions 
are longer. The total gesture time is nearly as twice as male 
participants in females.  
Detailed description of the abbreviations defined in Table 
VI can be listed as follows as in Nasser and Kavakli [2]: 
Total video duration: The total video duration is 
measured as the sum of total duration of each participant. 
Average video duration: The average video duration is 
measured as the number of total video duration divided by 
the number of the participants.   
Total number of gestures: The total number of gestures 
is measured as the sum of the total gestures of each 
participant used in the video.  
Average gestures per participant: The average gesture 
per participants is measured as the number of total gestures 
performed by the participants divided by the number of the 
participants. This way we get the average gestures 
performance for each gender. 
Total gesture time: The total gesture time in the video 
records. 
Average gesture time: The average gesture time is 
measured as the number of total gesture time divided by the 
number of the participants.  
Frequency: The frequency is measured as the number of 
gestures performed by a participant divided by the gesture 
time period of the same participant. This way we get the 
gestures per second and it will help assess speed of gesture 
performance and point out what gestures are most significant 
for the gesture recognition system. 
 
D. Structural Analysis Results 
To analyse gender differences in the functional 
description of a chair, we divided the sample chair into 
different parts (Figure 6): seat, back, bars and legs. Each 
part is connected to another part. In Figure 6, we found 
gender differences in the descriptions of the functional parts 
of a chair. Functional parts of a chair were described before 
in [38]. In [38], Kavakli et al. found that chairs are 
externalized and drawn by fine arts students using a 
functional description as a mental image. 
 
Figure 6. Parts of a chair as used in [38] 
 

72
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The number of males and females describing the specific 
parts of the chair is demonstrated in Figure 7 following a 
part based description. Overall, 2 males vs 3 females 
describe Part1, 3 males vs 1 female Part2,   2 males vs 4 
females Part4 and 5, 0 males vs 4 females Part5 and 6, 1 
male vs 4 females Part6 and 7, 2 males vs 5 females Part8 
and 9, 0 males vs 4 females Part9 and 10, and 0 males vs 4 
females Part10 and 11. We found referral to 10 parts of the 
chair in males vs 29 in females. 
We also observed that females’ seem to more 
systematically refer to a structural description in their 
description. For example, first they tend to describe the leg 
followed by the other legs, then they start pointing out the 
rungs, the seat and back of the chair. However, males’ 
description of these functional parts is random.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. Number of participants describing functional parts of a chair  
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our motivation to examine gender diﬀerences originates 
from ubiquitous system development for gesture recognition 
[16] suggesting the use of gender-adaptive systems in HCI 
[36]. Gender diﬀerences found in psychology, computer 
science, marketing, neuroscience, education, and economics 
that strongly suggest that males and females solve problems, 
communicate, and process information diﬀerently. In this 
study, we defined two hypotheses to test:  
(1) Users’ gender and their computer experience have a 
significant effect on the perception of the gender of IT.  
(2) Gender differences in gestural communication have a 
significant influence on user association and the perceived 
gender of technology and in return these may affect the 
acceptance of technology.  
Regarding Hypothesis 1, there are gender differences in 
the perception of the gender of IT. While desktop computers 
seem to be perceived as a more masculine technology 
(43.3%), mobile phones are perceived more feminine (50%). 
Laptops have no gender (68%), neither does the Internet 
(73%). When comparisons are drawn between males and 
females, all male participants consider the Internet with no 
gender at all. Majority of males think that their IT device has 
no gender. Still, if there is a gender associated with it, 
desktop is masculine (40%), mobile phone (20%) and laptop 
are feminine technologies (14.2%). On the contrary, more 
than 86.6% of females think that their desktop has a gender. 
Their perception of mobile technology is primarily feminine 
(80%) but their laptop (36.3%) and internet (33.3%) are 
partially feminine, while majority of them think that their 
laptop and internet has no gender.  
These findings imply that while males show a tendency 
to objectify the technology, and do not seem to expect to find 
a personality or gender behind their IT device, a large 
proportion of females seem to perceive a personality and 
gender associated with their IT device. These differences 
between males and females may be the driving force behind 
their adoption of IT.   
We also found that 53.3% of males spend more than 6 
hours on a computer each day, however, only 33.3% of 
females spend 4- 6 hours on a computer each day. Perhaps, 
as a result of this, most females consider themselves as 
beginners in computer use (92%), however, most males 
(92%) consider themselves as intermediate or professional 
users of computer. 
Regarding Hypothesis 2, there are gender differences in 
the use of gestures. We found male participants only use 4 
types’ gestures out of 7. However, females make use of all 7 
types. Females seem to be more diversified compared to 
males in their gesture types. We found higher number of 
deictic and junk gestures (17% each) in males’ video 
protocols, as well as no use of metaphoric gestures. Iconic 
gestures are the most frequently used gestures in both 
protocols (50% for males and 56% for females). The beat 
gestures are used the least by females. Both males and 
females use plenty of junk gestures but the portion of junk 
gestures is smaller in females (11% vs 17%). Females use 
more gestures in a longer period (84 vs 72 gestures and 1:48 
vs 1:28 seconds on average). Frequency of gestures is higher 
in females (2.39 vs 1.78).  
We also found gender differences in the functional 
description of a chair, referring to differences in mental 
imagery. Females refer to functional parts 3 times as much as 
males. This implies that males and females may employ 
different cognitive processing methods. Females tend to 
describe the chairs following a part based description and 
referring to a structural description. However, males’ 
description of these functional parts seems to be random.  
User association with IT may be driven by the way 
humans process information. If there are gender differences 
in the way we process information and males and females 
use different system architectures, then the development of 
gender-adaptive systems would increase the acceptance of 
technology. 
There is also supporting evidence in behavioral research 
that there are gender differences in cognitive spatial abilities 
[39-41]. These may directly impact the ability to perceive, 
interpret, and cognitively process spatial properties and 
spatial relationships of visual objects [42]. Males have less 
computer anxiety [43]. Future research studies should 
investigate not only psychological but also physiological 
aspects of gender differences in information processing. In 
this article, we have presented that these differences may be 
the reason for females being not so interested in a masculine 

73
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
technology. To motivate females’ interest in IT, we must 
start developing feminine technologies that females feel 
more associated with as demonstrated in this article.   
It is important to state that these are only pilot studies. 
Future studies require a larger sample size and must focus on 
the consistency of the annotations using independent coders.  
It would be useful to collect psycho-physiological 
feedback to verify these results, such as EEG data sets. 
Further, research may also investigate the combined effects 
of gender and culture on gesture performance. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Australian Research 
Council Discovery grant (ARC DP0988088) titled “Gesture 
Recognition in Virtual Reality”.  The author is thankful for 
the contributions of Dr Jing Liu and Y.L. Chen in data 
collection, data sharing, and analysis. This paper is an 
extended version of the paper submitted to CENTRIC 2014 
titled “Gender Differences in Gesture-based Interaction” by 
Kavakli & Chen [1]. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Kavakli and Y.L. Chen, “Gender Differences in Gesture-
based Interaction,” In Proc. CENTRIC 2014, The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and 
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, pp. 
15-21, October 12 - 16, 2014 - Nice, France 
[2] K. Nasser and M. Kavakli, “Influence of Culture in 
Multimodal Interfaces: Differences in Gesture behavior 
between Anglo-Celtic and Latin Americans,” the International 
Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, v 4 n 3&4, pp. 1-10, 
2012. 
[3] M. Volman, E. Eck, I. Heemskerk, and E. Kuiper, “New 
technologies, new differences,” Gender and ethnic differences 
in pupils’ use of ICT in primary and secondary education. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2004.03.001, 2004. 
[4] http://mashable.com/2014/02/13/smartphone-us-adoption/ last 
accessed on 14th Sep 2015. 
[5] http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2014/mobile-
millennials-over-85-percent-of-generation-y-owns-
smartphones.html last accessed on 14th Sep 2015. 
[6] https://www.marketingtechblog.com/women-men-use-social-
media-mobile-differently/ last accessed on 14th Sep 2015. 
[7] S.G. Mazman and Y. Usluel, “Gender differences in using 
social networks,” The Turkish Online Journal of Educational 
Technology, April, Vol.10, Issue 2, 2011. 
[8] H. Ono, and M. Zavodny, “Gender differences in information 
technology usage: A U.S – Japan comparison,” Sociological 
Perspectives, Vol.48, Issue 1, 2005. 
[9] ECAR 
Research 
Study, 
“Technology 
Adoption 
and 
Ownership of IT, Students and Information Technology,” 
Educase Center for Applied Research, pp. 1-17, 2010. 
[10] V. Venkatesh, M.G. Morris, and P.L.Ackerman, “A 
Longitudinal Field Investigation of Gender Differences in 
Individual 
Technology 
Adoption 
Decision-Making 
Processes,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes 83, no. 1, pp. 33–60, September 2000. 
[11]  E. Hargittai and S. Shafer, “Differences in Actual and 
Perceived Online Skills: The Role of Gender,” Social Science 
Quarterly 87, no. 2, June 2006.  
[12] E. Tanellari, G. Kostandini, and J. Bonabana. “Gender 
Impacts on Adoption of New Technologies: Evidence from 
Uganda,” 2013 SouthernAgricultural Economic Association 
annual meeting, Orlando Florida, February 2-5, 2013.  
[13] D. Gefen, and D. Straub, “Gender Differences in the 
Perception and Use of E-mail: An Extension to the 
Technology Acceptance Model,” MIS Quarterly, 1997, pp. 
389-400. 
[14] M. Gullberg, “Methodological reflections on gesture analysis 
in second language acquisition and bilingualism research,” 
Second Language Research 26,1, pp. 75–102, 2010.  
[15] M. W. Kruger, “Environmental technology: Making the real 
world virtual”, Commun.ACM 36, 7 (July), pp. 36 –37, 1993. 
[16] M. Kavakli, “Gesture Recognition in Virtual Reality, Special 
Issue on: “Immersive Virtual, Mixed, or Augmented Reality 
Art,” 
The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Arts 
and 
Technology  (IJART), ISSN (Online): 1754-8861 - ISSN 
(Print): 1754-8853, Vol 1, No 2, 215-229, 2008. 
[17] A. Boyali, and M. Kavakli, “Robust Gesture Recognition for 
wearable 
garments,” 
MMEDIA 
2012: 
The 
Fourth 
International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia, 
Chamonix/ Mont Blanc, France, April 29-May 4th 2012, 1-6, 
2012. 
[18] T. Gulrez, M. Kavakli, and A. Tognetti, “Decoding 2D 
Kinematics of Human Arm for Body Machine Interfaces,” 
ICIEA 2013: The 8th IEEE Conference on Industrial 
Electronics and Applications, Melbourne, 1-4, 19 – 21 June 
2013. 
[19] A. Herlitz, L.G. Nilsson, and L. Backman, “Gender 
diﬀerences in episodic memory,” Memory & cognition 25(6), 
pp. 801, 1997. 
[20] D. C. Geary, S. J. Saults, F. Liu, and M. K. Hoard, “Sex 
diﬀerences in spatial cognition, computational ﬂuency, and 
arithmetical reasoning,” Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology 77(4), pp. 337, 2000. 
[21] J. S. Hyde, E. Fennema, and S .J. Lamon, “Gender diﬀerences 
in mathematics performance: a meta-analysis,” Psychological 
bulletin 107(2), pp. 139, 1990. 
[22] C. Kramer, “Perceptions of female and male speech,” 
Language and Speech 20 (2), pp. 151, 1977. 
[23] N. Briton and J. Hall, “Beliefs about female and male 
nonverbal communication,” Sex Roles 32(1),  pp. 79, 1995. 
[24] E. 
V. 
College, 
“Gender 
difference 
in 
nonverbal 
communication”, 
 
http://evc-
cit.info/psych018/observation_samples/observation9028.pdf  
last accessed on 1st August 2014. 
[25] J. Freeman, “Women: A feminist perspective,” (4th ed) 
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 1992, 
pp. 329–46. 
[26] D. M. Saucier and L. J. Elias. “Lateral and sex diﬀerences in 
manual gesture during conversation,” Laterality: Asymmetries 
of Body, Brain and Cognition 6 (3), pp. 239, 2001. 
[27] H. Cochet and J. Vauclair, “Hand preferences in human 
adults: Non-communicative actions versus communicative 
gestures,” Cortex 48(8), pp. 1017-1026, 2012. 
[28] H. Cochet, and J. Vauclair, “Deictic gestures and symbolic 
gestures produced by adults in an experimental context: Hand 
shapes and hand preferences,” Laterality, Vol. 19, No. 3, 278-
301, 2014. 
[29] S. G. Mazman, Y. Koçak Usluel, and V. Çevik, “Social 
Influence in the Adoption Process and Usage of Innovation: 
Gender 
Differences,” 
World 
Academy 
of 
Science, 
Engineering and Technology, no. 49, pp. 409–412, January 
2009. 
[30] J. Brewer, A. Bassoli, “Reﬂections of gender, reﬂections on 
gender: Designing ubiquitous computing technologies,” In 

74
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Gender & Interaction: Real and Virtual Women in a Male 
World, Workshop at AVI, pp. 9–12, 2006. 
[31] D. McNeill, “Hand and Mind: what Gestures Reveal about 
Thought,” University of Chicago Press, 1992. 
[32] W. Fikkert, P. Van der Vet, G. Van der Ver, and A. Nijholt, 
“Gestures for large display control . Computer Interaction,” 
8th International Gesture Workshop, Revised Selected Papers. 
Germany: Springer, pp. 245-256, 2009.   
[33] H. Li, and M. Greenspan, “Model-based segmentation and 
recognition of dynamic gestures in continuous video streams,” 
Pattern Recognition, 44, pp. 1614-1628 Retrieved from 
ScienceDirect Database, 2011. 
[34] H. Kang, C. Lee, and K. Jung, “Recognition-based gesture 
spotting in video games,” Pattern Recognition Letters 25, 15, 
pp. 1701-1714. DOI:10.1016/j.patrec.2004.06.016, 2004. 
[35] G. H. Hofstede,  and G. J. Hofstede. Minkov Michael In: 
Cultures and organizations: software of the mind : 
intercultural cooperation and its importance for survival. (3rd 
ed) 
McGraw-Hill 
Professional 
ISBN 
0071664181, 
9780071664189, 2010. 
[36] J. Liu, and M. Kavakli, “Towards Accommodating Gender 
Differences in Speech-Gesture Based Multimodal Interfaces 
Design,” ICITA 2013, 8th International Conference on 
Information Technology and Applications, Sydney, Australia, 
1 - 4 July, pp.1-6, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[37] Anvil, http://www.anvil-software.org/, 2014 last accessed on 
1st August 2014. 
[38] M. Kavakli, S.A.R. Scrivener, and L.J. Ball, “Structure in idea 
sketching behaviour,” Design Studies: The International 
Journal for Design Research in Engineering, Architecture, 
Products and Systems, ELSEVIER, 19(4),  485-517, 1998. 
[39] D. Kimura, E. Hampson, “Neural and hormonal mechanisms 
mediating sex differences in cognition,” In P. A. Vernon 
(Ed.),Bio- logical approaches to human intelligence.Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex., 1992. 
[40] M.C.Linn, 
and 
A.C. 
Peterson, 
“Emergence 
and 
characterizationof sex differences in spatial ability: A meta-
analysis,” Child Development, 56, pp. 1479−1498, 1985. 
[41] D. Voyer, S. Voyer, and M. P. Bryden, “‘Magnitude of sex 
differences 
in 
spatial 
ability: 
A 
meta-analysis 
and 
consideration of critical variables,” Psychological Bulletin, , 
117, pp. 250−270, 1995. 
[42] C. Van Slyke, and M. Khosrow-Pour, (Eds.) “Information 
Communication Technologies: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools and Applications,” 2008. 
[43] A. Broos, “Gender and Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) Anxiety: Male Self-A ssurance and 
Female Hesitation,” CyberPsychology & Behavior 8, no. 1, 
2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

