40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Extended View on Benefits and Barriers of Ambient Assisted Living Solutions 
 
Christina Jaschinski1,2 and Somaya Ben Allouch1 
Research Group Technology, Health & Care  
Saxion University of Applied Sciences1
 , University of Twente2  
Enschede, The Netherlands 
{c.jaschinski, s.benallouch}@saxion.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract— Motivated by the older adults’ desire to age in their 
trusted home environment and the increasing financial 
pressure on the healthcare system, Ambient Assisted Living 
(AAL) technologies are designed to facilitate healthy and 
autonomous aging in place. To aid the acceptance of these still 
immature technologies, one first need to understand how 
prospective users perceive AAL technologies. Following this 
objective two studies were conducted. Study I contains an 
extensive literature of 26 AAL papers, which resulted in eight 
benefit categories and ten barrier categories. Study II 
attempted to validate and specify these benefits for a 
conceptual AAL application called SONOPA (Social Networks 
for Older Adults to Promote an Active Life). Focus groups and 
interviews were conducted with older adults and elder care 
professionals in Belgium, France and the UK. The results of 
these studies were translated into several design guidelines for 
SONOPA and related AAL applications. 
Keywords-Ambient 
Assisted 
Living; 
elderly; 
benefits; 
barriers; design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
With the rapid increase of Ambient Assisted Living 
projects, we need to put more focus on how these 
applications are perceived by their prospective users. Initial 
insights on this topic were presented at AMBIENT 2014 [1]. 
The current paper forms an extension to this paper and 
provides an extended view on the benefits and barriers of 
AAL technologies. 
 Worldwide the proportion of elderly people is 
increasing. With 18.2% of the population being 65 years or 
older in 2013, Europe has one of the highest shares of elderly 
people in the world [2]. It is expected that this proportion 
will rise to almost 30% by 2050 [3]. This goes along with a 
sharp increase in the old-age dependency ratio, meaning that 
the number of potential recipients of health and pension 
funds rises (65 years and older), while the number of 
potential providers of funds belonging to the working age 
population (15-64 years), continues to decline [3][4]. While 
global aging can be considered as a great accomplishment of 
today’s socially and technologically advanced culture, it 
creates immense challenges for governments in terms of 
healthcare regulations, pension schemes and state budgets 
[3].  
A. AAL Technologies 
To meet these challenges, the concept of AAL was 
introduced. AAL is an umbrella term for innovative 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) based 
products, services and systems, which support healthy and 
active aging at home, the community and at work [5]. AAL 
technologies cover a broad field of applications including 
smart homes, assistive robotics and mobile and wearable 
sensors. Various algorithms and computational techniques 
such as activity recognition, context modeling, location 
identification, planning and anomaly detection are used to 
support the older adults’ physical (e.g., detecting falls, 
medication reminders) and psychological well-being (e.g., 
facilitate interaction with peers and family members) [6]. By 
promoting a healthy and autonomous lifestyle, AAL 
technologies meet both the older adults’ desire to remain 
independent and age in place and the demand for controlling 
healthcare cost [7][8]. 
Despite the fact that AAL technologies offer a promising 
perspective on independent aging, it is uncertain if older 
adults are ready to adopt and use these technologies [9][10]. 
Usability problems [8][11], the lack of perceived benefits 
[7][10][12] and self-efficacy [10][13] can form, among other 
factors, severe barriers to technology adoption among elderly 
people. In addition, older adults form a highly divers target 
group with regard to their health, activeness, social 
involvement and technological skills [9]. In our view, this 
heightens the need for a user-centered approach when 
designing AAL technologies, to access the wishes and needs 
of the intended user and identify potential benefits and 
barriers at an early stage of development. 
B.  SONOPA Project 
The presented work is part of the SONOPA project [14] 
which is carried out in the framework of the AAL Joint 
Programme. The aim of the SONOPA project is to empower 
elders to stay active, autonomous and socially connected and 
consequently support and unburden family caregivers. 
SONOPA will achieve this objective by combining a social 
network with activity recognition techniques in a smart home 
environment to stimulate and support activities and daily life 
tasks. The SONOPA system consists of three major 
subcomponents (see Figure 1). Firstly, a simplified smart 
home environment for providing assistance to the older 
adults and obtain information about their activities.  

41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1. SONOPA System Architecture 
Secondly, a module for intelligent behavior analysis which 
derives activity information from raw sensor data and finally, 
the social network application which manages the 
communications between users and their caregivers, and 
promotes activities. All these components communicate via a 
WLAN network setup in the home environment. The 
behavior analysis module, user interface and the middleware 
which connects with the social network are installed on a 
computer at the user’s home – the SONOPA controller. The 
controller will collect the sensor data received from the 
visual sensors and passive infrared sensors. The user 
interacts with the smart home environment and the social 
network through the audio/video calling system and the 
smart wall displays. The smart wall displays are a touch-
enabled display that provides spontaneous communication in 
any room in the home. The video messaging system enables 
a rich communication between the elder and their friends, 
relatives and caregivers. The SONOPA controller provides 
access to the social network application hosted in the cloud, 
which connects the different homes of the elders in the 
neighborhood.  
C. Overview  
In this paper, several design guidelines for AAL 
technologies are identified. Findings are based on both 
insights from an extensive literature study (study I) and a 
user-requirement study conducted as part of the SONOPA 
project (study II). Section II provides an overview of the 
conducted literature study. The design of the user-
requirement study is described in Section III. The combined 
results of both studies with regard to the perceived benefits 
and perceived barriers of assisted living technologies are 
described in Section III. Together, these insights led to 
several design guidelines, that are directive for the 
development process of SONOPA and related AAL 
applications. These guidelines are described in Section IV. 
Section V provides general conclusions and implications for 
the future work with regard to the SONOPA system and 
related AAL technologies. 
II. 
STUDY I: LITERATURE STUDY  
To get an insight in the perceived benefits and barriers of 
AAL technologies, relevant literature about AAL and related 
technology applications designed for the purpose of healthy 
and active aging in place was reviewed. We searched several 
scientific databases (Scopus, Web of Science, Google 
Scholar) with keywords such as ‘older adult’, ‘assistive 
technology’, ‘(ambient) assisted living’, ‘smart home’ 
‘robots’ ‘monitoring’, ‘independent’, ‘adoption’, ‘use’ or 
synonyms of these words. After initial screening of titles and 
abstracts, we included (n = 26) papers applying the following 
criteria : 
 
Peer – reviewed 
 
English language 
 
Published between 2000 - 2015 
 
Systematic review, qualitative study, quantitative 
study or mixed method approach 
 
Research focusing on factors which influence the 
adoption and use of technology applications 
designed for healthy and active aging 
 
The selected papers studied different AAL applications 
such as sensor and monitoring technologies (n = 11), social 
network applications (n = 2), domestic robots (n = 3), smart 
health technologies (n = 1), an intelligent mobility aid (n = 1) 
or the more general concept of technologies for aging in 
place (n = 8) (see Appendix I). With a few exceptions, 
participants in the sample were aged above 60. The sample 
size ranged from 1-1518. Some of the included studies 
focused on older adults in good health, while other studies 
included participant with physical and cognitive limitations. 
Accordingly, the living situation of the sampled participants 
varied as well. Several studies (n = 10) also included the 
perspective of informal caregivers and health care 
professionals. 
While 
some 
studies 
investigated 
the 
technology in a more conceptual phase, some technologies 
(mostly prototypes) were tested in the field. We also 
included two systematic reviews. The selected studies were 
conducted in the US (n = 12), EU (n = 10), Australia (n = 1) 
and Canada (n = 1). 
We extracted the perceived benefits and barriers from the 
selected papers and grouped them into categories. 
Consequently, eight benefit categories and ten barrier 
categories for AAL technologies could be identified. 
III. 
STUDY II: USER-REQUIREMENT STUDY 
To evaluate the perceived benefits and barriers identified 
from the literature study in the context of the SONOPA 
technology, a user-requirement study with older adults and 
elder care professionals was conducted. 
Three focus groups (UK: n = 8; FR: n = 5; BE: n = 9) and 
semi-structured interviews (n = 21) were conducted in the 
UK, France and Belgium. In total, 28 older adults aged 
between 55 and 86 (M = 71.36, SD = 9.45) participated in 
the study. Six older adults participated in both focus-groups 
and in-depth interviews. Of all participants, twelve were 
male and sixteen were female. Nine participants lived on 
their own, while the other participants lived with a partner, 
family members or a friend. The older adults lived 
independently and without the regular help of a formal or an 
informal caregiver. A few seniors depended on their family 
members or external help for certain chores such as cleaning, 
Multicast 
Address
UDP
UDP
JSON
HOME 1
HOME 2
HOME 3
Activity & 
Recommendation 
Algorithms
SONOPA 
Local Apps
HTTP REST 
interface
SONOPA 
Controller
Data 
Base
Social Network
Data 
Base
INTERNET
HTTP REST 
Interface Wrapper
Smart Displays
HTTP REST 
Interface Wrapper
PIR Sensors
4
HTTP REST 
Interface Wrapper
Visual Sensors
SONOPA 
Social Apps
Matching 
Algortihm
 

42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
transport, grocery shopping or gardening. Although their 
self-reported physical well-being showed some variation, the 
majority felt fairly healthy. Overall, participants also felt 
fairly active, ranking their own activity level at an average of 
7.06 (SD = 2.07) on a 10-point scale. Moreover, the majority 
of the older adults felt socially involved, ranking their own 
level of social involvement at an average of 7.32 (SD = 1,59) 
on a 10-point scale. 
The Belgium focus group was conducted with four male 
and five female elder care professionals. The professionals 
were aged between 36 and 61 years (M = 46.50, SD = 9.89) 
and had an average of M = 14.44 years of work experience in 
the care sector (SD = 6.32).  
A video was used to visualize two potential user-
scenarios of the future SONOPA technology. Subsequent 
questions targeted the following topics: 
 
Problems related to ADLs and the level of social 
involvement 
 
Opinion about the SONOPA solution 
 
General level of technical skills and design 
requirements for technology for elderly 
The recorded material was then coded according to the 
benefits and barriers perceived by the participants. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Based on the conducted literature study (Study I), eight 
benefit categories and ten barrier categories for AAL 
technologies could be identified (see Table I). Almost all of 
these benefits and barriers were supported in the user-
requirement study (Study II) with regard to the conceptual 
SONOPA technology. This section presents the combined 
results of both studies and provides a detailed description of 
all benefits and barriers. 
A. Perceived Benefits 
1) Health and Safety 
Health and safety are prerequisites for aging in place [7]. 
Hence, the literatures study showed that responding to 
emergencies [7][8][16]-[21], detecting and preventing falls 
[7][8][16][18]-[23] and monitoring physiological parameters 
[7][8][19][24] were regarded as vital features of AAL 
technologies. 
Other 
valued 
features 
included 
health 
management tools such as fitness tracking and medication 
management [20][24], property security [8][18] and 
detection of safety hazards, e.g., fire or unlocked doors 
[18][25]. In sum, the literature study showed that AAL 
technologies can provide older adults with an increased sense 
of safety, security and peace of mind. 
Safety was also a valued user-requirement with regard to 
the future SONOPA technology. Older adults and elder care 
professionals both felt that embedded sensors could provide 
added safety and security by detecting abnormal behavior 
such as falls or other emergencies, and automatically contact 
help. Thus, paralleling the findings from the literature study, 
fall-detection and emergency response were identified as key 
features. Another feature that was suggested to be 
incorporated to the SONOPA system was a reminder for 
turning off the stove. 
TABLE I.  BENEFITS AND BARRIERS OF AAL TECHNOLOGY 
Benefits  
Papers (n=) 
References 
health and safety 
23 
7, 8, 15-26, 32, 37, 39,  
41-44, 48  
independent living and 
aging in place 
11 
7, 16-19, 22-24, 26, 41, 44 
support carenetwork 
9 
16-19, 22, 24, 26, 30, 32 
social involvement 
8 
16, 26, 30-32, 37, 47, 48 
support with daily 
activities 
7 
8, 18, 20, 24, 25, 37, 39 
enjoyment and leisure 
6 
25, 26, 31, 32, 37, 47 
education and 
information 
2 
24, 32 
self confidence and status 
2 
21, 26 
Barriers 
Papers (n=) 
References 
privacy, intrusiveness and 
controle 
18 
8, 15-18, 20, 22-24, 26, 
32, 37, 39-43  
perceived need and 
perceived usefulness 
15 
7, 8, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 
24, 32, 37, 39, 41, 43, 47 
48 
Usability 
13 
7, 8, 17, 18, 22, 24, 32, 
37, 39-41, 43, 47 
lack of human interaction 
10 
7, 8, 19, 22, 24-26, 32, 37, 
42 
social stigma and pride 
9 
7, 8, 17, 19, 21, 39, 41-43 
technology anxiety, 
technology experience 
and self-efficacy 
8 
7, 8, 17, 18, 24, 32, 41, 43  
reliability and trust in 
technology 
8 
7, 8, 17, 18, 22, 41, 42, 44  
cost 
8 
7, 8, 16,17, 22, 37, 41, 43 
burden others 
3 
8, 17, 19 
health concerns 
2 
7, 17 
 
In the literature study automatic and around-the-clock 
monitoring was viewed as a major advantage of sensor-based 
assistive living technologies in comparison with existing 
solutions, such as an emergency button or a human caregiver 
[7][18][19].  
The user-requirement study showed that automation was 
also regarded as a main advantage of the future SONOPA 
technology, as becomes clear in this statement by a female 
older adult participant: “I have a panic button on my mobile 
[…]. But as far as I’m concerned it is practically useless. 
Because if something serious happens it is either going to be 
on the other side of the room, or in your hand bag, or you’re 
not capable to press the button. So really what you are 
talking about, is a lot more helpful”. 
2) Support Care Network 
According to the literature study, both informal 
caregivers and the elderly people themselves perceived AAL 
technologies as good tools to support the care network 
because they can provide some peace of mind and can 
reduce the overall burden of family caregivers [16]-
[18][22][24][26]. With the help of in-home monitoring, 
professional and family caregivers can gain a better overall 
understanding 
of 
the 
elderly 
person’s 
well-being, 

43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
immediately react in emergency situations and detect 
functional and cognitive decline at an early stage [19]. 
Similar findings resulted from the user-requirement 
study. The older adults stated that SONOPA could be very 
valuable to support the care network and provide peace of 
mind for the relatives. One male senior participant regretted 
that a similar technology was not available when he was an 
informal caregiver: “When my mother was older I looked 
after her to be sure she is well. And I think this kind of 
solution would have been very valuable in that situation”.  
3) Social Involvement 
Another benefit of AAL technologies which resulted 
from the literature study concerns the improvement of the 
user’s social involvement. Social connectedness has been 
described as a key element of a good quality of life [27][28] 
and successful aging [29]. Several of the reviewed projects 
demonstrated that AAL technologies can help elderly to feel 
closer to family members and combat social isolation and 
loneliness [26][30][31]. Huber et al. [26] showed that the 
tested technology gave the elderly and their family members 
“windows into each other’s daily lives” (p. 450) and 
provided new topics of communication while eliminating 
monitoring questions. Similarly, the field trial of the ‘Digital 
Family Portrait’ project [30], revealed that the female 
participant felt less lonely, knowing a family member was 
watching over her. AAL technologies can also provide 
opportunities to connect with peers. In the ‘Building 
Bridges’ project [32], elderly people met fellow seniors via 
online calls and chat to discuss a broadcast they had 
commonly listened to. Participants stated that they were very 
keen to arrange real-life meetings and get to know their 
conversations partners. 
 In the user-requirement study, social involvement was 
also perceived as an important advantage of the future 
SONOPA technology. The participating older adults and 
professional caregivers liked that the social network feature 
of the technology would allow elderly people to make new 
friends and strengthen the neighborhood network, as stated 
by one male senior: “It’s like a social club.” They also 
valued that one could stay in touch with family and other 
existing contacts. Participants appreciated that contact would 
be one-on-one and could lead to real-life interaction. They 
concluded that SONOPA could prevent social isolation by 
getting people outside the house, motivate them to 
participate in social life and therefore, give them back a 
sense in life. By aiding social involvement, SONOPA could 
simultaneously stimulate the elderly people’s activity level. 
As stated by one female senior participant: “If you meet 
someone, you get ready, you clean the house and you get 
busy with other daily chores. And in this way this kind of 
technology could contribute to staying active”. While this is 
in line with some studies from the literature study, it 
contradicts findings from Steele et al. [7] who found that 
their elderly participants strongly rejected the suggestion to 
incorporate social aspects in an assisted living technology. 
However, one female elder care professional in our user-
requirement study argued that particularly these social 
aspects could be the reason that the more healthy and active 
elderly people would be interested in SONOPA: “For some 
people safety would not be such a big problem at first, and if 
that is all there is, they probably would not get [the 
technology] installed. But it also includes some social 
elements which could maybe convince people to get it 
installed anyway. This way they get familiar with [the 
technology] […] and by the time it is needed for safety 
purposes than there is already a good [activity] profile of this 
people and that I consider a strength”. Mynatt and Rogers 
[46] also implicated that the more technologies can be 
incorporated in the homes of fit elderly, the more likely they 
will be to adopt more advanced assistive technologies when 
their health declines. 
4) Support with Daily Activities 
With older age physical, cognitive and sensory 
impairments such as muscle stiffness, memory decline and 
poor vision increase [33]-[36]. AAL technologies can help 
elderly people to compensate for these deficits and help them 
with their daily activities. Indeed, Smarr et al. [25] found that 
elderly people would value the assistance of domestic robots 
in helping them with chores such as cleaning, fetching 
objects or reminders. With those tasks robotic assistance is 
even preferred over human assistance. Similarly, Demiris et 
al. [8] found that older adults identify assistance with 
impairments and a reminder function as potential advantages 
of assisted living technologies.  
In line with these findings from the literature study, 
assistance with chores and reminders (e.g., medicine, 
important appointments) was a much appreciated feature 
among older adults and elder care professionals in the 
SONOPA user-requirement study. A few older adults liked 
the possibility to get personal advice from peers or family 
members via video-chat. One female senior participant even 
suggested to use SONOPA to recruit help for chores through 
the social network feature: “But imagine if you want to 
decorate your kitchen and you put it on there, you could have 
five people come around and you could go shopping and 
come back and it would all be done”.  
5) Enjoyment and Leisure 
 According to the literature study, enjoyment was 
identified as another benefit of AAL technologies. Several 
older adults reported to have fun when interacting with the 
tested technologies [26][32]. They also recognized that AAL 
technologies could stimulate leisure activities. For example, 
in the study of Beer and Takayama [37] older adults 
suggested to use the tested virtual presence robot to attend 
concerts or sport events from the comfort of their own home.  
When discussing the conceptual SONOPA technology 
during the user-requirement study, several participants 
imagined that using SONOPA would be fun and enjoyable. 
Several older adults also saw the SONOPA social network 
feature as an opportunity to share common interests. As one 
female participant stated: “I do watercolor painting, I might 
find somebody who wants to come in with me once a week 
and sit.”  
6) Education and Information 
Opposed to common stereotypes, a good proportion of 
elderly people are still capable of learning new things and is 
still fairly active and productive [38]. This was confirmed by 
the results of the literature study. In the ‘Building Bridges’ 

44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Project [32], participants were very excited about the 
educational element of the tested device. Similarly, Joe et al. 
[24] found that elderly people would like their tested AAL 
technology to include features like ‘learning something new’ 
and ‘keep up with the news’.  
In line with these findings some of the user-requirement 
study participants were interested in informational and 
educational features for the future SONOPA technology. For 
instance, one participant suggested to incorporate online 
classes or educational videos in the SONOPA system.  
7) Independent Living and Aging in Place 
In the literature study, independent living and aging in 
place were perceived as essential benefits of AAL 
technologies. Several studies reported that independence is 
of utmost importance to elderly people, and technology 
which can facilitate autonomous living is therefore perceived 
as useful, e.g.,  [7][18][19]. Many elderly people are attached 
to their own homes because of their possessions, past 
memories 
and 
the 
familiar 
neighborhood 
[17][18]. 
Consequently, they often have a negative view on nursing 
homes and regard institutionalization as a last resort 
[7][17][18]. The desire for independent living was so strong, 
that it often superseded other concerns, such as privacy and 
intrusiveness [19].  
 Independent living and aging in place was not explicitly 
mentioned in the user-requirement study with regard to the 
future SONOPA technology. A possible explanation is that 
SONOPA was already presented as a conceptual technology 
for healthy and independent aging at home. Consequently, 
participants might have felt that this was an obvious 
advantage and therefore, unnecessary to recall. However, 
various statements made clear that independence is very 
important to the participants. This and the fact that it was a 
major advantage in previous studies lead to the conclusion 
that independent living and aging in place indeed should be 
emphasized as a benefit of AAL technologies 
8) Self confidence and Status  
Finally, it was recognized in the literature study that 
AAL technology could built up the self-confidence of older 
adults [21] and even serve as a status symbol [26]. However, 
‘self-confidence and status’ was not a very prominent 
benefit. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that it was not mentioned in 
the SONOPA user-requirement study. However, we still 
think it would be a desirable benefit for AAL technologies as 
low self-esteem is a common problem among older adults 
[45]. 
B. Perceived Barriers 
Besides benefits, several barriers that could interfere with 
the successful adoption of AAL technologies were extracted 
from both studies. The insights on those barriers are 
discussed below. 
1) Privacy, Instrusiveness and Controle 
Concerns about privacy, security and possible intrusion 
were perceived as important barriers to the adoption of AAL 
technologies. Elderly people were worried that their personal 
information can get in the wrong hands and be misused 
[15][24]. Some were reluctant to the monitoring aspect of 
assisted living technologies, as it felt like surveillance to 
them [22][23]. Especially, the use of cameras, was strongly 
rejected [8][20]. In contrast, some studies found that privacy 
is just a minor concern to their elderly participants [7][19]. 
They regarded some loss of their privacy as a valid trade-off 
for their safety, independence and health. Another reason 
could be the lack of awareness of potential security risks. 
Moreover, older adults were worried that technologies are 
too visible in their home environment [17][39], and could 
interfere with their normal routine [23][32][39]. Indeed, 
some participants in the study by Van Hoof, Kort, Rutten 
and Duijnstee [18] complained about visible cables, 
annoying sounds and interference with other devices, such as 
the TV. Others worried about having to dress up and keeping 
their home clean for video calls [23]. 
Following these findings, the participants of the user-
requirement study considered the loss of privacy as a 
negative aspect of the future SONOPA technology. Some of 
SONOPA’s potential functionalities were also regarded as 
intrusive. Several senior participants felt that the SONOPA 
technology would invade their personal space, and that they 
would feel observed as becomes clear in this statement by a 
female participant : “I think it is big brother, being watched 
all the time”. The older adults worried that they would feel 
restricted in their freedom and loose spontaneity as argued 
by another female older adult: “But I don’t know whether 
you would creep around the house, thinking oh dear they can 
see me […] That would be horrible, sort of spy on the wall”. 
Some of the older adults were concerned that the data could 
get in the wrong hands. However, the majority of the older 
adults found the idea of sensors acceptable because they 
perceived them to benefit their personal well-being and 
safety at home, as this male participant stated: “When I know 
that the sensors are installed in my home for my well-being, I 
don’t have any problems with them being in my home”. 
Furthermore, most of the participants who were comfortable 
with sensors, were comfortable to have them in every room 
of the house as falls could happen everywhere. However, a 
few older adults would not like to have sensors in the toilet, 
bathroom and bedroom.  
According to the literature study, the level of user control 
was a matter of concern to the elderly user. Most elderly 
people wanted to have some level of control about the 
technology, e.g., turn it off manually [17][40]. Consequently, 
the lack of user control is perceived as a barrier. On the other 
hand, some elderly people argue that a monitoring system 
cannot assure safety, unless it is switched on all the time. 
Emergencies could happen when the system is switched off 
or when users forget to switch it back on [7]. A low level of 
user-control would also be more suitable for people who are 
not very confident in interacting with technologies [8]. 
In line with these findings, most older adults from our 
user-requirement study wanted to be able to switch the future 
SONOPA system on and off, be aware of which data are 
shared and decide with whom the data are shared. On the 
contrary, other participants thought that the system would 
only work to its full potential, when it could not be switched 
off.  
 

45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) Perceived Need and Perceived Usefulness 
The subjective need and the perceived usefulness of a 
new technology are essential for elderly people to adopt it. 
Consequently, the literature study showed that the lack of 
subjective need and perceived benefits forms a major barrier 
to accepting assisted living technologies. The subjective need 
for AAL technologies seems to be influenced by the elderly 
person’s perceived well-being in terms of health, activity and 
social involvement. Steele et al. [7] found that elderly 
persons with good social ties were less likely to feel the need 
for such a technology. Greenhalgh et al. [39] discovered that 
their participants saw no value in assistive technologies if 
they had never needed to use it before. However, many 
elderly people struggled to imagine future deterioration 
where they might benefit from features such as monitoring 
[19]. Others simply did not want to admit the need for 
assistive technology [21]. This is confirmed by Peek et al. 
[17] who concluded that many elderly people talk about a 
hypothetical older person who could benefit from assisted 
living technology rather than themselves. The use of existing 
technologies, such as an emergency button and the help of 
family members or a spouse can also reduce the perceived 
need for assisted living technologies [17]. This is contributed 
by the fact that many elderly people did not fully understand 
the additional benefits assisted living technologies can 
provide [7][39]. While the perceived benefits were more 
abstract, the concerns related to those technologies were very 
specific [17]. 
Similar results were found in the user-requirement study. 
Although the majority of the older adults liked the general 
idea of SONOPA, many felt no need for it in their current 
situation. They found the concept of SONOPA more 
beneficial for people who are less independent, active and 
healthy; and who are more isolated as becomes clear in this 
statement of an older couple: “I mean we’re not in the 
position at the moment to need any of those things. But 
thinking of other people, I think it is marvelous”. They also 
found it hard to imagine that they might feel less healthy in 
the near future and would need more assistance. Like in the 
study of Peek et al. [17], it was observed that many older 
adults talked about a hypothetical older person who could 
benefit from SONOPA, rather than themselves. However, 
eleven older adults indicated that they have no need for it at 
the moment, but could imagine to use it in the future, when 
they felt less healthy and active, or in case they would lose 
their partner. Some older adults found that the future 
SONOPA technology would not offer a lot of added benefits. 
Several older adults indicated to already use a paper diary for 
overlooking their appointments, or a pill-box to remember to 
take their medications. However, it also became clear that 
the concept of the technology was still quite abstract and 
therefore, some of the participants did not fully understand 
all benefits the SONOPA technology could offer to them. 
3) Usability 
In the literature study, many elderly were worried about 
the user-friendliness of AAL technologies. They feared that 
those technologies will be difficult to use and not adapted to 
their specific needs as older adults [17][24]. Indeed several 
field studies encountered usability problems with regard to 
the tested AAL technology, e.g., [18][32]. 
As in many previous studies from the literature review, 
older adults in the SONOPA study were worried about the 
potential complexity of the SONOPA interface, and how 
much user participation is needed to operate the system as 
becomes clear in this statement by a female participant: “But 
if you got to go to an iPod thing and should do tututututu 
[push buttons] before you find out what you are supposed to 
do, that is not helpful”.  
4) Lack of Human Interaction 
 According to the literature study, the lack of human 
interaction was also a matter of concern to the elderly target 
group. They thought that AAL technologies cannot and 
should not replace human assistance and human interaction, 
but should be used as a supplement to human care 
[7][8][19][22][26][32][37]. Indeed, Smarr et al. [25] revealed 
that while robot assistance is accepted for certain tasks, 
human assistance is preferred for personal care tasks (e.g., 
wash hair), leisure activities (e.g., entertaining guests) and 
most health related tasks (decide which medication to take). 
Similarly, Joe et al. [24] found that their participants 
preferred in-person communication with their physician over 
technology-mediated contact. On the other hand, in the study 
of Huber et al. [26] it was found that despite concerns about 
monitoring technologies reducing the contact with family 
caregivers, the quality and quantity of communication 
actually improved during the field trial with the technology. 
However, this does not change the fact that older adults are 
concerned about technology replacing human care. 
 In line with these findings, older adults and professional 
caregivers from the user-requirement study stated that 
SONOPA could not and should not replace human care and 
human interaction, as becomes clear in this statement by a 
male older adult: “For me human contact is still most 
important […] Thus, I prefer no computer”. A female senior 
participant pointed out: “The negative point is that this 
person’s family and the environment cannot fully rely on this 
application. Because the application cannot replace the 
human”.  
5) Social Stigma and Pride  
The literature study showed that social stigma was also a 
potential barrier to the acceptance of AAL technologies. 
Many elderly people were hesitant to use technologies that 
could stigmatize them as frail or needing assistance 
[8][17][21][41]. Pride and embarrassment were often the 
reason for not using assistive devices [7][19][21]. 
Consequently, older adults indicated that AAL technologies 
should be as discreet and unobtrusive as possible [7][42][43].  
Similar findings resulted from the user-requirement 
study. While assistance with chores was well perceived by a 
few older adults, others felt no need for assistance and 
almost felt insulted by the idea as this statement by a female 
participant indicates: “I don’t need anybody to tell me how to 
make a stew”. We observed that some older adults were very 
proud of their independence and therefore, rejected anything 
which would imply otherwise. Indeed, one older adult 
pointed out that seniors might be resistant to accepting that 

46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
they need assistance and therefore, would not want to use 
technology that stigmatizes them as frail and dependent.  
6) Technology Anxiety, Technology Experience and 
Self-Efficacy  
According to the literature study, several elderly people 
were apprehensive towards technology and worried about 
their abilities concerning technology use [7][8][24]. They 
perceived technology to be very complex and inaccessible 
for elderly people who miss the necessary skills and 
experience [32]. Making mistakes when interacting with the 
technology, was a major concerns. However, some of them 
were willing to undertake training and believed that this 
knowledge could make the interaction with the technology 
easier [7].  
In line with these findings, the older adults from our user-
requirement study were worried about the complexity of the 
future SONOPA technology. It was repeatedly emphasized 
that they did not grew up with technology and therefore, 
might lack the necessary skills, experience and confidence as 
this statement by a male senior participant shows: “I think a 
lot of our generation are computer shy”.  
7) Reliability and Trust in Technology 
The literature study showed, that many elderly people 
worried about the reliability of AAL technologies and 
questioned the accuracy and ability of those technologies in 
ensuring the health and safety of the user [7][17][22][41]. 
They worried about interruptions in energy supply [7][44] 
and the occurrence of false alarms [7][17][18][42]. Indeed, 
several studies testing monitoring systems reported false 
emergency alarms during field trials, e.g., [18][22]. While 
some participants were annoyed by these false alarms 
[18][22], other participants perceived false alarms as a 
reassurance that the systems is actually working [18][30]. 
In accordance with these findings, older adults in our 
user-requirement study were concerned about the reliability 
of the future technology, especially the sensors. They 
worried that SONOPA could give false alarms as becomes 
clear in this statement by a female participant: “It might just 
go off with your natural things”. Two seniors regarded the 
activity recommendations as ineffective: “I am not 
convinced that a single technology application and especially 
a screen can motivate people to do stuff”. Older adults also 
wondered if all parts of the system could be installed in 
different domestic environments as becomes clear in this 
statement by a female participant: “I can’t honestly visualize 
it to be a possibility. Not in an old house”. 
8) Cost 
Another barrier concerns the cost of assisted living 
technologies. In the literature study, several elderly people 
have stated that, due to their limited income, such systems 
would either not be affordable to them [7][8][22][37][41], or 
they would not to be willing to spend a lot of money on such 
technologies[7][22]. Elderly people also mentioned that cost 
should be subsidized by the government [7]. 
Although cost came not up as a top-of-the-mind concern 
among the older adults in the user-requirement study, it 
became clear that the SONOPA technology has to be 
affordable for a person living on a pension. Several French 
and Belgium seniors demanded that the government would 
have to cover parts of the costs.  
9) Health Concerns 
Finally, the last barrier regards health concerns. In the 
literature study, several elderly people worried that 
electromagnetic radiation caused by wireless sensors could 
cause health problems [7][17]. 
Although our user-requirement study participants were 
not worried about electromagnetic radiation, one older adult 
stated that SONOPA could potentially provide too much 
assistance and make people less active and healthy because 
then they do not have to go outside the house to have social 
contact: “It could be that you shackle them behind the 
computer”. 
10) Burden Others 
The literature study showed that, while support for 
caregivers was identified as a potential benefit of AAL 
technologies by several older adults, others perceived AAL 
technologies to put an additional burden on relatives as 
family caregivers [8][17][19].  
This barrier was not mentioned in the context of the 
SONOPA user-requirement study. Nevertheless, we should 
keep in mind that some older adults might worry to burden 
their family when using AAL technologies.  
V. 
DESIGN GUIDELINES 
Based on the findings from the literature study and the 
SONOPA user-requirement study, we formulated several 
design guidelines which are discussed below. 
A. Clear, Specific and Flexible Benefits 
To stimulate older adults and their caregivers to use AAL 
technologies, these technologies must not just offer added 
benefits to its users, but at the same time those benefits have 
to be clear, specific and profound. The benefits that should 
be targeted by AAL technologies include the following 
areas: health and safety, independence, support for the care 
network, social involvement, support with daily activities, 
enjoyment and leisure, education and information and self-
confidence. Especially, social, leisure and educational 
benefits should not be overlooked, as some older adults are 
still very active and fit, and therefore, might not feel an 
immediate need for a technology which is mainly focused on 
health, safety and support. Because the concept of AAL 
technologies is often perceived as abstract, elderly should be 
able to try out or experience a technology without being 
obliged to buy it first. 
In the context of SONOPA, a central element of the first 
prototype is the social network which helps the user to 
connect with peers and family members and offers leisure 
and informational features such as personal interests groups 
and event information. By emphasizing social, leisure and 
educational benefits we try to target the still healthy and 
active, older adults. During the upcoming pilot phase, two 
demo sites will be equipped with the SONOPA prototype, so 
a large number of potential users can experience the system 
and get a better understanding of its benefits. 

47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Ensuring Privacy, Security and Unobtrusiveness 
AAL technologies often collect sensitive data such as 
personal health and activity records. Therefore, measures 
must be taken to ensure the secure storage of this sensitive 
information. By giving the user control over whether the 
system is active, where potential sensors are placed and 
which data are shared and with whom, privacy concerns can 
be reduced. However, the level of user control has to be 
weighed against the proper working and reliability of the 
AAL technology. In case of a monitoring system, a time 
limit for deactivation could be applied, to avoid that people 
forget to switch the system back on. Furthermore, caregivers 
could be informed when the system is switched off for a 
longer period of time. To counter obtrusiveness, it is 
recommended to embed the hardware in the elderly people’s 
home environment and blend it with the surroundings. 
Moreover, the system should be able to communicate 
wirelessly, without noise, and no interference with other 
devices in the home environment. 
For the SONOPA pilot phase we will take all necessary 
measures to ensure safe data storage. Moreover, we will try 
to reduce the number of sensors and collect feedback on the 
design to make the system less obtrusive. Within the social 
network environment the users can control which data they 
want to share and with whom. 
C. Simplicity and Familarity 
The interaction with an AAL technology should be 
simple, consistent and easy to use and learn. The interface 
has to be intuitive and clearly structured. Technical slang 
should be avoided and textual elements should fit the 
elderly’s frame of reference. The challenge is to create a 
simple design but not limit the functionality [32]. 
The SONOPA prototype is designed to be simple and 
easy to use. During the pilot phase we aim to collect detailed 
feedback to further improve the user-friendliness of the 
system.  
D. Training and Low Level of Active Interaction 
To simplify the interaction with AAL technologies, it is 
suggested to automate most processes and to opt for a 
minimal level of active user interaction, if desired by the 
user. Special training programs should be designed to teach 
the elderly how to use a technology and thereby improve the 
perceived ease of use and the confidence in their skills. 
Many features of the SONOPA prototype are automated 
and require little user interaction. During the pilot phase the 
participants will receive a short training for using the more 
‘active’ features such as the social network environment. 
Moreover, we will try to improve the usability of these 
features with the help of the user’s feedback.  
E. Emphasizing Abilities rather than Disabilities 
When designing and marketing AAL technologies like 
SONOPA, emphasis should be put on the abilities rather than 
the disabilities of the target group. This can be achieved by 
further developing and embedding social, leisure and 
educational features and positioning AAL technologies as a 
wellness tool rather than a assistive device. Functionalities of 
AAL technologies should be helpful but not patronizing and 
be flexible to the wishes of the still healthy and active user. 
As mentioned earlier, social, leisure and educational 
features are a central element of the SONOPA prototype. 
This features will help to market SONOPA as a wellness tool 
rather than a assistive device. During the pilot testing, we 
will investigate if the recommendations provided by 
SONOPA are perceived as patronizing and adapt this feature 
accordingly.  
F. Reliability and Technial Support 
Given that the average experience with technology in the 
elderly target group is rather low, robustness to mistakes is 
another important demand for designers to keep in mind. 
Furthermore, sensors should be accurate and reliable to avoid 
false alarms. Technical support in form of a helpline or a 
well-written manual should be available to all users to 
minimize technology anxiety and promote a successful 
interaction with the technology. 
For SONOPA, we conducted a technical test in two home 
environments prior to the pilot studies, to test the integration 
between the different technical elements and ensure that all 
elements are working properly and in a reliable manner. 
During the pilot phase, the technical installation in each pilot 
site will be monitored remotely by the responsible technical 
partners and if technical problems occur, they will intervene 
directly at the pilot sites. The participants can contact their 
end-user contact person at any time if they experience 
technical problems. The insights from the pilot study will be 
used to further improve the reliability and proper 
functionality of the SONOPA system. 
G. Flexibility and Adaptiveness 
AAL technologies should be adaptive to differences in 
physical constraints, personal preferences, technological 
skills, context and environment. By offering high flexibility 
in content, functionalities and level of control, AAL 
technologies can appeal to the different needs of this highly 
divers target group. 
With regard to SONOPA, we aim to offer the system in 
different modes. One mode is tailored to the active and 
healthy older adults with an emphasis on the social aspects 
and only a few sensors. The other mode will target the older 
adults who start to experience physical problems and put 
more emphasis on health and safety with a denser sensor 
installation. 
H. Promoting not Replacing Social Interaction 
AAL technologies should promote and not replace social 
interaction. For instance, it is recommended to use a local 
social network so that face-to-face interaction is a possibility. 
We expect that the SONOPA social network and event 
recommendations will improve the contact with family and 
peers and stimulate the creation of new social connections 
online and offline.  
I. 
Low Cost and Spread Payments 
Keeping in mind that the average income in parts of the 
intended target group is rather low, costs should fit into the 

48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
available resources of the users. Also, a monthly payment 
scheme is recommended. Furthermore, one should keep in 
mind that users might expect that costs are partially covered 
by social security means. 
By offering different modes of the SONOPA system and 
keeping the hardware requirements to a minimum we try to 
minimize the costs of the SONOPA system. We also plan to 
use a different monthly payment scheme for the different 
modes of the SONOPA system. This way, we can adapt to 
different user needs.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
AAL technologies offer a promising prospect on 
independent aging and managing health care costs. However, 
it remains unclear if older adults are ready to adopt these 
new technologies. In this paper, we identified eight benefits 
and ten barriers of AAL technologies as perceived by the 
elderly user and their caregivers. These benefits and barriers 
were the result of an extensive literature study and a user-
requirement study of a conceptual AAL application called 
SONOPA. Together the results of both studies led to the 
following design guidelines: (1) clear, specific and flexible 
benefits, (2) ensuring privacy, security and unobtrusiveness, 
(3) simplicity and familiarity, (4) training and low level of 
level of active interaction, (5) emphasizing abilities rather 
than disabilities, (6) reliability and technical support, (7) 
flexibility and adaptiveness, (8) promoting not replacing 
social interaction, (9) low cost and spread payments.  
Our approach is not without limitations. The benefit, 
barriers and consequent design guidelines are still based on 
qualitative data. However, the initial study was extended [1] 
and our preliminary results were verified. Moreover, recently 
another SONOPA user-study was conducted, and the first 
results seem to confirm the findings of this paper. Also, a 
recent content analyses of AAL deliverables, showed similar 
benefit categories and also provided some theoretical 
background for these found benefits [49].  
 
Future work will focus on integrating the found benefits 
and barriers into a model for AAL acceptance and gather 
quantitative data to test the conceptual model. The SONOPA 
system will be tested in the field and the user feedback will 
be used to further adapt and improve the system according to 
the user’s needs. 
Although design guidelines need further evaluation, they 
form a valuable directive for the developers of SONOPA and 
other AAL technologies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Part of this research is supported by the AAL Joint 
Program under contract number AAL-2012-5-187. We 
would like to thank our partners for their effort, insights and 
continuous support. Also we would like to thank all 
participants of the user-requirement study for their 
contribution. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Jaschinski and S. Ben Allouch, "Ambient Assisted Living: 
Benefits and Barriers From a User-Centered Perspective," in 
AMBIENT 2014, The Fourth International Conference on 
Ambient 
Computing, 
Applications, 
Services 
and 
Technologies, pp. 56-64, 2014. 
[2] Central Intelligence Association. The World Factbook- 
People and Society: European Union. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/ee.html, 2013.04.01. 
[3] United Nations, DESA, World Population Ageing: 1950-
2050, New York: United Nations Publications, 2002. 
[4] European Union, Eurostat., The EU in the world 2013 – A 
statistical portrait, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the 
European Union, 2012. 
[5] Ambient Assited Living Association. About. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.aal-europe.eu/about/, 2013.04.01. 
[6] P. Rashidi and A. Mihailidis, "A survey on ambient-assisted 
living tools for older adults," IEEE journal of biomedical and 
health informatics, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 579-590, 2013. 
[7] R. Steele, A. Lo, C. Secombe, and Y. K. Wong, “Elderly 
persons’ perception and acceptance of using wireless sensor 
networks to assist healthcare,” International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 78, no. 12, pp. 788-801, 2009, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.08.001. 
[8] G. Demiris et al., “Older adults' attitudes towards and 
perceptions of 'smart home' technologies: a pilot study,” 
Informatics for Health and Social Care, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 87-
94, 2004, doi: 10.1080/14639230410001684387. 
[9] G. P. Moschis, "Marketing to older adults: an updated 
overview of present knowledge and practice," Journal of 
Consumer Marketing, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 516 – 525, 2003. 
[10] T. Heart and E. Kalderon, “Older adults: Are they ready to 
adopt health-related ICT?,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 82, no. 11, pp. e209-e231, 2011, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.03.002. 
[11] A. D Fisk., W. A. Rogers, N. Charness, S. J. Czaja, and J. 
Sharit, Designing for older adults: Principles and creative 
human factors approaches. Boca Raton, FL: CRC press, 2004. 
[12] A. S. Melenhorst, W. A. Rogers and E. C. Caylor, “The use of 
communication technologies by older adults: exploring the 
benefits from the user's perspective,” Proc. of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society (HFES) Annual Meeting, 
HFES press, pp. 221-225, 2001. 
[13] A. Morris, J. Goodman, and H. Brading, “Internet use and 
non-use: views of older users,” Universal Access in the 
Information Society, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 43-57, 2007, 
doi:10.1007/s10209-006-0057-5. 
[14] SONOPA Consortium. Welcome to the SONOPA project. 
[Online]. Available from: www.sonopa.eu, 20140601 
[15] L. Boise et al., "Willingness of older adults to share data and 
privacy concerns after exposure to unobtrusive in-home 
monitoring," Gerontechnology: international journal on the 
fundamental aspects of technology to serve the ageing 
society, 
vol. 
11, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
428–435, 
2013, 
doi:10.4017/gt.2013.11.3.001.00. 
[16] A. Mahmood, T. Yamamoto, M. Lee, and C. Steggell, 
"Perceptions and use of gerotechnology: Implications for 
aging in place," Journal of Housing for the Elderly, vol. 22, 
no. 1-2, pp. 104-126, 2008, doi:10.1080/02763890802097144. 
[17] S. Peek et al., "Factors influencing acceptance of technology 
for aging in place: a systematic review," International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, vol. 83, pp. 235-248, 2014, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2014.01.004. 
 

49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[18] J. Van Hoof, H. S. M. Kort, P. G. S. Rutten, and M. S. H. 
Duijnstee, "Ageing-in-place with the use of ambient 
intelligence technology: Perspectives of older users," 
International journal of medical informatics, vol. 80, no. 5, 
pp. 310-331, 2011, doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.02.010. 
[19] K. Wild, L. Boise, J. Lundell, and A. Foucek, "Unobtrusive 
in-home monitoring of cognitive and physical health: 
Reactions and perceptions of older adults," Journal of Applied 
Gerontology, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 181-200, 2008, doi: 
10.1177/0733464807311435.  
[20] M. Kanis, S. Alizadeh, J. Groen, M. Khalili, S. Robben, S. 
Bakkes, and B. Kröse, "Ambient monitoring from an elderly-
centred design perspective: What, who and how," in Ambient 
Intelligence, pp. 330-334. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 
[21] A. K. Bright, and L. Coventry, "Assistive technology for 
older adults: psychological and socio-emotional design 
requirements, " in Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive 
Environments, p. 9. ACM, 2013. 
[22] A. J. Sixsmith, “An evaluation of an intelligent home 
monitoring system,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
vol. 6, pp. 63–72, 2000, doi:10.1258/1357633001935059. 
[23] R. Beringer, A. Sixsmith, M. Campo, J. Brown, and R. 
McCloskey, "The “acceptance” of ambient assisted living: 
Developing an alternate methodology to this limited research 
lens," in Toward Useful Services for Elderly and People with 
Disabilities, pp. 161-167. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 
[24] J. Joe, S. Chaudhuri, J. Chung, H. Thompson, and G. Demiris, 
"Older adults' attitudes and preferences regarding a 
multifunctional wellness tool: a pilot study," Informatics for 
Health and Social Care, pp. 1-16, 2014. 
[25] C. Smarr et al., "Domestic Robots for Older Adults: Attitudes, 
Preferences, and Potential," International Journal of Social 
Robotics, 
vol. 
6, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
229–247, 
2014, 
doi:10.1007/s12369-013-0220-0. 
[26] L. L.Huber, K. Shankar, K. Caine, K. Connelly, L. J. Camp, 
B. A.Walker, and L. Borrero, "How in-home technologies 
mediate caregiving relationships in later life." International 
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 
441-455, 2013. 
[27] C. Victor, S. Scambler, J. Bond, and A. Bowling, “Being 
alone in later life: loneliness, social isolation and living,” 
Reviews in Clinical Gerontology, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 407-417, 
2000, ISSN (print) 0959-2598.  
[28] Z. Gabriel and A. Bowling, “Quality of life from the 
perspectives of older people,” Ageing and Society, vol. 24, 
no. 5, pp. 675-691, 2004, doi: 10.1017/S0144686X03001582. 
[29] H. Bouma, J. L. Fozard, D. G. Bouwhuis, and V. Taipale, 
“Gerontechnology in perspective,” Gerontechnology, vol. 6, 
pp. 190-216, 2007, doi: 10.4017/gt.2007.06.04.003.00. 
[30] J. Rowan and E. D. Mynatt. "Digital family portrait field trial: 
Support for aging in place," Proc. of the SIGCHI conference 
on Human factors in computing systems, ACM Press, pp. 
521-530, 2005 
[31] R. Cornejo, J. Favela, and M. Tentori, "Ambient displays for 
integrating older adults into social networking sites," in 
Collaboration and Technology, pp. 321-336. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2010. 
[32] J. Wherton and D. Prendergast, “The building bridges project: 
involving older adults in the design of a communication 
technology to support peer-to-peer social engagement,” in 
HCI and Usability for e-Inclusion, A. Holzinger and K. 
Miesenberger, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, pp. 111-134, 
2009. 
 
 
[33] F. Schieber, “Human factors and aging: Identifying and 
compensating for age-related deficits in sensory and cognitive 
function,” in Impact of technology on successful aging, K. W. 
Schaie and N. Charness, Eds. New York: Springer, pp. 42-84, 
2003. 
[34] F. I. Craik, “Memory changes in normal aging. Current 
directions in psychological science, ” vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 155-
158, 1994, doi: 10.1111/1467-8721.ep10770653. 
[35] J. Massion, “Postural control system,” Current opinion in 
neurobiology, 
vol. 
4, 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
877-887, 
1994, 
doi:10.1016/0959-4388(94)90137-6. 
[36] B. E. Maki and W. E. McIlroy, “Control of rapid limb 
movements for balance recovery: age-related changes and 
implications for fall prevention,” Age and ageing, vol. 35, 
suppl. 2, pp. ii12-ii18, 2006, doi:10.1093/ageing/afl078. 
[37] J. M. Beer, and L. Takayama, "Mobile remote presence 
systems for older adults: acceptance, benefits, and concerns," 
in Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Human-
robot interaction, pp. 19-26. ACM, 2011. 
[38] M. Ory, M. K. Hoffman, M .Hawkins, B. Sanner, and R. 
Mockenhaupt, "Challenging aging stereotypes: strategies for 
creating a more active society," American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 164-171, 2003, 
doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(03)00181-8. 
[39] T. Greenhalgh et al., "What matters to older people with 
assisted living needs? A phenomenological analysis of the use 
and non-use of telehealth and telecare," Social Science & 
Medicine, 
vol. 
93, 
pp. 
86-94, 
2013, 
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.05.036.  
[40] M. Ziefle and C. Rocker, "Acceptance of Pervasive 
Healthcare 
Systems: 
A 
comparison 
of 
different 
implementation 
concepts," 
In 
Pervasive 
Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), pp. 1-6. 
IEEE, 2010. 
[41] J. F. Coughlin, L. A. D'Ambrosio, B. Reimer, and M. R. Pratt, 
"Older adult perceptions of smart home technologies: 
implications for research, policy & market innovations in 
healthcare," in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 
2007 (EMBS 2007), 29th Annual International Conference of 
the IEEE, pp. 1810-1815. IEEE, 2007. 
[42] F. Marquis-Faulkes, S. J. McKenna, P. Gregor, and A. F. 
Newell, "Scenario-based drama as a tool for investigating user 
requirements with application to home monitoring for elderly 
people," HCI International, Crete, Greece , pp. 512-516, 2003. 
[43] S. Beach, R. Schulz, J. Downs, J. Matthews, B. Barron, and 
K. Seelman, "Disability, age, and informational privacy 
attitudes in quality of life technology applications: Results 
from a national web survey," ACM Transactions on 
Accessible Computing (TACCESS), vol. 2, no. 1, 2009. 
[44] M. E. Morris, B. Adair, K. Miller, E. Ozanne, R. Hansen, A. 
J. Pearce, N. Santamaria, L. Viega, M. Long, and C.M. Said, 
"Smart-home technologies to assist older people to live well 
at home," Journal of aging science, vol. 1,  pp. 1-9, 2013. 
[45] R. W. Robins, and K. H. Trzesniewski, "Self-esteem 
development across the lifespan," Current Directions in 
Psychological Science,vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 158-162, 2005. 
[46] E. D. Mynatt and W. A. Rogers, “Developing technology to 
support the functional independence of older adults,” Ageing 
International, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 24-41, 2001, doi: 
10.1007/s12126-001-1014-5.  
[47] M. Heerink, B. Kröse, V. Evers, and B. Wielinga, “Assessing 
acceptance of assistive social agent technology by older 
adults: the Almere model,” Int J Soc Robot, vol. 2, pp. 361–
375, 2010, doi:10.1007/s12369-010-0068-5. 
 
 

50
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[48] A. Cesta, G. Cortellessa, V. Giuliani, F. Pecora, M. Scopelliti, 
and L. Tiberio, "Psychological Implications of Domestic 
Assistive Technology for the Elderly," PsychNology Journal, 
vol. 5, no. 3, 229-252, 2007. 
[49] C. Jaschinki and S. Ben Allouch, “Why should I Use This? 
Identifying Incentives for Using AAL Technologies,” 
Manuscript submitted for publication, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
APPENDIX I OVERVIEW SELECTED PAPERS
Ref.
Technology Category
Test User Characteristics
Test
Country
Applied
Method
Number
Age
Gender
Health Status
Living Situation
Caregivers
involved
7
sensor network/monitoring
n = 13
65+
6 males
7 females
n/a
independently
no
Australia
focus groups
8
technologiesforagingin
place
n = 15
65+
7 males
8females
n/a
independently and
assisted living and
nursing home
no
US
focus groups
15
sensor network/monitoring
n = 119
80+
m = 83
22% males
78%females
average or
betterhealth
n = 92 with normal
cognitive function
n=27 with MCI
independently
no
US
fieldtrialwith
questionaire
16
technologiesforagingin
place
n = 9
70+
2 males
7females
normalcognitive
function
assisted living
no
US
focus groups
17
technologiesforagingin
place
samplesizerange:7-
1406
60+
n/a
n/a
independently
n/a
mostlyUS
(67%)
systematic
review
18
sensor network/monitoring
n = 18
63+
4 males
14females
The majority of
participants deal
withavarietyof
comorbidities,
n = 7 mild to
moderate
psychogeriatric
health
problemsincluding
dementia
independentlyand
assisted living
informal
caregivers
Netherlands
fieldtrialwith
observational
data and
interviews
19
sensor network/monitoring
n=23 elderly
n=16 informal carers
66-9 1
m=80.6
n/a
stable health, no
signsofdementia
n/a
informal
caregivers
US
focus groups
20
sensor network/monitoring
n = 6
60-85+
n/a
some participants
hadpartialphysical
or cognitive
impairments
assisted living
no
Netherlands
participatory
design
activities,
interviews,
questionaire
21
Intelligent mobility aid
n = 19
67-86
n/a
mobility problems
n/a
informal
carers
UK
focus groups,
observation
and
interviews
22
sensor network/monitoring
focusgroups:n=28
field trial: n = 22
elderly and n = 20
informalcaregivers
65+
Equalgender
distribution
n = 8 had a
significant
healthproblemand
n=9reportedminor
healthproblems
assisted living
informal
caregivers
and
care
professionals
in focus
groups and
informal
carersinfield
trials
UK
focus groups
and field trial
with
interviews
and
questionaires

52
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Ref.
Technology Category
Test User Characteristics
Test
Country
Applied
Method
Number
Age
Gender
Health Status
Living Situation
Caregivers
involved
23
sensor network/monitoring
n = 12
61-95
m = 75.6
3 males
9females
mean of 3.75
chronicconditions
andn=5
relying on an
assistivedeviceto
functionwithinthe
home
n/a
no
Canada
interviews
24
sensor network/monitoring
Threegroupwith7-15
participant
n = 7 sheltered
housingwardens
n/a
n/a
Some studies
included healthy
older adults, while
others
included
participants with
neurological
deficits.
n/a
informal
carers and
sheltered
housing
wardens
UK
focus groups
with scenario
based drama
25
domestic robot
n = 21
65-93
6 males
good health
independently
no
US
focus groups,
m=80.25
15females
questionaires
26
sensor network/monitoring
n = 6
73-86
6 females
good to excellent
retirement
informal
US
field trial with
m = 82.17
(self-rated)
community
carers
datalogsand
interviews
30
sensor network/monitoring
n=1 elderly
n=1 informal caregiver
76
1female
good health
independently
informal
caregivers
US
fieldtrialwith
interviews,
diaries
31
technologiesforagingin
place
n = 14
62+
6 males
8females
n/a
retirement
community
no
US
focusgroups
and
questionaires
32
social network application
field trial n=15
60+
n/a
n/a
n/a
Professional
carers
Ireland
homevisits
interviews
focusgroups
workshops
field trial
37
domestic robot
n = 12
63-88
5 males
7 females
excellent:17%
very good: 33%
good:42%
fair:8%
poor: 0%
independently
no
US
interviews
39
technologies for aging in
n = 40
60–98
13males
various medical
independent and
no
UK
Various
place
m=81
27 females
conditions
sheltered housing
ethnographic
techniques:
interviews
cultural
probes
field notes
home tour
40
smart health technology
group 1: n = 7
group 1: 40-50, m =
group 1: 45% males
n = 39 suffer chronic
n/a
no
Germany
questionaire
group 2: n = 35
45.5
and 55% females
diseases
group3: n = 40
group 2: 51-65,
group 2: 43% males
m = 58.6
and 57% females
group 3: 66-92,
group 3: 45% males
m=74.1
and 55% females

53
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Ref.
Technology Category
Test User Characteristics
Test
Country
Applied
Method
Number
Age
Gender
Health Status
Living Situation
Caregivers
involved
41
technologiesforagingin
place
n = 30 aging service
leaders and policy
advocates
40-75
13males
17females
n/a
n/a
agingservice
leaders and
policy
advocates
US
workshopand
focus groups
42
ambientdisplaywithsocial
network application
n=1 elderly
n=8 informal carers
88
1female
n/a
n/a
informal
carers
n/a
fieldtrialwith
interviews
43
technologiesforagingin
place
group 1: n = 762
group 2: n = 756
group1:45-64
group 2: 65+
499 males
1019females
bothdisabledand
nondisabledadults
n/a
no
US
survey
43
technologiesforagingin
place
samplesizerange:1-
78
mostly 65+
n/a
hetereogenous
heterogenous
4 studies
included
informal
carers and
care
professionals
Mostly
North
America
andEurope
Systematic
review,
interviews
47
domestic robot
Exp. 1: n = 40
Exp. 2: n = 88
Exp. 3: n = 30
Exp.4:n=30
Exp.1:65-89
Exp. 2: n/a
Exp. 3: 65-94
Exp. 4: 65-89
Exp. 1: : 18 males
and 22 females.
Exp. 2: 28 males
and 60 females.
Exp.3:8malesand
22 females.
Exp.4:16males
and14females.
n/a
n/a
no
Netherlands
4
experiments
48
sensor network/monitoring
n = 40
56-8 8
m=70.3
n/a
n/a
n/a
no
Italy
experiment
and
questionaire

