30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Cloud Based Patient-Centered eHealth Record 
 
Konstantinos Koumaditis, Leonidas Katelaris, and Marinos Themistocleous 
Department of Digital Systems  
University of Piraeus 
Piraeus, Greece 
e-mail: (konkoum,lkatelaris,mthemist)@unipi.gr  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract - This research focuses on the Patient-Centered 
e-Health (PCEH) concept by introducing its importance 
and demonstrating a multidisciplinary project that 
combines advanced technologies. The project links 
several aspects of PCEH functionality, such as: (a) 
homecare telemedicine technologies, (b) e-prescribing, e-
referral, e-learning and (c) state-of-the-art technologies 
like cloud computing and Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA), will lead to an innovative integrated e-health 
platform that delivers many benefits to the society, the 
economy, the industry and the research community. This 
paper provides insights of the PCEH concept and the 
current stages of the project. In doing so, we aim to 
increase the awareness of this significant work and 
disseminate the knowledge gained so far through our 
work. 
Keywords-Personal Healthcare Record; Cloud Computing; 
Healthcare Information Systems Integration. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare Information Systems (HIS) integration has 
been associated with various aspects, amongst others: 
strategic, social, and/or organisational [1, 2]. In this respect, 
there is a common trend to address HIS integration by an 
overall approach, seen as integrated patient centered care [3]. 
Integrated patient centered care reflects on integrated HIS 
(with elements as e-health services) requiring coordination 
across professionals, facilities, support systems that is 
continuous over time and between patient visits [4]. This 
approach is observed on national healthcare strategies that 
encourage patient involvement in their healthcare treatment. 
Moreover, in the USA and Europe, online personal health 
records that allow patients to manage their health data have 
emerged [5]. For example, in Finland, this integration trend 
can be observed in a legislation that allows citizens to access 
and interact with their own Electronic Healthcare Records 
(EHRs), ePrescriptions and audit-logs via the Internet [6].  
Following similar legislative opportunities worldwide, 
patients increase their involvement with HIS. This is a 
growing involvement, seen in parallel with mechanisms for 
the collection of information (obtained by mobile and other 
sources) in order to develop an enhanced, complete and 
integrated view of citizens health status. The latter is reflected 
in EHRs and Personal Health Records (PHRs), which are 
being enriched and exploited by different actors and 
stakeholders (i.e., health and care professionals, citizens, 
nutrition experts, hospitals, etc.) in the health ecosystem. 
Three general PHR models have been proposed [7]: a) the 
stand-alone model, b) Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
system, and c) the integrated one, which is an interoperable 
system providing linkage with a variety of patient 
information sources, such as EHRs, home diagnostics, 
insurance claims etc. The main types of health information 
supported by PHRs are problem lists, procedures, major 
illnesses, provider lists, allergy data, home-monitored data, 
family history, social history and lifestyle, immunizations, 
medications and laboratory tests [8, 9]. Widely known PHR 
platforms in terms of centralized web-based portals include 
Dossia [10] and Microsoft Health Vault [11] platforms. Many 
systems presented in literature offer integration with already 
established PHRs platforms [12, 13]. Early experiences from 
the adoption of PHR-based systems have been found to be 
positive, showing that such systems can be feasible, secure, 
and well accepted by patients [14]. Nonetheless, today’s 
EHRs and PHRs are far from being what the citizens consider 
as of value to their health, since for the public view, health 
means more than being disease-free. 
Following this trend for patients’ empowerment, 
academics, practitioners and patients advocate in favor of the 
patient centered healthcare systems. Still the aforementioned 
advocates have not yet reached a concise definition of Patient-
Centered e-Health (PCEH) that is shared across the research 
disciplines that focus on health and Information Technology 
(IT) [15]. The lack of consensus can be attributed, amongst 
other, (a) on the number of challenges that are involved in 
transitioning healthcare delivery to a more patient-centered 
system and (b) the lack of proof-of-concept through well-
documented and effective PCEH projects. 
Healthcare is unique and complex ecosystem that poses 
several challenges on developing PCEH [16]. The healthcare 
ecosystem consists of several networking organisations that 
constantly interact with each other, but also differentiate 
amongst them. The differentiation can be noted in issues, such 
as: (a) medical specialisations, (b) socio-technical and IT 
capacities, (c) organisational cultures, (d) structures, (e) actors 

31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and (f) business process [2]. More precisely, healthcare tasks 
are distributed between several actors (physicians, nurses, 
residents, and other clinical support staff) and artefacts 
(information technology, healthcare specific machines, paper 
notes) [17]. 
Thus, the challenge to integrate and redesign existing 
healthcare systems towards a more patient-centered exists [3].  
This challenge is emphasized when integration efforts as the 
PCEH projects try to leverage the different actors and their 
sub-sequential attributes. Apparently, the professional 
healthcare actors with their many years of training, 
qualifications and expertise have much more medical 
knowledge than their patients. As a result, a paternalistic 
system has evolved where physicians expect, and patients 
expect them, to make the decisions about, or at least 
recommend, an appropriate course of treatment [18]. 
Therefore, an integrated system of personal healthcare 
information that is governed by the patient him/herself 
contradicts the established norms and highlights new 
challenges (e.g., validity and royalty of medical data, decision 
making culture etc.). For example, following a more shared 
decision making or interpretation of the enclosed data, as the 
PCEH entails, requires (a) a plethora of the necessary medical 
data integrated in an easily accessible and comprehensible 
platform adequate for decision-making and (b) the physicians’ 
arbitration to support or contradict those decisions. This 
requires well-developed sophisticated systems with clear 
boundaries 
on 
decision-making, 
responsibilities 
and 
availability of data.  
Regardless the challenges, moving toward patient-
centeredness is important [15].  To this end, this paper aims to 
introduce: (a) the main concepts surrounding the PCEH and 
(b) a PCEH project utilizing cloud computing.  
With this section introducing the reader to the research the 
rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section II presents 
the Patient Centered E-health (PCEH) theory, Section III lists 
relevant PHR and cloud computing projects, Section IV 
depicts the PINCLOUD project, Section V addresses the main 
ideas behind the PINCLOUD project, Section VI analyses the 
E-referal business process, Section VII highlights the expected 
benefits and Section VIII presents the conclusions and future 
research agenda. 
II. 
PATIENT-CENTERED E-HEALTH (PCEH) 
Most developed countries are facing important overall 
problems regarding health care services, such as: (a) aging 
population with increased demand on specialized health care 
services (e.g., Chronic diseases), (b) need for increased 
efficiency with limited financial resources (e.g., Staff /bed 
reduction), (c) requirements for increased  accessibility of 
care outside hospitals (e.g., home care) to name a few. To 
these problems, advances in information and communication 
technologies have provided considerable assistance in the 
form of EHRs [6]. Yet, it seems that traditional EHRs, which 
are based on the 'fetch and show' model, provide limited 
functionality that does not cover the spectrum of the patients’ 
needs. Therefore, new solutions as the PHRs appeared to 
narrow this gap. In more detail, PHRs’ data can come from 
various sources like EHRs, health providers (e.g., e-
Prescibing, e-Referal), and/or directly from the patient 
him/herself – including non-clinical information (e.g., 
exercise habits, food and dieting statistics, etc.) [19]. 
The PCEH concept is a new multidiscipline area of 
research, with crucial aspects as it deals with the wellbeing of 
patients.  
However, due to the length limitations of this paper we 
briefly present up-to-date research on the field, with the 
intention to fully present and analyse our rigorous research in 
a future publication. In this paper, we focus mainly on [15, 
20] views. In more detail, [15] depicts that the PCEH should 
integrate three themes:  
 
 
Patient-focus - In many cases, e-health developers have 
created systems designed for patients’ use that is not 
patient-focused but rather focused on healthcare 
organizations’ objectives. Patient-focus requires PCEH 
strategies to be centered first and foremost on the 
requirements and perspectives of patients. To this extent 
if the patient require e-health services tailored to their 
needs, developers need to accommodate these needs. For 
example, young web-savvy patients expect their e-health 
applications to be responsive to their medium of choice 
(mobile, tablet, etc.), while more unexperienced elderly 
patients require a more user friendly environment. 
 
 
Patient-activity 
- 
Patient-activity 
requires 
comprehensive, interactive input by patients in providing 
data about themselves and representing their own 
perspectives as well as consuming information of interest 
to them. Yet, achieving high patient-activity in other e-
health services may require reconceptualization of 
healthcare processes and information flows in order to 
provide opportunity to patients to add information they 
perceive to be relevant. The PHR is an example of such 
an e-health application.  
 
 
Patient-empowerment - in a technological perspective 
the empowerment happens through information-sharing, 
offering the patients a visual overview of their course of 
treatment, 
letting 
the 
patients 
take 
their 
own 
measurements, and letting them provide verbal and 
written inputs. From the PCEH perspective, however, 
patient-empowerment centers on providing similar levels 
of control via e-health that exist for patients in other 
modes of interaction with their healthcare providers. 
 
The value of the three introduced characteristics is to 
ascertain the generalizability and abstraction properties of 

32
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patient-focus, patient-activity, and patient-empowerment to 
the theoretical domain and to explore relationships among the 
PCEH characteristics [20]. Although at an early stage [20] 
arguments provide helpful guidance in the emerging issue of 
patient-centered e-health and can be of value in the 
development, design and evaluation of PHRs. These issues 
are included in our research agenda as well. 
III. 
PHR/EHR CLOUD-COMPUTING PROJECTS 
Literature includes various examples of PHR and EHR 
approaches with different themes, addressing various aspects 
and produced in diverse settings (e.g., industry, academia 
etc.). This composes a mosaic of different examples that 
individual researchers of the field and/or developers need to 
consider before embarking in the Cloud-Computing e-health 
journey. Studying past endeavors one may learn from the 
successes and diverge from the mistakes of others. Therefore, 
our intentions for presenting such examples extent from 
providing a helpful list of recent PHR/EHR projects to 
illustrate unique techniques to implement Cloud services, 
describe ways to resolve the integration challenges faced, 
provide recent advances from academia and industry and 
highlight lessons learned and recommendations. The authors 
acknowledge that this is not an exhaustive list of examples 
but a suitable one for the theme and audience of this Journal.  
To provide a better illustration and help the reader 
understand this important integration issue, the authors 
researched the literature and depict herein a twofold 
categorization of the findings, such as: (a) PHR/EHR 
solutions and/or (b) PHR/EHR components. This provides a 
useful categorization in the current ongoing PHR issues 
discussion. Starting with the PHR/EHR below the identified 
projects are presented in an alphabetical list. 
CareCloud offers several approaches ranging from SaaS, 
to data analytics and IaaS. It offers healthcare practices a way 
to manage their practice with a plethora of tools. 
CentralCloud allows the management of patient records, 
appointments, billing and reporting. Charts solution provides 
an easy to use EHR system. CareCloud also has solutions for 
doctor – patient virtual interaction [21]. 
ClearHealth Office is a solution for small practice (fewer 
than ten physicians or 20,000 encounters per year) that can be 
distributed in two forms. The one is on premise and the 
second is cloud based. The first one (on premise), requires 
hardware and detailed setup processes. The second one is a 
cloud solution that removes the need for hardware and the 
problems with detailed setup. It is called HealthCloud and 
promises to deliver ready-to-go installations of ClearHealth 
Office on fully managed and secured datacenters owned by 
Amazon. This service is suitable for US practitioners, 
interested in self-serving their installations [22].  
EMC Electronic Health Record Infrastructure Solutions 
consist of integrated, validated solutions with industry- 
leading healthcare (Independent Software Vendor) ISV 
partners [23], clinical applications, and best-in-class 
hardware, software, and services to help caregivers to move 
forward with their EHR deployment. EMC provides the 
supporting IT infrastructure aligned with clinical services 
needs for the highest levels of performance, availability, 
security, virtualization, and integration [24]. 
Healthcare Trustworthy Platform is a multilevel Personal 
Health Record (PHR) platform based on the Trustworthy 
Cloud Technology that allows people to share health data 
while guaranteeing security and privacy. It aims at the 
integration of third party applications and give them access to 
user’s health data (e.g., view, add and update). It also 
provides a high security model, which allows the patients to 
decide how and with whom to share data [25]. 
The most popular solution in our list is the well-known 
HealthVault. It is being distributed through Windows Azure 
cloud server, which is already widely implemented in 
business environments and in some public administrations. 
Microsoft HealthVault provides one place to store and access 
of health information online. It supports interoperability with 
other healthcare providers. There is a growing list of devices 
such as pedometers, blood pressure monitors, blood glucose 
monitors, and even weight scales, which work with 
HealthVault. In that way, the users do not have to enter 
anything by hand, just upload their data directly to 
HealthVault from compatible devices [26].  
Medscribler is a SaaS solution for recording patient data. 
It uses mobile technologies such as tablets and smartphones 
and handwriting recognition software to allow ease 
submission of patient data. It is an EMR solution that 
provides a quick and intuitive way to update medical records 
of patients. These records can be stored in a cloud. This 
solution provides an innovative approach to the problems of 
mobile practicing of medicine. The doctor is able to update 
patient records via a network connection and thus has no need 
for bulkier equipment than a tablet computer [27].  
OpenEMR is a free and open source Electronic Health 
Records 
(EMR) 
and 
medical 
practice 
management 
application that can run on multiple platforms. OpenEMR is 
supported by a community of volunteers and professionals. 
This software can be implemented into a cloud as SaaS. It 
supports cloud structures, encryption, remote access and web 
browser access [28].  
SOFTCARE is a multi-cloud-enabled platform, which has 
developed a prototype of a monitoring system for seniors that 
allow caregivers (formal and informal) and senior users to get 
real-time alarms in dangerous or potentially dangerous 
situations and warnings on long-term trends that could 
indicate a future problem. It is based on Artificial Intelligence 
techniques that allow the recognition of daily activities based 
on the data obtained from an accelerometer (bracelet device) 
and location information [29]. 
Another integration platform is X1.V1. It offers effective 
tools to generate reports about (a) the general healthcare 
status of the population, (b) the quality of healthcare 
performance and (c) the financial costs. In that way, it 

33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
facilitates the cooperation among the different caregivers in 
the provision of diagnosis and treatment. Another intuitive 
feature is that enhances epidemic diseases and cancer 
detection rate [30].   
Zappa is an open source, extensible, scalable and 
customizable cloud platform for the development of e-
Health/m-Health systems. It aims at delivering resources as 
services over Internet (Cloud-Computing). Moreover, the 
platform is intended to provide uninterrupted monitoring with 
the goal of obtaining some information that can be 
subsequently analyzed by physicians for diagnosing.  Two e-
Health applications have also been developed based on that 
platform: (a) Zappa App, (b) Cloud Rehab.  
Having described the PHR/EHR solutions, the second part 
of list, the PHR/EHR components are depicted. 
Cloud Rehab is a full m-Health system that is used to 
monitor the daily activities of patients with severe brain 
damage. It is a component to the Zappa cloud platform 
mentioned above. Cloud Rehab consists of two applications 
(a) web application and (b) Android application. Web 
application is being used by the medical staff to manage 
patients’ medical information. Whereas, Android application 
is being used by the patient. The mobile application monitors 
heart rate and sends the data to the cloud [23]. 
DAPHNE is a Data as a Service (DaaS) platform for 
collecting, managing and analyzing wellness data in order to 
provide healthy lifestyle and preventive medicine [31]. 
DAPHNE platform is open to hardware and software 
developers, providing data for different personalized health 
services, both for the citizen and the service provider. 
EMC Collaborative Healthcare Solutions provides a 
patient-centric infrastructure to "content-enable" Picture 
Archiving and Communication System, Hospital Information 
System, and Electronic Medical Record applications for 
accessing all relevant clinical, financial, and operational data. 
Based on open standards, the solution is in accordance with 
the Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise initiative that 
promotes the coordinated use of established standards. Their 
solution enhances operational agility through the abstraction 
of applications and infrastructure, improves financial 
performance by managing physical and virtual assets with 
highly automated tools, and secures access to and prevents 
loss of protected health information [21]. 
VIGOR++ is an international research project that aims to 
create a personalized gastrointestinal tract model, which 
facilitates accurate detection and grading of Crohn’s disease. 
VIGOR++ processes multi-scale information from 
patients, including laboratory, MRI, colonoscopy and 
microscopy (histopathology) data. 
 
 
 
 
 
Its techniques are integrated in the 3DNetMedical.com 
medical imaging cloud service, to make them immediately 
available in a clinically usable environment [32]. 
Zappa App is an m-Health system used to monitor the 
heart rate, temperature and blood pressure of the patient. It is 
a component to the Zappa cloud platform, which is mentioned 
above. In addition, Zappa App is able to save the vital sign 
values, detect health problems and share information with a 
doctor or medical staff that are in the same place that the 
patient (Bluetooth) [23]. The aforementioned categorized list 
is presented in Table I. The first column is an arithmetic count 
of the projects, the second the name, the third the type based 
on our categorization, the fourth the description and the last 
column the reference for each. 
The aforementioned PHR/EHR solutions utilize the 
Cloud-Computing advances to achieve common goals, 
therefore they hold similarities such as: (a) integration, (b) 
interoperability and (c) lower business expenses. All of the 
aforementioned approaches try to integrate different systems 
to manage medical information based on a centralized system 
hosted on cloud. Furthermore, they try to provide users with 
the ability to access the systems through different type of 
operating systems (e.g., Windows, Linux, and MAC OS) and 
devices (e.g., desktop, laptop, tablet, smartphones, and 
medical sensors). The solutions presented in Table I leverage 
Cloud-Computing benefits to lower expenses both on 
Operating Expenditure (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure 
(CAPEX) at the health section. For example, solution number 
7 can run in different systems, while 1, 4, 9 support 
integration of different type of systems resulting to lower 
business expenses. 
Apart from the similarities, the above mentioned solutions 
also have differences between them, such as: (a) different 
type of users, (b) different target territories and (c) different 
type of devices. For example, solution number 8 is designed 
for senior people, 2 for small practices and 11 for patient with 
severe brain damage, 2 targets USA practitioners and 11, 15 
address mobile devices implementations.  
The aforementioned Cloud-Computing solutions hold 
several merits and aim at the same goal, provide better e-
health services. Yet, due to the critical nature of healthcare 
and the importance of successful implementation of such 
endeavors, there is still need for rigorous research that can 
carefully examine the development steps and provide “best-
fit” technologies. To accommodate this need the authors’ 
involvement in a multidiscipline e-health integration project 
that utilizes Cloud-Computing. This endeavor is analyzed in 
the following section.     
 

34
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table I. PHR Projects 
 
 
To this end, we introduce in this paper our own practical 
involvement with a PHR project and provide a brief 
introduction in the following section. 
 
IV. 
PROVIDING INTEGRATED E-HEALTH SERVICES FOR 
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE UTILIZING CLOUD 
INFRASTRUCTURE (PINCLOUD) 
 
PINCLOUD is a multidiscipline research project 
involving partners both from academia and industry that 
seeks to integrate different application components, leading 
to the provision of an end-to-end personalized disease 
monitoring and medical data service “anytime, anywhere”, 
which ensures an independent living regardless of age [33].  
The scenario, upon which PINCLOUD is based, is 
depicted in Figure 1 and involves a patient that governs 
his\her PHR, which is also remotely monitored by a physician 
located either at a hospital or medical office. Complementary 
to the PHR’s stored information the doctor monitors the 
patient using a home care platform that receives and analyses 
patient’s medical data. The proposed home care platform will 
include among others the following services: (a) Asthma or 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) disease 
management; (b) Hyper-tension disease management; (c) 
Diabetes 
monitoring; 
(d) 
Electrocardiogram 
(ECG) 
monitoring; (e) Video/ Audio Access to physicians for remote 
consultation; (e) Remote picture and text archiving and 
communication service (back-up/long term archiving 
complementary to infrastructure operated by hospitals) and 
(f) Fall Prevention and Detection Services. The doctor can 
access the patient’s PHR on-line through a cloud computing 
service. The latter can support the doctor in decision making 
and results in better quality of health service. In more detail, 
the doctor retrieves and updates the patient’s medical data and 
can also use the proposed on-line system to: (a) prescribe a 
new medicine; (b) fill in an e-referral for specific exams (e.g., 
blood test); (c) inform and advise his/her patient or (d) ask the 
patient to visit the hospital. Following the doctor’s advice, the 
patient visits a pharmacy, or a diagnostic centre or a hospital. 
At the final stage, the healthcare service providers (doctors, 
hospitals, diagnostic centres) and pharmacies interact with 
the health insurance organisation to compensate all 
outstanding orders and medical actions. 
Currently, PINCLOUD [19] is in its implementation 
phase, upon which the various components, such as: (a) PHR 
platform, (b) e-prescribing and e-referral, and (c) homecare 
applications, are being developed and tested. 
 
Figure 1. Providing Integrated e-Health Services for 
Personalized Medicine utilizing Cloud Infrastructure 
(PINCLOUD) 
V. 
MAIN IDEAS 
Service and data availability is crucial for healthcare 
providers who cannot effectively operate unless their 

35
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
applications are functioning properly and patients’ data is 
available in a consistent manner. This is also the case for 
PINCLOUD. PINCLOUD’s services (e.g., E-Prescription, E-
Referral, Home-Care and PHR) ought to be available 
continuously 
with 
no 
interruptions 
or 
performance 
degradation since they will be used for decision making 
regarding the patients wellbeing.  
New research projects, as PINCLOUD need to reinsure 
service availability to the participating healthcare providers 
and other organizations. In addition, hardware and software 
installations, upgrades, and reconfigurations have to be 
managed and maintained without any service interruptions 
that may cause problems. In order to achieve the availability 
in a cost efficient way the use of Cloud-Computing seems to 
be the appropriate solution and thus the PINCLOUD was 
designed based on its features. These features as cost-saving, 
agility, 
efficiency, 
resource 
consolidation, 
business 
opportunities and Green IT are relevant and applicable to the 
healthcare sector. 
Besides, PINCLOUD potentially will be responsible for 
the governance of a big volume of medical data. The 
protection and integrity of such data is vital for both the 
patients’ privacy and their wellbeing. At this stage of the 
project the protection of these data is achieved with a Private 
Cloud delivery model. A Private Cloud model is operated by 
a single organization. In the private cloud, the technology 
resides within an organization's own data center and the 
resources are deployed as needed to the different 
departments. In our project, a private IT company, which is 
part of the consortium has provided the Private Cloud’s 
infrastructure. Thus, the developers can overcome the 
challenges associated with other Cloud models (e.g., Public, 
Hybrid) since the ability to manage and control sensitive 
patient data remains within the organization.  
PINCLOUD is based on the well-known Cloud-
Computing three service models’ structure, namely: (a) 
Software as a Service (SaaS), (b) Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
and (c) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Respectively, 
PINCLOUD provides the user interaction through SaaS. In 
theory, SaaS is the capability provided to the consumer to use 
the provider’s applications running on a cloud infrastructure. 
The applications are accessible from various client devices 
through either a thin client interface, such as a web browser 
(e.g., web-based email), or a program interface. PINCLOUD 
offers four applications, such as (a) E-prescription, (b) E-
referral, (c) Home-Care and (d) PHR. These applications 
provide the main functionality required and are being 
consumed 
by 
End-Users 
(e.g., 
Patients, 
Doctors, 
Hospitals/Labs and Insurance Bodies). All these users access 
the PINCLOUD through user interface provided as a service. 
For example, a PINCLOUD registered user can have access 
to his/her medical record online. 
In addition, PINCLOUD takes advantage of PaaS service 
model. Literature presents PaaS as the capability provided to 
the consumer to use and or deploy into the cloud 
infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications 
created using programming languages and tools supported by 
the provider (NIST). Accordingly, it takes advantage of the 
PaaS model and provides open source components as Web-
Services and  
Application 
Programming 
Interfaces 
(APIs) that facilitate the integration with third (3rd) parties 
(e.g., Medical Data Providers, Hospitals). For example, when 
a hospital decides to be integrated in the PINCLOUD system, 
it can allocate and consume the Web-services’ API created.  
The processing and storage capability of PINCLOUD is 
based on IaaS model. IaaS is the capability provided to the 
consumer to provide processing, storage, networks, and other 
fundamental computing resources while the consumer can 
deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include 
operating systems and applications. PINCLOUD takes 
advantage of the IaaS and provides data processing and 
storage of medical data. IaaS consists of multiple Virtual 
Machines (VM), Medical Data Base and Network 
Infrastructure. In the given case, multiple VMs are utilized 
with each one dedicated to one service (e.g., Database, 
Access Control, Backup).  
VI. 
E-REFERALL BUSSINESS PROCESS 
This section familiarizes the reader with the PINCLOUD 
architecture and provides a detailed account for one of its 
main services, the E-referral service, as seen in Figure 2. In 
more detail, Figure 2 demonstrates the three service models, 
upon which PINCLOUD platform is based, namely: (a) 
Software as a Service (SaaS), (b) Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
and (c) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Additionally, the E-
Referral Service Business Process flow is exposed in its main 
functionality (e.g., Login, find, open etc.).  
As shown in Figure 2, SaaS provides all the 
PINCLOUD’s services such as: (a) Personal Health Record 
(PHR), (b) Home-Care, (c) E-referral and (d) E-Prescribe. 
The PHR is accessible by PINCLOUD’s Services (E-
Referral, E-Prescribe and Home-Care), but also by thirty 
party services and entities, which have access to the patient’s 
PHR. Such thirty party services are the (a) Insurance Bodies, 
(b) Diagnostic Centers, (c) Trainers, (d) Medical Devices and 
manually submitted data by patient and access is granted with 
the patient’s approval, as he is the owner of the PINCLOUD 
system. 
The different web services (e.g., E-Referral, E-
Prescription and Home-Care) are depicted in PaaS and can 
run independently and exchange information between each 
other. More specifically PICNLOUD provides two kinds of 
APIs, such as: (a) interconnectivity between the different 
provided services and storage and (b) providing access to 
thirty parties to connect with PINCLOUD, exploiting the 
advantages of PaaS Cloud models.  
PINCLOUD is also using the IaaS Cloud model for: (a) 
Storage for the databases the platform is using, (b) The 
Virtual Machines where the PICNLOUD platform services 
are hosted and running and (c) The Network that is 
responsible for the interconnectivity between the different 
services and the different Virtual Machines of PINCLOUD. 

36
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It is worth mentioning that the PICNLOUD platform exploits 
several advantages from Cloud models such as the (a) 
Scalability (b) Elasticity and the (c) Lower Total Cost of 
Ownership (TCO), but also ensures the medical data 
integrity. 
 
 
Figure 2. E-Referral implementation in PINCLOUD 
Platform 
 
In a closer look of the E-Referral Service, an analysis of 
the Business Process flow is presented in the following 
paragraphs and depicted in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. E-Referral Process 
 
The E-Referral Service is one of the four main services 
the PINCLOUD platform offers as mentioned earlier in this 
section. The E-Referral Service is a complex web service 
consisting of several simple web services multiplexed 
together. In the diagrammatical flow shown in Figure 2, 
common (white border) and E-Referral steps (gray border) 
exist. The common steps referred to the steps which the 
doctor has to walk through despite the PINCLOUD service 
he/she executes (e.g., they are common for E-Prescribe as 
well). The first common step is “Login”, in which the doctor 
provides his/her credential in order to gain access into the 
PINCLOUD platform. In the second step, “Find Patient” the 
doctor searches for the patient using the patient’s SSN 
number, which is a unique key identifier for each patient as it 
shown in Screenshot 1. 
 
 
Screenshot 1. The Doctor initiates the search for the 
patient’s information 
 
Moving on, the doctor selects between the offered 
services, such as:  PHR, Home-Care, E-Referral and E- 
prescription, as depicted in Figure 2. In the next step (step 3), 
the doctor is able to create/open a new E-Referral (“Open E-
Referral”).  The “Open E-Referral” is followed by “Register 
Disease” in step 4, where the doctor obligated by the system 
to write the disease diagnosis with any comments (e.g., free 
text) as a guideline for the patient (Screenshot 2). The 
diagnosis for the patient’s disease is encoded based on the 
Worlds Healthcare Organization International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems that 
is now at its 10th Revision (e.g., ICD 10).  
 
  
Screenshot 2. Diagnosis 
 
Moving on in the E-Referral flow in step five, the doctor 
is able to select all the required exams for the patient in order 
to issue the E-Referral.  This step named “Select Exams” by 
the authors as shown in Screenshot 3. The exams, which the 
doctor is able to select are also based on the ICD10 standard. 
It has to be mentioned at this point that, the PINCLOUD 
platform provides efficient mechanisms in order to prevent 
medical errors. To this direction in the current Service (E-
Referral) the system is able to ensure the disease to medical 
exams interactions by providing appropriate alerts in such 
cases. Thus, the doctor is able to select up to ten different 
medical Exams for each E-referral.  Finally, the doctor is 
Step 3 
Step 4 
Step 2 

37
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ready to issue the E-Referral and save it in step six “Save” 
and logout. 
 
Screenshot 3. Available Medical Exams 
 
VII. 
EXPECTED BENEFITS 
 
The project shall build a reliable, secure and extensible 
platform warranting stakeholder collaboration and enjoying 
public trust. The expected benefits for all participant 
organizations include amongst others: (a) the development of 
integrated healthcare services that improve quality of service 
and reduce costs; (b) business process reengineering, 
improvement, simplification and integration; (c) enhanced 
decision making for health organizations and significant 
reductions to medical errors; (d) standardization, automation, 
synchronization, better control and communication; (e) 
improved coordination, management and scheduling of 
specific health supply chains and services; (f) development of 
monitoring systems that improve quality of care of patients at 
home; (g) establishment of an infrastructure that provides up-
to-date information; (h) development of an innovative 
organizational environment for the participating hospital 
using horizontal processes instead of the traditional 
hierarchical organization; (i) implementation of an extensible 
and maintainable infrastructure that can be enriched with 
other medical services; (j) development of an appropriate, 
sustainable technological framework that can be deployed 
and applied in other relevant situations and environments; (k) 
investigation of state-of-the art technologies and novel 
research that extends the body of knowledge; (l) significant 
research outcomes and publications of excellent quality; (m) 
production of new platforms, infrastructures and solution that 
can be further exploited, (n) knowledge and expertise gained 
can lead to competitive advantage and (o) production and 
export of technical know-how for all the participants.  
The results of the proposed project are of great importance 
for the businesses that deal with the medical/health sector as 
they will increase the potential to gain competitive 
advantages through the project. The area of healthcare is 
significant and the need for advanced and innovative IT 
solutions in this area is apparent too. Thus, the participant 
enterprises will have the opportunity to: (a) develop an 
integrated platform that can be used by other organizations in 
the future; (b) better understand and analyze the complexities 
of the Greek healthcare environment; (c) experiment and 
implement innovative integrated solutions that can be turned 
into products; (d) gain expertise and know-how on a complex 
area; (d) sell these products and know-how at national and 
international level since PINCLOUD seeks to develop an 
innovative solution; (e) obtain and reinforce experiences that 
can be used for the development of other network-oriented 
systems and (f) extend their business activities.  
The benefits for both healthcare organizations include 
among others: (a) specifications of processes for the 
management of healthcare processes; (b) simplification and 
acceleration of business processes; (c) better management of 
healthcare tasks; (d) personalized disease monitoring and cost 
calculation; (e) more efficient operation and (f) economies of 
scale. 
The academic institutions’ participation in the project is 
equally important and include benefits, such as: (a) 
knowledge exchange and transfer; (b) engagement in 
innovative research; (c) investigation of state of the art 
technologies; (d) opportunity to publish research articles of 
high quality; (e) prospect to conduct applied research and 
combine theory and practice.  
PINCLOUD will deliver the following benefits to the 
national economy and society: (a) enhancement of occupation 
and working activities for the participating partners; (b) the 
reinforcement of scientific research; (c) improved delivery of 
healthcare services at reduced cost; (d) patients’ and next of 
keen satisfaction; (e) the development of innovative and state 
of the art healthcare systems; (f) more efficient allocation and 
management of computing resources; (g) the development of 
new products and jobs; (h) reduction of medical errors and 
consequently the amount of people that are affected or die due 
to them; (i) the reduction of the cost as an immediate effect 
of the reduction of medical errors; (j) technical, scientific and 
research benefits; (k) reduction of the amount of prescriptions 
and referrals and the associated cost; (l) improvement of the 
quality of life of people who live in islands or rural areas.  
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA 
This paper introduces a Patient-Centered e-Health 
(PCEH) conceptual aspects alongside a multidisciplinary 
PHR project that combines state of the art technologies like 
cloud computing, Service-Oriented-Architecture (SOA), 
homecare telemedicine technologies, e-Prescribing, e-referral 
and e-learning in healthcare environment. The aim of the 
project is to create an integrated PHR platform that delivers 
many benefits to the society, the economy the industry and 
the research community. To this end, various technologies (e-
health, cloud, etc.) and healthcare issues (e.g., complexity, 
PCEH, etc.) were presented. Additionally, our intentions on 
the way we propose to address and combine these issues were 
Step 5 

38
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
explained and depicted. In the previous section, the benefits 
of such an endeavor alongside the steps taken so far to realize 
the implementation of a secure and reliable system, were 
analyzed. Yet, further research is required both in the testing 
and evaluation of our design and implementation. 
To this end, the Research and Development (R&D) team 
engineered several mechanism to test and evaluate 
PINCLOUD and its components. For example, a proof-of-
concept test will be implemented to check the communication 
of various sensors with the main PHR. The results of this test 
will be examined by healthcare professionals and provide 
initial evaluation of the technologies used. Additional, testing 
mechanism have been designed for other components (e.g., e-
prescribing and e-referral) as well.  Besides, PINCLOUD will 
be implemented in two different cloud IaaS providers so as to 
study the interoperability in two different settings. The results 
of this test will again provide insights into the utilized 
technologies and if needed reconfigurations and adjustments 
will be implemented. The authors expect the results of this 
test to be the subject of our next publication. 
 
Acknowledgments: The research leading to the results 
presented in this paper has received funding from the 
European Union and the Greek National Strategic Reference 
Framework 
Programme 
(NSRF 
2007-2013), 
Project 
PinCloud 
under 
grant 
agreement 
number 
“11SYN_6_1013_TPE”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Koumaditis et al., “Introducing a Patient-
Centered e-Health Record Over The Cloud,” in The 
Third International Conference on Global Health 
Challenges (GLOBAL HEALTH 2014). 2014, 
IARIA: Rome, Italy. 
[2] 
D. Finnegan and K. Hamid, "Information systems 
(IS) integration approaches in healthcare: a critical 
review in Integrating Healthcare With Information 
and Communications Technology," W. Currie and 
D. Finnegan, Editors. 2009, Radcliffe Publishing: 
London. pp. 35-63. 
[3] 
T. Leventhal et al., "The Patient-Centered Medical 
Home and Health Information Technology," 
Telemed J E Health. , 2012. 18(2). 
[4] 
S. Singer et al., "Defining and measuring integrated 
patient care: promoting the next frontier in health 
care delivery," Med Care Res Rev, 2011. 68(1): pp. 
112-127. 
[5] 
A. D. Black et al., "The Impact of eHealth on the 
Quality and Safety of Health Care: A Systematic 
Overview," PLoS Med, 2011. 8(1): p. e1000387. 
[6] 
Ruotsalainen, P., A. Iivari, and P. Doupi, "Finland's 
strategy and implementation of citizens' access to 
health information," Stud Health Technol Inform., 
2008. 137: pp. 379-85. 
[7] 
D. Detmer et al., "Integrated personal health 
records: transformative tools for consumer-centric 
care," BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 2008. 8: pp. 45. 
[8] 
P. Tang et al., "Personal Health Records: 
Definitions, Benefits, and Strategies for Overcoming 
Barriers to Adoption," Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, 2006. 13(2): pp. 
121-126. 
[9] 
J. Halamka, K. Mandl, and P. Tang, "Early 
Experiences with Personal Health Records," Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
2008. 15(1): pp. 1-7. 
[10] 
Dossia Persnonal Health Record. 2015  [cited 2015 
May]; Available from: http://www.dossia.org/. 
[11] 
HealthVault, M. Microsoft HealthVault. 2015  
April]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.healthvault.com/gr/en. 
[12] 
S. Reti, H.J. Feldman, and C. Safran, "Governance 
for Personal Health Records," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2009. 
16(1): pp. 14-17. 
[13] 
F. Zhou et al., "Mobile Personal Health Care System 
for Patients with Diabetes, in Aging Friendly 
Technology for Health and Independence," Y. Lee, 
et al., Editors. 2010, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 
94-101. 
[14] 
P. Jennett and M. Watanabe, "Healthcare and 
Telemedicine: Ongoing and Evolving Challenges," 
Disease Management & Health Outcomes, 2006. 
14(1). 
[15] 
V. Wilson and D. Strong, Editors’ "Introduction to 
the Special Section on Patient-centered e-Health: 
Research 
Opportunities 
and 
Challenges," 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 2014. 34(15). 
[16] 
K. Koumaditis et al., "A Proposition of Critical 
Sucess Factors Influencing SOA Implementation in 
Healthcare, 
in 
European 
Conference 
on 
Information Systems," 2012: Barchelona, Spain. 
[17] 
T. Kannampallil et al., "Considering complexity in 
healthcare 
systems," 
Journal 
of 
Biomedical 
Informatics, 2011. 44(6): pp. 943-947. 
[18] 
S. Sherer, "Patients are Not Simply Health IT Users 
or Consumers: The Case for ‘e-Healthicant’ 
Applications," Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, 2014. 34(17): pp. 351–
364. 
[19] 
V. Koufi, F. Malamateniou, and G. Vassilacopoulos, 
"An Android-Enabled PHR-based System for the 
Provision of Homecare Services," International 
Journal 
of 
Measurement 
Technologies 
and 
Instrumentation Engineering (IJMTIE), 2013. 3(2): 
pp. 1-18. 
[20] 
E. 
Wilson, 
W. 
Wang, 
and 
S.D. 
Sheetz, 
"Underpinning a Guiding Theory of Patient-

39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Centered E-Health," Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, 2014. 34(16). 
[21] 
SUCRE. Sucre State of the Art Report. 2014  [cited 
2014 
13.04.2015]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.sucreproject.eu. 
[22] 
ClearHealth. 
ClearHealth 
Smart. 
Simple. 
Sustainable. 2013  [cited 2014 15.04.2014]; 
Available from: http://clear-health.com/. 
[23] 
A. Ruiz-Zafra et al., Zappa: "An Open Mobile 
Platform to Build Cloud-Based m-Health Systems, 
in Ambient Intelligence-Software and Applications," 
2013, Springer. pp. 87-94. 
[24] 
EMC. Electronic Health Record Infrastructure 
Solutions. 2014  [cited 2014 17.04.2014]; Available 
from: 
http://greece.emc.com/industry/public-
sector/electronic-health-record-infrastructure.htm. 
[25] 
Tclouds. TClouds - Trustworthy Clouds Healthcare 
Scenario. 2014  [cited 2014 15.04.2014]; Available 
from: 
http://www.tclouds-
project.eu/downloads/factsheets/tclouds-factsheet-
15-healthcare.pdf. 
[26] 
Microsoft. HealthVault. 2014  [cited 2014 
15.04.2014]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.healthvault.com. 
[27] 
Medscribbler. Medscribbler. 2014  [cited 2014 
16.04.2014]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.medscribbler.com/. 
[28] 
OpenEMR. OpenEMR a Free and Open Source 
electronic health records 2014  [cited 2014 
15.04.2014]; Available from: http://www.open-
emr.org. 
[29] 
AAL-Europe. 
AMBIENT 
ASSISTED 
LIVING 
catalogue of projects 2013. 2013  [cited 2014 
18.04.2014]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.aal-
europe.eu/. 
[30] 
Deadalus. Interoperability Platform X1.V1. 2014  
[cited 2014 17.04.2014]. 
[31] 
Daphne. Daphne Data-as-a-Service Platform for 
Healthy lifestyle and preventive medicine. 2013  
[cited 
2014 
April 
15th]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.daphne-fp7.eu/node/21. 
[32] 
Vodera. VIGOR++ virtual gastrointestinal tract. 
2014  [cited 2014 15.04.2014]; Available from: 
http://www.vigorpp.eu/. 
[33] 
M. Themistocleous, K. Koumaditis, and G. 
Vassilacopoulos. "Providing Integrated e-Health 
Services for Personalized Medicine utilizing Cloud 
Infrastructure. in European, Mediterranean & 
Middle 
Eastern 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems," 2013 (EMCIS2013), October 17-18. 2013. 
Windsor, United Kingdom. 
 

