16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Electronic Communication as a Tool to Reduce Elective Surgery Cancellations 
A Case Study from Norway 
 
Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
conceicao.granja@telemed.no 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
stein.roald.bolle@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvingsen 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital 
settings as they increase costs, reduce productivity and 
efficiency, increase waiting lists, and directly affect patients. The 
elective surgery cancellation problem in a northern Norwegian 
university hospital is addressed. Based on observations and 
interviews conducted at the hospital, lack of information during 
pre-operative planning was identified as the main cause for 
elective surgery cancellations. The problems with the existing 
pre-operative process were identified, and a new process is 
proposed. By studying the pre-operative planning at the 
hospital, we have determined that part of the information flow 
can be moved to the patient at home through electronic 
communication. From the work presented herein, we conclude 
that the assessment information required during the pre-
operative planning can be compiled in a personal health 
assessment questionnaire, and requested from the patient, at an 
earlier stage.  
Keywords-elective 
surgery 
cancellations; 
pre-operative 
planning; electronic communication; clinical process; context-
awareness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Surgical departments are simultaneously the major source 
of investment, and the greatest source of revenue for most 
hospitals [1][2][3] . However, it is known that between 10 and 
40 % of elective surgeries are cancelled [2][4][5][6]. In 
western countries, up to 20 % of elective surgeries are 
cancelled on the day of surgery [7][8][9]. Furthermore, it has 
been reported that 50 % of these cancellations might be 
avoided [2][10][11]. 
Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital settings 
as they increase costs, reduce productivity and efficiency, 
increase waiting lists, and directly affect the patient [4][9][12]. 
Considerable resources are invested in maintaining operating 
theatres, and having surgeons and theatre staff available on an 
agreed schedule [2][13]. In spite of this, the cancellation rate 
of elective surgeries is high, especially in the public sector 
[10][14]. Cancellations can significantly inconvenience 
patients and their families [15][16]. It is also reported that 
patients may suffer psychological stress, and/or financial 
hardships [10]. Accordingly, cancellations are stressful and 
costly, with a high level of emotional involvement before 
surgery [2]. 
The causes for elective surgery cancellation are diverse 
and may be divided in two major categories: (a) hospital, and 
(b) patient related reasons, when considering who took the 
underlying decision to cancel. Hospital related reasons are the 
most frequent and encompass causes such as the 
unavailability of the surgical team [4][8][9], incomplete pre-
operative 
study/preparation 
[8][17], 
lack 
of 
surgical/anaesthetic readiness [8][9], and lack of theatre time 
due to extended duration of scheduled surgeries [8]. On the 
other hand, patient related causes are mostly due to patient no-
shows and refusal to undergo surgery [8][9][17]. It is argued 
that the majority of cancellations are due to information that 
existed prior to the day of surgery, but was not available when 
required [10][14][18][19][20][21]. 
In line with what is reported in literature, our site of 
research, the University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), 
has identified inadequate planning due to lack of information 
as a main cause for cancellations (Figure 1). The hospital has 
reported that more than 50 % of all cancellations at UNN are 
 

17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1. Causes for day of surgery cancellations distribution at UNN from January to June 2011. 
related to inadequate pre-operative planning [18]. It is 
anticipated that the pre-operative planning process may be 
improved if adequate patient information is gathered at an 
earlier stage, before the patient is admitted at the hospital. The 
cancellation problem at UNN is addressed by the eTeam-
Surgery project group. This group consists of an 
interdisciplinary research team, who is studying if and how 
electronic communication can involve the patient in the pre-
operative planning process to provide the missing 
information. 
In this paper, the elective surgery cancellation problem 
caused by inadequate pre-operative planning, in a university 
hospital in Norway, is addressed. We started by studying and 
evaluating the pre-operative planning process at UNN. The 
aim was to explore a system for gathering information from 
patients on their condition through a personal health 
assessment questionnaire. It is suggested an architecture for a 
two-way electronic communication tool to support the pre-
operative planning process. 
The paper is divided in six sections. In the first section the 
problem object of the study is described and classified 
according to its causes. In the second section a brief review of 
the state of the art is presented. Data collection methodologies, 
with which the results were obtained, are presented and 
explained in the third section. The results are disclosed in 
section four. In the fifth section, the results are interpreted and 
discussed in relation to the context-awareness methodology. 
In the last section conclusions about the results are drawn, and 
some indicators of future work in the area foreseen. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In literature, pre-operative planning is reported to be 
approached in several different ways. A brief state-of-the-art 
on how information is gathered from the patient prior to 
surgery is presented below. 
A widely studied approach to the elective surgery 
cancellation problem is the establishment of pre-operative 
assessment clinics (POACs). The aim of a POAC is to prepare 
patients for the administration of anaesthesia and for surgery. 
The implementation of POACs may take different 
configurations relating to the health worker leading the 
appointment. Doctor-led POACs were implemented by 
[17][22][23][24] in an attempt to solve elective surgery 
cancellations due to lacking information. In this settings, 
patients are referred to the POAC either from the ward or the 
outpatient clinic. It was concluded that the number of 
cancellations was reduced but considered not significant [17]. 
In nurse-led POACs [25][26][27] the role of the physicians is 
transferred to the nurse. Thus, in such environments, the pre-
operative assessment is undertaken by nurses, with overall 
supervision of a consultant anaesthesiologist. Nurse-led pre-
operative assessment systems POACs do not address the 
hypothesis that the pre-operative assessment information may 
be collected from the patient at home. 
A different, but still similar, approach to improve pre-
operative planning is to re-evaluate the role of health workers 
in the pre-operative process, and create tools that enable the 
transfer of responsibilities from physicians to nurses. It is 
advocated that the pre-operative assessment of elective 
surgical patients may be undertaken by trained nurses 
[19][28][29]. Following this hypothesis, nurse-led pre-
operative assessment systems have been implemented 
[19][28][29], using protocols to guide nurses in the decision 
making process. Nurse-led pre-operative systems do not 
address the hypothesis that the pre-operative assessment 
information may be collected from the patient at home.  
Searches on the major academic literature databases (i.e., 
PubMed, Web of Science, Inspec, SCOPUS), on pre-operative 
planning that use electronic communication with the patient at 
home, did not retrieve any relevant result. Following, an 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Frequency

18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approach to the problem of elective surgery cancellations by 
contacting the patient at home is presented. 
Telephone calls are being studied as a solution to reduce 
elective surgery cancellations, due to patient no-shows, on the 
day-of-surgery 
[30][31]. 
Such 
studies 
propose 
a 
communication channel between the patient and the provider 
to enable the confirmation of the patient’s intention to attend 
surgery, or simply address patient’s questions and concerns. 
Information exchange between health personnel and patients, 
while the patients are still at home, may solve some of today’s 
challenges with late pre-operative planning and, consequently, 
cancellations of surgical procedures. 
In developed countries, like Norway, where the population 
is well prepared and able to use ICT (e-readiness), a new 
approach is possible [32] to promote patient-centred health 
care [33][34]. Many patients [35], including elderly or less-
educated [36], are strongly motivated to use electronic 
services [37]. In order to address the potential of electronic 
communication in the healthcare sector, a brief state-of-the-
art on the use of electronic communication in other health care 
settings was conducted, and is presented hereafter.  
A promising application of health information and 
communication technology (ICT) is the facilitation of web-
based communication between patients and health workers. 
Such tools are expected to improve health care services by 
promoting streamlined communication, improving resource 
usage, facilitating shared decision-making, and patient self-
management [38][39][40][41][42]. 
A web-based questionnaire of patient symptoms in 
primary care has been implemented at the Mayo Clinic, with 
a 40 % decrease of office visits [43]. 
Zhou et al. [44] reported on the use of secure e-mail 
between physicians and patients at the Kaiser Permanente, for 
a period of two months. The patient portal was integrated with 
the EHR, and 35 % of the hospital patients were registered in 
the portal. The study focus on patients with diabetes and 
hypertension. During the study period, the authors registered 
556 339 e-mails with a total of 630 807 messages, and 85 % 
of the threads were initiated by the patient. In this study was 
shown that the use of secure e-mail between the patients and 
physicians was associated with higher performance of quality 
measures. 
In Rosen and Kwoh's [39] study, a consecutive series of 
patients’ families in paediatric care were offered e-mail access 
over a 2 years period. The authors reported that 5.7 % of 
patients’ e-mails were urgent (i.e., notification of disease flare 
or new symptoms) and only 0.002 % of the e-mails required 
physicians’ emergent attention. After 1 year of enrolment in 
the patient-physician e-mail service, the majority of families 
agreed that service increased access to the physician and 
improved the quality of care. 
A web-based collaborative care management tool was 
presented by Ralston et al. [45]. The tool targeted patients 
diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, and the aim was to support the 
patient at home in the management of their disease. Features 
such as patient access to the EHR, and secure e-mail with 
health workers were included in the tool. During the period 
from August 2002 to May 2004, 83 patients were randomized 
to receive care through the web-based tool as an addition to 
the established care procedures. The authors reported that the 
use of secure e-mail between the patient and the physician 
improved glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes. 
Increased 
collaboration 
with 
patients, 
as 
active 
participants, through ICT solutions, are also defined as a 
priority area, as stated in the Norwegian Ministry of Health 
and Care Services’ Coordination Reform [46]. 
At the same time, an extensive ICT investment is taking 
place in the northern health region of Norway, including at the 
UNN hospital, our site of research. Helse-Nord, the Northern 
Norway Regional Health Authority, is investing €62.5 million 
in the FIKS (from the Norwegian Felles innføring kliniske 
systemer) project to develop the electronic health record 
(EHR) for the future – a fundamental tool for high-quality 
patient treatment [47]. The planning tool on the surgical 
module in the current EHR system has been recognized as an 
unused resource by the FIKS project of the Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority and the Lean Project [47]. The 
described health care trends in Norway open new possibilities 
to approach the elective surgery cancellation problem. 
The aim of our research is to reduce the elective surgery 
cancellations at UNN, by studying pre-operative planning and 
determine if it may be moved from the hospital to the patient 
at home. We will explore if surgical patients and health 
personnel can collaborate in a team while the patient is still at 
home, through an electronic communication tool, and if this 
reduces elective surgery cancellations, by better preparing 
hospitals and patients for surgical procedures. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
To develop an efficient and functional web-based tool for 
hospital-patient collaboration is not an easy task, and it has not 
always been successful. As the development of health ICT 
grows, there is also an increasing number of reports on 
unsuccessful implementation projects, challenges and 
unforeseen consequences of ICT in health care, particularly in 
hospitals [48][49][50][51][52][53][54][55][56][57][58][59]. 
A contributing factor to such results may be found on the focus 
of health ICT on improving individual tasks rather than 
supporting value added care processes. By supporting 
individual tasks, ICT is focusing on the provider. This is a 
significant contribution to a lower quality and high cost health 
care. On the other hand, process focused care is centred on the 
patient. It integrates the team work (e.g., patients, physicians, 
nurses, caregivers, managers, and administrative personnel) to 
provide high quality and efficient care throughout the full 
process. Value added care processes are the goal of the patient 
centred health care. However, few health care processes have 
been modelled comprehensively enough to provide a basis for 
specifying software requirements to health ICT designers. 
Thus, health ICT designers have focused on supporting the 
work of individual care team members by taking existing 
paper-based tools, as their models. The result is that most 
health ICT systems do little to support care teams. Hence, 
prior to development, eTeam-Surgery carried out an in-depth 
study of the pre-operative planning at UNN. 
The management at UNN, our site of research, is 
determined to reduce the cancellation rate at the hospital. 
Resources have been allocated, and a Lean process for elective 
surgical patient pathways at the Operation and Intensive care 
clinic has been initiated at UNN. Lean projects are commonly 
used to transform healthcare organizations for improvements 
in patient care through the development of a quality driven 
culture [12]. At UNN, Lean is defined to concern the right 

19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
things at the right place, time and amount, with a minimum of 
waste while, at the same time, being flexible and prepared for 
changes. The Lean process at UNN is organized as a project 
team, including a project manager, a Lean consultant, a Lean 
mentor, an economics and an IT-consultant. In addition, the 
Lean project has an executive board, a project group and a 
focus group. At the start of the Lean Project, the focus group, 
which is the actual working group, consisted of; one 
anaesthetist nurse, one theatre nurse, two anaesthesiologists, 
three surgeons, one member of the staff responsible for 
sterilization of surgical equipment, three staff members 
responsible for elective surgery planning and waiting lists in 
the surgery ward, one paediatric nurse, two ICT consultants 
(one of them responsible for the EHR), one employee 
representative, and one user (patient). 
Two researchers from our research team have followed the 
Lean process since the initial group meeting in April 2012. 
One has participated solely as a researcher, conducting 
observations during Lean meetings, while the other had an 
active role and contributed as an anaesthesiologist in the Lean 
process. The researchers observed and participated in more 
than twenty meetings. 
The data on the causes for elective surgery cancellation, 
presented in Figure 1, is a result of the work carried out by the 
Lean project. In addition to following the Lean process, we 
have accomplish three weeks of fieldwork at the Operation 
and Intensive care clinic, conducting observations and 
unstructured interviews while following an anaesthesiologist 
and an anaesthetist nurse in their daily work. We have also 
conducted thirteen structured interviews with physicians, 
nurses and administrative personnel. Based on the knowledge 
from the quantitative and qualitative inquiries, it was 
identified the need to proceed with further analysis of the data 
on the causes for cancellation provided by the Lean project, as 
explained in the results section. 
Data collected through observations and interviews was 
analysed together with observational data from the Lean 
project. Our analytical qualitative approach focuses on the 
interaction between technical and social factors that produces 
particular outcomes [60]. The preliminary results are limited 
to the identification of the information needed for pre-
operative assessment from the anaesthetists and surgeons’ 
point of view. 
An empirical inquiry of the reported causes for 
cancellations in the hospital’s EHR, and on the pre-operative 
planning process at the hospital, was conducted. The study 
was carried out using mixed methods, involving both a 
quantitative and a qualitative approach. A quantitative 
approach was used to map the causes for cancellation reported 
in the hospital’s EHR, while a quantitative approach was 
applied in the study of the current preoperative planning 
process at the hospital. 
The aim of the quantitative approach was to quantify and 
map the different causes for cancellations at the hospital in 
order to determine if extended communication between the 
patient and the hospital is an adequate initiative to reduce 
surgical cancellations. In order to make an analysis on how 
such interaction can be organized and integrated in the 
existing work practices at the hospital, it was identified the 
need for a qualitative study of the preoperative planning at the 
hospital. The qualitative approach consisted of an in-depth 
study of the current preoperative planning process, including 
observations and interviews at the hospital. The aim was to 
acquire in-depth knowledge on the information flow and 
workflow during the pre-operative planning process, and 
identify bottlenecks and/or challenges that lead to 
cancellations. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A process model facilitates a systematic description of the 
events permitting the identification of decision activities, and 
the health workers responsible for each of them. In addition, 
it allows us to learn about the information flow, and to identify 
the underlying process issues that are causing the patient 
assessment information not to be available when required. The 
observations and interviews, described in Section III, allowed 
the identification of the activities involved in the pre-operative 
planning as it is done today at UNN.  
The data on elective surgery cancellation, presented in 
Figure 1, is categorized according to the causes reported in the 
EHR system. The data presented in Table I evidences that the 
identified causes for elective surgery cancellation inside the 
same category are not all related to the same context. Thus, 
these causes required further classification according to the 
decision context for the cancellation: management, medical, 
or patient. Decisions within the patient context are related to 
the patient, as patient no-show and will. Decisions in the 
medical context are related to clinical issues and are, therefore, 
taken by surgeons and anaesthesiologists. Finally, the 
decisions taken in the management context relate to planning 
and operational issues and are taken by secretaries, nurses, and 
physicians. This allowed us to identify the responsible (e.g., 
health workers) for the activities required for the process 
modelling. The mapping of the existing pre-operative process 
model is shown in Figure 2. 
TABLE I.  CATEGORIZATION OF THE CAUSES FOR ELECTIVE SURGERY 
CANCELLATION AT UNN, ACCORDING TO WHO TOOK THE UNDERLYING 
DECISION TO CANCEL AND THE RELATED ACTOR. 
 
Cause for elective surgery cancellation 
Decision 
context 
Hospital 
Lack of capacity 
 
Anesthesia nurse 
Management 
Anestheseologist 
Surgeon 
Surgery nurse 
Intensive care 
Recovery 
Ward beds 
Missing Equipment 
Overbooking 
Emergency surgery 
Higher duration of previous surgery 
Insufficient surgery indications 
Medical 
Incomplete study 
Patient 
Other acute medical condition 
Patient no-show 
Patient 
Patient will 
 
 

20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 2. Scheme of the surgery process at UNN. Assessment activities after patient arrival (Box with green border), may contribute to late cancellations 
(box with red border) while there are many possibilities for hospital-patient interaction at earlier stages (Letters to patient and patient at the hospital). 
Referral
Patient 
registration
Order entry
Start referral 
evaluation
Sufficient 
Information
Request information from 
referral institution or GP
Get information
Call the patient
Patient referred to 
Outpatient Clinic
No need for health care from 
specialist (Return to GP)
N
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Inpatient Admission
Y
End referral 
evaluation
Letter to Patient and referral 
institution/GP acknowledging 
the referral was received 
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Schedule patient to 
surgery (Day surgery)
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Sufficient 
Information
N
Y
Appointment at 
Outpatient Clinic
Schedule patient to 
surgery (to himself)
Patient referred to 
appointment with 
another specialist
Internal Referral
No need for surgery
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Schedule 
Follow-up
2nd Referral 
Evaluation
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
Letter to Patient and referral institution/
GP with appointment date/time and 
indication of additional examinations
Surgery planning meeting
Patient arrives at the 
hospital (if not Inpatient)
Procedures in surgical 
department
Surgical Assessment
Treatment
Medical Exam
Surgery 
Cancelled
Discharge
Information 
Required
Anesthesia 
Preparation
Surgery
Surgery form 
(operasjonmelding)
N
Y
OK for 
surgery
N
Y
Had Anesthesia 
Assessment
N
Y
Anesthesia 
Assessment
Admitted for 
Surgery
Admitted for 
Observation
Patient Observation & 
Further Investigation
Schedule for 
Surgery
Schedule 
Follow-up
Discharge
Secretary
Surgeon
Anesthesiologist

21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At UNN, as seen in Figure 2, the final pre-operative planning 
is often done after the patient has arrived at the hospital for the 
scheduled surgery. Which means, the final pre-operative 
planning might be done the day before, or even on the day of 
surgery. During this final planning process, new information 
is gathered from patients which may lead to cancellations. 
Considering the data collected during the observations and 
interviews, and the analysis of the existing pre-operative 
process, all the decision activities were identified and 
characterized. Based on the information requirements on each 
of those activities, a new pre-operative process was proposed. 
In the new pre-operative process the assessment information 
is requested to the patient at an earlier stage and while the 
patient is still at home. The assessment information identified 
as required might be included in the personal health 
assessment questionnaire which some departments ask the 
patients to fill out and bring to the hospital when hospitalized 
for surgery. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper addresses the elective surgery cancellations 
problem at UNN. Observations and interviews were 
conducted at UNN, and lack of information during the pre-
operative planning was identified as the main cause of elective 
surgery cancellations. The problems with the existing pre-
operative process were identified and a new process was 
proposed. In the new process, the assessment information is 
systematized in a personal health assessment questionnaire, 
and provided by the patient at an earlier stage, while the 
patient is still at home. 
The mapping of a generic pre-operative process model 
facilitated the identification of the decision activities, and the 
health workers responsible. The identification of activities, 
and their responsible health worker, allowed us to carry out 
semi-structured interviews to determine the information 
required to complete the pre-operative assessment. 
Surgeons and anaesthesiologists at UNN considered that 
the identified information may be provided by the patient. 
Some departments ask the patients to fill out a personal health 
assessment questionnaire and bring it to the hospital when 
hospitalized for surgery. The information classified as 
required might be included in this questionnaire. Such 
questionnaires can be sent to the patient through the postal 
system, and the patient can fill it out at home. 
At this stage, the collaboration between surgical patients 
and health personnel cannot do much for the elective surgery 
cancellations related to management context. These are 
mostly due to inadequate planning and should be approached 
within the adequate research field. On the other hand, the 
causes for elective surgery cancellation related to the 
remaining decision contexts, patient and medical, may be 
positively influenced by such collaboration, either by 
gathering information on the patient health status based in the 
afore mentioned personal health assessment questionnaire or, 
by improving the dialogue through electronic communication. 
The aim of the research project “eTeam-Surgery” is to 
reduce the number of elective surgery cancellations at UNN. 
In today’s surgical process the information required for 
anaesthetic evaluation is gathered after the patient is 
hospitalized, as shown in Figure 2. The aim of eTeam-Surgery 
is to provide a tool for two-way electronic communication, 
Figure 3, between the hospital and the patient prior to hospital 
admission. Such tool will enable the hospital to collect the 
lacking information at an earlier stage in the pre-operative 
planning process, while the patient is still at home. The tool 
proposed by the eTeam-Surgery project, will provide two 
communication channels: (1) Collect the lacking information 
based on the Patient Health Assessment Questionnaire 
described in Section I. To guarantee that the information 
collected through this channel can be shared by the health 
workers involved in the patient episode, it should be structured 
data that can be included in the EHR system. However, by 
collecting the information while the patient is still at home 
means that patients loose the support from health workers 
while completing it. Therefore, eTeam-Surgery will support 
(2) two-way electronic communication. This part of the tool 
will provide an asynchronous messaging service that will 
enable the patient to pose questions to the hospital, and vice-
versa. 
 
 
Figure 3. Ilustration of the eTeam-Surgery solution architecture. 
The implementation of such tool implies that the pre-
operative planning process, described in Figure 2, needs to be 
restructured. Which means that some of the identified 
activities might be removed from the process, and new ones 
be created. It might also involve the re-evaluation of the health 
workers responsible for the activities. This knowledge, 
combined with the reports in literature that patients often 
evidence “selfish” communication practices which could 
result in an overload of conversations that would not occur if 
the tools were not available [61], leads to the question: “How 
to balance the need to gather information from the patient, and 
the requirements for electronic communication, with the 
reported consequences of communication tools on clinical 
processes?” 
EHR 
Patient Health Assessment Questionnaire 
EHR 
eTeam-Surgery 
Structure Data 
Patient 
Two-way Electronic Communication 
Patient 
Assynchronous 
Messaging 
Hospital 

22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A possible solution may be found in the field of context-
awareness. Let us first define context. Abowd et al. [62] 
defined context as “any information that can be used to 
characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person, 
place, or object that is considered relevant for the interaction 
between a user and an application, including the user and 
application themselves”. This definition shows the importance 
of which information is relevant or not in a context-aware 
system. A context-aware system could, therefore, be defined 
as a system allowing interactions between multiple entities 
using relevant information. In [62] is state that: “A system is 
context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant 
information and/or services to the user, where relevancy 
depends on the user's task”. This definition shows that a 
context-aware system can change its behaviour and send some 
relevant information according to the context, which reflects 
our view. 
The trend in the health IT field has been to push as much 
information as possible to the users, in order to provide more 
sophisticated and useful services while, at the same time, 
making users more available. During a preliminary research 
study on the Aware Media system [63], they suggested a 
classification that splits the above listed information along 
three main axes: 
 
Social awareness: `where a person is', `activity in 
which a person is engaged on', `self-reported status'; 
 
Spatial awareness: 'what kind of operation is taking 
place in a ward', 'level of activity', 'status of 
operation and people present in the room'; 
 
Temporal awareness: 'past activities', 'present and 
future activities' that is significant for a person. 
A context-aware system, comprises two main modules: 
 
Context engine: This module interfaces with other 
information systems and devices to collect raw data. 
These are then fed to an analyzer to classify raw data 
and generate context data; 
 
Rules engine: This module acts as filter between the 
data and the user. By applying a set of pre-defined 
conditions that define what, when, and to who the 
information must be presented. Such rules can be 
defined manual or automatically. 
The adoption of context-aware systems based on these 
definitions is growing in a variety of domains such as, smart 
homes, airports, travel/entertainment/shopping, museum, and 
offices, as mentioned in [64]. 
In the scope of the eTeam-Surgery project, context 
information may be used to decide, e.g., who should 
communicate with the patient, the urgency level of the 
communication, and time frame when the communication 
should be available. In this way, it would be possible to 
balance the eagerness of the patients to communicate with 
hospital with the fact that communication tools make health 
care workers “fatally” available. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
By studying the pre-operative planning at UNN, we have 
determined that parts of the information flow can be moved to 
the patient at home. From the work presented herein, we 
conclude that the assessment information required during the 
pre-operative planning can be compiled in a personal health 
assessment questionnaire, and requested from the patient, at 
an earlier stage. 
The authors acknowledge that the paper-based pre-
operative planning process proposed is not in line with the best 
practices suggested in literature. When using the postal system 
the information flow between the patient and the hospital is 
time consuming, and it is not possible for the hospital to 
confirm the reception and submission of the personal health 
assessment questionnaire. At the same time, due to: (a) the 
patient prioritization rules in Norway, (b) waiting list, (c) and 
emergency surgeries, surgeries can be delayed and the patient 
might be requested to complete the personal health assessment 
questionnaire more than once. On the other hand, when asking 
the patient to answer a personal health assessment 
questionnaire from home, the patient might require support 
from health workers when interpreting the questions, and 
selecting the relevant information.  
The international healthcare trends on paperless and 
patient focused clinical processes, combined with the e-
readiness in Norwegian society, point to new possibilities on 
how to gather assessment information from the patient at 
home. To access this information, low-cost communication 
with patients and their families has been recommended [13]. 
Thereby improving pre-operative planning, and reducing the 
number of cancelations, due to lack of information. In order 
to enable the communication between the patient and the 
hospital, the interaction with patients should take place 
through a variety of synchronous and asynchronous secure 
communication channels, including phone, messaging 
systems, email, and web-pages. Considering the impact of 
health ICT in clinical processes, the authors suggest the 
adoption of the context-aware methodology in the 
development of electronic communication tools to reduce 
elective surgery cancellations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the regional health 
authority Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST 
1119-13 and HST 1125-13. We would also like to thank the 
personnel at UNN and the Lean project, especially Tonje 
Drecker. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvingsen, "Reduced 
Elective Surgery Cancellations through Patient Involvement in 
Pre-Operative Planning in Norway," eTELEMED 2014, The 
Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 164-169. 
[2] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. 
Sindhusake, M. R. Fearnside, and P. L. Klineberg, 
"Cancellation of Operations on the Day of Intended Surgery at 

23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a Major Australian Referral Hospital," Medical Journal of 
Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 2005. 
[3] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of Surgery 
Sequencing and Scheduling Decisions under Uncertainty," 
Health Care Management Science, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[4] A. Foster, "Operating Theatres: Review of National Findings," 
Audit Commission for Local Authorities and the National 
Health Service, London 2003. 
[5] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Canceled Elective Surgery: An 
Evaluation," American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 1994. 
[6] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, 
"Patient Reactions to Cancelled or Postponed Heart 
Operations," Journal of Nursing Management, vol. 10, pp. 75-
81, 2002. 
[7] M. Aaserud, M. Trommald, and J. Boynton, "Elektiv Kirurgi - 
Strykninger, Skjerming Og Effektivitet," Tidsskr Nor 
Lægeforen vol. 21, pp. 2516-2519, 2001 (in Norwegian). 
[8] A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J. M. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, and S. García-del-Valle, 
"Causes for Cancellation of Elective Surgical Procedures in a 
Spanish General Hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 
2009. 
[9] S. Z. Yoon, S. I. Lees, H. W. Lee, H. J. Lim, S. M. Yoon, and 
S. H. Chang, The Effect of Increasing Operating Room 
Capacity on Day-of-Surgery Cancellation vol. 37. Edgecliff, 
AUSTRALIE: Anaesthesia Society of Anaesthetists, 2009. 
[10] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and 
K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary 
Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & 
Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[11] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. 
Woodward, "Cancelled Elective Operations: An Observational 
Study from a District General Hospital," Journal of Health 
Organisation and Management, vol. 21, pp. 54-58, 2007. 
[12] R. R. Cima, M. J. Brown, J. R. Hebl, R. Moore, J. C. Rogers, 
A. Kollengode, G. J. Amstutz, C. A. Weisbrod, B. J. Narr, and 
C. Deschamps, "Use of Lean and Six Sigma Methodology to 
Improve Operating Room Efficiency in a High-Volume 
Tertiary-Care Academic Medical Center," Journal of the 
American College of Surgeons, vol. 213, pp. 83-92, 2011. 
[13] V. Haana, K. Sethuraman, L. Stephens, H. Rosen, and J. G. 
Meara, "Case Cancellations on the Day of Surgery: An 
Investigation in an Australian Paediatric Hospital," ANZ 
Journal of Surgery, vol. 79, pp. 636-640, 2009. 
[14] M. B. Ferschl, A. Tung, B. Sweitzer, D. Huo, and D. B. Glick, 
"Preoperative 
Clinic 
Visits 
Reduce 
Operating 
Room 
Cancellations and Delays," Anesthesiology, vol. 103, pp. 855-
859, 2005. 
[15] M. G. Perroca, M. d. C. Jericó, and S. D. Facundin, "Surgery 
Cancelling at a Teaching Hospital: Implications for Cost 
Management," Revista latino-americana de enfermagem, vol. 
15, pp. 1018-1024, 2007. 
[16] A. R. Tait, T. Voepel-Lewis, H. M. Munro, H. B. Gutstein, and 
P. I. Reynolds, "Cancellation of Pediatric Outpatient Surgery: 
Economic and Emotional Implications for Patients and Their 
Families," Journal of clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 213-219, 
1997. 
[17] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The Impact of 
Pre-Operative Assessment Clinics on Elective Surgical Case 
Cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[18] R. Busund, "Rapport Fra Prosjekt: Optimal Ressursutnyttelse 
Av Opperasjonskapasiteten I Unn," Universitetssykehuset 
Nord-Norge, Norway 2008 (in Norwegian). 
[19] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of Surgery Cancellations after 
Nurse-Led Pre-Assessment in an Elective Surgical Centre: The 
First 2 Years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-699, 2003. 
[20] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, and W. S. Sandberg, "Causes of Cancellations on 
the Day of Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," 
Surgical Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[21] W. A. van Klei, C. L. Rutten, K. G. Moons, B. Lo, J. T. Knape, 
and D. E. Grobbee, "Limited Effect of Health Council 
Guideline on Outpatient Preoperative Evaluation Clinics in the 
Netherlands: An Inventory," Nederlands Tijdschrift voor 
Geneeskunde, vol. 145, pp. 25-29, 2001 (in Dutch). 
[22] M. A. Starsnic, D. M. Guarnieri, and M. C. Norris, "Efficacy 
and Financial Benefit of an Anesthesiologist-Directed 
University Preadmission Evaluation Center," Journal of 
clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 299-305, 1997. 
[23] M. Agah and B. Radpay, "Efficacy of Anesthesia Clinic on 
Preoperative Evaluation, Preparation and Related Costs," 
Tanaffos, vol. 3, pp. 63-68, 2004. 
[24] R. Odijk, "Process Optimization of the Preoperative Anesthesia 
Clinics at Zgt Almelo and Hengelo," 2012. 
[25] M. Reed, S. Wright, and F. Armitage, "Nurse-Led General 
Surgical Pre-Operative Assessment Clinic," Journal of the 
Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, vol. 42, pp. 310-313, 
1997. 
[26] B. J. Kirkwood, K. Pesudovs, P. Latimer, and D. J. Coster, 
"The Efficacy of a Nurse-Led Preoperative Cataract 
Assessment and Postoperative Care Clinic," Medical journal of 
Australia, vol. 184, pp. 278-281, 2006. 
[27] H. 
Walsgrove, 
"Piloting 
a 
Nurse-Led 
Gynaecology 
Preoperative-Assessment Clinic," Nursing times, vol. 100, pp. 
38-41, 2004. 
[28] AmandaBeck, "Nurse-Led Pre-Operative Assessment for 
Elective Surgical Patients," Nursing Standard, vol. 21, pp. 35-
38, 2007. 
[29] H. Kinley, C. Czoski-Murray, S. George, C. McCabe, J. 
Primrose, C. Reilly, R. Wood, P. Nicolson, C. Healy, S. Read, 
J. Norman, E. Janke, H. Alhameed, N. Fernandes, and E. 
Thomas, "Effectiveness of Appropriately Trained Nurses in 
Preoperative 
Assessment: 
Randomised 
Controlled 
Equivalence/Non-Inferiority Trial," BMJ (Clinical research 
ed), vol. 325, p. 1323, 2002. 

24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[30] M. A. G. de Avila and S. C. M. Bocchi, "Confirmação De 
Presença De Usuário À Cirurgia Eletiva Por Telefone Como 
Estratégia Para Reduzir Absenteísmo," Revista da Escola de 
Enfermagem da USP, vol. 47, pp. 193-197, 2013 (in 
Portuguese). 
[31] K. Haufler and M. Harrington, "Using Nurse-to-Patient 
Telephone Calls to Reduce Day-of-Surgery Cancellations," 
AORN Journal, vol. 94, pp. 19-26, 2011. 
[32] H. K. Andreassen, M. M. Bujnowska-Fedak, C. E. Chronaki, 
R. C. Dumitru, I. Pudule, S. Santana, H. Voss, and R. Wynn, 
"European Citizens' Use of E-Health Services: A Study of 
Seven Countries," BMC Public Health, vol. 7, p. 53, 2007. 
[33] B. Kaplan and P. F. Brennan, "Consumer Informatics 
Supporting Patients as Co-Producers of Quality," Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 8, pp. 309-
316, 2001. 
[34] E. Randeree, "Personal Health Records: Patients in Control," 
in Health Information Systems: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications, J. Rodrigues, Ed., ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 2111-2124. 
[35] L. Millsopp, S. Frackleton, D. Lowe, and S. N. Rogers, "A 
Feasibility Study of Computer-Assisted Health-Related 
Quality of Life Data Collection in Patients with Oral and 
Oropharyngeal Cancer," International journal of oral and 
maxillofacial surgery, vol. 35, pp. 761-764, 2006. 
[36] P. E. Kummervold, D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, J. A. Johnsen, T. 
Hasvold, and J. H. Rosenvinge, "Social Support in a Wired 
World: Use of Online Mental Health Forums in Norway," 
Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 59-65, 2002. 
[37] P. M. Webb, G. D. Zimet, J. D. Fortenberry, and M. J. Blythe, 
"Comparability of a Computer-Assisted Versus Written 
Method for Collecting Health Behavior Information from 
Adolescent Patients," Journal of Adolescent Health, vol. 24, 
pp. 383-388, 1999. 
[38] J. S. Brown and P. Duguid, The Social Life of Information: 
Harvard Business Press, 2000. 
[39] P. Rosen and C. K. Kwoh, "Patient-Physician E-Mail: An 
Opportunity to Transform Pediatric Health Care Delivery," 
Pediatrics, vol. 120, pp. 701-706, 2007. 
[40] E. M. Liederman, J. C. Lee, V. H. Baquero, and P. G. Seites, 
"The Impact of Patient-Physician Web Messaging on Provider 
Productivity," Journal of Healthcare Information Management, 
vol. 19, pp. 81-86, 2005. 
[41] T. Delbanco and D. Z. Sands, "Electrons in Flight-E-Mail 
between Doctors and Patients," New England Journal of 
Medicine, vol. 350, pp. 1705-1707, 2004. 
[42] J. D. Ralston, C. M. Rutter, D. Carrell, J. Hecht, D. 
Rubanowice, and G. E. Simon, "Patient Use of Secure 
Electronic Messaging within a Shared Medical Record: A 
Cross-Sectional Study," Journal of general internal medicine, 
vol. 24, pp. 349-355, 2009. 
[43] S. C. Adamson and J. W. Bachman, "Pilot Study of Providing 
Online Care in a Primary Care Setting," Mayo Clinic 
Proceedings, vol. 85, pp. 704-710, 2010. 
[44] Y. Y. Zhou, M. H. Kanter, J. J. Wang, and T. Garrido, 
"Improved Quality at Kaiser Permanente through E-Mail 
between Physicians and Patients," Health affairs, vol. 29, pp. 
1370-1375, 2010. 
[45] J. D. Ralston, I. B. Hirsch, J. Hoath, M. Mullen, A. Cheadle, 
and H. I. Goldberg, "Web-Based Collaborative Care for Type 
2 Diabetes a Pilot Randomized Trial," Diabetes care, vol. 32, 
pp. 234-239, 2009. 
[46] Helse- og omsorgsdepartement, "Samhandlingsreformen," Det 
Kongelige 
helse- 
og 
omsorgsdepartement 
2009 
(in 
Norwegian). 
[47] Helse-Nord. Dette Er De Nye Systemene. Available: 
http://www.helse-nord.no/helse-nord-nytt/dette-er-de-nye-
systemene-article90645-1526.html 4 November 2013 (in 
Norwegian). 
[48] J. Starling and S. Foley, "From Pilot to Permanent Service: Ten 
Years of Paediatric Telepsychiatry," Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 80-82, 2006. 
[49] P. Whitten, B. Holtz, and L. Nguyen, "Keys to a Successful and 
Sustainable Telemedicine Program," International journal of 
technology assessment in health care, vol. 26, pp. 211-216, 
2010. 
[50] P. Zanaboni and R. Wootton, "Adoption of Telemedicine: 
From Pilot Stage to Routine Delivery," BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 12, 2012. 
[51] M. Berg, "Implementing Information Systems in Health Care 
Organizations: Myths and Challenges," International journal of 
medical informatics, vol. 64, pp. 143-156, 2001. 
[52] R. Heeks, "Health Information Systems: Failure, Success and 
Improvisation," International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 75, pp. 125-137, 2006. 
[53] C. May, M. Mort, F. S. Mair, and T. Finch, Telemedicine and 
the Future Patient: Risk, Governance and Innovation: 
Economic and Social Research Council, 2005. 
[54] C. May and N. T. Ellis, "When Protocols Fail: Technical 
Evaluation, Biomedical Knowledge, and the Social Production 
of 'Facts' About a Telemedicine Clinic," Social Science & 
Medicine, vol. 53, pp. 989-1002, Oct 2001. 
[55] S. Dünnebeil, A. Sunyaev, I. Blohm, J. M. Leimeister, and H. 
Krcmar, "Determinants of Physicians’ Technology Acceptance 
for E-Health in Ambulatory Care," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 81, pp. 746-760, 2012. 
[56] KS, "Ikt I Helse- Og Omsorg 2008-2012 - Strategi- Og 
Handlingsplan," Oslo 2008 (in Norwegian). 
[57] H. K. Andreassen, "What Does an E-Mail Address Add? Doing 
Health and Technology at Home," Social Science & Medicine, 
vol. 72, pp. 521-528, 2011. 
[58] N. Schreurs. (2012) Fiasko Eller Fremtid? Computerworld.  (in 
Norwegian) 
[59] J. C. Wyatt and F. Sullivan, "Ehealth and the Future: Promise 
or Peril?," BMJ, vol. 331, pp. 1391-1393, 2005. 
[60] B. Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and 
Engineers through Society: Harvard university press, 1987. 

25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[61] F. P. Glascoe, "Improving Clinical Communication: A View 
from Psychology," Ambulatory Child Health, vol. 7, pp. 53-60, 
2001. 
[62] G. D. Abowd, A. K. Dey, P. J. Brown, N. Davies, M. Smith, 
and P. Steggles, "Towards a Better Understanding of Context 
and Context-Awareness," Handheld and ubiquitous computing, 
Springer, 1999, pp. 304-307. 
[63] J. E. Bardram, T. R. Hansen, and M. Soegaard, "Awaremedia: 
A Shared Interactive Display Supporting Social, Temporal, and 
Spatial Awareness in Surgery," presented at the 20th 
anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative 
work, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2006. 
[64] A. Hristova, "Conceptualization and Design of a Context-
Aware Platform for User Centric Applications," Master of 
Science in Communication Technology Master, Department of 
Telematics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, 2008. 
 

