154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Construction of the emotional environment and media 
Treton Cécile and Bourret Christian 
DICEN IDF/ – UPEM (Paris East University) 
Paris, France 
e-mail: ceciletreton@gmail.com 
     e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract – The article addresses the society problem of the 
perception of individual loneliness in the cohort of elderly 
people. The researchers conducted empirical research by 
recorded interviewing a cohort of female and male people 
between the age of 65 and 99. The researchers postulate that 
the feeling of solitude is an opportunity to reveal the relational 
needs of individuals. They question the opportunity of a 
technical mediation in an emotional situation. Is it possible to 
consider approaches that are not limited to functional aspects? 
This work is integrated in the field of anthropology 
communication as defined by F. Martin-Juchat and B. 
Galinon- Mélénec. These approaches consider the body as a 
medium. The studies focus on the singular message that it 
leaves in its environment. The researchers highlight the unique 
aspects of communicative experience. The research method 
examines the interactions including the use of social networks 
on the web and the significations. The researchers postulate 
that relational developments correlate to certain life events, 
e.g., war, death, retirement. Their investigative work focuses 
on the elderly with the collection of autobiographical 
testimonies. They have formalized an interpretative grid from 
an extended approach of the "situational and interactionist 
semiotics" developed by A. Mucchielli. This grid was used as a 
tool of analyze. The relationship to the other people brings a 
sense of material and emotional security. They have shown that 
the construction of the relational environment includes a 
strategic and creative dimension. They concentrated their 
investigations on the mediation of relational creativity. They 
rely on works on the biography of C. Delory Momberger and 
they established a model of mediation. They propose a model 
called "relational biography". This approach highlights the 
way the person builds its relational environment. It highlights 
the emotional and bibliographic part of the action. It takes into 
account the experience lived in its fictional dimension. This 
research highlights a relational mode with the object which 
contributes to the inscription of the person in the reality and 
participle in the relational feeling of satisfaction. In the 
situation studied by ageing, it allows to establish the necessity 
of taking into account the creative dimension of the relation as 
the esthetics of the everyday life. The old age is marked by 
breaks in the route of life that accompany intense phases of 
identity reorganization. The researchers suggest developing a 
bibliographic approach from the object as a media of 
evocation. The fictional object favors the conditions of the 
reorganization of the relational environment. The media like 
digital networks is integrated in the model like an extension of 
human being and relational space. It is a research in-progress. 
Keywords - loneliness; strategy of relations; emotional social 
network; age; friendly. 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE  
A. 
Felling lonely and  infrastructure 
The article takes back the communication “Loneliness 
and Relational Biography-Affective communication” [1]. 
The medico-social sector is subject to numerous changes 
and problems. In this context, there are two aspects that we 
wish to explore and connect, even though they seem un-
related at first. On one hand, the health sector, led by the 
goals of streamlining services to the population, explores the 
development of individualized and modeled benefits, 
provided remotely through digital technologies in the 
context of the e-health with the approach of patients’ 
pathways.  On the other hand, the social sector whose 
demand is increasing in terms of compliance with standards 
of hygiene, safety and care, is moved by the increasing 
isolation situations that mainly affect marginalized people, 
because of their health status, their age, or their social status. 
It appears that the infrastructure that offers many 
opportunities for communication and security cannot 
resolve the development of a feeling of loneliness for a 
growing part of the population. The paradoxical aspect of 
this situation raises issues pertaining to the humanities. It 
seems conducive to questions that fall within the field of 
social innovation in terms of communication sciences. The 
suffering caused by loneliness disturbs. It emerges in a 
society characterized by the diversity of its technological 
possibilities of communication: mobile phones, digital 
social networking, mails, Web 2.0, etc. and by its 
individualism, according to P. Flichy and the “connected 
individualism” [2]. 
It challenges the institutions. Indeed, E. Durkheim [3] 
demonstrated the consequences of the transition from a 
traditional to a modern society. In a traditional society, the 
family ensures the protection of individual. In modern 
society, the concept of family disappears and the State may 
support or not the vulnerable individual's protection 
according to common standards. According to S. Paugam 
[4], the institutions contribute in reality to the emergence of 
this loneliness. They use intervention models that tend to 

155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
dehumanize the relational practices perceived only as 
"services".  
B. 
Socialisation and relational tensions   
 The question of the loneliness is for the society the 
opportunity to wonder about the relational needs for the 
individuals and the possibilities of answering it through 
approaches that are not limited to functional and pragmatic 
aspects. These questioning require to take into account the 
components from the relation to the other one in its active 
dimension "as experience of the communication" to resume 
the terminology of Louis Quéré [5], by integrating his 
emotional and emotional forms. Norbert Elias [6], 
demonstrates the interdependence between the individual 
and the community. He underlines the necessity for the man 
to communicate to assure his survival through the collective. 
He highlights the physiological and biological potentialities 
of the man such as the word that allow him to strengthen his 
relation with others and his survival. Through the relation of 
the man with the other one is formed a report of 
membership in the collective underlined by A. Honneth [7]. 
The other one is perceived as an object of the social. He 
offers the opportunity to the individual to experiment its 
relation to the collective and to negotiate the report between 
his identity peculiarity and the cultural standards of the 
community to be integrated. The construction of the relation 
can be considered as a social knowledge. This knowledge is 
the object of a learning of psychic nature that according to 
D.W. Winnicott [8] develops from the childhood in a natural 
process of detachment between the baby and her mother. 
The tension led by the distance allows the child to become 
aware of his intimate being and to consider in the same 
movement her mother as a subject and not an object at his 
disposal. D.W. Winnicott underlines the importance of 
solitary times that offer to the child then the adult the 
opportunity of return on himself and the desire of new 
meetings. The emotional sharing is an essential component 
of the relation. Its biological nature dresses a vital 
importance for A. Damasio [9]. He describes a process of 
emotional regulation that allows the individual to react to 
his environment. In the description of a behavioral 
adjustment of the individual in real situation, A. Damasio 
adds a description of the internal processes of regulation that 
participate in the self-awareness. It emerges from the report 
between the emotion and the feeling. It ends in an awareness 
that develops through a double movement of identity 
reorganization. It pulls an identity transformation that 
allows to answer the biological and psychic necessity of a 
preservation of one. The relation in the other one generates a 
psychic energy that finds its origins in the biological body 
and pass by a process of awareness of the feelings. These 
feelings depend on the sociocultural environment of the 
person and on its history. The constructed dimension from 
the relation to the other one fluctuates between need and 
desire. It is established in a duality between autonomy and 
dependence that expresses itself for P. Ricoeur [10] and P. 
Malrieu [11] through the narrative of its life. Through the 
narrative account of oneself, the person highlights its 
questioning in the way she invests the reality. C. Delory 
Momberger [12] observes the increase of the narrative of its 
life in the modern society in particular by means of the 
digital social networks. She considers that this behavior 
testifies of the solitude of the people confronted only with 
multiple social questions. Her approach is shared by B. 
Spiegler [13] and M. Maffesoli [14]. They hypothesize that 
a new sociability is made visible by networks.  The use of 
the digital social networks compensate for the absence of 
recognition of the emotion in the modern society. 
C. 
Communication and relational  engagment  
   In the field of the sciences of the information and the 
communication, the question is a matter of the ethics. 
According to E. Illouz [15], the modern society considers 
communications tools as opportunities of economic 
development and leans on the mass media as the media of 
promotion. Nevertheless, the digital social networks let 
appear behavior of exchanges that give great emphasis to 
the personal expression. A. Casilli [16] observes that the 
social networks develop social learnings and that their use is 
considered as a "continuum" of the everyday life. He 
specifies that the digital social use of networks does not 
seem either to increase the feeling of solitude or to reduce it. 
The limits of networks live for M. Doueihi [17] in the 
modelling of the exchanges. For M. Doueilhi, the 
socialization of networks is restricted to the social roles. It 
joins in a logic of capitalization of the resources that does 
not take into account the emotional part of the relations. G 
Simmel [18] demonstrated by means of the structural 
sociology 
that 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
relational 
environments reveals distinctive forms among that the 
relations for two, "dyades", are next to community circles. 
For C. Bidart [19], these forms testify of the importance of 
the emotional relation. The individuals make choices and 
categories in their relations. They constitute a distinction 
between the relations of group and affective relations as the 
friendship. M. Mauss [20] considers the friendly relation as 
a "complete social relationship". She is freely chosen and 
mixes social gratitude and emotional commitment. O. 
Renault [21] underlines that Aristote observes from the 
Antiquity, the moral value of the friendship. According to P. 
Ricoeur, it allows man to recompose his understanding of 
his environment through a phenomenology of desire. P. 
Ricoeur distinguishes a permanent form of personality, 
"selfhood", around that are developed changing identities. P. 
Ricoeur emphasizes man's anxiety in front of these 
continual identity changes. He needs to reassure himself by 
searching for clues of permanence. According to P. Ricoeur, 
friendship is "a promise in time of a self-preservation." 
The relational theories show the necessity for the 
individual to compose a relational environment. It develops 
in a report of desire and need that involves identical and 
emotional aspects. It tells a search for safety and for 
assertion of one in the relation to the other one. It is built on 
the basis of distinctions. They build themselves gradually 

156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and end in an emotional commitment. It rests on the 
confidence and passes by modes of emotional exchanges. 
The relation develops little by little through transformations 
of life and the identities in evolution underlined by C. 
Bidart. Within the framework of our reflection, we wish to 
envisage approaches that can take into account the 
emotional part from the relation to the other one. It is a 
factor of satisfaction, in the sense of the "flow" described by 
M. Csikszenmihalyi [22]. He considers it as a psychic 
energy that results from a balance between the current 
action and the potentialities of the actor. We are particularly 
interested in the phases of transformations that reveal 
tensions and relational imbalance. Our objective is to rest 
the question of the mediation such as she is invested by the 
sciences of information and communication under the angle 
of the intervention of a technical device to envisage a model 
adapted to our observations.     
 
II. 
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
In the field of Information and Communication 
Sciences, our approach is in the course of the anthropology 
of communication and in particular with reference to the 
emotional communication as defined by F. Martin-Juchat 
[23]. She perceives the emotional body as "moved" by the 
emotion. F. Martin-Juchat highlights the lack of studies on 
this emotional dimension, in the field of science of 
information and communication that is shared between two 
conceptual approaches. The first concerns the question of 
the interpersonal relationship and considers the body in 
terms of signs verbal and nonverbal. This approach refers to 
the work of F. Saussure and of the Invisible College of Palo 
Alto. The second highlights the manipulative attempts of 
mass media. In both cases, the receiver is not considered in 
its ability to act as if he had not feelings. According F. 
Martin-Juchat, the receiver's action must be considered as a 
media. She proposes to put the "emotional body" in the 
heart of the communication device like a media.  
The current of the anthropology of communication 
highlights the paradigm of "man-trace that B. Galinon- 
Mélénec [24] defines as follows: "the human is an 
anthropologically man-trace in the sense that it is both a  
trace builder and a trace producer. " She questions herself 
on action of communication highlighted by Habermas 
(1987). She considers the verbal expression (speech, 
writing) as an indicator of the "meaning" of the 
communication action in its dialectical dimension between 
internalization and externalization. The central issue of the 
approach revolves around the objectification of human 
thought and body. The body is perceived in the community. 
It is designed sensorily. The separation between the body 
and the reality is an artifact because the body lives in its 
reality and his reality is constituted by the body. B. Galinon- 
Mélénec writes: "When the body lives, he smells, he sees, 
he moves even when it is stationary. The flesh constantly is 
tested by the interactions of man with his environment. The 
separations between inside and out, emotional and 
cognitive, are artifacts. "The interpretation of the "meaning" 
of the footprints or traces, verbal or non-verbal left by man's 
actions in reality gives him the opportunity to access the 
understanding of his action. The individual is seen in his 
etymological dimension (from the Latin "individuum", 
"what is indivisible") of uniqueness. The report to another is 
established in a process of objectification and the 
confrontation with the other builds the identity of the 
individual. The unity of the subject is "still on trial" through 
interaction and involves regular work of reconstruction and 
transformation. The body is seen as "a way to exist," it is 
studied by searcher from his footsteps. These traces are left 
in real or virtual spaces. Sung do Kim [24] highlights the 
mediation dimension of places that organize the flow of 
material and immaterial exchanges. The methodological 
issue stressed by B. Galinon- Mélénec involves taking into 
account the analog dimension of the interpretative work of 
traces. Our approach takes as reference the paradigm of 
"engaging communication" to the meaning of F. Bernard 
[25]. The concept of commitment is used to demonstrate the 
link between the action and the meaning given to action. 
The commitment depends on the situation. The "engaging 
communication" is based on the action as a mean of change. 
The identification is integrated in the processing of change 
through the action.  
These theoretical approaches orientate our research 
method. We consider communication actions as singular 
productions of the person in reality. They become relational 
objects used as expressive media. They reveal the human 
inscription modes into reality. The media in this sense is 
seen as an additional space that reveals the communication 
actions. Mediation is used as awareness means and supports 
the exploratory process. 
 
III. 
RELATIONAL INVESTIGATIONS  
      
The researchers highlighted the existential challenge of 
relating to others. They want to study how the person asserts 
his existence through the relationship to another. They 
established three questions. With the first question they have 
attempted to theoretically clarify how individuals build their 
relational environment. Their second question concerns the 
meaning that the person gives to its communication 
activities. Indeed, they consider the person as the driving 
element of the relation that is established. Their third 
question deals with the transformation and is particularly 
relevant with regard to their subject. The question is to 
identify the impact of the changes in the relationship and the 
uses of reorganization of the relational environment.   
From those questions, they studied the relational 
dynamics of the elderly in order to highlight their mode of 
action, the uniqueness of their subjective experience and 
confirm temporal and spatial changes. The ageing is a stage 
of life that seems to reactivate interrogations about the 
relationship to another. 

157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Relational dynamics characteristics in old age  
  Building on the contributions of sociologists and 
gerontologists, the researchers find that the old age - 
estimated at the retirement age - is a period marked by many 
transitions and changes. V. Caradec [26] and P. Pitaud [27] 
observe that the elderly person is faced with a multiplicity 
of events and breaks. These changes are due to recurrent 
affective losses, changes in material and economic living 
conditions, a decline in physical abilities, often affecting 
motor skills and the initial conditions of life. The old age is 
a particularly intense period of identity reorganization. The 
life changes impact the modes of socialization of the person. 
C. Bidart emphasizes socialization change with age with a 
tendency to build proximity links and to keep more distance 
in the relation. She notes the need to more moments of 
intimacy. For gerontologist M. Billé [28], these times of 
intimacy and relational distancing correspond to the need 
for "interior narrative work." The elderly need to remember 
the past to ensure a temporal continuity at their life and 
preserve a consistent and positive image of their life. The 
collected items highlight the intensity for the elderly from 
an internal contradiction between autonomy claimed as 
singularity and social integration as assimilation and 
dependency. The researchers understand through the 
transformations described that during the retirement are 
developing events. Those events can be felt as an 
accumulation of loss and grief. The activity of the elderly is 
not an economical necessity normalized by the job. It 
depends on a determination that seems related to the desire 
to assert its autonomy, to assert them as active and alive. 
The aim is to remove the scary specter of the final 
dependence. 
B. 
Method of collecting and interpreting data   
    The researchers chose to proceed by biographical 
interviews. The biographical interview allows the collection 
of data revealing the subjectivity of relational experience. It 
can be used as a means to train the person to take action. 
The approach that they consider analytic allows us to focus 
on the speech of the person. As stated by C. Delory-
Momberger, the biography enables a work on the self 
images that precede action. The researchers agree with this 
approach that considers the individual as an agent of his 
own socialization by the action. This method of data 
collection takes into account the "emotional body". C. 
Delory-Momberger notes that it is the place of biographical 
investment. The researchers have collected 15 hours of 
recording stories of friendship of fifteen women and men, 
aged 65 to 99 years. As researchers, their goal was to 
highlight the words collected. Didier Demazière and Claude 
Dubar [29] observe that the empirical research work that 
uses the interview must use a method of analysis. It is 
necessary to establish comparative tables and explain its 
translation procedures. Thus the word becomes knowledge. 
The emerging theory should not be a simple data formatting, 
but must be the result of the comparison of these data. The 
aim is to highlight a process common to several behavioral 
phenomena and accompany them with information. This 
approach encourages reflection through a data aggregation 
and translation through explicated categories. The categories 
are "a structured symbolic world" that tells the speech.  The 
analysis involves exceeding these categories and concepts 
by theoretical tools described by the researcher. Thus, 
analytical posture passes successively by several categories, 
natural, emerging, conceptual and abstract. To analyze the 
biographies, the researchers used categorization method 
proposed by A. Mucchielli [30] through situational and 
interactionist semiotics. A. Mucchielli raises the question of 
social identification. He writes: "Identify the other is a 
judgement for define him in a specific context. Identify 
others is a means to give a meaning to my "being" situated 
also in a context." This method allowed us to establish a 
frame of reference from a categorization that we have 
defined. These categories form "interpretive frameworks' of 
intentions and needs of the actor, its reference standards, its 
positioning in relation to other actors, quality of 
relationships in a historic, temporal and sensory setting. The 
meaning is defined in a constructivist perspective and shows 
a schematic representation of the operation of the 
phenomena studied.  
 
C. 
Results  
 
The following table shows an extract of the 
interpretative grid. The researchers highlight three aspects 
common to all the interviews. They find that relational 
environment evolves according to life events. Relationships 
are always built on the same pattern. This pattern is 
established from emotional factors related to values and 
beliefs. It shows the specific needs of each person and his 
way of composing relations through the choice of 
communication spaces and rhythms of interactions. The 
researchers established a grid from distinctions between the 
components of the relationship and the relational modes of 
action that we have identified. The grid looks like the model 
below. 
 
BOARD I:  EXTRACT INTERPRETATIVE  GRID  
 
Categorizations 
 
Biographical 
frame 
 
characterization of the 
relationship  
 
Methods 
activation  
 
D. 
Boarding school  
Work 
Marriage  
Death  
 
 
Compensatory mode 
and selective  
strongly linked to the 
stages of change and 
emotional traumas  
 
favors the 
communal 
group activity  
 
A. 
Childhood 
Studies 
Work 
Travels 
Marriage 
Death 
 
Adaptive mode and 
links marked by 
complicity siituational  
Links with family 
friends  
Friendship is a family 
value  
 
friend and 
ritualized 
moments : 
New Year's 
Day / birthday 
/ holiday  
 
N. 
War/Childhood 
(holocaust) 
 
Selective mode 
search for 
help, support, 

158
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Categorizations 
 
Biographical 
frame 
 
characterization of the 
relationship  
 
Methods 
activation  
 
Marriage 
Accident 
(vision 
loss) 
marked by mistrust, 
emotional distancing, 
sharing the difficulty,  
Classification of 
friends by period  
 
taking account 
of disability  
 
 
Using this method, the researchers have defined the 
criteria for analysis. They compare the action patterns of 
people and their interpretation. The action patterns are 
defined by how they use the resources of their environment, 
and the spaces in that they organize their time. The study 
reveals identity and biographical aspects.  
D.  Determinations of the congruence of factors in the 
composition of relations to others   
All the evidence confirms a match between the emotional 
state and the manner that the persons build their 
relationships. Loneliness appears in stages of life related to 
an upheaval. Some have experienced affective breaks (or 
professional breaks, but most have experienced a feeling of 
loneliness from events related to advancing age, retirement, 
deaths of spouses and health problems.  The reorganization 
of the social environment is common to all. It comes along 
with a strong determination expressed in a very voluntary 
way. Most of the time, the collective brings protection and 
validation. The contribution to the collective is imperative. 
The elective friendships often stemming from these 
collectives do not exceed 2 or 3 people. The meeting 
becomes established in an empathic way. The particular 
attraction for a person is expressed through personality's 
elements dependent on qualities such as the beauty, the 
kindness, the intelligence, etc. The relation is strengthened 
through exchanges based on the friendly listening, the 
shared gaiety, the common activities. They are perceived as 
gifts. The notion of gift seems different between the sexes. 
The men express the values that they bring to the other one: 
transmit, allow other one to develop, to protect. The women 
express an expectation of mutual protection or conceive the 
exchange from shared values. The sharing of centers of 
common interests or common values is determining. 
Finally, the anchoring in the territory is essential. He 
expresses himself in a recurring way. The relation in the 
territory is identity, bibliographic and relational. The district 
is particularly quoted by the Parisian. Age is quoted most of 
the time. He expresses himself by a consciousness of time 
and of the life story and the anticipation of the losses of 
physical abilities. 
E.    Relational strategy and relational creativity  
This work shows two components of the experience of 
communication that it can be distinguishing in terms of 
relational 
strategy 
and 
relational 
creativity. 
Those  
distinctions design a model of mediation adapted to the 
relational needs for the individuals. The researches observe 
that the person builds its relation through plans of actions 
that pass by an operational effectiveness in the reality and 
are common to all. These actions obey a relational strategy. 
The relational strategy leans on real or virtual spaces of 
mediation. They define the relational strategy as a 
construction of relations leaning on the resources of the 
reality. The relational creativity depends on the sense that 
the person gives to its actions. It transfigures the reality. 
These elements of creativity depend on a personal relational 
history that gives a coherence to the current relation. The 
relational creativity is of the interpretation by the person of 
its relations. It has a nature of identification and idealized 
image of one according to values. It integrates a symbolic 
perception of the reality. The reality establishes breaks that 
put in tension the person. The reorganizations are lived in an 
identity way. They participate in an emotional regulation 
and generate a feeling of satisfaction. The researchers 
perceive dependence between the events of life and the 
appearance of new relationships. The person builds its 
relation in time. The events impact on his relational 
environment. Therefore, there is a relational biography. 
Each phase change appears to activate a clean relationship 
strategy to each person and builds on perennial patterns 
The relational strategy and the relational creativity are 
closely imbricated. The person makes a classification and 
tells for example: "my friends from before” according to his 
report with his history and to the way he perceives his old 
age: it concerns the disappearance of friendships: "of my 
generation has disappeared ...", "we were ten friends... we 
are no more than two". It expresses itself by the regret of the 
bonds of the past by comparison with those present: "Yes I 
have had really good friends, it was great ... today, it is 
different." It indicates a feeling of loneliness evoked on the 
mode of a battle to fight, "for not to be alone, you have to go 
out! ". Classifications depend on elements of identification 
established on the basis of emotional elements and of 
elements of social standardization through values such as 
the value placed on friendship, beliefs and expectations. 
They direct the sympathies or antipathies. They provide data 
on the image that the person has of itself in an idealized 
form. 
The 
relational 
choices 
appear 
homogeneous, 
standardized, selective based on distinguishing elements of 
social status, age, etc. The interactions are located in social 
contexts and spaces that have a symbolic value as: schools, 
companies, unions, associations of hikers, etc. They 
reinforce the value of belonging.  
The relational commitment is linked to an idealized 
image of one but it is established according to the 
immediate needs for each. The emotional factors determine 
the level of commitment in the relationship ex. "When they 
suffer, I suffer." They compose an imaginary of the 
relationship: "I wanted to have news from him because it 
was my first love". The person creates, in this case, an ideal 
relational environment that is considered like a game. This 
is particularly noticeable when the person uses digital 
communication media. "I am in relation to a community of 

159
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
artists". The exchanges are organized according to 
temporality of pragmatic order, as the definition of a date of 
meeting, but also symbolic. It takes the form of ritualized 
interactions whose rhythm varies among individuals: annual 
exchange of holidays wishes, weekly meal, evening 
conversations on Skype, etc. They take singular forms 
appropriate to the needs of the person such as sharing of 
activities or friendly moments, or its values: "to give is my 
life ..." etc.  
The information collected shows activation of affects in 
the implementation of the social network and the 
importance of biographical and identity work that is 
developed. The experience through the implementation of 
the relationship strategy own to everyone and the relational 
creativity appears as the essential element of identity’s 
reorganization.  
The relation in the other one does not have a harmless 
nature. It coincides with a stage of life and takes sense for 
the person through an event. The relation in the other one is 
lived as an effective registration of one in the reality. It is 
about a reality perceived through the subjectivity. It consists 
of objects, spaces and temporality to that the person gives 
sense through its personal history. Other one acquires a 
status of object in this composition of the reality. The 
relation is a creative expression of one in the reality through 
the otherness. The search underlines that it is not so much 
the way we communicate with the other who matters but the 
way the other one confirms our existence. That is why the 
hypothesis is to grant a singular place to the relational 
creativity and to envisage the opportunity of a mediation.of 
it. The objective would be to facilitate the imaginative 
report towards the other one.  
IV. 
THE NOTION OF FICTIONAL OBJECT  
 
The difficulty of the questioning is to determine a way 
of highlighting the subjective part from the relation to the 
other one. Is it possible to show what belongs to the domain 
of the close friend? How to envisage a mediation of the 
imaginary part of the relation?  
It is important for the researchers to define the 
imaginative process that is established in the relation with 
the other one. The put in perspective of this process appears 
through the elaboration of a relation that they described the 
characteristics and that they identified through an 
interpretative bar.  
A. 
The fictional créativity in the relation to the other one  
They lean on surrounding areas of G. Bachelard [31], J. 
Schaeffer [32] and G. Simondon [33] to study the relation in 
its report of sensitive immediacy with the object.  
G. Simondon postulates that a person can be considered 
as an object. The object in its materiality and corporeality 
interests us as object of exploration and object of dialogue 
with the reality. According to G. Simondon, the object is the 
opportunity for the person of an imaginary and driving 
exploration that is of the playful and generates of the 
inventiveness. This exploration answers a need to solve a 
problem posed by the reality.  
The person finds in this action the opportunity to reveal 
and strengthen its feeling of one, to assert its desire and to 
express an intuition as a life force. The imagination allows 
the individual, as J. Schaeffer demonstrates it, to negotiate 
its report in the reality to transform it as one pleases. The 
imagination is a skill.  
G. Bachelard highlights the epistemic value of the 
imagination and J. Schaeffer considers it as a fictional skill. 
G Bachelard describes a relational experience elaborated 
through the interiorized image revealed in the contact of the 
object.  
G. Simondon and J. M. Schaeffer show that the 
imaginative function is borrow of myths transmitted 
socially. They facilitate the dumping in the reality. G 
Simondon introduces a distinction into the process of 
elaboration with the objective reality between the symbol, 
the image and the imago. It considers the imago as an 
intermediate stage that allows the individual to act in the 
reality to transform it in a creative way.  
The relational creativity bases on the constitution of an 
object that possesses in him a fictional dimension because it 
is perceived through the imagination of the person. This 
imagination is fed by the history of the person. The 
momentariness of the relation with the object of election is 
possible through symbols and feelings. The otherness adds 
to this subjective projection the division of common 
feelings.  
The relation develops in the time and corresponds to the 
perception of the friendship evoked by F. Guattari [34] as 
one " a weaving " that he qualifies as "Third World". The 
relation passes by a singular approach of co-elaboration and 
joins in a history built for two.  The fiction is fed in a joint 
way by the reality and its interpretation and develops by a 
temporal and spatial process that strengthens it. We hold 
two aspects of this composition, the dumping and the 
exploration.  
On one hand, the object calls out. It generates an internal 
dialogue made up of images and symbols stemming from 
the imagination and nourishing of cultural references. The 
person seems friendly through common affinities that are 
like "idem".  
On the other hand, the person is perceived in a way 
distanced as an object of the reality with that a 
communication makes a commitment in an exploratory way 
on the basis of a subjectivity mixture of images and intimate 
and socialized symbols. In this relation, the reality is 
transformed.  
The relation takes sense in its biographic dimension. 
This story builds itself from two movements. These mental 
movements correspond to two times. We observe a 
movement of exploration and a movement of immediate 
apprehension. First engages a work of transformation, the 
second activates a sensation.   

160
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The following board distinguishes these two aspects: 
 
BOARD II : FICTIONAL COMPOSITION 
OBJECT 
Exploration  
(transformation of the 
reality  and construction of 
the relationship) 
shared image  
          
Immersion 
(questioning at the time of 
the meeting and the 
dialogue) 
symbol one/other 
SUBJECT 
 
The fictional composition leans on a strategy of anchoring 
in the reality but rests on a creativity that amplifies the 
relational experience lived between two people. The relation 
in the other one acquires a density through the shared 
fiction. This fictional dimension develops around three 
complementary elements, the historicity, the imagination 
and the inventiveness. The imagination feeds on shared 
symbolism, on identification, on idealized image, on 
identical evolutions. It assures an office of one and seals the 
relation. The feeling of solitude appears when the relation 
loses its creative meaning. The object of election does not 
fill any more its role of emotional questioning and the 
relation does not have the means any more to be invested in 
an exploratory way. The fiction diminishes and loses its 
capacity of "tonic effect". 
B. 
The relation in the other one as the experience of the 
body 
The fictional dimension from the relation to the other 
who develops in a dialogue between subjectivity and reality 
is of a process of immediacy. In the field of the 
communication, O. Galibert [35] uses the term "relational 
anthropology" to indicate the relation to the other one in 
subjectivity. The notion of identity is studied through the 
dialogue that develops on the basis of a reciprocity. He 
suggests using the term of "person" as the one who appears 
in the relation to the other one. The self-awareness does not 
precede the communicative activity, it is the result. The 
relational anthropology does not distinguish the subjectivity, 
the otherness and the relation but considers them as a whole. 
In reference to E. Levinas [36], O. Galibert considers that 
the experience of others passes by the body and writes: " 
The presence in the other one calls out to me ". Other one is 
arrested not in a reflexive way but as experience. This 
experience calls an "ethical" responsibility because contrary 
to the relation in the thing, the vulnerability of other one 
moves me in "native way". Our work of bibliographic 
collection highlights a dialectic of the relation. In a 
functionalist way, J. Caune [37] describes this dialectic as a 
"sensitive mediation". It passes by the institution of a 
"captivating" word fed by shared references and by common 
experiences. J. Caune defines the relation as a "breach" that 
is as an interstitial space that gives way to the perception 
subjective as experience of one and sensitive experience for 
the understanding of the social standards.  He distinguishes 
this space, of the "contact" the stake in that is the balance 
between the closeness and the distance and of the "link" as 
the participation in the community by material, symbolic 
and imaginary links. We consider that the link testifies in its 
material dimension of the relation. C. Delory Momberger 
observes in the narratives of life the emergence of the "faces 
of one" in "the action" within spaces defined by their 
materiality and invest by the interpretation of the subject. 
C. 
Materiality and relational creativity: the object of 
dialogue 
In its fictional dimension, the presence of other one can 
pass in transit by a realized object. G. Simondon tells that 
the intermediate space allows explorations through concrete 
objects that D.W. Winnicott considers as "transitional 
objects" universal. In this notion of object of exploration, G. 
Simondon adds "the intermediate object" perceived through 
the memories. G. Bachelard describes the intimate 
perception of the object in the place of residence. He 
underlines that the imagination generates a feeling of 
happiness from the harmless. The process is short-lived and 
orders. It develops through the subjectivities fed by the 
history of the subject. It is about a story in movement that 
implies transformations and fixations revealed by G. 
Bachelard. He underlines the historic density concentrated 
in the contact of the object. We observe that the elderly 
continue to maintain strong relations with people died in a 
silent dialogue and through objects.  The object establishes a 
particularly perceptible shared dialogue through the work of 
art. J. Schaeffer demonstrates the implicit understanding of 
emotional and symbolic nature that develops between the 
creator and the receiver by means of the object of art. The 
pleasure is into a symbolic and poetic complicity shared by 
common cultural references or by feelings. N Alter [38] 
underlines that the object is a symbolic gift that consolidates 
the relation. J.M. Schaeffer distinguishes three aspects of the 
fiction, the "mimesis", the "representation of volitional 
states" and the creativity. He defines the mimesis as "a 
learning by modelling " that allows the individual to shape 
his behavior to that of the group for a better cohesion. The 
representation of volitional states corresponds to the way the 
individual is going to adapt himself to the reality while the 
inventiveness and the creation, on the contrary, adapts the 
world from an interiorized representation. In the process of 
communication that develops by means of the work of art, 
the creator gives a shape to the object on the mode of the 
mimesis while the receiver perceives the object in a creative 
way in an immediate echo. R Barthes [39] underlines that 
without the imaginative contribution, the photography could 
have that a morbid effect in its temporal fixedness. 
According to him, the photo testifies of a reality but through 
a painful fixedness of last moment. The photo livens up 
only through the emotional projections of the receiver.  
This movement of perception corresponds to the 
immersion. The person is invaded by an emotion activated 

161
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
by the object. This emotion depends of its personal story of 
life. The object is perceived as a "bait" in the sense of G. 
Bachelard, that generates and amplifies, according to J.M. 
Schaeffer, our "emotional skills."  
D. 
Mediation of the relational biography  
  The consideration of the singular relational creativity 
pulls a modification of the mediation. The objective of the 
mediation would be to participate in the highlighting of the 
fictional object. G Simondon underlines that the project 
always proceeds of a simplification of the initial imaginative 
moose. He considers that the intervention of an object of 
dialogue between the transmitter and the receiver is a 
relational structure "tertiary sector". The intervention of the 
third as mediator always reduces the imaginative dimension. 
As such, C. Delory Momberger considers that the support 
by the biography proceeds of a "shaping" by the word of the 
reality lived by the narrator and the "direction" of this 
reality told by the practitioner. For G. Simondon the 
relational inventiveness is already a mediation in itself and 
she can thus lean on an "instrumental mediation". The tool 
is perceived in its anthropological dimension such as 
defined by A. Leroi Gourhan [40] as a display of the human 
capacities. B. Spiegler underlines that he participates in a 
reification of moment. He names: "tertiary retention" this 
status of object of the media that keeps the registration of a 
gesture. In this context, the realization ensures the 
continuity of the idea. The technique the limits of that we 
identified by the modelling possesses intrinsically this 
arrangement in the repetition and in the memory if only in 
his conception. The project spreads through the possibilities 
of the technical system. This registration is perceived as a 
track that can give rise to the interpretation in an 
understandable way. Within the framework of paradigm of 
the man-track, the track of the relational gesture passes by 
an object or by a space. For B. Galinon-Mélénec, the object 
considered as a track acquires a value of indication. For 
Sung do Kim [24], the track is a way for the individual "to 
mark" its space and to establish a membership. He 
underlines new practices of writings "situated and located" 
that he considers as private and public scriptural tracks. 
They express a new relation to the memory because each is 
a "cultural producer". According to him, all these tracks 
make 
up 
one 
"ambient 
commons" 
or 
"ambient 
consciousness" that participates in the constitution of an 
increased "reality". The space is increased by the imaginary 
interpretations of each through the flows of information and 
by exchanges. P. Lévy [41] underlines that spaces are 
invested in a way abstracted through the expression of 
movements. The space is not a decoration but it is 
established through the human experience. According to A. 
Cassili, the interpersonal media make visible a set of 
dialogues and of relations perceived as a "continuum" of the 
everyday life. The interpersonal media compromise for P. 
Levy the "fourth space" of exploration and exchanges that 
train a "cosmopédie". P Lévy considers that the cyberspace 
exists only through the interactions. The cyberspace is 
topographic and kinetic. This space, according to P. Lévy, 
tells a singular creativity that questions the model of the 
mediation through the expert. For P. Lévy, the relations in 
this space are an immanence because each is responsible for 
it. P. Lévy considers that the human sciences have to take 
into account the multiplicity of the processes of 
interpretation generated by these interactions. 
  The bibliographic approach perceives the track in its 
projective dimension. The moment is registered in the 
unique and singular route. The biography that we name 
"relational" takes for track "rundowns" of the gesture 
relational as anchor point in the reality and the subscriber in 
a temporal continuity. The relational biography is interested 
in the emotional echo of the track in the "real-life" body. It 
strengthens the relational creativity through an interpretation 
of the action in the reality perceived through the fictional 
and subjective dimension. It has for objective to offer the 
conditions of an elaboration of a relational environment 
piloted by the subject. The goal is to be capable of taking 
into account the creative dimension of the elaboration from 
the relation to the other one in its emotional dimension. It 
would be a question then of developing the objective 
outlines of a dynamic scenario of the relation as the "history 
in movement". 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
 
This research concerns loneliness in the relationship to 
another. The researchers question the appropriateness of 
technical mediation in situations of loneliness. They search 
highlighted reveal two crucial needs for the human being 
related to safety and self-awareness. These needs are 
expressed through communication with the external 
environment composed of other people. This constitutes the 
means for a person to validate their existence through 
recognition and to strengthen their feeling of protection. The 
relation that takes shape in the form of mutual identical 
projections is transformed into attachment when the reliable 
feeling evolves and strengthens. This reliable feeling comes 
along with the certainty of a common cultural belonging that 
expresses itself through shared activities and symbolic 
exchanges. This process consolidates the commitment in the 
relationship. 
The experience of communication is perceived as a 
construction. It develops on the basis of choice and of 
classifications that the structural sociology highlighted. 
Every relation corresponds to a level of commitment. It is 
defined according to identical stakes on that depends the 
self-awareness. The strong links contributes to strengthen a 
positive self-awareness based on the mutual identification. 
The aspects of identity are expressed through emotions and 
feelings. The self-awareness answers a desire of self-
idealization through values that direct the emotions.  
The feelings are the mainspring of the composition of 
the relational environment because they play beforehand a 
role in the choice of selected people. 

162
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The theoretical contributions of the sociology and the 
psychology, allowed us to adapt to our subject of search our 
interpretative railing. The study of the bibliographic 
testimonies of the elderly highlighted the way the person 
recomposes its relational environment in a phase of 
transformation further to a break in its life. The researchers 
emphasized the friendly relation considered as a symbolic 
relation of the report between the peculiarity and the 
standard. They observe that the relational composition 
depends on actions in the reality. They have a strategic 
dimension and a creative dimension. The relationship 
strategy composed of the elements highlighted in our study 
shows the importance of the building of the relationship as a 
sensitive experience level. The relational creativity develops 
in the meeting with the other one perceived as an object of 
stimulation. The history of the relation participates in this 
creativity. The relation evolves during the relational process 
between the people. It constitutes a story made up of events 
of that the meeting with the person is a part, and is 
characterized by the importance of the moments and shared 
activities. From this point of view, the story of the relation 
can be the object of a biography characterized by the 
ascendancy of its emotional contents. The experience of the 
communication reveals a fictional dimension. The fictional 
dimension depends on the imagination. The imagination 
allows the individual to accommodate the reality to its 
expectations. It contributes to the inventiveness. The 
communication stimulates the creativity. Other one is 
perceived as an object with that to enter into a relationship 
generates a tension. The relational balance requires the 
appeal 
to 
the 
personal 
imagination. 
A. 
Damasio 
demonstrated how the perception of the object pulls a 
process of internal consciousness likened to a social 
knowledge. The fiction is objectified in the reality. She can 
move on an object perceived as transitional support or as 
object of dialogue. Within the framework of a question 
about opportunity of a mediation, the researchers are 
confronted with the questioning of B. Spiegler and G. 
Simondon on the simplifying dimension of the media as the 
"tertiary retention” in its transposition of a polymorphic 
reality. They observe that the object through the feeling that 
it inspires to the person contributes to a validation of its 
existence in the present reality. So, the capacity of 
reification of the present moment of the technical mediation 
observed by B. Spiegler can contribute to underline this 
capacity of the man to register his intimate history in the 
present real-life experience. From the functional approaches 
but also in reference to the phenomenological approaches, 
the researchers propose a model. They qualified it as 
“relational biography”. The relational biography consists of 
a work of specific singular interpretation of the actions and 
the meanings in the context from the relation to the other 
one. The media is perceived as a space of mediation. It is 
used in its dimension of memorization of the track perceived 
as relational gesture and the shaping of the relational 
environment. The track and the shape are "baits" of the 
experience of the communication. The mediation appears as 
a way to strengthen the experience of communication as 
assertion of one and registration in an "increased" reality 
that participates in the "history in movement". 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C.Treton, C. Bourret, “Loneliness and Relational Biography – 
Affective 
Communication”, 
Proceedings 
/ 
The 
First 
International Conference on Human and Social Analytics, 
HUSO 2015 – IARIA, Saint Julians, Malta – pp. 45-48, 
October 11-16, 2015.  
[2] P. Flichy, “L’individualisme connecté : entre la technique 
numérique et la société,  Nouvelles réflexions sur l’internet,” 
Réseaux, vol. 22, n° 124, pp. 17-52, 2004. 
[3] E. Durkheim, “The division and labour in society,” PUF 
1930, Paris, p. 124, new collection « Quadrige », 2012. 
[4] S. Paugam, “The social bond,” PUF, Paris,  pp. 7-103, 2013.  
[5] Louis Quéré, “Des Miroirs équivoques, Aux origines de la 
Communication Moderne,” Aubier Montaigne, coll. Res 
Babel, Paris, 1982. 
[6] N. Elias, “Society of individuals,” Fayard, Paris, pp. 208-301, 
1991. 
[7] A. Honneth, “The struggle for recognition,” Folio essais 
(n° 576), Gallimard, Paris,  pp. 114-235, 2013. 
[8] D. W. Winnicott, “Capacity to be alone,” Payot-Rivages, 
Paris, pp. 46-108, 2012. 
[9] A. Damasio, “The feeling of what happens, body, emotions, 
conscience,” édition Odile Jacob, Paris, pp. 110-299, 2002. 
[10] P. Ricoeur, “Oneself as Another,”édition du Seuil, Paris, 
1990.  
[11] P. Malrieu, “The process of personnalization,” in ERES, 
«Pocket - Society», Toulouse, p.280, 2003. 
[12] C. Delory-Momberger, “The biographical condition. Essai on 
self-narrative in the advanced modernity,” Teraèdre, Paris, pp. 
61-75, 2010. 
[13] B. Stiegler, “Le bien le plus précieux à l’époque des 
sociotechnologies - Réseaux sociaux,” Editions FYP, Paris, 
p.235, 2012, Cit. G. Simondon G. (1997), L’individu et sa 
genèse hysico-biologique, Paris, Edition Jérôme Milliam, 
p.156.  
[14] M. Maffesoli, “Le Réenchantement du monde. Morales, 
éthiques, déontologies,” éd. Table Ronde, Paris,  2007. 
[15] E. Illouz, “Les sentiments du capitalisme,” Seuil, Paris, 2006. 
[16] A. Casilli, “Les Liaisons numériques : vers une nouvelle 
sociabilité ? ” Editions du Seuil, Paris, 2010. 
[17] M. Doueihi, “Pour un humanisme numérique,” Seuil, Paris, 
2011. 
[18] G. Simmel, “Studies on forms of socialization,” PUF, trad., 
1999. 
[19] C. Bidart, “Studying networks, contributions and prospects 
for social sciences,” Informations sociales n° 147, pp. 100-
259, 2008. 
[20] M.Mauss, “Essai sur le don. Forme et raison de l’échange 
dans les sociétés archaiques ” in sociologie et anthropologie, 
PUF, Paris,1923. 
[21] O. Renaut, “Platon, la médiation des émotions, L'éducation du 
thymos dans les dialogues,” Vrin, Paris, 2014.  
[22] M. Csikszenmihalyi, “Finding Flow,” in Editions Basic 
Books, New York, p103-125, 1997. 
[23] F. Martin-Juchat, “Think the emotional body as a media, 
anthropology of affective communication,” Revue Le corps 
n°4, Paris,  pp. 85-92, 2008. 

163
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24] B. Galinon Mélénec, F. Liènard et S. Zlitni, S. do Kim “ 
L’homme Trace inscriptions corporelles et techniques,” 
CNRS Edition, Suresnes, 2015. 
[25] F. Bernard and R. V. Joule, “Link, meaning  and action : 
Towards an engaging communication,” Communication and 
organization, online, URL : 
http://communicationorganisation.revues.org/2918, mars 2012 
[retrieved : August, 2015]. 
[26] V. Caradec, “Sociology of the elderly and aging,” Armand 
Colin, Paris, pp. 87-103, 2012. 
[27] P. Pitaud, “Loneliness and isolation of the elderly,” Editions 
Erès, Toulouse, pp. 25-103, 2010.  
[28] M. Billé and J. Pollard, “Manifesto for age and life, reenchant 
old age,” Editions Erès, Paris,  pp. 63-112, 2012.   
[29] D. 
Demazière, 
C. 
Dubar, 
“Analyser 
les 
entretiens 
biographiques,” les Presses de l’Université de  Laval, 2009.  
[30] A. Mucchielli, “Situation and Communication,” Ed. Ovadia : 
Nice, 2010. 
[31] G. Bachelard, “La poétique de l’espace,” PUF, Paris,1957. 
[32] J. M. Schaeffer,  “Pourquoi la fiction ? ” Le Seuil, Paris, 
1999. 
[33] G. Simondon, “Imagination et invention,” Les éditions de la 
transparence, réédition, Paris, pp. 237-268,2008. 
[34] F. Guattari, “Chaosmose, Penser avec Félix Guattari,” Revue 
Chimères, N°77, éditions Erès, pp. 17-107, 2012.  
[35] O. Galibert,  “L’incommunicabilité dans le cadre de la 
pratique anthropologique,“ Socio-anthropologie, pp.23-241 
2009. 
[36] E. Levinas,  “Altérité et trasncendance,“ Edition Poche, Paris, 
2006.   
[37] J. Caune, “Pour une éthique de la médiation. Le sens des 
pratiques culturelles,”Presses universitaires de Grenoble, 
1999.  
[38] N. Alter, “Donner et prendre,” Editions La découverte,  Paris, 
2010. 
[39] R.Barthes, “La chambre claire, note sur la photographie,” 
Editions de l’Etoile Gallimard Seuil , 1980. 
[40] A. Leroi Gourhan , “ Les racines du monde”, Edition Belfond, 
Paris,  p.290, 1982. 
[41] P. Lévy, “ L’intelligence collective, pour une anthropologie 
du cyberespace,” Editions La découverte, Paris, 1997. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

