Modeling of Driver’s Distraction State based on Body Information Analysis 
 
Kazuhito Sato, Masafumi Sawataishi, Hirokazu Madokoro 
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
ksato, m18a016, madokoro @akita-pu.ac.jp
Momoyo Ito 
Institute of Technology and Science, 
Tokushima University 
 Tokushima, Japan 
momoito@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp 
Sakura Kadowaki 
 Smart Design Corp. 
Akita, Japan 
sakura@smart-d.jp 
 
Abstract - For this study, we defined a "concentration state" as 
that when a driver performs only driving tasks and a 
"distraction state" as that when a driver performs a driving 
task and a mental arithmetic task simultaneously. Based on 
results of these driving tests, we elucidate the characteristics of 
safety confirmation behaviors by near-misses according to 
differences between two driving conditions when approaching 
an intersection. Specifically, using Bayesian Networks (BNs) to 
express the relation between safety confirmation behaviors 
graphically for driving scene and driver’s internal state, we 
analyze correlations between characteristic body information 
(i.e., eye-gaze / face orientation) and operation information (i.e., 
steering wheel, accelerator, and brake) when switching from a 
"concentration state" to a "distraction state" based on 
viewpoints of driving style and driving workload sensitivity. 
Using evaluation experiments, by constructing internal state 
estimation models of subjects for whom driving style and 
driving workload sensitivity are mutually opposite, we try to 
analyze body information and the operation information by 
which the influence of a distracted state appears easily 
through the specification of unique behavior patterns 
associated with each driving scene. 
 
Keywords - body information; driver behavior; human 
engineering; near miss; non-regulated intersection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to accident statistics, at non-regulated 
intersections where numerous crossing accidents occur, non-
confirmation of safety is common: cognitive distraction 
states account for approximately 3/4 of human error in 
crossing accidents. Of pedestrian accident factors that result 
in death, 35% are states of careless driving, classified as a 
"distraction state" or "state of fatigue" according to the level 
of driver arousal. To clarify the relevance between a 
"distraction state" and a driver’s driving characteristics, we 
have been studying a possibility of modeling drivers’ 
internal states when switching from a concentrating state to 
a distracted state [1]. Detection indices of the "distraction 
state" are restricted to physiological information and body 
information. Methods of detecting attentiveness and arousal 
level from face orientations and eyelids (e.g., blinking or 
eyelid opening) captured by an onboard camera [2] [3] and 
an approach to detect the reduction of driver arousal level 
from vehicle behaviors [4] have been put to practical use as 
techniques of fatigue state estimation for drivers. More 
recently, research and development projects to detect and 
use eye-gaze movements have been promoted actively for 
the detection of signals of inattentive driving and distraction 
states [5] [6]. Furthermore, as case studies dealing with 
facial expression changes during driving, studies dealing 
with the relation between the evaluation value of facial 
expression changes by a third party and the degree of 
fatigue have been reported as attempts at driver fatigue 
measurements [7] [8]. In these studies, various methods 
been attempted, with increasing capabilities demonstrated 
by the evaluation of facial expression changes. 
In earlier studies [9] [10], to extract characteristic 
behavior patterns that occur when a driver becomes 
distracted, we used a mental arithmetic task to perform a 
driving experiment simulating a driver's distraction state. 
Then, we analyzed the relation between data of physical 
information such as the face orientation / eye-gaze 
movement obtained from experiments and a driver’s driving 
characteristics. Results show that a clear difference might 
occur in the distribution of eye-gaze movement in a 
concentration state and distraction state. Furthermore, 
through analysis of correlation between the physical 
information and operating information of vehicles, we 
confirmed the possibility of modeling drivers’ internal states 
when switching from a concentrating state to a distracted 
state. 
For this study, we attempt to model driving behavior 
using Bayesian Networks (BNs) [11] for a dataset acquired 
in earlier research. Actually, BNs can represent a causal 
relation of several random variables as a graph structure. 
Furthermore, one can obtain the a posteriori probability 
distribution of other variables by setting the evidence of the 
causal variable. For this study, we set the evidence for the 
42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

driving scene and the driver’s internal state, and perform 
probabilistic inference. Then, we find a posterior probability 
distribution of each node of physical information, biometric 
information, and operation information, and analyze the 
characteristic driving behavior, which changes depending 
on the driving scene and the driver’s internal state.  
This paper is presented as follows. We review related 
work to clarify the position of this study in Section II. 
Section III presents a definition of the running route and 
near-miss events assuming the sudden appearance of a 
bicycle. In Section IV, we examine two cases of 
"concentration state" to assess driving tasks and "distraction 
state" to assess driving tasks and mental arithmetic tasks 
simultaneously. Additionally, we identify characteristic 
behavior patterns corresponding to the three driving scenes 
and analyze the correlation between physical information 
and operation information, each of which is likely to be 
affected by the distracted state using the constructed internal 
state estimation model. Finally, we present conclusions and 
intentions for future work in Section V. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A cognitive distraction state is difficult to ascertain from 
external appearances because it is an internal state of a 
driver. No estimation method has been established. 
Proposed methods of distraction state detection [12] were 
classifiable into four types based on the modalities to be 
measured [13] [14]. Considering the burden on drivers, the 
use 
of 
"physiological 
information" 
and 
"subjective 
evaluation" of drivers is unrealistic for application to actual 
driving conditions. For "operating information" such as 
steering and braking, which are involved directly with risk, 
notifying the driver even after detecting the distraction state 
can occur too late for danger avoidance. The distraction 
states addressed in this study include a "thinking state" and 
a "blank state" in which attention resources are distributed, 
and "impatience, or a frustrated state" attributable to time 
constraints under driving tasks. Abe et al. examined a 
"thinking state" [15]. Honma et al. reported a "blank state" 
[16]. Each study examined the experimental verification of 
each state. Each confirmed the presence of distinctive 
situations in which oversight and delayed discovery of 
changes in the surrounding circumstances would occur 
easily. 
In earlier studies of modeling driving behaviors, Kumano 
et al. modeled eye-gaze movement using Dynamic Bayesian 
Networks (DBNs) [17]. They constructed a model of eye-
gaze behaviors using DBNs from elements such as body 
movements, driving operations, and driving situations for 
identifying three types of eye-gaze movements such as 
forward gazing, dead angle confirmation, and inattention. 
As a result of verifying observation parameters because of 
differences in eye-gaze behaviors, they demonstrated the 
possibility of acquiring a high discrimination rate using 
context information such as driving operations and driving 
situations. However, the internal state estimation of each 
driver has not been reached for prediction of risky driving. 
However, in constructing real-time distraction detection 
systems, Ahlstrom et al. investigated the usefulness of a 
real-time distraction detection algorithm called AttenD [18]. 
They described that it is difficult to measure the driver 
distraction state. There is no commonly accepted ground 
truth for driver distraction [19]. The validation of AttenD 
was performed in the field using the general methodological 
setup of a field operational test. That earlier study found that 
true distraction is difficult to attain in an artificial setting 
such as a simulator. However, AttenD seems not to respond 
appropriately our target distraction states such as a "thinking 
state" or "blank state" as described above. Therefore, we are 
convinced of the necessity of modeling along with each 
cycle of recognition, judgment, and operation which is the 
basis of driving tasks. 
 
 
Figure 1. Experimental system for measuring driver 
behaviors. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Outline of experimental protocols. 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
METHODS 
A. Experimental Systems 
This study used a driving simulator (DS) to assess driving 
behaviors for freely set road environments and traffic 
conditions that affect driver behaviors. Figure 1 portrays the 
experimental system configuration used to measure driver 
behaviors. The DS used for experiments has platforms 
corresponding to compact and six-axis motion, which is 
equipped with ordinary cars. The DS has three color liquid 
crystal displays mounted in the front of the cabin, and has a 
function reproducing pseudo-driving environments that are 
freely configurable to horizontal viewing angles. As Figure 
1 shows, to measure body information such as head poses, 
face orientations, and eye-gaze movements without 
restraining drivers, we installed cameras to the left and right 
in the center of the three-color liquid crystal monitors 
mounted in front of the cabin. Additionally, we set an 
infrared pod on top of the instruments in front of the cabin. 
Here the camera heads and infrared pod are input-based 
sensors of a head-gaze tracking device (FaceLAB; Ekstreme 
Machine Corp.). 
B. Experimental Protocols 
Figure 2 depicts the experimental protocol outline. The 
"concentration state" for driving represents driving states 
while performing only driving tasks. In contrast, the 
"distraction state" is defined as a "thinking state" during 
which driving tasks and simple mental arithmetic tasks are 
performed 
simultaneously. 
Similarly 
to 
experiments 
described by Abe et al. [15], mental arithmetic tasks used in 
our experiment included one digit addition, presented to 
drivers at 3 s intervals. Mental arithmetic results were to be 
reported verbally. The correctness of the results of each 
mental calculation was not reported to the driver during 
driving. Initially, as individual characteristics of each 
subject, we conducted an examination of the following 
questionnaire methods: attitude, oriented, and concept to 
work on driving were performed using the driving style 
check sheet [20]. Regarding the types of operation burdens 
that were strongly felt, they were performed using a driving 
load sensitivity check sheet [21]. In one running test, for 
each target subject wearing a heart rate monitor (RS800CX; 
Polar), we measured the instantaneous heart rate of a normal 
state during 1 min in advance. Next, to improve the 
measurement accuracy for face orientations and eye-gaze 
movements of each participant, we calibrated the cameras of 
the head-gaze tracking device (FaceLAB). We recorded a 
face video while driving with the USB camera (Xtion Pro 
Live; ASUS Corp.) to analyze the facial expressions of the 
subject. After these preparations, each participant ran three 
laps along the running scenario described later in Section 
Ⅲ.C, by synchronizing the time base of each measuring 
device. Finally, using a questionnaire that specifically 
examines traffic events occurring at intersections, subjective 
reviews, a four-stage check, were also conducted when a 
near-miss occurred. 
After obtaining the approval of Akita Prefectural 
University Research Ethics Board, the experiment contents 
for all subjects were explained fully to participants in 
advance. We obtained written consent of participants. From 
 
 
(a) Running route for simulation 
 
 
(b) Sudden appearance of bicycle at intersection 1 
 
 
(c) Sudden appearance of bicycle at intersection 2 
Figure 3. Simulation course with near-miss events of two types (Route 1/Route 2). 
44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

each, we also obtained an agreement to publish a face image 
along with the consent to experimental participation. 
C. Near-miss events and running scenarios 
Figure 3 presents a definition of the running route and 
near-miss events assuming the sudden appearance of a 
bicycle. The running route is a circuit course simulating 
non-controlled intersections near the Tokushima University 
campus, where joint research has been conducted. As targets, 
we set two types of sudden appearance of bicycles for 
intersection 1 and intersection 2 as shown in Figure 3. One 
near miss is defined as the sudden appearance of a bicycle 
along route 1, which is crossing from the right side to the 
left side of the vehicle. The other near-miss entails the 
sudden appearance of a bicycle along route 2, which is 
interfering with the vehicle path at intersection 2. With the 
main campus gate as a starting point, each subject traveled 
from the intersection 1 in order through intersection 5. In 
addition, intersection 1 and intersection 2 are non-controlled 
intersections that had poor visibility. 
Subsequently, we present an overview of running 
scenarios in the following. The basic traveling scenario is 
configured to three laps of the running route described 
above. We conducted control of near-miss events for 
generation as follows. The first lap and the third lap were 
without near-miss events. The second lap includes the 
sudden appearance of bicycles along route 1 at intersection 
1 and route 2 at intersection 2. Furthermore, it is necessary 
to control other traffic flows such as traffic turning right and 
straight oncoming vehicles at intersection 1, and that of cars 
crossing in front of one’s own vehicle at intersections 2 and 
 
          
 
(a) Eye-gaze movements 
 
 
 
 
(b) Face orientations 
 
Figure 4. Scatter diagram of the sections ranging from detection to gaze-tracking of sudden appearance of bicycle. 
 
 
         
        
 
(a) Target scene  
 
 
(b) Eye-gaze movements 
 
(c) Face orientations 
 
Figure 5. Detection case of sudden appearance of the bicycle for the first time. 
 
 
         
         
 
(a) Target scene  
 
 
(b) Eye-gaze movements 
 
(c) Face orientations 
 
Figure 6. Case in which eye movements and face orientations were plotted concurrently. 
 
 
45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3. Based on the fundamental running scenarios described 
previously, we must assess behaviors in different weather 
(i.e., sunny or rainy) and time periods (i.e., daytime or 
nighttime). We prepared four driving environments: sunny 
day, rainy day sunny night, and rainy night. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
For 
experiments, 
we 
examined 
two 
cases 
of 
"concentration state" to assess driving tasks and "distraction 
state" to assess driving tasks and mental arithmetic tasks 
simultaneously. Based on the running scenarios described in 
Section III.C, the experiments were conducted to three laps 
of the same route with one running environment, for driving 
environments of four types with varying weather and time 
zones. Furthermore, by changing the driving environments 
in the order of sunny day / rainy day / sunny night / rainy 
night, we examined the same conditions for all participants, 
all of whom were students of our university with ordinary 
vehicle driver licenses. These 10 men were designated as C, 
D, E, H, I, J, K, L, M, and N; 2 women were designated as F 
and G. During running experiments, we gave instructions to 
each driver to observe traffic rules and speed limits based on 
as pause, as stipulated in the Road Traffic Law. 
A.  Correlation between driving behaviors and driving 
load sensitivity 
Our previous study [9] specifically examined time-series 
variation of eye-gaze movements and face orientations 
before and after encountering a near-miss. Consequently, we 
extracted behavioral patterns characterizing the "distraction 
state" on driving, and attempted to derive the effective 
findings for engineering modeling. In this section, 
narrowing down the time axis on the sudden appearance of 
the bicycle from microscopic points of view, we should 
analyze the temporal relation between eye-gaze movements 
and face orientations from the start point of viewing to the 
end point of tracking with respect to the sudden appearance 
of the bicycle. Figure 4 depicts scatter diagrams of eye-gaze 
movements and face orientations from the starting to the end 
point of tracking in the "concentration state." Comparison to 
the scatter diagram of face orientations shows that the 
scatter diagram of eye-gaze movements has been scattered 
widely. We recognized a tendency to control eye-gaze 
movements before face orientations when searching for the 
gazing target. Therefore, we subdivide the time axis from 
the start point of viewing to the end point of tracking, and 
analyze the eye-gaze movements and the face orientations 
by particularly addressing the timing to be shown on the 
scatter diagram. Figure 5 depicts the results by which only 
the eye-gaze movements appeared to scatter diagrams ahead. 
By contrast, Figure 6 presents results for which both eye-
gaze 
movements 
and 
face 
orientations 
appeared 
simultaneously in scatter diagrams. In Figures 5 and 6, 
respectively, (a) is a scene image sudden appearance of the 
bicycle, (b) a scatter diagram of eye-gaze movements, and 
(c) is a scatter diagram of face orientations. As understood 
from Figure 5, when the driver was able to view the sudden 
appearance of the bicycle at first, we were unable to observe 
changes in the scatter diagram of face orientations. 
Subsequently, we confirmed the scatter diagram in which 
the eye-gaze movements and the face orientations were 
matched in Figure 6. Therefore, we believe that the driver 
had to view and track the sudden appearance of the bicycle 
for the first time at this timing. 
Next, we consider the effect of the driving load sensitivity 
to eye-gaze behaviors in the "distraction state" and the 
"concentration state." In this study, particularly addressing 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Calculation results of "concentration inhibition for driving" for all participants. 
46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the "concentration inhibition for driving" from the 10 
indices of the driving load sensitivity, Figure 7 depicts the 
result of whole participants. The value of the driving load 
sensitivity is calculated at 0.50 steps from 1.00 to 5.00, the 
average value (i.e., 2.63) in Figure 7, which indicates the 
survey result intended for the drivers of 20 years old to 74 
years old conducted by Research Institute of Human 
Engineering for Quality Life. In the "concentration 
inhibition for driving" by performing mental arithmetic 
tasks and driving tasks simultaneously, we have classified 
"easily burdened group (i.e., C, E, F, G, I, K, L, and M)" and 
"not easily burdened group (i.e., D, H, J, and N)." Then, we 
analyzed gazing behaviors using heat maps of eye-gaze 
movements. Results show that for the easily burdened group 
the "concentration inhibition for driving" tended to fall into 
a "distracted state" by performing mental arithmetic tasks 
and driving tasks simultaneously. We inferred that the 
"easily burdened group" had unintentionally devoted 
attention resources to mental arithmetic tasks because their 
eye-gaze movements were distributed when approaching 
intersections. 
Additionally, we consider the effect of the driving style to 
eye-gaze behaviors in the "distraction state" and the 
"concentration 
state." 
Particularly 
addressing 
the 
"confidence in driving skills" from the 9 indices of the 
driving style, Figure 8 depicts the result of whole 
participants. The value is calculated at 0.50 steps from 1.00 
to 4.00, the average value (i.e., 2.57) in Figure 8, which 
indicates the survey result as same as the driving load 
sensitivity. In the easily burdened group (i.e., C, E, F, G, I, 
K, L, and M), we have confirmed subjects I and K having 
with the "confidence in driving skills." On the other hand, 
subjects C, E, F, G, L, and M don’t have the "confidence in 
driving skills." We have expected that a concentration state 
and distraction state strongly depend on both "concentration 
inhibition for driving" and "confidence in driving skills" of 
each driver. 
 
B. Modeling of internal states estimation 
BNs can be used as a probabilistic model to visualize 
complicated dependence of the target problem by a graph 
structure. They represent dependence between variables by 
non-circular effective links. BNs represent random variables 
by nodes. Furthermore, BNs combine nodes with directed 
links and define the mutual dependence of variables as 
probability distributions. The node under the directed link is 
called the parent node. The node at the end of the directed 
link is called the child node. A random variable we want to 
find is defined as X. The value of the observed variable is 
defined as e. A normalization constant is defined as π. The 
probability of propagation from parent node or child node is 
defined as π and λ. An arbitrary a posteriori probability is 
calculable locally using the following equation: by 
stochastic inference using BNs, the probability distribution 
of the target random variable is obtainable. 
 
)
) (
(
)
(
j
i
j
X
X
P X e

 
 
(1) 
 
The internal state estimation model handled in this 
research consists of 8 nodes: 2 nodes corresponding to the 
face 
orientation 
and 
eye-gaze 
movement of 
body 
information (Head and Eye), 1 node corresponding to the 
heart rate of the biometric information (Heart), 3 nodes 
corresponding to handles, accelerator, and brake of 
operation information (Handle, Accelerator, Brake), and 2 
 
 
Figure 8. Calculation results of "confidence in driving skills" for all participants. 
47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

nodes corresponding to the driving scene and the driver’s 
internal state (Scene, State). Table I presents the list of 
nodes. For each node from "Head" to "Brake," changes of 
values were recorded every 3 s because the mental 
arithmetic task given every 3 s in the driving experiment. 
"Scene" is an assigned number denoting the state according 
to the three driving scenes (straight line, intersection entry, 
and right turn) from characteristics of the simulation course. 
For building the internal state estimation model, we use 
BAYONET, which is Bayesian Network building support 
software by NTT Data Matrix Systems. BAYONET has the 
function of learning the characteristics of the target dataset 
and automatically constructing a network. Now, based on 
the precondition that the driver's internal state and operation 
information are influenced according to the driving scene, 
the driving scene "Scene" is set as the parent node. Then the 
internal state "State" and the operation information "Handle, 
" "Accelerator," and "Brake" are set as child nodes. Then 
the directed link is set manually. Furthermore, based on the 
hypothesis that the driver’s internal state is likely to appear 
in the physical information and in the biological information, 
the physical information "Head," "Eye" and the biological 
information "Heart" are set as parent nodes. The internal 
state "State" is set as a child node. The directed link is set 
manually. 
We consider that the driver’s internal state "State" is 
determined by the distribution of attention resources 
accompanying the performance of the driving task and the 
mental arithmetic task. Therefore, we quantify the 
distribution of attention resources for driving tasks and 
mental arithmetic tasks, and define the driver’s internal state 
using these values. We use the number of occurrences of 
saccades every 3 s as the evaluation value of the attention 
resource distribution to driving tasks. Because saccades are 
a rapid movement of the eye-gaze movement from the gaze 
point to the gaze point, many saccades occurred during 
driving while devoting attention to the surrounding 
environment. The evaluation value of i-th driving task Di is 
defined using the following equation. The number of 
occurrences of saccade Si is normalized as a value of 0–1. 
 
min
max
min
S
S
S
S
D
i
i



 
(2) 
 
We use the time from the instant the question is presented 
to the end of the answer as the evaluation value of attention 
resource distribution to mental arithmetic tasks. A quicker 
answer reflects concentration on the mental arithmetic task 
and represents allocation of more attention resources. 
Therefore, the evaluation value is higher. However, in the 
case of no answer or a wrong answer, we set the evaluation 
value as the lowest because attention resources are not 
allocated to the mental arithmetic task. Specifically, it was 
set to the same value as the longest response time of each 
subject. The evaluation value of the mental arithmetic task 
at i-th point Ai is defined as shown in the following equation. 
In addition, Ti, which is the time from the question entry to 
the end of the reply, was normalized as a value between 0 
and 1. Ai is set to approach 1 for rapid answers. 
 
min
max
min
1
T
T
T
T
A
i
i




 
(3) 
 
From the above, the  i-th evaluation value of the driver’s 
internal state Statei is defined from the evaluation value of 
the driving task Di and the evaluation value of the mental 
arithmetic task Ai using the following equation. 
 
2
i
i
i
A
D
State


 
(4) 
C. Analysis of internal states estimation model 
The state in which attention resources are not properly 
allocated according to the driving scene is called a 
distraction state. If a distraction state continues, then it 
engenders dangerous driving and a higher probability of 
causing an accident. Additionally, it is expected that a 
concentration state and distraction state defined as the 
driver’s internal state depend on the driving skill of each 
driver. For this reason, we think that an analysis 
particularly addressing the driving style and driving 
workload sensitivity based on check sheets is important. As 
described herein, we specifically examine subject C, who 
has less opportunity to drive, and subject I, who drives on a 
daily basis. Figure 9 presents test results related to the 
driving style. Figure 10 shows test results reflecting the 
driving workload sensitivity. Average values shown in 
Figure 9 and Figure 10 are the values of results from about 
540 men and women for a survey conducted by the 
Research Institute of Human Engineering for Quality of Life 
(HQL). In the driving style of Figure 9, subject C has high 
"passivity to driving" and "a propensity for anxiety." In 
addition, Subject I had a high tendency for "confidence in 
driving skills" and a "car as a status symbol." From this, 
they are found to have polar opposite driving styles. In 
terms of the driving workload sensitivity in Figure 10, both 
subjects had a high "concentration inhibition for driving." 
TABLE I. DEFINITION OF BNs NODES 
Node 
Contents 
HEAD 
Displacement value of head pose movements for 3 s [m] 
EYE 
Displacement value of eye-gaze movements for 3 s [m] 
HEART 
Variation of instantaneous heart rate for 3 s [s-1] 
HANDLE 
Operation value of steering for 3 s (-1 ~ +1) 
ACCEL 
Operation value of accelerator for 3 s (-1 ~ +1) 
BRAKE 
Operation value of brake for 3 s (-1 ~ +1) 
SCENE 
Driving scenes 
 (1: straight, 2: approaching intersections, 3: turn right) 
STATE 
Internal states  
(1: concentration state, 2: neutral state, 3: distraction state) 
 
48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Subject I exhibited a tendency to have a higher "driving 
pace inhibition." In other words, we estimate that both 
subjects have characteristics that easily fall into a 
distraction state because of simultaneous performance of the 
driving task and mental arithmetic task. 
The learning data used to construct the internal state 
estimation model are a joining of all data acquired in the 
four driving experiments conducted with different weather 
and time zones. The number of data of subject C was 634. 
The number of data of subject I was 619. In addition, these 
data were discretized in three stages using K-means method. 
The model of subject C is presented in Figure 11. The 
model of subject I is shown in Figure 12. Comparing Figure 
11 with Figure 12 enables confirmation of the existence of a 
directed link unique to each subject. Because the directed 
links connect the nodes in a form optimized to raise the 
accuracy of the inference, significant correlation exists 
between the nodes to which the directed links are 
established. For example, in Subject C in Figure 11, a 
directed link from the "Scene" node to the "Eye" node is 
established, but in subject I in Figure 12, its directed link is 
not established. In other words, subject C's eye-gaze 
movement is more likely to be affected depending on the 
driving scene. Conversely, subject I's eye-gaze movement 
might be affected only slightly. In subject I in Figure 12, a 
directed link is established from the "Scene" node to the 
"Heart" node and from the "Brake" node to the 
"Accelerator" node, respectively, but in the subject C in 
Figure 11, its directed link is not established. Particularly 
because the directed link from the "Brake" node to the 
"Accelerator" node shows a clear causal relation between 
the brake and the accelerator operation amount, it can be 
regarded as the skill level of the driving operation. The 
feature shown above demonstrates that it is possible to 
construct an internal state estimation model that is unique to 
the subject because of differences in driving style and 
driving workload sensitivity. 
 
      
 
Figure 9. Driving style results of subjects C and I.           Figure 11. Internal state estimation model for risky driving          
                         (Subject C).  
 
   
 
 Figure 10. Driving workload sensitivity results of subjects C and I.     Figure 12. Internal state estimation model for risky driving  
  
 
 
 
 
       (Subject I). 
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Stochastic reasoning by internal states estimation 
model 
Next, we identify characteristic behavior patterns 
corresponding to the three driving scenes and analyze the 
correlation between physical information and operation 
information, each of which is likely to be affected by the 
distracted state using the constructed internal state 
estimation model. The three driving scenes are controlled by 
evidence of the "Scene" node. Scenes are classified into a 
straight section "Scene 1," an entrance section "Scene 2," 
and a right turn section "Scene 3." Subsequently, we gave 
evidence to the ‘State’ node representing the driver’s 
internal state for each driving scene, and compared the 
probability distribution of each node in the concentrating 
state "State 3" and the distracted state "State 1." Figures 13–
15 present the posterior probability distributions of subjects 
C and I obtained by stochastic reasoning corresponding to 
three driving scenes. In the figure, values 1–3 indicated by 
each node on the abscissa show the magnitude of the 
movement amount and the operation amount. The ordinate 
axis shows values of their posterior probabilities. 
In the straight section of Figure 13 and the approach 
section of Figure 14, devoting attention to the posterior 
probability distribution of the ‘Head’ node and the "Eye" 
node, subject C has a large face orientation and movement 
amount of the eye-gaze movement. Conversely, subject I's 
movement amount is small. Regarding the driving style, 
subject C has high "passivity to driving" and "a propensity 
for anxiety." Subject I has a high "confidence in driving 
skill," so it can be inferred that this is attributable to the 
difference in driving skill levels. In addition, in the right 
turn section of Figure 15, a tendency is apparent by which 
the face orientation and eye-gaze movement amount of 
subject I become greater than in the straight section of 
Figure 13. In other words, it can be inferred that subject I 
was driving while identifying points to be noticed according 
to each driving scene, in contrast to subject C, who did not. 
In addition, when comparing concentrating state "State 3" 
and distracted state "State 1" in a distracted state in both 
driving scenes of both subjects, the amounts of movement 
 
(a) Subject C 
 
 
(b) Subject I 
 
Figure 13. Probability distribution of respective nodes with evidence of the straight running period. 
 
50
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the face orientation and the eye-gaze movement are small 
(posterior probability of "Head 1" and "Eye 1": distracted 
state > concentrating state). However, in the concentrating 
state, for both driving scenes of both subjects, the amount of 
movement the face orientation and the eye-gaze movement 
is large (posterior probability of "Head 3" and "Eye 3": 
distracted state > concentrating state). These tendencies are 
regarded as evident in the change in the amount of the 
movement of the face orientation and the eye-gaze 
movement for both subjects as a result of depriving attention 
resources by the simultaneous execution of the driving task 
and the mental arithmetic task. Next, devoting attention to 
the posterior probability distribution of the ‘Handle’ node in 
the straight section of Figure 13 and the entry section of 
Figure 14, in the distracted state, the steering wheel 
operation amount of subject C is increased, whereas the 
steering wheel operation amount of subject I is decreased. 
Moreover, subject I, more than subject C, showed a 
difference in posterior probability when the concentrating 
state changed to the distracted state. This tendency suggests 
that the simultaneous execution of mental arithmetic tasks is 
strongly influential because subject I shows a burden from 
"distributing the concentration of the driving" and "driving 
pace inhibition." 
Finally, 
we 
specifically 
examine 
the 
probability 
distribution of the "Heart" node of the instantaneous heart 
rate. In the internal state estimation model of subject I 
presented in Figure 12, a direct link is established from the 
"Scene" node to the "Heart" node. For subject C presented 
in Figure 10, the directed link is not recognized. By 
devoting attention to this point and by comparing the 
posterior probability distributions of both subjects shown in 
Figures  13–15, subject I presents a marked difference 
between the posterior probability of the concentrating state 
and distracted state in each driving scene, but subject C 
shows no marked difference. This result is attributable to the 
presence or absence of an effective link in the internal state 
estimation model that is unique to each subject. 
E. Validation of internal states estimation model 
After constructing an internal states estimation model 
with three datasets of learning data out of the four running 
 
(a) Subject C 
 
 
 
(b) Subject I 
 
Figure 14. Probability distribution of respective nodes with evidence of approaching the intersection period. 
 
51
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

experiments conducted with different weather and time 
zones (sunny day / rainy day / sunny night / rainy night), 
probabilistic inference was conducted for the model using 
the remaining 1 dataset as test data. Then the accuracy of 
the model was verified through cross validation. Table II 
presents the results. Assuming that the number of 
verification data is N and that the correct number of 
inference results is C, then the correct answer rate is 
represented as C / N. Therefore, the average value was 
calculated and inferred by all combinations (model 
construction and test of four patterns). It is noteworthy that 
the "Scene" node and the "State" node were used as 
explanatory variables. The other six nodes were set as 
objective variables to find the correct answer rate. 
As shown in Table II, particularly addressing Subject I, it 
indicates a high correct answer rate in all the nodes except 
the "Heart" node. Especially, in the "Eye", the "Head," the 
"Handle," and the "Brake" nodes directly connected to 
judgment / operation of driving behavior, the correct answer 
rate of more than 70% can be confirmed for each node. 
These numerical values show the possibility of extracting 
and defining a characteristic driving behavior pattern when 
shifting from the driving concentration state to the distracted 
state. Results suggest effectiveness of the internal state 
estimation model that is unique to the subject. However, the 
correct answer rates of the "Eye" node and the "Head" node 
of subject C tended to be lower than those of subject I 
because subject I was driving without glasses, whereas 
subject C was wearing glasses while driving. Therefore, we 
infer that the difference in detection accuracy between the 
eye-gaze movement and the face orientation was influenced. 
 
 
(a) Subject C 
 
 
(b) Subject I 
 
Figure 15. Probability distribution of respective nodes with evidence of turning to the right period. 
 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF ACCURACY VALIDATION 
Node 
Subject C 
Subject I 
HEAD 
0.48715 
0.779525 
EYE 
0.417975 
0.707025 
HEART 
0.49720 
0.443275 
HANDLE 
0.70335 
0.746700 
ACCEL 
0.52265 
0.574150 
BRAKE 
0.71645 
0.755225 
 
52
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For this study, we analyzed driver behavior changes to 
ascertain the time at which a driver becomes distracted. In 
an earlier study, we conducted a driving experiment 
simulating a distraction state and obtained a dataset. 
Additionally, 
we 
constructed 
a 
Bayesian 
model 
incorporating the driver’s internal state as a node for two 
subjects, and executed probabilistic reasoning. We analyzed 
the relation between inference results and driving style / 
driving workload sensitivity. Results clarified the following 
points. Dividing "watching behaviors" when approaching 
the intersection and the "safety confirmation behaviors" 
after a temporary stop is effective for analyses of the 
behavioral patterns characterizing the "distraction state." It 
is possible to construct a specific internal state estimation 
model of the subject by differences in the driving style and 
driving workload sensitivity. In addition, results show a 
unique directed link of the subject. Although we analyzed 
only two subjects in the present study, we expect to evaluate 
more subjects and analysis items in future research. 
Additionally, it is considered that temporal information is 
necessary for dealing with driving behavior. Therefore, we 
plan to conduct research with modeling using DBNs. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number 
25330325. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Sato, M. Sawataishi, H. Madokoro, M. Ito, and S. Kadowaki, 
"Basic Study for Distraction State Detection based on Driver Body 
Information Analysis," The twelfth International Multi-Conference 
on Computing in the Global Information Technology (ICCGI 2017), 
July 2017. 
[2] 
P. Smith, M. Shah, and N. da Vitoria Lobo, "Determining Driver 
Visual Attention with One Camera," IEEE Trans. on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 205-218, 2003. 
[3] 
Y. Dong, Z. Hu, K. Uchimura, and N. Murayama, "Driver 
inattention monitoring system for intelligent vehicles: a review," 
IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 12, No. 2, 
pp. 596-614, 2011. 
[4] 
Y. Tanaka and T. Bando, "Anomaly Driver State Detection from 
Vehicle Behavior Data," Society of Automotive Engineers of Japan, 
Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 685-690, 2013. 
[5] 
K. Kircher, C. Ahlstrom, and A. Kircher, "Comparison of Two Eye-
gaze based on Real-time Driver Distraction Detection Algorithms in 
a Small-scale Field Operational Test," Proc. Fifth Int. Symposium on 
Human Factors in Driver Assessment, Training and Vehicle Design, 
pp. 16-23, 2009. 
[6] 
R. Yonetani, H. Kawashima, T. Hirayama, and T. Matsuyama, 
"Mental Focus Analysis using the Spatiotemporal Correlation 
between Visual Saliency and Eye Movements," Journal of 
Information Proc., Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 267-276, 2012. 
[7] 
A. Tsuchida, H. Kawanaka, and K. Oguri, "Classification of Driver’s 
Drowsy States with Respect to Individual Difference Based on 
Application of Subjective Rating by Facial Expression," The 
Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communication Engineers, 
Technical Report, ITS Vol. 111, No. 441, pp. 251-256, 2012-02-13. 
[8] 
T. Omi, "Driver Sleepiness Detection by Video Image Processing, 
Japanese Society for Artificial Organs," Vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 99-103, 
2013. doi: 10.11392/jsao.42.99. 
[9] 
K. Sato, M. Ito, H. Madokoro, and S. Kadowaki, "Driver Body 
Information Analysis for Distraction State Detection," International 
Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety, pp. 13-18, 2015. 
[10] M. Sawataishi, K. Sato, H. Madokoro, M. Ito, and S. Kadowaki, 
"Driver Internal State Estimative Model for Distracted State 
Detection," IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 2504-2509, 2017. 
[11] Y. Motomura, "Probabilistic reasoning algorithms and their 
experiments in Bayesian network," IEICE, pp. 157-162, 2004. 
[12] M. Miyaji, H. Kawanaka, and Oguri, "Driver’s Cognitive Distraction 
Detection using Physiological Features by the AdaBoost," 12th 
International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
pp. 1-6, 2009. 
[13] T. Hirayama, K. Mase, and K. Takeda, "Timing Analysis of Driver 
Gaze under Cognitive Distraction toward Peripheral Vehicle 
Behavior," The 26th Annual Conference of the Japanese Society for 
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1-4, 2012. 
[14] T. Hirayama, S. Sato, K. Mase, C. Miyajima, and K. Takeda, 
"Analysis of peripheral vehicular behavior in driver’s gaze 
transition: Differences between driver’s neutral and cognitive 
distraction states," 17th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 962-967, 2014. 
[15] G. Abe, K. Kikuchi, R. Iwaki, and T. Fujii, "Effects of Cognitive 
Distraction on Driver’s Visual Attention," The Society of 
Mechanical Engineers (JSME), Transactions of the JSME (c), Vol. 
76, No. 767, pp. 1662-1668, 2010. 
[16] R. Honma, G. Abe, and K. Kikuchi, "Characteristics of Visual 
Attention while Driving under the State of Drowsiness," Society of 
Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 42, No. 5, pp. 
1217-1222, 2011. 
[17] S. Kumano, "Sensing Human Actions for Mental State Estimation," 
University 
of 
Tokyo, 
2009. 
http://hdl.handle.net/2261/28031 
[retrieved: May, 2018] 
[18] K. Kircher and C. Ahlstrom, "The Driver Distraction Detection 
Algorithm AttenD," in Driver Distraction and Inattention: Advances 
in Research and Countermeasures, M. Regan, J. D. Lee, and T. W. 
Victor, Eds. Surrey, U.K.: Ashgate, pp. 327-348, 2012. 
[19] C. Ahlstrom, K. Kircher, and A. Kircher, "A Gaze-Based Driver 
Distraction Warning System and Its Effect on Visual Behavior," 
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol.14, 
no.2, pp. 965-973, 2013. 
[20] M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Driving 
Style 
Questionnaire: 
DSQ," 
Research 
Institute 
of 
Human 
Engineering for Quality Life, 2003. 
[21] M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Workload 
Sensitivity Questionnaire: WSQ," Research Institute of Human 
Engineering for Quality Life, 2003. 
53
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

