Combining User-Centered Design with the Persuasive Systems Design Model; 
The Development Process of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring System for 
Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes 
Nienke Beerlage-de Jong1, Andrea Eikelenboom-Boskamp2,3, Andreas Voss2,3, Robbert Sanderman1,4, Lisette van 
Gemert-Pijnen1 
1Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
n.beerlage-dejong@utwente.nl,  
j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl 
 
2Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 
Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
3Medical Microbiology 
Radboud University Medical Centre 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
eikelenboomandrea@gmail.com, vossandreas@gmail.com  
 
4Department of Health Sciences 
University of Groningen 
Groningen, the Netherlands 
r.sanderman@rug.nl 
Abstract — To improve the usefulness and user-friendliness of 
eHealth interventions, a framework for the development of 
eHealth technology has been developed. It combines User-
Centered Design with the Persuasive System Design model. 
The current paper is aimed at offering a (practical) method for 
the integration of these two design approaches. Via a case 
study, the paper demonstrates how User-Centered Design and 
the Persuasive Systems Design model can complement and 
mutually enrich each other. 
 
Keywords - User-centered design; Persuasive design; Web-
based; eHealth technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we present an extended version of work  
presented at the Sixth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2014) in 
Barcelona, Spain [1]. 
In healthcare, and specifically in infection prevention and 
–control, many apps have been developed. They are intended 
to improve quality of care and patient safety, but are 
definitely not always successful. They often don’t fit with the 
way the intended end-users work or think, or they fulfil a 
non-existent need. 
Therefore, the Center for eHealth Research and Disease 
Management, has developed a framework to develop apps 
that are successful in daily clinical practice: the CeHRes 
Roadmap [2]. This framework makes use of User-Centered- 
Design (UCD) and the Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) 
model.  
Within UCD, during the entire development and design 
processes of a technology, close cooperation is sought with 
end-users and other stakeholders. This is done to achieve an 
optimal fit between the newly developed technology, the 
context in which it is used and the way the intended end-
users work or think [3]. User problems can thus be 
recognized and prevented. For the prevention of such issues, 
and to motivate and support the end-users, the PSD model is 
used [4]. According to this model, technology can be 
developed with the aim of changing the users’ behavior, 
without using coercion or deception [5][6]. Thus, the 
technology itself can make a substantial contribution to its 
own success. We, the Center for eHealth Research and 
Disease Management, are convinced that the combination of 
these two models can be of great added value for the 
development of successful eHealth technology.  
 This paper describes such a development and design 
process, with the aim of offering a tool for the development 
of persuasive and user-friendly eHealth technology. To do 
so, the different stages of the iterative development process 
(following the CeHRes Roadmap, see Fig. 1) of a single app 
is described.  
Whereas most development processes start with the 
design of a technology, we consciously take a step back. The 
first stage of the CeHRes Roadmap is the Contextual 
Inquiry. In this stage, the developer seeks cooperation with 
known stakeholders of the technology to explore the context 
in which the technology must be used, and which 
preconditions it should meet [2].  
Based on the outcomes of this inquiry, and again in 
cooperation with known stakeholders, it is then studied 
whether there are any potentially relevant stakeholders 
missing, and what values and needs they have. This is all 
done during the stage of Value Specification [2].  
Then, in the Design stage, attention is given to the 
question of how solutions to the found problems and 
preconditions can be incorporated within the technology. A 
prototype of the technology is developed and evaluated by 
intended end-users [2].  
As mentioned before, within this paper, the development 
process of a single app will be described, i.e., the Prevalence 
App. Aim of this app is to support Elderly Care Physicians in 
nursing homes during the registration of their clients during 
prevalence 
measurements 
of 
Healthcare 
Associated 
Infections (HAIs).  
262
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.   The CeHRes Roadmap [2]. 
 
HAIs form an increasingly pressing threat to patient 
safety [7]. To be able to adequately protect patients against 
this threat, one of the first steps is to gather knowledge on its 
occurrence [7]. For hospitals, already a vast amount of 
surveillance data is available [7][8][9][10][11][12][13]. For 
other healthcare institutions (such as nursing homes), 
prevalence studies have more recently begun to take place. 
The results of the first prevalence study of HAIs in Dutch 
nursing homes were published in 2011 [14]. 
To enable prevalence research in nursing homes, data 
must be collected on all clients that are present in the nursing 
homes at one point in time. The success of such data 
collection is entirely dependent on the willingness and 
capability of the elderly care physicians to register their 
clients in a correct and timely manner. Preferably, the 
registered data should be collected in a standardized way to 
fit other (e.g., nation-wide) surveillance programs [7][8]. The 
prior registration system consisted of many (often irrelevant) 
long and very complicated questions, that are prone to 
interpretation errors. Physicians sometimes doubted the exact 
meaning of the questions, which could harm the reliability of 
the data. Registration via this system also took its users quite 
some time.  
The eventual aim of the new registration system is to use 
user-centered and persuasive design to optimally support 
nursing home physicians during the registration of their 
clients in HAI prevalence measurements. However, for the 
current paper, that is not the main purpose or focus. Here, we 
describe the process towards achieving such aim. To reach 
the end goal, our approach is applied. In this paper, we 
describe how UCD and PSD can together contribute to the 
development of a successful registration system for HAIs in 
nursing homes.   
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, the methods that are used in this study are described: an 
expert-discussion to gain insight into the current situation 
(Section II-A); a questionnaire study to analyze the users’ 
needs (Section II-B); in-depth interviews and scenario-based 
user-tests to analyze the system’s user-friendliness and 
persuasiveness (Section II-C). Then, in Section III, the  
 
results of the different parts of the study are described: 
Section III-A is about the current situation, Section III-B 
concerns the users’ needs and values, and Section III-C goes 
into the development and evaluation of the prototype. 
Finally, the study is discussed (Section IV) and conclusions 
are drawn, about the added value of combining UCD and 
PSD (Section V).  
II. 
METHODS 
Here, the different steps, that are taken to follow the 
CeHRes Roadmap towards the development of a user 
friendly and persuasive eHealth technology are described. 
A. Contextual Inquiry – An Expert Discussion 
This project started with a request from iPrevent [15] to 
aid in the development of a new ‘mobile’ registration 
system. iPrevent is a regional infection control network 
within which healthcare institutions, elderly care physicians, 
medical microbiologists and Infection Control Professionals 
(ICPs) work together to structurally offer high quality care 
in the field of infection prevention [15].  
Instead of immediately initiating the development and 
design of a technology, the CeHRes approach required us to 
take a step back, to perform a Contextual Inquiry [2]. 
Therefore, to gain insight into what iPrevent specifically 
wants or needs from this project, and into the prerequisites 
for the registration system, an expert discussion was held. 
1) Participants 
Participants in the expert discussion were invited to the 
meeting via e-mail. Two of them are project leaders (a 
medical microbiologist and an ICP) of the iPrevent network, 
they are also the initiators of the development of a 
Prevalence App. One of the project leaders is also the data 
analyst, who is responsible for collecting, analyzing and 
reporting the registration data (both for publication purposes 
and as feedback towards the participating nursing homes). 
Also, two behavioral researchers, specializing in UCD for 
persuasive technology, participated in the expert discussion. 
 
263
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2) Procedure 
The expert discussion included relatively few people. 
Therefore, it was decided to keep the setting and discussion 
informal. The expert discussion thus took the shape of a 
conversation, during which the behavioral scientists did ask 
additional questions to acquire all the information that was 
necessary for the development of a new registration system, 
e.g., who have an interest in the performance or results of 
the prevalence measurements, and why. 
3) Data-analysis 
Notes were made by one of the behavioral researchers, 
during the entire discussion. These were used to form a 
‘working document’ that would be used as a communication 
tool (between behavioral researcher and project leaders) 
during the entire development process. In the document, the 
outcomes of the discussion were complemented with 
literature 
about 
the 
registered 
HAIs 
and 
national 
surveillance programs. This was done to make sure the 
registration system would fit the context as described by the 
experts.  
B. Value Specification – A Questionnaire 
Then, following the CeHRes Roadmap, the Value 
Specification stage was initiated, to gain insight in what 
values end-users had (concerning a registration system) and 
whether the project aims match these values [2]. For this 
purpose an online questionnaire was developed, based on 
the results of the Contextual Inquiry. 
1) Participants 
Elderly care physicians were invited to participate, by 
one of the project leaders, via e-mail. They were informed 
about the Prevalence App that was being developed, and 
that their input was needed to make sure that it would fit 
their needs and work processes. A total of 24 elderly care 
physicians, who worked at different nursing homes within 
the iPrevent network, were willing to participate in the 
study. Their ages ranged from 30 to 61 (mean age 47 years). 
Most participants were female (19 female vs. 5 male).  
2) Procedure 
The invitation e-mail included a direct link to the 
questionnaire.  The questionnaire consisted of some basic 
questions about the demographics of the respondent, his / 
her technology use and how the registration is currently 
being performed. Then, questions were asked about how 
relevant the physician feels the prevalence measures are, 
and how, when and via what kind of device the physician 
prefers to register clients. Additionally, questions were 
included about what information or feedback the physician 
expects to get from the registration system and what would 
motivate them to adopt a new system.   
3) Data-analysis 
Questionnaire results are analyzed to obtain descriptive 
 
 
 
 
statistics. 
Further 
statistical 
analyses 
were 
deemed 
redundant, given the developmental purpose of the study. 
Answers that are given to open-ended questions, were 
summarized if they overlapped and then their frequencies 
were analyzed as an indication of how many respondents 
share a specific opinion. 
C. Design – In-Depth Interviews and Scenario-Based Tests  
Next step in combining user-centered and persuasive 
design, is to start the Design stage of the CeHRes Roadmap 
[2]. Thus, to validate the questionnaire data and to optimize 
the user-friendliness and persuasiveness of the prototype, 
scenario-based user-tests and in-depth interviews with end-
users are performed.  
1) Participants 
Participants were invited to the study by one of the 
project leaders. If they agreed, they were contacted by the 
researcher to schedule a meeting at a location that was 
convenient for the participant. Four female elderly care 
physicians who worked in different nursing homes within 
the iPrevent network participated. Their ages varied from 33 
to 59 (mean age 45 years). One of the nursing homes they 
worked at, already used Electronic Client Files (ECFs), the 
others expected they would start to do so in the near future.  
2) Procedure 
First of all, a prototype of the Prevalence app was 
developed, in close cooperation with an ICP, using 
Balsamiq software [16]. It was based on the outcomes of the 
expert discussion, about the context of requirements of the 
registration.  The prototype incorporated elements of the 
PSD model [4]. Not all elements of the PSD model were 
deemed relevant, only elements that are relevant in this 
specific context and for this specific app have been applied. 
Then, two scenarios were developed to be used in the 
user-tests. They were developed in close cooperation with 
an ICP and made use of literature on the HAI definitions. 
The scenarios addressed critical issues for registration e.g., a 
client with multiple infections or a lab test that has been 
performed without the results being known yet.  
The physician was instructed to talk out loud during the 
entire user-test, not only mentioning what she thought, but 
also what she saw or sought, did or wanted to do during the 
registration of the fictional client. The entire conversation 
was audio recorded, with permission of the participant. 
3) Data-analysis 
The conversations, including both interview and user 
tests, took about 45-60 minutes each. Audio recordings of 
the conversations were transcribed verbatim and analysed 
using a code book, which aided in the structuring of data. 
Some examples of the codes are given in Table 1. All codes 
were combined and the frequencies with which they were 
mentioned were analysed.  
 
 
264
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. EXAMPLES OF CODES USED FOR ANALYSIS OF USER-TESTS 
Examples of codes used for data-analysis 
Category 
Code 
Description 
Contextual 
Inquiry 
C1 
Subject describes a problem that is 
experienced in the current work process 
Value 
Specification 
V1 
Subject thinks working with the new 
system might be faster 
Design 
D1 
Subject thinks the order of the items in 
the mock up is wrong 
Operationalization 
O1 
Subjects talks about a possible barrier 
for using the new system 
III. 
RESULTS 
Aim of the current paper is to describe how UCD and 
the PSD model can simultaneously and complementarily be 
applied, to develop successful eHealth technology. For that 
purpose, the development process of the Prevalence app is 
used. In this section, we will describe the results that were 
rendered during the different stages of the CeHRes 
Roadmap.  
A. Contextual Inquiry – Description of the current situation 
First of all, the Contextual Inquiry generated more in-
depth insight into the current situation (the situation prior to 
the development of a new registration system).  
iPrevent has, over the last years, worked together with 
the approximately 30 nursing homes within their network, to 
perform annual prevalence measurements for HAIs in 
nursing homes. This implies that the elderly care physicians 
are required to once a year register all relevant data about 
the residents that live in their nursing homes. This not only 
entails information about the presence of HAIs, but also 
about the presence of risk factors for the occurrence or 
spread of infections. Risk factors are e.g., the use of 
antibiotics or catheters, or staying in a room with multiple 
other clients. Inherent to the fact that it is a prevalence 
measurement, all clients must be registered within a short 
timeframe around a reference date.  
The content of the registered data is largely determined 
by the given definitions of HAIs. These definitions were 
developed by the regional network in cooperation with the 
national surveillance system (PREZIES) [17]. In the 
hospital setting, surveillance is performed by trained 
infection control nurses. The use of the definitions in the 
nursing home setting, where registration is performed by 
physicians with little or no experience with surveillance, 
registration is far more complicated. The prior registration 
system directly used the definitions of HAI as questions. It 
did 
not, 
however, 
offer 
additional 
explanation 
or 
clarification about their meaning, or any other kind of 
support with answering the questions. Physicians had 
indicated that they sometimes debated with their colleagues 
about how to interpret and answer a certain question (see 
Quote 1). This, of course, caused some issues with 
standardization and analysis of data.  
 
 
 
The prior registration system consisted of an online 
questionnaire, developed by experts in the field of Infection 
Prevention and Control. The questionnaire consisted of a 
long list of complicated questions (see for example the 
screenshot of the prior registration system in Fig. 2). Many 
of them are irrelevant for most residents. For example, if a 
client does not use an antibiotic, the question about what an 
antibiotic is used for, is rather redundant. Also, most 
questions were presented on a single page. Physicians thus 
had to scroll down for quite some time. They had to read all 
questions, including irrelevant ones, to check whether they 
applied to the client.   
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the prior registration system 
Furthermore, an increasing amount of nursing homes 
(>30) participate in the prevalence measurements that 
iPrevent performs. Thus, increasingly large datasets are 
collected. Data processing, data analysis and presentation of 
feedback of the results to the nursing homes were all 
performed by a single data-analyst. This will soon no longer 
be feasible. Therefore, project leaders (and the data-analyst) 
would like the system to perform these tasks automatically.  
Finally, project leaders requested that the new system 
would be ‘mobile’ (to be used on a smartphone) to enable 
bedside registration of clients by elderly care physicians. 
B. Value Specification – Users’ Needs and Values 
For the second stage of the CeHRes Roadmap, the 
questionnaire that was used resulted in insight in the users’ 
values and needs.  
First of all, most (83,3% out of 24) participants indicated 
that they did consider prevalence measurements of HAIs in 
the nursing home setting to be relevant. They found it 
important since it contributes to gaining insight into the 
current status of HAIs in nursing homes, and enables 
organizational policies to be adapted to the findings. One of 
(Quote 1 – Originally in Dutch) “[…]The way the questions 
are asked. They are not always clear, and that’s important. 
Now, I sometimes have to go to one of my colleagues to ask 
them, like: hey, how do you answer this? And it is important, 
that everyone registers in the same way.” 
265
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the participants also considered it to be of great importance 
for the quality of care (see Quote 2). 
 
 
 
When asked what kind of device they would like to use 
for the registration, most subjects indicated they preferred a 
PC (50,0%) or laptop (20,8%). The other subjects preferred 
to use a smartphone (12,5%), tablet (8,3%), or paper (8,3%).   
Most important reasons for users to be willing to use the 
new registration system were: (1) if they can interrupt 
registration without losing data; (2) if the new system is 
more user friendly; (3) if it can be opened simultaneously 
with ECFs; (4) if clear insight is given in the results; and (5) 
if registration can be performed faster.  
One of the prerequisites that were found during the 
expert discussion said that it would be desirable if 
registration could be performed at the residents’ bedside. 
This would enable the physicians to directly see how the 
resident is doing. However, the questionnaire showed that 
none of the physicians considered this to be desirable. Most 
of them (54,2%) did indicate that it would be of added value 
for them to be more flexible in the location in which they 
register their clients, but didn’t want to do so at bedside. 
Also, 41,7% said that it would not be of added value at all 
since they just liked to register their residents in their 
offices. One physician (4,2%) wanted to register her clients 
in the department’s office, with the client files at hand.  
The in-depth interviews gave even more insight into the 
situation. The clients that are to be registered with the 
prevalence app are mainly elderly people, who have health 
issues. Unfortunately, these elderly clients are quite often 
also somewhat lonely. So, upon doing their rounds or 
checking up on their clients, the elderly care physicians had 
experienced that clients were in need of attention and 
wanted to interact with them. The physicians felt it would be 
poor bedside manners to be standing next to a client, while 
being entirely focused on the registration. At the same time, 
if they were to pay more attention to the client, they feared 
that the registration would take up to much time, or would 
be prone to errors due to a lack of concentration. They are 
therefore opposed to bedside registration of clients. 
At the same time, physicians did indicate that being 
‘mobile’ during registration would have advantages. They 
explained that their nursing homes were (going to be) using 
ECFs. This is software that contains highly personal and 
private information about the residents. Therefore, many 
safety measures have been taken to protect this information. 
Because of one of these safety measures it is impossible to 
simultaneously open the ECF and the World Wide Web. In  
 
 
 
practice, this meant that elderly care physicians had to open 
the ECF, and write down all the information about all of 
their clients that they needed to register in the prevalence 
measurements. Then they had to close the ECF, open the 
registration system and enter the information they had 
written down. Not to mention that if they had forgotten any 
information, the entire procedure had to be repeated. 
Therefore, some subjects did want registration to be possible 
on a mobile device, but for reasons that differed from what 
was expected, i.e., so they could simultaneously open the 
ECF on their pc and the registration system on the other 
device.   
C. Design – Developing and evaluating a prototype  
The results that were generated in the Design stage are 
twofold: (1) we can now describe how we applied certain 
elements of the PSD model to the prototype of the 
prevalence; and (2) we can make a brief analysis of the user-
friendliness and perceived persuasiveness of the prototype 
of the app. 
1) The use of the PSD model in the Prototype 
Here, a description is given of how elements of the PSD 
model were incorporated in the prototype. This is intended 
to benefit other eHealth technology developers, who might 
use it as an example for how the theoretical constructs of the 
PSD model can be applied in practice. 
a) Primary Task Support 
One of the main concerns with working with the prior 
registration system was that working with it required the 
physician to read through many irrelevant questions for 
every client. One of the most important elements of PSD 
that were to be used in the new system was therefore 
tunneling [4]. Tunneling is defined by Oinas-Kukkonen and 
Harjumaa as ‘Using the system to guide users through a 
process or experience’ [4]. The prototype system was 
designed to guide the user through the process of 
registration: questions to be answered are dependent on the 
answers given to prior questions. Thus, the entire system is 
one big decision tree, to make sure every client is registered 
via the shortest (fastest) possible route. 
Another concern with the prior registration system was 
the complexity of the used questions, a single question 
could actually consist of multiple individual questions (see 
for example Quote 3). To reduce the complexity, and thus 
the risk of interpretation errors, reduction was used. The aim 
of reduction is ‘to reduce complex behavior into simple 
tasks, to help users perform the target behavior’ [4]. This 
was done by translating complex and long questions into  
multiple shorter and easier questions with a routing structure 
between them. For example, the originally used question for 
Gastro-Enteritis, was rather lengthy and complicated (see 
Quote 3).  
 
(Quote 2 – Originally in Dutch) “Thus far, too little research 
has been performed, among the nursing home population, to 
be able to act in a meaningful and evidence based way.” 
266
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Quote 3.   Question about Gastro-Enteritis in the prior registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
 
The different elements of this one question were split up 
into multiple questions. These were one-by-one presented to 
the users. A build-in logic system directed the users to the 
appropriate follow-up questions on different screens. Some 
of these screens are shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Part of the screens of the prototype used for Gastro-Enteritis; 
Example of Reduction: (1) Answer options: Yes / No; (2) Button to return 
to previous screen; (3) Help-button for additional information; (4) Button 
to continue to next screen. 
 
 As mentioned before, it was of great importance that 
registration would be faster and could be paused without 
losing data. To enable this, elements of tailoring are applied 
to the prototype. Tailoring, according to Oinas-Kukkonen 
and Harjumaa, stands for ‘the adaptation of the offered 
information to the potential needs, interests, personality, 
usage context, or other factors relevant to a user group’ [4]. 
In this case, the system tailored the information to the usage 
context factors. Every nursing home was given a unique 
log-in code and password. A physician had to log-in once, 
and was then able to continue registering their clients one 
 
 
 
after another. Moreover, when starting the system, 
physicians are given two options: to register a new client or 
to edit data of an existing client (see Fig. 4). For the latter, 
an overview was generated of all clients that had previously 
been registered by that specific nursing home. Clients of 
other nursing homes are not shown. By selecting a client, 
their data are shown and can be adjusted. 
 
             
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of a screen that leads to Tailored information 
 
b) Dialogue Support 
Dialogue support stands for the feedback that a system 
gives to its users, to help them keep moving towards their 
goal (completing the registration) [4]. In this case, the 
prototype registration system requires physicians to indicate 
which pathogens caused an infection. However, during the 
user tests it became clear that within nursing homes, little 
funding is available to perform the laboratory tests to 
acquire this knowledge. Furthermore, if a laboratory test 
was performed at the moment of registration, its results 
were not always known yet. Therefore, in the final 
registration system, questions are added to ask whether a 
laboratory test was performed. If yes, the system inquires 
whether its results are already known. If the latter question 
was answered with ‘no’ a pop-up screen appeared. This 
screen reminder was shown, which means that the system 
reminds its users of their target behaviour [4]. In this case, 
the reminder made the physician aware that lab results 
should be added later. 
Also, suggestion [4] is added to the final registration 
system. According to Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa 
‘systems offering fitting suggestions will have greater 
persuasive powers’ [4]. Within the prevalence app, this is 
done by letting the system offer fitting suggestions for 
reaching the goal of registering clients. A suggestion might 
concern a suggested behaviour, but in the case of the 
prevalence app, it consisted of suggestions in the sense of 
finishing the words that the user started to type. For 
example, physicians have to register all antibiotics that are 
used by their clients. However, the variety of antibiotics that 
exist is enormous and their names are complex. Initially, the 
intention was to let physicians scroll through an alphabetical 
list of generic names of all available antibiotics (see Fig. 5).  
 
Does the resident have Gastro-Enteritis? The diagnosis 
Gastro-Enteritis is given if one of the following symptoms 
occurs in the client:  
 Three times or more diarrhea (different from normal for this 
client, frequency is not applicable when using incontinence 
materials)  
 Diarrhea and two of the following symptoms: fever, 
vomiting, nausea, stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or 
mucus in feces.  
 Vomiting three times within 24 hours, without any 
additional symptoms (if vomiting is not associated with 
medicine use)  
 Vomiting and two of the following symptoms: fever, nausea, 
stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or mucus in feces.  
 
 
Does the client 
have diarrhea? 
If yes, more 
than three 
times a day? 
If no, does 
client vomit? 
3 
1 
2 
4 
1 
1 
Edit a client’s data; only 
clients of the own nursing 
home are shown 
Register a new client 
267
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

          
 
 
Figure 5.   Example of the screen that subscribes the need for Suggestion 
 
However, due to the large number of antibiotics that are 
available, this was still too time consuming. Therefore, in 
the final registration system, a search system in which the 
physician enters the first three letters of the antibiotic is 
added. The system then automatically generates only 
antibiotics that start with these letters. The same search 
system was then used for selecting the pathogens that have 
caused the infection. 
c) System Credibility Support 
Finally, in healthcare in general and for the registration 
of HAIs in nursing homes specifically, it is of great 
importance that the system is credible according to its users. 
Therefore, a website  was created about the services 
provided by the registration system [18]. The Infection 
Manager website was developed within the (INTERREG 
IVa) EurSafety Health-net project [19]. This is a large and 
successful European cross-border project, involving many 
hospitals, microbiology laboratories and other healthcare 
institutions. It aims to increase patient safety by preventing 
(the spread of) HAIs. The part of the Infection Manager 
website about the registration system consists of e.g., 
background information about the project and the parties 
that were involved in the development process. This was 
intended to give more clarity about the trustworthiness  and 
expertise of the project and its project members [4]. 
Lastly, in the final registration system, it was decided to 
add the EurSafety Health-net logo, to give the system more 
surface credibility [4]. This entails the initial assessment 
that users make about the credibility of the system, based on 
first hand inspection [4]. 
2) Analysis of the User-Friendliness of the Prototype 
User-testing the developed prototype, is aimed at 
evaluating whether the elements of PSD have indeed 
contributed to the development of a user-friendly and 
persuasive eHealth technology. 
Based on the performed user-centered scenario-tests, we 
found that issues with the prior registration system had 
indeed been resolved, or had at least been improved. For 
example, to implement the concept of tailoring, elderly care 
physicians now had to log-in to be able to register their 
clients. Besides allowing us to tailor the presented 
information, it also had other (unintended) benefits: some 
questions had become redundant, which could possibly 
speed-up the registration process (see Quote 4).   
 
 
 
According to the physicians, an additional advantage of 
the log-in system, is that registration can be paused without 
losing the data (see Quote 5). 
 
 
 
Still, major and minor adjustments had to be made in the 
mock ups. These concerned the clarity of wording, sequence 
of questions, completeness, user-friendliness, design and 
location of the buttons. For example, initially, there were 
two screens in our prototype  for ‘Aids’, which asks whether 
the client uses any aids such as a catheter or tracheotomy; 
and ‘Incontinence’, which asks whether the client is 
incontinent. During the user-tests, the subjects had several 
comments about these screens. First of all, whereas we 
interpreted the term ‘aid’ as being a catheter of some kind, 
the subjects indicated that the term ‘aid’ to them meant 
‘walker’ (see Quote 6). So, they suggested using a different 
term.  
 
 
 
Furthermore, they found the screen about incontinence 
unclear. In one of the scenarios, a client was described who 
had a catheter. The participants indicated that, although 
incontinence is a possible reason for clients to get a catheter, 
they did not consider this client as being incontinent 
anymore (see Quote 7). Therefore, they said the option of 
having a catheter or stoma should be added to this screen. 
 
 
 
As a result, the two screens where replaced by a new 
screen. This screen asks whether a client is incontinent. 
However, an additional answer option has been added, to 
indicate that a client has a catheter or stoma.  
After the fourth user-test, no major issues where found 
anymore. Therefore, meetings with Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) developers were held to 
 
(Quote  4 – Originally in Dutch) “Cause now, I have to 
indicate every time: Nursing home X, Department so-and-so. 
But we fill in the registration for one entire department. So it 
saves time if we would only have to fill it in once.”   
(Quote 5 – Originally in Dutch) “Well, the advantage is that 
one can keep adding (new) clients. You could for example 
continue at a later moment. Such as when you only have time 
to complete the registration of 10 clients, then register 10 now, 
and just continue two hours later.”   
(Quote 6 – Originally in Dutch) “Yes, we use the word ‘Aid’ 
for something completely different. We use this word for 
walkers. So I would try to come up with a different word 
here.”  
(Quote  7 – Originally in Dutch) “You see, this client is not 
incontinent, but has a urethra catheter… So this is strange. You 
should add catheter here I guess. Because with a catheter you 
are not really incontinent anymore.”   
Too long list to scroll 
through, due to 
availability of many 
different antibiotics 
Which antibiotics does 
the client use? 
268
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

further discuss how to incorporate the requirements into the 
registration system and to finally develop it. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
As far as the authors know, this study was the first to 
demonstrate how User-Centered Design (UCD) and the 
Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) model can be combined, 
and can even complement each other, in the development of 
easy to use eHealth technology. It was intended to provide 
insight into the steps that might be taken for applying 
elements of the PSD model during the developmental stages 
of an eHealth technology. It did so, by describing the 
development process of a single app: the Prevalence App. 
First of all, the use of UCD has proven its benefits: the 
constant and structural cooperation with end-users during 
the development process, gave us the opportunity to make it 
an iterative and reflexive process. This means that it was 
possible to evaluate the eHealth technology with end-users, 
in every stage of its development, and to (at any time) adjust 
the direction that it was going in. This aids in the dynamic 
development of an eHealth technology that fits its users’ 
needs and context, and could potentially prevent high costs 
of re-design if major necessary adjustments are only found 
after final release of the technology. 
Second, this paper has shown that the PSD model is 
indeed useful and applicable for the design of any kind of 
eHealth technology. However, and more importantly, we 
believe that it is the combination of the two theoretical 
frameworks above, within the CeHRes Roadmap, that has 
proven to be of the greatest added value. We feel that by 
‘simply’ applying the PSD model to an eHealth technology, 
one would not be using it to its full potential. Merely 
incorporating elements of the PSD model in eHealth 
technology, does not necessarily mean that the end-users of 
the technology also have a need for these elements. If there 
is no such need, developers are at risk of using 
sledgehammers to crack nuts, to be greatly overreaching 
themselves. This paper has demonstrated that the success of 
a technology is not dependent on the quantity of persuasive 
elements that are used. Rather, the key to success is to use 
elements of the PSD model in a focused and user-centered 
manner. This is why the combination with UCD is so 
beneficial. Using UCD, for instance in the form of scenario-
based user-tests, developers can expose which elements of 
the PSD model should be used, to cope with any kind of 
usability issues and to create an optimal fit with the end-
users.  
In their paper, Oinas Kukkonen and Harjumaa present 
the PSD model as being part of development process [4]. 
They indicate that before the actual design of the 
technology, the first step in that development should be to 
understand ‘fundamental issues behind the persuasive 
systems’ [4]. Then, ‘the context for persuasive systems 
needs to be analyzed, recognizing the intent, event, and 
strategies for the use of a persuasive system’ [4]. The 
integration of the PSD model within the Contextual Inquiry, 
Value Specification and Design stages of the CeHRes 
Roadmap offers a structure for the application of these steps 
in the development of a successful eHealth technology. It 
offers a practical framework by which elements of the PSD 
model can be used in practice.  
We believe that the holistic approach using the CeHRes 
roadmap, has provided the opportunity to further ground the 
PSD model. It has proven to be a very suitable tool to 
integrate UCD and the PSD model in a way that developers 
not only profit of their individual strengths, but were they 
also complement and further strengthen each other. Via 
UCD, for which we used e.g., scenario-based tests, we 
found essential issues during the use of the prototype. Via 
the PSD model, we were able to address these issues, and to 
eliminate or at least decrease their presence.  
Thanks to the CeHRes Roadmap, we developed a 
registration system to optimally support elderly care  
physicians in the correct and timely registration of their 
clients, taking into account the national prevalence studies 
[7][8] with which collected data should be compatible. 
Certainly, we still want to evaluate the speed, user-
friendliness, fit with work processes, ease of use, clarity and 
persuasiveness of the final registration system. Thus, a 
summative evaluation is currently being planned. This 
evaluation will combine both qualitative and quantitative 
methods and will e.g., focus on user friendliness, speed of 
registration (both were found important by the end-users) 
and amount of errors that are made (important for the 
quality of the data). But for now, it can be said that the new 
system has already been used in two rounds of prevalence 
measurements, successfully registering over 3000 nursing 
home residents. It is web-based, so it can be used on any 
device capable of connecting to the world wide web. An 
example of a screen of the eventual registration system is 
given in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Example of the look and feel of the eventual registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
269
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Limitations 
A limitation of this study is that it suffered from very 
strict and ambitious deadlines. This limited us in the amount 
of effort that we could put into the implementation stage of 
the development. Although this is thought to be a very 
relevant stage according to the CeHRes Roadmap, in this 
project its influence might be limited. The elderly care 
physicians who are the end-users of the registration system 
in this study, are obligated to use it if their nursing home 
participates in the prevalence measurements. 
Another possible limitation might be that our study had a 
relatively low number of participants. However, aim of this 
study was solely the serve as an example of a development 
process of an eHealth technology, not to perform an 
evaluation of its effects. 
Also, the prevalence measurements have to be suited to 
be used in national surveillance (by PREZIES). Therefore, 
the new registration system has to meet certain requirements 
(e.g., data that must be collected, or in what form). Thus, in 
this case, and in most cases where a new eHealth technology 
is being developed, legislation was part of our Contextual 
Inquiry and also may have had an influence on  the design 
of the technology.  
Finally, the given setting for this project (nursing homes) 
presented us with its very own challenges. The opportunities 
for using technology were limited, because of the 
technological infrastructure of Dutch nursing homes 
(wherein often outdated PCs are used), and the degree to 
which people are used to working with technology (e.g., 
only 47,1% of the physicians used a smartphone). However, 
this gave us an interesting opportunity to  put ourselves and 
the possibilities of the CeHRes Roadmap to the test, to see 
how it and how we would cope with such limitations. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article goes beyond the mere development of 
eHealth technologies. It has subscribed our strong believe 
that combining UCD and the PSD model is of paramount 
importance for the creation of successful and persuasive 
eHealth technologies, because (1) UCD gives insight in the 
needs and wishes of the end-users, that have to be met by 
the eHealth technology; (2) the PSD model offers 
opportunities to deal with the issues and needs that are 
found using UCD; and (3) although they might have used 
their own words to express themselves, end-users appeared 
to have very clear ideas about the their needs regarding 
Persuasive Systems Design. 
Also, our approach, using the CeHRes Roadmap has 
allowed for the development to be an iterative process, 
which may prevent costly redesign to be necessary. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the Interreg IV “EurSafety 
Health-net” project. We also thank the elderly care 
physicians who participated in this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. de Jong, A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A. Voss, and 
J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, “User-centered and persuasive 
design of a web-based registration and monitoring system for 
healthcare-associated infections in nursing homes” The Sixth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2014) IARIA, Mar. 2014, pp. 
152-157, ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-327-8 
[2] 
N. Nijland, “Grounding eHealth; towards a holistic 
framework for sustainable eHealth technologies,” University 
of Twente: Enschede. 
[3] 
J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, J. Karreman, S. Vonderhorst, 
F. Verhoeven, and M.J. Wentzel, “Participatory development 
via user-involvement-a case study about the development of 
a 
web-based 
patient-communication 
system 
about 
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,” Electronic 
Journal of Health Informatics, vol. 6(4), pp. e28, 2011. 
[4] 
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive Systems 
Design: key issues, process model, and system features,” 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
vol. 24, pp. 485-500, 2009. 
[5] 
H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Behavior Change Support Systems: a 
research model and agenda,” in Persuasive Technology, T. 
Ploug, P. Hasle, and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, Eds. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 4-14, 2010. 
[6] 
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa. “Towards deeper 
understanding of persuasion in software and information 
systems,” First International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interaction (ACHI 2008), IEEE, Feb. 
2008, 
pp. 
200-205, 
ISBN: 
978-0-7695-3086-4, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACHI.2008.31 
[7] 
Euopean Centre for Disease Prevention and Control,  “Point 
prevalence survey of healthcare-associated infections and 
antimicrobial use in European acute care hospitals,” 
Stockholm: ECDC, 2013. 
[8] 
PREZIES. “Referentiecijfers maart 2007 t/m maart 2012: 
Prevalentieonderzoek,” 2012  [cited 2014 6-11]; Available 
from: 
http://www.rivm.nl/Onderwerpen/P/PREZIES/Prevalentieon
derzoek_Ziekenhuizen/Referentiecijfers_Prevalentieonderzo
ek_ziekenhuizen. 
[9] 
R.T. Mayon-White, G. Ducel, T. Kereselidze, and E. 
Tikomirov, “An international survey of the prevalence of 
hospital-acquired infection,” Journal of Hospital Infection, 
vol. 11 Suppl A, pp. 43-48, Feb. 1988, doi: 10.1016/0195-
6701(88)90164-8. 
[10] R.M. Klevens, et al., “Estimating health care-associated 
infections and deaths in US hospitals”, Public health reports, 
vol. 122(2), pp. 160-166, Mar. 2007. 
[11] E.T.M. Smyth, et al., “Four country healthcare associated 
infection prevalence survey 2006: overview of the results,” 
Journal of Hospital Infection, vol. 69(3), pp. 230-248. Jul. 
2008, doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2008.04.020. 
[12] D. Gravel, et al., “Point prevalence survey for healthcare-
associated infections within Canadian adult acute-care 
hospitals,” Journal of Hospital Infection, vol. 66(3), pp. 243-
248, Jul. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2007.04.008. 
[13] O. Lyytikäinen, M. Kanerva, N. Agthe, T. Möttönen, and P. 
Ruutu, “Healthcare-associated infections in Finnish acute 
care hospitals: a national prevalence survey, 2005,”  Journal 
of Hospital Infection, vol. 69(3), pp. 288-294, Jul. 2008, doi: 
10.1016/j.jhin.2008.03.005. 
270
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14] A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, J.H. Cox-Claessens, P.G. Boom-
Poels, M.I. Drabbe, R.T. Koopmans, and A.Voss, “Three-
year prevalence of healthcare-associated infections in Dutch 
nursing homes,” Journal of Hospital Infection, vol. 78(1),  
pp. 59-62. 2011, May 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2011.01.024. 
[15] iPrevent, www.i-prevent.net,  [cited 2014 6-11]. 
[16] Balsamiq, https://balsamiq.com/ 
[17] iPrevent, “Definities van verpleeghuisinfecties,” [cited 2014 
6-11]; 
Available 
from:                      
www.infectionmanager.com/definities 
[18] Infection Manager. [cited 2014 6-11]; Available from: 
www.infectionmanager.com/prevalentie 
[19] M.J. Wentzel, J. Karreman, and J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, 
“Towards an internet-based infectious disease management 
platform to increase patient safety,” The third International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2011) IARIA, Feb. 2011, pp. 47-50, ISSN: 
2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9 
271
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

