151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Method for Architectural Inclusive Design: the Case of Users Experiencing Down 
Syndrome 
Clémentine Schelings, Catherine Elsen 
LUCID-ULg 
University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: {clementine.schelings; catherine.elsen}@ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract—This paper develops an in-situ methodology to help 
architects insure better inclusion of people with Down 
syndrome all along preliminary phases of the architectural 
design process, and eventually to the designed space. This 
methodology first offers architects some design keys in regard 
of how people with Down syndrome interact with two types of 
spaces: their personal dwellings and some completely unknown 
spaces. The methodology then unfolds towards more pro-active 
inclusion of the participants thanks to playful expression of 
their feelings and perceptions. This paper discusses how this 
methodology relates to inclusive and universal principles, 
useful to design smart environments, be they ICT-enabled or 
not. This paper closes on prevalent models of disability in 
architecture and how they articulate with the model of 
“architectural handicap”. 
Keywords-disability; Down syndrome; inclusive design; 
universal design; methodological framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper, an extended version of a previous, shorter 
publication presented at the conference Smart Accessibility 
2017 [1], tackles the challenge of disability inclusion to 
architecture, disability considered here as a temporary or 
permanent condition likely to show up at any time of 
everyone’s life. Statistically speaking, disability concerns 
15% of the European population, i.e., more than 80 millions 
individuals [2]. Among them, only 20% are disabled from 
birth, while 80% will experience impairment later in life, as a 
result of an accident, an illness, ageing or a more temporary 
condition such as pregnancy [3]. We are therefore all 
concerned with disability, whatever our current situation. 
Designers are yet struggling with the inclusion of 
disabled people, given the challenge of end-users’ inclusion 
into the design process in general, the variety of disabilities 
and the variety of adaptations those disabilities require on 
both spatial and functional levels. In architectural design, and 
in Belgium more specifically, norms about persons with 
reduced mobility (PRM) constitute one of the few 
frameworks available to help designers integrate the needs of 
people who use a wheelchair or the needs of blind people. 
This regulation, yet, does not take into account cognitive 
impairments (nor hearing loss) that are thus generally 
neglected during the architectural design process. Likewise, 
in ICT related fields, cognitive impairments seem to be less 
often considered than visual or hearing loss impairments [4]. 
Consequently, this paper aims at offering some concrete 
design methodology to architects confronted to the needs of 
people with cognitive disabilities, and more specifically 
people with Down syndrome. The paper will first aim at 
studying the impact of architecture on the spatial perception 
of people with cognitive disabilities. In-situ observations of 
participants evolving through various spaces will provide 
some useful design keys in that regard. The methodology 
will then be expanded in order to include those users into a 
more active encounter with architecture, providing architects 
with fruitful information about how people with Down 
syndrome experience space on a more multi-sensory level.  
This paper is structured in five more sections. In Sections 
II and III, literature review and the resulting research 
questions are presented. Section IV details the methodology 
developed in order to conduct the observations. Section V 
describes the obtained results, presented in four subsections: 
space perception of participants with Down syndrome 
(Subsection 
A), 
representativeness 
of 
those 
results 
(Subsection B), handicapping situations (Subsection C) and 
methodological recommendations for inclusion of Down 
syndrome in architectural design (Subsection D). Section VI 
closes on a theoretical discussion considering prevalent 
models of inclusion and disability in architecture and how 
these models should be revised in order to consider people 
with Down syndrome’s sensitiveness as opportunity, rather 
than threat, to the architectural design process. Some insights 
built in this paper might be relevant for universal/inclusive 
design in ICT related fields. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Since the modernist era, a distance has been created 
between the architect and the end-user, the latter being 
considered as some abstract, hypothetical subject required to 
adjust 
him-/herself 
to 
the 
designed 
building 
[5]. 
Phenomenologists such as Juhani Pallasmaa argue that this 
“modernist reductionism”, i.e., this way of conceiving some 
architectural artifact that “standard” users will encounter 
mainly in a visual way, has globally impoverished both the 
professional praxis and the architectural experience [6][7]. 
In order to re-instate a more inclusive, multi-sensorial 
approach of architecture (both in its design and experience), 
some researchers and practitioners have developed since the 
70’s some hands-on, participative methodologies. One has 
to observe that these methodologies, although being well-

152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
meaning initiatives, often remain too distant from 
architectural 
practice, 
or 
too 
superficial 
in 
their 
implementation, and therefore still offer considerable room 
for improvement [8]. Indeed, participation methodologies 
have generally been implemented either as a way to collect 
end-users’ post-building assessment [9], or as a way to 
secure users’ acceptance at the very late design phases [10], 
rather than a tool helpful to take into account users’ needs 
and perceptions as soon as the early phases of the design 
process [11]. This lack of effective upstream frameworks 
makes it very difficult for architects to integrate laypeople 
into the design process, and makes it even harder when 
considering a wider range of end-users, including people 
with disabilities. 
This literature review section is structured into four 
subsections, starting with some observations about the 
current state of architectural practice, followed with the 
challenge of including disabled users into the design 
process, continuing with the specificities of people with 
Down syndrome and ending with an overview of how 
disability could be considered as an expertise, instead as an 
obstacle to design and creativity. 
A. About architecture, end-users and their well-being 
We highlight here two main observations from 
architectural state of the art: the uni-sensoriality and the 
environmental impact of current architectural design. 
1) Uni-sensoriality 
As observed by several phenomenologists, most of 
current architectural design projects are almost exclusively 
visually designed [7]: architects strive to impress with 
attractive and pleasing graphical designs, and often invest 
less efforts into the integration of users’ various ways of 
experiencing space [12][13]. Architecture, authors argue, 
consequently 
suffers 
some 
kind 
of 
uni-sensoriality 
hegemony [6]. Yet architecture intrinsically is a multi-
sensorial experience, since “qualities of space, matter and 
scale are measured equally by the eye, ear, nose, skin, 
skeleton and muscle [6 (p.41)].” In fact, all our senses 
interact together and complement each other in order to 
shape our understanding of the world, and particularly the 
spatial environment. For instance, the human mind 
unconsciously associates visual shapes with odors and 
emotions because “the most persistent memory of any space 
is often its smell [6 (p.54)].” Some authors associate this uni-
sensoriality 
hegemony 
with 
an 
impoverishment 
of 
architectural experience and praxis, and retrace its roots to 
the modernist era where architecture, according to their 
critical historical analysis, has been reduced to the sole 
consequence of visual expression and experience, therefore 
neglecting the other perceptual senses and consequently 
deviating 
from 
the 
users’ 
multi-sensorial 
realities 
[6][14][15]. 
This focus on sight is even sometimes considered as an 
“handicap” for the architects themselves [12], as such uni-
sensorial approach does not only reduce the human 
capabilities but also the design opportunities and qualities. 
The whole body should therefore be considered as a complex 
“thinking organ” [16] that combines multiple intelligences 
such as visual, haptic and kinesthetic ones. Taking into 
account the complete scope of the human mind and body, 
phenomenologists argue, aims at avoiding superficial and 
dehumanized architectural design [6] and at proposing more 
sensitive and creative projects. 
2) Environmental impact 
Theories of environmental psychology and healing 
environments suggest that the architectural environment 
influences the wellbeing, considering architecture either as a 
factor having a positive (curative architecture) or a negative 
(disabling architecture) impact on the emotional and physical 
experience [17][18]. 
According to those theories, architects themselves 
sometimes 
accidentally 
generate 
discomfort 
and 
dissatisfaction feelings for the end-users of their buildings, 
simply by being unaware of the consequences their 
“disabling design” might have on people [18]. Most of the 
time those “architectural disablements” are completely 
independent of any medical disability end-users might 
themselves experience, and are rather more fundamentally 
related to building impediments such as, most commonly, ill-
designed stairs or uncomfortable, confined spaces [13]. This 
is particularly true for a parent, for instance, who might 
experience difficulties when pushing a stroller through some 
heavy doors or narrow hallways [13]. As a result, the 
henceforth “architecturally disabled people” either manage to 
overcome the obstacles but only with effort and frustration, 
or simply are prevented to use the building. 
B. About the integration of disabled users 
Most prevalent approaches characterize disability as a 
constraint for both designers and users. Considering 
disability, and the norms associated to it, as obstacles to 
their creativity [19], most architects rarely expand their 
effort of integration beyond the simplest form of a user, 
such as the “average, six-foot-tall, 20-years-old male, with 
perfect vision and a good grip [20 (p. 60.7)].” As a 
consequence, users experiencing disability (either as a 
permanent or temporary condition) rarely see their specific 
needs and perceptions taken into account. This denial of 
diversity finds its roots as much as the uni-sensoriality 
hegemony in the modernist quest for economical and 
aesthetic 
design, 
considering 
only 
invariant 
body 
proportions [21] and predictable users’ needs [22]. 
When relating to existing norms and regulations 
regarding disabled people, architects are moreover only 
informed about a limited variety of disabilities, not even 
considering variations within the same disability. Reference 
documents and standard procedures, for length and clarity, 
indeed generally tackle a limited range of bodily 
(in)capabilities. As a result, over-simplification of their 
interpretation 
causes 
shortcuts 
from 
“people 
with 
disabilities” to “people using a wheelchair” [21]. One has to 
observe that the main studied disabilities are actually motor 
impairments and blindness, while cognitive impairments are 
more rarely addressed, except for autism that has been 

153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
explored [23][24]. The resulting recommendations and 
designs are thus never perfectly adapted to the users with 
cognitive disability, whose needs and necessities are 
misunderstood and excluded [23]. 
C. About people with Down syndrome 
Among the variety of cognitive disabilities one could 
design for, this paper focuses on Down syndrome, a genetic 
anomaly linked to the presence of a third chromosome on 
the 21st pair. This is not an illness per se, but rather a 
physical and cognitive state of the person expressed by 
several characteristics like physical appearance, medical 
fragility, cognitive disability, peaceable temperament and 
short life expectancy [25][26][27][28]. 
Among all those specificities shared by people with 
Down syndrome, some have a direct impact on the way they 
experiment architectural environments and spaces. First, 
their small size influence their space perception as their 
field-of-view is lower than average [26]. Second, because of 
their premature ageing [27], people with Down syndrome 
often develop early motor impairments and try to limit their 
moves, this behavior being yet sometimes counteracted by 
their curious and playful nature. Third, due to their lack of 
concentration [28], the presence of a disruptive element can 
generate trouble and monopolize so much of their attention 
that they completely ignore other environmental or spatial 
factors. They are also known to give much importance to 
rituals and habits in their daily lives, in order to limit the 
occurrence of such disruptive events. Yet, people with 
Down syndrome can show high adaptive capacity: after a 
while, they tend to accept all kinds of situations, even 
uncomfortable ones. In fact, their affability [28] disposes 
them to go beyond the drawbacks of one situation and to 
eventually get used to it.  
Eventually, the cognitive disability brings two specific 
features regarding spatial apprehension. People with Down 
syndrome are first of all particularly receptive to their multi-
sensory experience of space [28]. Similarly to people with 
autism spectrum disorders [29], people with Down 
syndrome moreover present a remarkable hypersensitivity 
and a particular spatial perception that induces spontaneous 
emotions and instinctive reactions towards some space. This 
spontaneity and peculiar way to experience space, revealing 
some of its specificities (qualities and/or defects), could 
potentially enrich assessment of any building for instance. 
By doing so, “turning disability experience into expertise in 
assessing building accessibility [30 (p. 144)]” or in 
designing multi-sensorial spaces [7], a concept that has 
essentially focused on motor and visual impairments until 
now, could open towards other types of disability such as 
Down syndrome. 
D. About considering disability as an expertise 
Encouraging architects to question and reinstate users’ 
multi-sensoriality and sensitivity into their work, a few 
researchers propose to interact with disabled people and to 
integrate their perceptions as soon as early stages of the 
design process [12][31]. The disability is then considered as 
an opportunity, both for architects who develop new ideas 
and for disabled people who take part into a process from 
which they are usually excluded. In this case, disabled 
people are considered as experts and become a real source of 
creativity for designers [31]. The literature documents two 
ways to integrate the disabled people’s expertise in the 
design process. 
1) Disability as specific expertise for disabled users 
In this case, disabled users are experts of their own ways 
of experiencing space and the generated results directly 
benefit people with similar disabilities. For instance, 
Tufvesson’s and Tufvesson’s study compares pupils with 
autism, hyperactivity and Down syndrome and provides 
some design strategies and environmental factors with 
positive (e.g., individual desks) or negative (e.g., low 
acoustical insulation) effects on the work atmosphere [29]. 
Studying children with learning disabilities thus primarily 
provides solutions for disabled children. 
2) Disability as general expertise for all users 
Another approach takes advantage of the expertise of 
disabled users either to design innovative projects 
addressing the needs of a larger audience, or to tackle 
additional challenges of the architectural field in general. A 
good example of that approach is Penezic and Rogina 
design of the “Glass House 2001 for a blind man” [32]. 
Given 
that 
transparency 
and 
reflection 
are 
both 
unperceivable properties for people with visual impairment, 
these architects developed technologies so that any user 
would experiment the building in an equivalent way. As a 
consequence, the walls are constituted of two layers of glass 
between which a fluid circulates at different temperatures 
and speeds, this way mobilizing two alternative perceptual 
senses, the touch and the hearing. Besides being particularly 
innovative and inclusive, this ingenious system solves two 
recurrent problems of glass buildings, i.e., acoustics and 
thermal insulation. 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Considering people with Down syndrome peculiar multi-
sensoriality and hypersensitivity, we suggest that their spatial 
experience should be valued as specific expertise and 
considered as a way to reinstate multi-sensorial qualities into 
architectural design, and to limit “handicapping situations” 
for end-users. To this end, a methodological framework has 
to be developed in response to their specific needs and 
necessities. 
This methodological framework will be nurtured by the 
answers to the following three research questions: 
• 
How do people with Down syndrome perceive 
space at a multi-sensory level? 
• 
Which “handicapping situations” do people with 
Down syndrome face? 
• 
How to leverage Down syndrome’s specificities and 
expertise for architectural design? 

154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
To answer those research questions, we build an original 
methodology of in-situ observation and in-situ interaction 
with disabled participants, inspired by theories of inclusive 
design 
and 
Nijs’ 
and 
Heylighen’s 
own 
research 
methodology [30]. 
A. Inclusive design methodologies 
Inclusive design theory relies on two main principles, 
i.e., 
(i) 
considering 
the 
users’ 
and 
designers’ 
complementarity given their respective specific knowledge 
and expertise [33], and (ii) re-integrating the users’ 
experiences, emotions and reactions in order to design 
sensitive architecture ensuring their wellbeing [16]. 
Several methodologies share the idea that every user has 
a “potential equal contribution to the design outcomes” [34 
(p. 524)]. For instance, methodologies of co-design and 
participative design endeavor to overcome the historical 
denial of end-users by giving them a real voice in the 
decision-making process. 
Nonetheless, this objective is still considered ambitious 
because it threatens two widespread conceptions: on the one 
hand, the professional architect seen as the sole legitimate 
author of architecture, and, on the other hand, the user seen 
as an obedient spectator, contemplating the building as a 
piece of art [22]. As a matter of fact, most architects reject 
unpredictable and creative usages as well as any behavior 
that deviates from the original design of the building, 
starting from the premise that “art is the product of 
individual creativity” [22 (p. 22)]. 
When 
such 
methodologies 
are 
nevertheless 
implemented, a gap might subsist between architect’s and 
end-users’ habituses, i.e., between specialized knowledge of 
architectural 
practice 
and 
unfamiliarity 
with 
the 
architectural 
design 
process, 
that 
might 
generate 
misunderstandings or even conflicts [35].  End-users, 
although given a voice, might indeed feel disempowered 
when confronted to the unknown field of architecture, 
especially when they are asked to participate without being 
provided with any kind of support or formation [36]. 
The methodology developed here, inspired by the 
inclusive design theory and principles, therefore grant 
special care to the architect/investigator posture and to the 
support provided to the participants all along its in-situ 
implementation. 
B. Nijs’ and Heylighen’s research mehodology 
Given the reluctance towards users’ inclusion in general 
and the limits of current frameworks, Nijs and Heylighen 
have developed a specific methodology that considers 
disabled people as experts of their own peculiar way of 
experiencing spatiality and architecture [30]. Through 
several cases studies, these researchers invited disabled 
people to visit a building and to discuss their own 
experience verbally, thanks to different keywords suggested 
by the researchers.  
The novelty of this approach, compared to classic 
accessibility assessments, is the creation of four groups, one 
for each type of disability (motor, visual, auditory and 
cognitive impairments). The methodology is the same for 
each group: participants were asked to follow a predefined 
route across the building while one of them, designated 
“research assistant”, had to fill out a specific evaluation 
sheet for the group. The collected data are mainly the 
formalized transcript of participants’ oral comments when 
moving freely in the rooms, and the expression of their 
feelings 
about 
spatial 
quality 
and 
accessibility. 
Supplemented by some pictures, the resulting evaluation 
report attests to the group’s specific point of view and is 
then collectively debated with the other groups in order to 
write the final common report. Eventually, the participants’ 
experience, identified problems and proposed solutions 
could be communicated to building practitioners and 
designers. 
We believe this methodology works perfectly for three 
groups out of four, but is only half adapted to people with 
cognitive impairments, and more specifically to persons 
with Down syndrome. Indeed, those users undoubtedly 
show potential expertise in visiting different architectural 
spaces and in assessing their multi-sensorial qualities, but 
capturing that information by written and oral comments 
and debates seems unsuitable. While Subsection IV.C will 
develop how we implemented our specific methodology, 
Section V will thus come back on how and why our 
methodology had to be adapted in regard of Nijs’ and 
Heylighen’s one, given the communication difficulties of 
people with Down syndrome. 
C. Implemented methodology 
The methodology has been developed iteratively, on basis 
of two campaigns of observation. This section will first 
present the test observation and then the main observation, 
both corresponding to different observation techniques and 
different roles of the observer. 
1) Test observation 
A good observation is characterized by a good preparation 
and requires a well-trained researcher [37]. A first step of 
our methodology, particularly suggested to architects who 
would be willing to implement it, is to conduct some test 
observations in order to practice and to highlight the major 
elements requiring particular attention, i.e., the main themes 
of a future observation grid [38]. 
Before starting our main observations, we thus chose to 
test and fine-tune a first version of our observation criteria. 
This first testing phase was conducted in the context of a 
guided tour organized by a museum for a group of people 
with cognitive disabilities, including people with Down 
syndrome. During the visit, the researcher took the role of a 
complete observer, meaning that the participants had no clue 
they were observed, and used the “fly on the wall” 
observation technique [39]. As the name suggests, the 
observer remains discreet and collects information without 

155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
interacting with the observed people. The main advantages 
are the participants’ spontaneity and the possibility to 
quickly gather data from several persons at the same time. 
This first observation expanded our observation grid with 
some attention points such as emotions, disruptive elements 
and events as well as particular attention to personal 
vocabulary. Moreover, this visit of the museum initiated the 
idea of a playful interaction with the participants, which 
would go beyond the “fly on the wall” discretion of the 
researcher but would also offer richer insights in terms of 
participants’ perceptions and emotions. The test observation 
eventually made us particularly aware of the impact an 
unknown place, such as a museum, might have on the 
participants. 
2) Main observation 
Initiating the main observation, we firstly proceeded to 
the selection of the participants affected by Down syndrome. 
Six participants were eventually chosen among the residents 
of a Belgian non-profit association welcoming adults with 
cognitive disabilities, and specifically intended to develop 
residents’ artistic skills. Those participants were chosen on 
the basis of several criteria such as the sex (to ensure gender 
parity), the housing type (in order to compare the 
participants’ experience in terms of living with family or 
living permanently in the residence) or the severity of their 
disability and the impact it could have on their capability to 
express their experiences and feelings (Tab. I). 
Secondly, 
we 
conducted 
two 
phases 
of 
in-situ 
observations: first the visit of the residents’ own dwellings 
and later the discovery of a public building, a local town hall 
unknown by the participants. Those two observation 
sequences were video-recorded to ease post comparative 
analysis. The goal here was to compare the spatial 
perceptions of people with Down syndrome when confronted 
to familiar vs. unknown spaces. This choice, inspired by the 
test observation, was additionally confirmed by two different 
aspects of the state of the art. On the one hand, the review of 
Down syndrome’s characteristics had informed us about the 
importance of daily routines and spatial memory [28], and 
we assumed we would more easily observe the impact of 
such factors inside some usual environment, i.e., inside the 
participants’ private dwelling. On the other hand, research 
about disabling architecture shows that handicapping 
situations generally occur in public buildings [13], which 
confirmed our choice of unusual environment. 
At the beginning of the visit of each dwelling, we set up a 
discussion table in order to collect some basic information 
such as, for instance, the resident’s age or favorite room(s). 
This stage also helped us create a climate of confidence with 
the participant and his or her referee (family member or close 
relative), invited to join the whole observation in order to 
ease communication and interaction. We then organized a 
playful activity, operationalized with the help of two 
psychologists, which consisted in visiting the resident’s three 
preferred rooms and interviewing him or her about his or her 
felt experience thanks to illustrated cards. 
This combination of observation and interview methods, 
close to the “shadowing” technique, enables the researcher to 
TABLE I.  DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF THE PARTICIPANTS HIGHLIGHTING 
SOME ADDITIONAL SPECIFICITIES 
# 
Selection criteria 
Gender 
Age 
Housing type 
Cognitive 
specificity 
Mobility 
specificity 
1 
female 
25 
family house 
/ 
artificial 
hip 
2 
female 
48 
residence 
/ 
slower 
motion 
3 
male 
27 
family house 
verbalizes 
through 
onomatopoeias 
/ 
4 
male 
36 
family house 
/ 
/ 
5 
male 
27 
residence 
/ 
/ 
6 
male 
49 
residence 
/ 
/ 
 
follow a person in his or her daily activities while asking him 
or her some questions to complete the observed information 
[40]. Within this framework, the researcher takes over the 
role of observer-as-participant, i.e., he or she spends more 
time observing than participating, while always clarifying the 
scientific objectives. This role has several benefits: it is 
especially adapted for short interviews, it enables real-time 
filling of observation grids and it ensures transparency of the 
research goals towards the observed subjects [41]. However, 
given the brevity of each session (40 minutes in average), a 
mutual misunderstanding can occur between the observer 
and the observed person. Hence the need to quickly build 
confidence [41], which could mainly be achieved thanks to 
the presence of the participant’s relatives. 
The methodology implemented during the visit of the 
town hall was rather similar: a few days later, we invited the 
same six participants to visit three rooms of the town hall, 
this time chosen by the researcher in order to compare each 
participant’s reactions. The visit of those three selected 
rooms was made individually. In the meantime, the five 
other participants were guided by a social worker for a 
recreational photo activity in order to capture their 
experience when they were visiting the town hall on their 
own, in the absence of the observer. 
The last step of our methodology was an artistic activity 
later organized in the drafting room of the day center. 
Participants were asked to draw or paint the buildings we 
visited the previous days. They could choose to sketch their 
private dwelling and/or the town hall from the inside and/or 
the outside, delivering their personal interpretation of those 
spaces. The drawings produced, as well as the pictures taken 
by the residents are an additional means of expression 
completing or confirming the information collected during 
the individual visits. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The four next sections will present the results of the in-
situ observations, starting with factors impacting space 
perception of participants with Down syndrome and 
representativeness 
of 
those 
results, 
following 
with 
observations of “handicapping situations” and ending with 
some methodological recommendations. 

156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Space Perception 
During the two observation phases, five main phenomena 
have been observed. 
Firstly, the people with Down syndrome who took part to 
this study all experienced some difficulties in identifying the 
limits between spaces that were not clearly delineated by a 
physical boundary. In the town hall for instance, the 
reception and entrance halls were separated by a simple inner 
bay frame (Fig. 1), but the participants designated those two 
spaces as one single room. When asked to walk around the 
reception hall, they indeed systematically travelled both 
halls, obviously confused by the proximity of two sub-spaces 
whose functions and boundaries were insufficiently distinct. 
Similarly in the case of private dwelling, one participant 
walked around the living room when asked to delineate the 
kitchen. 
Secondly, and in contrast with the previous point, people 
with Down syndrome who took part to this study paid 
particular attention to the privacy of a space and how this 
sense of privacy could delineate one space from another. 
During the visits of their dwellings, the participants have 
always chosen their own bedroom as their favorite room, 
which underlines their need to have a personal, private space 
available. This characteristic could also be observed while 
experiencing the public building, especially when some 
residents felt the need to be alone and left in search of some 
smaller, more comfortable and/or less traveled space to 
retreat to for some time. In the case of their private spaces 
(their rooms), privacy did, in spite of its intangible nature, 
build some boundary between two subspaces. This 
phenomenon was specifically observed in a bedroom shared 
by two residents who never crossed the invisible line 
dividing the room into two individual and appropriated 
zones. 
Thirdly, the participants demonstrated a particular 
attraction for light, bay windows, illuminated objects and 
surfaces. This characteristic was observed repeatedly, 
particularly when participants were asked to point to their 
favorite  object  within  a  room.  One  of  them,  for  instance, 
showed   us   his   stereo,   occupying   a   special   spot   on   the  
 
 
Figure 1.  Reception and entrance halls separated by an inner bay frame. 
windowsill of his bedroom, which was particularly well lit. 
This importance of natural light is moreover clearly 
illustrated by the participants through their drawings of the 
visited buildings. Most of the time, their representations were 
rather simple but they always involved drawings of the 
windows, including specific details such as frames, shadows 
and/or glazing (Fig. 2). 
Fourthly, our observations revealed the great importance 
of material landmarks in the everyday-life of the participants, 
especially in regard of their day-to-day rituals and habits. 
Those well-known elements, which could be objects, pieces 
of furniture or even a specific building material (e.g., local 
brown stone), were reassuring to them especially because 
they reminded them of aspects of their daily life and 
environments. In one of the residences, we visited a living 
room that had just been rearranged and refurnished. Inside 
this living room, social workers had left a small wooden 
table (Fig. 3) greatly appreciated by the participants because 
it had been crafted by one of the residents. This small table, 
placed there as a landmark of the previous space 
configuration, greatly facilitated the occupants’ appropriation 
of this new way of organizing the room. The presence of this 
recognizable piece of furniture helped the acceptance of a 
new situation otherwise potentially disturbing. 
Fifthly, spatial perception of the participants was strongly 
impacted by their personal preferences and areas of interest. 
During the visits, the participants spontaneously went 
towards objects or pieces of furniture referring to one of their 
passions or to an episode of their personal history. For 
instance, one of the participants’ interest for photography 
influenced his moves in the town hall, his path being 
essentially oriented towards specific photo frames. 
Besides those five keys of space perception, we have 
observed two additional mechanisms engaged in different 
settings: 
first 
the 
visuo-spatial 
memory 
participants 
developed in regard of everyday spaces, and second the 
multi-sensoriality 
participants 
deployed 
especially 
in 
unknown spaces. Those two additional phenomena confirm 
our initial hypothesis stating that comparing familiar and 
unfamiliar places would reveal different behaviors regarding 
space perception. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  One participant’s drawing of the town hall and its bay windows. 

157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Wooden table in the living room of one residence: the 
reassuring landmark easing the space re-organisation and appropriation. 
When interviewed inside their dwellings, the residents 
generally looked beyond the current situation and appealed 
to their memory to describe the space as they generally 
experience it, rather than describing it in regard of its 
specificities at the time of observation. For instance, one 
participant stated that the living room was a place where “it 
was dark” while it was a bright middle of the afternoon at the 
time. The participant described the room as he usually 
perceives it in situation of most frequent use, i.e., when he 
watches TV in the evening, this way appealing to his visuo-
spatial memory instead of his instant capacities of 
observation. Another resident displayed the same memory 
capacity when he showed us the living room, which was 
being renovated at the time of the visit. Although all the 
furniture was stacked in the corner of the room, the 
participant told us which armchair was his favorite and, even 
though the room was very quiet, he explained us it was an 
animated place where he usually spent time with his friend. 
Compared with other rooms visited with this participant, we 
observed that he took more time to answer our questions, 
probably because he was looking for responses in his 
memories and could/would not rely on his feelings on the 
fly. 
In the town hall, moreover, participants largely mobilized 
their five senses to experience space. For example, they 
relied on their hearing to determine the level of activity of 
the rooms: one participant said that the entrance hall was 
“here, quiet, everything is quiet” because we were alone in 
the room, while another one later found the space 
“animated” because several employees were present at the 
time. Some participants also appealed to kinesthesia and 
explored almost every inch of the room in order to appreciate 
the spatial quality of the room before answering the 
questions of the observer. We observed that multi-
sensoriality was generally only engaged during the discovery 
phases of a new space or a potentially disturbing 
environment. 
B. Representativeness 
As mentioned earlier, the results were gathered from a 
rather limited sample of only six people with Down 
Syndrome. However, such a qualitative study provides 
representative results on the condition that the saturation 
criterion is respected.  
The saturation criterion, originating from the social 
sciences, is “the point at which no new information or 
themes are observed in the data [42 (p.59)],” which means 
that the size of the sample may be limited to ‘n’ people if 
the person ‘n+1’ reveals no new essential data compared to 
the person ‘n’. This theory thus argues that the size of the 
sample, i.e., the number of observed people, should not be 
defined by a theoretical number fixed in advance, but should 
emerge from the research field [43]. The goal here is not to 
reach any statistical representativeness, but rather to “reflect 
at best the possible variety of the testimonies [44 (p. 58)]” 
through results built with observed data and confirmed by 
the forthcoming ones. In this prospect, social scientists use 
comparative analysis and follow an iterative process, 
constantly adapting their theory until recurrences reveal 
some clues of saturation [45]. 
Practically speaking, we made sure that the saturation 
point was reached by building a table structuring 
comparative analysis (Table II), in which the six space 
perception phenomena and the data provided by each of the 
six participants (both for their dwelling [D] and for the town 
hall [T]) were crossed. The idea was to check whether the 
results were observed in any situation, i.e., whether the 
saturation point was potentially reached, or if some 
exceptions remained. 
The Table II, presenting a simplified version of this 
comparative analysis table, uses five symbols:  
• 
“V” represents a phenomenon effectively observed 
in the dwelling of the resident; 
• 
“O” shows a phenomenon effectively observed in 
the town hall;  
• 
“X” corresponds to the absence of use of visuo-
spatial memory in unknown places; 
• 
“/” refers to the absence of multi-sensorial 
experience in familiar places; 
• 
“!” indicates an exception, i.e., an unobserved 
phenomenon where we would have logically 
expected it to occur. 
The theory of saturation is not necessarily opposed to 
the existence of exceptions and “the singular fact, the 
negative cases, the misunderstood or enigmatic phenomena, 
although they are essential, do not call into question this 
saturation [44 (p. 305)].” In our case, all exceptions find a 
rather simple explanation and some of them even share the 
same one. In Table II, we thus numbered from 1 to 5 each 
type of exceptions, for which we will provide below specific 
explanation. 
 

158
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS AND REPRESENTATIVENESS OF THE 
RESULTS REGARDING THE PARTICIPANTS’ SPACE PERCEPTION 
Space 
perception 
Participants 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
D 
T 
D 
T 
D 
T 
D 
T 
D 
T 
D 
T 
Limits 
V   !1 
V   O 
V   !1 
!2  !1 
V   O 
!3   O 
Privacy 
V   O 
V   O 
V   !1 
V   !1 
V   O 
V   O 
Light 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
!4   O 
V   O 
!5  !5 
Material 
landmark 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
Individual 
preferences 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
V   O 
Visuo-spatial 
memory 
V   X 
V   X 
V   X 
V   X 
V   X 
V   X 
Multisensoriality 
/     O 
/     O 
/     O 
/     O 
/     O 
/     O 
- 
D: in the dwelling 
- 
T: in the town hall 
- 
V & O: observed phenomena 
- 
X & /: logically not observed phenomena 
- 
!1, !2, !3, !4 & !5: exceptions 
 
In the first case (exceptions !1), two phenomena 
regarding space perception were not observed in the town 
hall: troubles with perceiving limits and search for an 
intimate space or a hiding place, that occurred only for half 
of the participants. For the other half such phenomenon 
didn’t occur, either because some of them refused to 
participate when asked to walk around the room or because 
they were so tired that they remained seated in each room 
we visited. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude 
whether they had difficulties with limits or not, as well as 
whether they felt the need for privacy or not. 
In the second case (exception !2), the third resident did 
not manifest any problem with the identification of limits in 
his dwelling. In fact, all the spaces of his private house were 
clearly delimited by walls and doors, leaving no place for 
spatial confusion. 
In the third case (exception !3), the sixth participant 
didn’t expressed problems with limits in the residence 
where he stayed. All spaces were not necessarily physically 
delimited, but the levels of privacy generated some invisible 
but perceptible boundaries between them. Therefore, the 
resident clearly differentiated one functional area (e.g., TV 
lounge) from another (e.g., game corner) even if they were 
in the same large room. 
In the fourth case (exception !4), the visit of the fourth 
participant’s dwelling took place at the end of the day, when 
it was already dark outside. Obviously, we did not observe 
anything regarding natural light, but that might have been 
the case at a different time of the day. 
In the fifth case (exceptions !5), the sixth participant did 
not show any interest for light and even preferred dark 
spaces, which can seem really surprising. Nevertheless, his 
appeal for darkness is linked to his character and personal 
history (see Section VI). 
Finally, each phenomenon has been observed at least 
once for each participant, except for the two dark grey boxes 
of Table II. Consequently, identical phenomena were 
observed for each participant, without any new trend when 
increasing the sample in size. The results therefore remain 
representative and respect the saturation criterion, allowing 
the involvement of small samples of participants in such 
methodology. However, the compared results also highlight 
that there is a variety of realities even inside the same 
disability. Building on this observation, our study suggests 
reconsidering the prevalent models of disability (see Section 
VI). 
C. Handicapping situations 
During the visits, we observed the two most common 
handicapping situations as defined by Goldsmith, i.e., 
confined spaces and stairs [13], but also a third one, which 
is the height of the furniture. Every time, the disabling 
situation is caused by an incompatibility between the spatial 
configuration and the users’ characteristics. 
In the residences, participants shared their rooms with 
other people and their personal space is reduced to a small 
area. As a result, nearly all the rooms become common 
places and there is no specific area really respectful of 
privacy, which is yet very important for the participants as 
our observations revealed (see Section V.A). As a social 
worker told us, when one resident is arguing with others, he 
or she cannot take refuge in a quiet place to calm down. In 
order to limit these incidents and to respect the participants’ 
need for privacy, individual bedrooms are recommended as 
well as several little shelters in different rooms of the 
residence.  
During the visits, we also observed that some 
participants with minor mobility impairments (e.g., a slight 
limp) hardly came up and down the stairs. In fact, besides 
the effort it takes them to climb the stairs, the residents were 
afraid of loosing their balance and falling down. Steps 
without risers are even scarier and, in her house, one 
resident had no choice but to slide down the spiral stairs on 
her back. In our view, the absence of risers is mainly 
justified by a search for aesthetics but it generates collateral 
damages like discomfort and fear, which could be easily 
limited with riders or even avoided with single stories 
buildings. 
As previously mentioned, participants with Down 
syndrome are small-sized and, thus, the usual height of 
furniture is generally not suitable for them. For instance, one 
participant had difficulty in sitting on the kitchen barstools 
and lost his balance because his feet did not touch the 
ground (nor the footrest). Similarly, social workers made 
some adjustments when providing lower shelves to store the 
objects that the residents use on a daily basis. 
In those three handicapping situations, design choices 
can have architecture-independent consequences such as 
discomfort, promiscuity or risk of falling because they are 
not adapted to the residents’ needs. In all cases, simple 
solutions can be found as soon as architects anticipate the 
users’ specificities, an anticipation that requires a specific 
methodology. 

159
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
D. Methodological Recommendations 
Compared to traditional approaches, inclusive design 
requires a meeting with the end-users as soon as preliminary 
design phases. Critics may argue that considering end-users 
from the beginning is time-consuming, but on the contrary 
we believe it saves time in the long term and avoids calling 
into question projects that are about to be built. Moreover, 
our observations demonstrate that there are possibilities to 
get to know the users within a short time (about one hour), 
which should be considered as an investment rather than a 
waste of time. However, in order to make the most of the 
meetings with the users, the designer should be open-minded 
towards their requests and suggestions, keeping in mind that 
end-users are experts of their own needs and ways of living. 
Yet, one has to observe that it is not natural for end-users to 
take part in the design process by documenting their daily 
behaviors and expressing their feelings about space. 
Therefore, we suggest developing renewed forms of  
interaction (other than simple conversations), such as for 
instance narrative inquiries, scenario-based approaches, or, 
as for participants with Down syndrome, playful activities. 
The following paragraphs summarize adaptations made 
to Nijs and Heylighen’s methodology [30] in order to make 
it more suitable to the specificities of people with cognitive 
disability (for which oral expression and debate, for instance, 
can be difficult). 
To begin with, the importance of the referee (family 
member, close relative or educator) was made clear during 
the first phases of “discussion tables” we added to the 
methodology: this actor, acting as mediator between the 
observer and the observed person, played a crucial role in 
decoding both stakeholders’ words, intentions and behaviors 
and in ensuring their mutual understanding and trust. In one 
particular case, the presence of the participant’s parents 
turned out to be essential to “translate” his personal 
vocabulary 
mainly 
composed 
of 
onomatopoeias. 
Furthermore, the referee generally took pleasure recounting 
some anecdotes, which complemented the resident’s 
comments and behaviors and contributed to faster reach the 
saturation point. 
Expression of feelings and perceptual spatial experiences 
were moreover greatly facilitated by the use of four cards 
illustrated with cartoony human faces, each featuring one of 
the most widespread human primary emotions (happiness, 
sadness, nervousness and fear). These cards, chosen with the 
help of a psychologist specialized in assisting people with 
Down syndrome, were voluntary simple (free of superfluous 
details) and limited in their number in order to help 
participants express their feelings as accurately, as well as 
simply, as possible. Participants were nevertheless free to 
combine several pictures to enrich their answers if necessary. 
Those cards, as suggested by Chase, adequately complement 
the content usually collected through narrative inquiry [46]. 
One important preliminary step, when presenting these cards 
for the first time, was to proceed to the emotions’ 
recognition, i.e., to align our understanding to what the cards 
meant in the eyes of the participants. For instance, one 
resident had identified the card of the scared figure as a 
person “who winced”, and this definition was therefore used 
for the rest of those observations. Those cards proved really 
useful to interact with the participants once on the field, and 
could efficiently replace the keywords used by Nijs and 
Heylighen [30] when interacting with people experiencing 
difficulties with verbal expression. 
From an organizational perspective, we visited each 
room in two phases: first, we started interviewing the 
participant, and then we let him or her walk around the room. 
During the visit of one dwelling, one of the residents at first 
refused to sit and to answer our questions. We had to wait 
until he stopped moving before obtaining a single answer. 
Organizing the intervention in several, distinct and 
repeatable phases thus allowed us to progressively channel 
the resident’s attention on our questions. We moreover 
observed that interviewing each participant separately proved 
particularly important to avoid participants influencing each 
other: at one point of the town hall visit, all six participants 
started to interact about the space and the influence of one of 
them was clearly at the disadvantage of self-expression. 
Eventually, considering additional means of expression, 
such as photography or drawing for instance, proved very 
useful to complete some participants’ comments. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Our in-situ observations contribute to an adapted 
methodology and to design keys useful for architects willing 
to include people with Down syndrome (their specific needs, 
their specific ways of experiencing space) into preliminary 
phases of their design processes. Since the results presented 
here are issued from six participants only, the findings 
should not be generalized to a larger group. As Kinnaer, 
Baumers and Heylighen underline in their research about 
autism, individual preferences play an important role for the 
perception and appreciation of certain spaces and should not 
be dismissed [24]. This has proven also true for people with 
Down syndrome, as one of the participants distinguished 
from the five others by his particular appeal for dark spaces. 
In this case, the participant considered his own bedroom, 
indeed rather dark, as his personal shelter of privacy, a space 
where he could freely unleash his emotions. He therefore 
associated dark spaces to this personal space, a protective 
cocoon where he could express himself untroubled. 
Designers willing to replicate the suggested adapted 
methodology should therefore apply the saturation criterion 
[42] as a way to capture both specific and shared spatial 
perceptions. 
 Down syndrome, as any other cognitive disabilities, 
consequently ought to be considered as a complex condition, 
characterized by a variety of realities unfortunately confined 
to a rather limited global medical model [23]. Yet, current 
theoretical and practical disability frameworks hardly take 
into account this variability. In general, end-users’ 
integration is hardly achieved, and reveals even more 
problematic for architects considering regulations about 
people with disability as an obstacle to their creativity rather 
than as a support to their design. Moreover, those regulations 
have the tendency to reduce the user to a single, 
« representative » profile: even the architectural norms 

160
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
applied to the inclusion of PRM tend to dismiss personal 
specificities one wheelchair user can develop in regard of 
another. Theories such as Universal design, on the other 
hand, intend to transform architecture into some universal 
product including the diversity of needs of all potential users 
[47]. To put it another way, universal architecture goes 
beyond “design for special needs” and proposes a built 
environment usable by every user without exception and 
under all circumstances [18]. Such Universal architecture, by 
doing so, might even reduce the model of the user and 
his/her uses, as each Universal user potentially accumulates 
the incapacities of a larger diversity of users, the designed 
object being consequently reduced to its lowest common 
possible use [48]. 
This research is therefore rather in favor of the inclusive 
model, taking into account the specificities of users and 
considering them, as much as possible, as creative input. 
Even thought providing a real voice to end-users, inclusive 
design still goes with some limitations, such as becoming a 
danger for disabled users’ autonomy. In some cases, the 
search for “absolute well-being” leads to the design of spaces 
perfectly adapted to the users’ needs, at the risk of creating 
overprotected and aseptic places in contradiction with users’ 
personal development [23]. In the case of people with 
cognitive disabilities, there is a need to find a delicate 
balance 
between 
users’ 
autonomy 
and 
prosthetic 
architecture, i.e., between stimulating users’ empowerment 
[23] and providing adjustments that ease daily life and 
counteract impairments [49]. Regarding the height of 
furniture for instance, most used objects by participants with 
Down syndrome could be stored on the lowest shelf boards 
accessible without any help, while a stepladder could be used 
to reach the highest objects when necessary. In this way, a 
safe and comfortable environment would be provided on a 
day-to-day basis and the residents would be encouraged to 
make punctual efforts and to look for alternative solutions 
when required. 
We argue that the methodology developed in this paper, 
favoring playfulness rather than simple consultation of the 
end-users, might potentially help architects conducting in-
situ research and gaining knowledge about how specific 
groups of people with Down syndrome interact with 
architecture. In our case, a playful approach was favored 
following the advice of a child psychologist and given the 
pretty childlike nature of people with Down syndrome, but 
the methodology should be adapted according to the users’ 
profile and the type of disability concerned. Therefore, this 
methodology is characterized by its flexibility and proposes a 
non-rigid reflexive framework for designers. Furthermore, 
participants, considered as experts of their own disability and 
their own specific ways of experiencing space, might in this 
way contribute to architectural projects more prone to benefit 
the greatest number of users. As much as hypersensitivity 
[29], people with Down syndrome’s specific ways to 
apprehend an architectural space, for instance through higher 
multi-sensoriality, could equip designers in their perception 
of end-users’ needs. Whereas universal design aims at the 
lowest common denominator, inclusive design, we argue, 
provides more diversified avenues for design exploration. 
Including participants with Down syndrome as soon as 
preliminary phases of the architectural design process, and 
specifically empowering them with a certain expertise, 
moreover suggests a possible evolution of current models of 
handicap in architecture. Disability has originally been 
considered the result of a medical condition, therefore 
building the “medical model” of disability in architecture. 
This model, focusing exclusively on disability as an illness 
together with its symptoms, nurtured a hygienist design of 
specialized institutions. At that time, architects had no 
responsibility at all regarding exclusion of people with 
physical and/or mental impairments, whose specificities 
were identified as the cause of handicap creation [8]. 
Furthermore, disabled users were supposed to adapt 
themselves to the built environment whatever their 
individual characteristics [18]. Later, a social model of 
disability in architecture rather focused on the human being 
rather than on the mere “patient”, and integrated notions such 
as “origin, milieu, education, profession, economical 
position and social status [50 (p. 11)], quoted by [51 (p. 
19)]” to the design of adapted spaces. This social model, as a 
consequence, informed the design of healing environments 
outside the institutionalized boundaries of the hospitals and 
proposed living environments “accommodating people with 
a social framework and, thus, supporting residents in 
developing their identity [51 (p. 24)].” Following this model, 
some 
architects 
became 
highly 
conscious 
about 
environmental impact on our perceptions; and even managed 
to use this architectural externality as a design key. For 
instance, the Maggie’s Centers are well known for their 
spatial capacity of becoming psychological and moral 
support for cancer-sick patients, which is enhanced by a 
welcoming and convivial architecture [52]. 
Following our observations, we would advocate a third 
model of disability, i.e., architecture considered as a 
potentially disabling factor. This model, as an extension of 
the social model, would “focus on individuality, difference 
(instead of commonality), experience and giving voice to 
people [51 (p. 25)],” while redefining the role of both 
architecture and the architects.  
This concept, introduced by Goldsmith in the context of a 
research focusing on motor and visual impairments [13], 
states that architecture can constitute a proper physical 
barrier as much for disabled users than for people with 
temporary limited mobility (injured or pregnant person for 
instance). This “architectural handicap” therefore translates 
into an uncomfortable and constraining situation for the user, 
caused by the lack of consideration or anticipation from the 
designer that would not, or could not take into account the 
specificities of a larger group of potential users [18].  
We argue this notion of architectural handicap extends to 
any type of disability, including cognitive ones, as well as 
any type of design field, including ICT-related ones. In the 
case of people with Down syndrome, our results suggest that 
architecture sometimes not only constitutes some physical 
barrier to one’s mobility, but also a psychological barrier 
(e.g., loss of autonomy, fear of falling or lack of privacy). 
Unclearly delineated spaces, for instance, can generate loss 

161
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of reference points, misunderstanding of sub-functions and 
consequently loss of autonomy and social exclusion. 
Architecture and architects therefore have a crucial role 
to play in terms of avoiding such handicapping situations: 
the design keys and methodology proposed in this paper 
offer support to architects who wish to deal with this new 
responsibility. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper develops a methodology to approach Down 
syndrome in architectural design, in line with inclusive 
design theories. The originality of this methodology lies in 
its early integration of participants and its playfulness, 
enabling to go beyond simple consultation with end-users 
and to value the disability experience as an expertise. 
The methodology and design keys suggested in this paper 
may be suitable to other user profiles, such as people bearers 
of another cognitive impairment, seniors or children who 
share some characteristics with people with Down syndrome. 
However, this methodology should not be applied as it 
stands for all user profiles, but should remain flexible and 
adaptable according to their specificities. 
Our research also highlights the limits of the current 
normative frameworks. Nonetheless, the actual lack of 
consideration 
for 
people 
with 
cognitive 
impairment 
compared with other disabilities, like motor impairment, 
demonstrates the benefits of such a norm. Since a strict 
regulatory framework would not be an adequate solution, 
this paper rather paves the way for a toolbox for designers, 
encouraging them to take into account people with cognitive 
disability and suggesting them some interaction techniques 
to reach this goal. 
No longer considering disability as a threat or obstacle 
for architectural design, this work rather suggests that people 
with Down syndrome experience space with some specific 
sensitiveness. This sensitiveness could be leveraged as a 
source of creativity for the designer (“disability as 
opportunity”), while architecture could be considered as a 
potentially handicapping factor for the user (“architectural 
handicap”). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank all who contributed to 
this research, in particular the team and residents of “Les 
Hautes Ardennes” center (Vielsalm, Belgium). The authors 
also thank Ms. Henry, psychologist at “Cité de l’Espoir” 
(Andrimont, Belgium), for her advices in carefully choosing 
the content of the illustrated cards, and Ms. Stiévenart, child 
psychologist and researcher (University of Liège, Belgium), 
for her suggestions for the operationalization of the playful 
activity. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Schelings and C. Elsen, “Inclusion of Down syndrome in 
architectural design: towards a methodology,” in Smart 
Accessibility 2017: The Second International Conference on 
Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart 
Environments, L. Smirek, D. Marghitu and K. S. Fuglerud, 
Eds. Nice : IARIA, pp. 20-25, 2017. 
[2] AViQ Agence pour une Vie de Qualité. How many people are 
disabled in Belgium, in Wallonia? [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.aviq.be/handicap/questions/infos_conseils/statisti
ques.html 2017.11.13 
[3] AViQ Agence pour une Vie de Qualité. The disabled 
workers? 
Workers! 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.aviq.be/handicap/pdf/documentation/publications
/emploi/Brochure-Travailleurs-handicapes.pdf 2017.11.13 
[4] A. Bai, H. C. Mork, T. Halbach, K. S. Fuglerud, W. Leister, 
and T. Schulz, “A review of universal design in ambient 
intelligence environments,” in Smart Accessibility 2016: The 
First International Conference on Universal Accessibility in 
the Internet of Things and Smart Environments, L. Smirek 
and K. S. Fuglerud, Eds. Nice: IARIA, pp. 6-11, 2016. 
[5] F. Choay, Urban planning, utopias and realities An anthology. 
Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1965. 
[6] J. Pallasmaa, The eyes of the skin. Chichester: John Wiley, 
2005. 
[7] J. Herssens and A. Heylighen, “Haptics and vision in 
architecture: designing for more senses,” Conference Sensory 
Urbanism, Flâneur Press, Jan. 2008, pp. 102-112, ISBN: 978-
0-95599-060-1. 
[8] Y. Lee, “Design participation tactics: the challenges and new 
roles for designers in the co-design process,” CoDesign, vol. 4 
(1), pp. 31-50, 2008, doi: 10.1080/15710880701875613. 
[9] F. Y. Y. Ling and C. L. L. Chong, “Design-and-build 
contractors’ service quality in public projects in Singapore,” 
Building and Environment, vol. 40 (6), pp. 815-823, Jul. 
2004, doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2004.07.017. 
[10] R. Luck, “Learning to talk to users in participatory design 
situations,” Design Studies, vol. 28 (3), pp. 217-242, May 
2007, doi: 10.1016/j.destud.2007.02.002. 
[11] M. Annemans, E. Karanastasi, and A. Heylighen, “From 
designing for the patient to designing for a person,” in 
Inclusive designing Joining usability, accessibility, and 
inclusion, P. Langdon, J. Lazar, A. Heylighen, and H. Dong, 
Eds. Cambridge: Springer, pp. 189-200, 2014. 
[12] A. Heylighen, P. Devlieger, and M. Strickfaden, “Design 
expertise as disability and vice versa,” Communicating (by) 
Design, Chalmers University of Technology, Hogeschool 
voor Wetenschap & Kunst, School of Architecture Sint-
Lucas, Apr. 2009, pp. 227-235, ISBN: 978-9-08132-380-2. 
[13] S. Goldsmith, Designing for the disabled The new paradigm. 
New-York: Routledge, 2012. 
[14] A. Dalhin, On architecture, aesthetic experience and the 
embodied mind. Seven Essays. Stockholm: Royal Institute of 
Technology, School of Architecture, KTH, 2002. 
[15] M. Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of perception. London 
and New York: Routledge, 2002. 
[16] M. Ferreira, D. Cabral de Mello, and J. Duarte, “Embodied 
emotions: a phenomenological approach to computation to 
explore empathy through architecture,” Digital Physicality,  
Proceedings of the 30th eCAADe Conference, vol. 2, Czech 
Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Architecture, Sep. 
2012, pp. 599-604. 
[17] V. Van der Linden, M. Annemans, and A. Heylighen, “You’d 
want an energy from a building: user experience of healing 
environment in a Maggie’s cancer caring centre,” Proceedings 
of the 3rd European Conference on Design4Health, Design 
Society, Jul. 2015, pp. 1-9, ISBN: 978-1-84387-385-3. 
[18] H. Froyen, E. Verdonck, D. De Meester, and A. Heylighen,  
“Documenting handicap situations and eliminations through 
universal design patterns,” Australasian Medical Journal, vol. 
1 (12), pp. 199-203, 2009, doi:10.4066/AMJ.2009.158. 
[19] G. Nijs, P. Vermeersch, P. Devlieger, and A. Heylighen,  
“Extending the dialogue between design(ers) and disabled 
use(rs): from conversation to embodied skill,” in DS 60: 

162
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Proceedings of Design 2010, the 11th International Design 
Conference, D. Marjanovic, M. Storga, N. Pavkovic, and N. 
Bojcetic, Eds. Dubrovnik: Design society, pp. 1817-1826, 
2010. 
[20] V. Fletcher, “A neighborhood fit for people,” in Universal 
design handbook, W. Preiser and E. Ostroff, Eds. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, pp. 60.1–60.15, 2001. 
[21] R. Imrie, “Responding to the design needs of disabled 
people,” Journal of Urban Design, vol. 5 (2), pp. 199-219, 
2000, doi: 10.1080/713683959. 
[22] J. Hill, Actions of architecture Achitects and creative users. 
London: Routledge, 2003. 
[23] K. McAllister and B. Maguire, “Design considerations for the 
autism spectrum disorder-friendly key stage 1 classroom,” 
Support for Learning, vol.  27 (3), pp. 103-112, Aug. 2012, 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9604.2012.01525.x. 
[24] M. Kinnaer, S. Baumers, and A. Heylighen, “How do people 
with autism (like to) live?,” in Inclusive designing Joining 
usability, accessibility, and inclusion, P. Langdon, J. Lazar, A. 
Heylighen, and H. Dong, Eds. Cambridge: Springer, pp. 175-
185, 2014. 
[25] RT21 Regroupement pour la trisomie 21. Qu’est-ce que la 
trisomie 
21? 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://trisomie.qc.ca/apropos/quest-ce-que-la-trisomie-
21/#en_detail 2017.11.13 
[26] S. Thérien. Synthesis on Down syndrome [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.asdet21.org/synthese.php 2017.11.13 
[27] R. Bonjean, “File: people with Down syndrome increasing 
age Editorial,” Le journal de l’apem t-21, vol. 11, pp. 1-2, 
2012. 
[28] J. A. Rondal, “Neurobehavioural specificity in Down 
syndrome,” in Congrès international neuropsychologie et 
comportement de la personne trisomique 21, Junglisnter: 
Trisomie 21 Lëtzebuerg a.s.b.l., pp. 18-25 , 2008. 
[29] C. Tufvesson and J. Tufvesson, “The building process as a 
tool towards an all-inclusive school. A Swedish example 
focusing on children with defined concentration difficulties 
such as ADHD, autism and Down's syndrome,” Journal of 
Housing and the Built Environment, vol. 24 (1), pp. 47-66, 
Apr. 2009, doi:10.1007/s10901-008-9129-6. 
[30] G. Nijs and A. Heylighen,  “Turning disability experience into 
expertise in assessing building accessibility: a contribution to 
articulating disability epistemology,” Alter, vol. 9 (2), pp. 
144-156, Apr. 2015, doi:10.1016/j.alter.2014.12.001. 
[31] J. Herssens and A. Heylighen, “Haptic architecture becomes 
architectural hap,” Ergonomics for a future, Proceedings of 
the 39th Annual Congres of the Nordic Ergonomic Society 
(NES), NES, Oct. 2007, ISBN: 978-9-19715-212-9. 
[32] P&R Penezić and Rogina. Tokyo works [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.behance.net/gallery/14244251/Tokyo-
Works  2017. 11.13 
[33] A. Heylighen and M. Bianchin, “How does inclusive design 
relate to good design? Designing as a deliberative enterprise,” 
Design Studies, vol. 34 (1), pp. 93-110, Jan. 2013, 
doi:10.1016/j.destud.2012.05.002. 
[34] R. Luck, “Dialogue in participatory design,” Design Studies, 
vol. 24 (6), pp. 523-535, Nov. 2003, doi: 10.1016/S0142-
694X(03)00040-1. 
[35] J. P. S. Siva and K. London, “Habitus shock: a model for 
architect-client relationships on house projects based on 
sociological and psychological perspectives,” in CIB W096 
2009: 
Proccedings 
of 
the 
CIB 
W096 
Architectural 
management, C.-T. Tzeng, S. Emmitt, and M. Prins, Eds. 
Taiwan: National Cheng Kung University, pp. 209-220, 2017. 
[36] E. Bjögvinsson, P. Ehn, and P.-A. Hillgren, “Design things 
and design thinking: contemporary participatory design 
challenges,” Design Issues, vol. 28 (3), pp. 101-116, Summer 
2012, doi: 10.1162/DESI_a_00165. 
[37] L. Baker, “Observation: a complex research method,” Library 
Trends, vol. 55 (1), pp. 171-189, Summer 2006, doi: 
10.1353/lib.2006.0045. 
[38] S. Martineau, “In-situ observation: challenges, opportunities 
and limits,” Recherches qualitatives, special issue (2), pp. 5-
17, 2005. 
[39] E. Matthew-Daniel and R. Kamper. Fly on the wall Get to 
know what your users want with this low-cost method for 
collecting valid customer data [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/us-
fly/index.html 2017.11.13 
[40] S. McDonald, “Studying actions in context: a qualitative 
shadowing method for organizational research,” Qualitative 
Research, 
vol. 
5 
(4), 
pp. 
455-473, 
Nov. 
2005, 
doi:10.1177/1468794105056923. 
[41] R. L. Gold, “Roles in sociological field observations,” Social 
Forces, 
vol. 
36 
(3), 
pp. 
217-223, 
Mar. 
1958, 
doi:10.2307/2573808. 
[42] G. Guest, A. Bunce, and L. Johnson, “How many interviews 
are enough ? An experiment with data saturation and 
variability,” Field Methods, vol. 18 (1), pp. 59-82, Feb. 2006, 
doi: 10.1177/1525822X05279903. 
[43] M. Mason, “Sample size and saturation in PhD studies using 
qualitative interviews,” Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / 
Forum: Qualitative Social Research, vol. 11 (3), art. 8, Aug. 
2010, doi: 10.17169/fqs-11.3.1428. 
[44] A. Cornet, The life experience of female magistrates in 
Frecnh-speaking Belgium (doctoral dissertation). Gilly: 
Université de Liège, 2011. 
[45] L. Savoie-Zajc, “How to build a scientifically valid sample?” 
Recherches qualitatives, special issue (5), pp. 99-111, May 
2006,  ISSN 1715-8702. 
[46] S. E. Chase, “Narrative inquiry Still a field in the making,” in 
The sage handbook of qualitative research 4, N. K. Denzin & 
Y. S. Lincoln, Eds. Oaks: Sage, pp. 421-434, 2011. 
[47] R. L. Mace, “Universal design in housing,” Assistive 
Technology, vol. 10 (1), pp. 21-28, Oct. 2010, doi: 
10.1080/10400435.1998.10131957. 
[48] M. Winance, “Universal design and the challenge of diversity. 
Reflections on the principles of universal design, based on 
empirical research of people’s mobility,” Disability and 
Rehabilitation, vol. 36 (16), pp. 1334-1343, Jul. 2014, doi: 
10.3109/09638288.2014.936564. 
[49] P. Dehan, Habitat of the elderly. From adapted dwelling to 
Ehpad, USLD and Alzheimer units. Paris: Editions Le 
Moniteur, 2007. 
[50] N. Mens and C. Wagenaar, The architecture of the elderly. 
Building for housing and care. Rotterdam: NAi Uitgevers, 
2009. 
[51] I. Van Steenwinckel, Offering architects insights into living 
with dementia Three case studies on orientation in space-
time-identity (doctoral dissertation). 
Kampenhout: 
KU 
Leuven, 2015. 
[52] C. Jenks and E. Heathcote, The architecture of hope. London: 
Frances Lincoln, 2010. 
 

