214
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Good telecare: on accessible mental health care 
 
Annemarie van Hout, Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga 
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
Email: a.van.hout@windesheim.nl, 
twjm.janssen@windesheim.nl, m.hettinga@windesheim.nl 
Jeannette Pols, Dick Willems 
Medical Ethics, department of General Practice 
Academic Medical Centre 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
a.j.pols@amc.uva.nl, d.l.willems@amc.uva.nl 
 
 
Abstract — Mental health care is increasingly given at a 
distance, supported by technology. In this article, we focus on 
whether care, when technology comes in, still counts as good 
care. Therefore, we looked into a mental health nursing 
telecare practice for patients that live at home. The telecare 
team offers 24/7 unplanned webcam contact. We observed and 
interviewed nurses whilst they were having webcam contact. In 
our analysis we focused on frictions in care. We found different 
examples, that relate to an overall dilemma in mental health 
care: how does the policy of reinforcing self-reliant patients 
relate to 24/7 care? The dilemma is reinforced through the 
webcam, as it makes care much more accessible. We used 
theories on good care, which show how good care is situational 
and established when enacted. We think professionals should 
look for complex examples and confer on frictions in order to 
improve good care. Exchange and discussion between care 
professionals, derived from their understandings with patients, 
will lead to applied knowledge, or even better, artisanal 
knowledge of good care. 
Keywords - good care; e-mental health; nursing telecare; 
ethnography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telecare provides an alternative form of contact between 
patients and nurses [1]. It is part of a growing movement of 
technology in mental health care, in which web-based 
systems like serious games, self-management instruments 
and online therapies have become regular interventions 
[2][3][4][5][6]. For mental health care institutions, telecare is 
mostly used to introduce new care interventions, enhance 
flexibility and reduce face-to-face contacts [7][8]. Flexibility 
is regarded as an important asset and the online interventions 
are often available for patients to use at their convenience. 
This fits the prevailing views on self-managing patients: 
request for support at the moment you need it or when it fits 
you. Not all ‘e-mental health’ technologies make use of a 
webcam, but they do share the capacity for care at a distance. 
The webcam has an extra feature: it makes the care 
professional accessible to patients in sight and sound at the 
push of a button. 
The webcam is bringing obvious changes to care. How to 
know if this care through a webcam is good care? Let us start 
with what comes to mind first: care at a distance leads to 
absent care professionals (or if you wish: absent patients). 
We can safely state that care at a distance will not be the 
same as care in person. There is the absent body, which can 
be cared for at a distance using information on the body that 
the patient provides through the technology [9]. Mental 
health care has more focus on non-physical care, with nurses 
guiding and supporting patients. For mental health care 
organizations, telecare seems a good alternative or addition 
to regular care, based on the presupposition that bodily 
presence might not always be necessary in mental health care 
[8][10][11]. 
The webcam does not only make the bodies absent, the 
webcam itself comes into the caring relationship: it is a 
technological object that asks for operation [12][13][14][15]. 
There is a rich literature in Science and Technology Studies 
on dealing with technology. Buttons need to be pushed, 
results read out, numbers configured and settings tailored for 
individual patients [16][17]. The work that needs to be done 
before the technology works, becomes part of the caring 
relationship, as technology is worked together, but is also a 
form of relationship with the technology. People get attached 
to devices, as technology becomes part of their day-to-day 
life  [18][19][20][21]. Technology takes hard work and 
subtle tinkering to make it fit in daily practices. In the 
process of tinkering, relations are established. The 
technology becomes part of the caring relation, bringing 
along changes. 
And that is our main concern:  if care changes with the 
technology, is that care still good care? Good care is a 
widespread, presumably understandable idiom. We all have 
ideas on what good care is. Some are easy to name, but many 
aspects of care are in our actions. Care is about patients, but 
often also about the patients’ spouses and everything that 
surrounds them. Care is for houses, pets, administration, 
food, plants and trinkets [22]. That we care not ‘just’ for 
patients, but also for what surrounds them (and us), shows 
how infinite care is and also how difficult to define. Care is 
not only about who and what we care for, but also why. Care 
is also about the relation and responsibilities of caregivers 
and caretakers. In prevailing  health care policy, self-
management is seen as a form of good care. The ideal of 
self-management is about patients who are in the lead, 
controlling their own lives, instead of being led by health 
care organizations. In day-to-day lives of patients though, a 
lot of practical stuff needs care, in which patients are often 
very dependent, next to dependency on physical care 
[23][21]. Care is also about rituals, in which the good is 

215
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
established [24].What binds the various aspects of care we 
just named, in which we were far from complete, is the 
establishment of the good along the way. Nurses and 
patients, patients by themselves, spouses, pets and stuff: in 
shared practices, or in the practice they are in, they all define 
good care by doing it. They make good care along the way, 
so to speak. The outcomes of the ‘good’ in care are different 
of course: in different practices good care will be establish in 
different ways. As the ‘good’ is constituted when care is 
given and depends on its environment, the ‘good’ is 
extremely fluid [25][23][ 26]. 
There is no uniform description of the good in care, but 
there is some agreement: care should be experienced as good 
by all involved. Therefore, good becomes something that 
needs to be negotiated. But will that what is negotiated as 
good, be renegotiated for its goodness when parts of it 
change? Or will this lead to the idea that the care is still 
good, because its seems the same, when in fact its merits 
might have changed? Making good care therefore demands 
tuning between nurses and patients, to discuss and adjust 
care when and where necessary. However, to know if there is 
something to discuss, nurses have to watch out for where the 
tuning fails. Following Mol [26] this means searching for 
moments and situations, for circumstances or signals that 
show the ‘bads’. Often patients will be very capable of 
saying so themselves, but many cases they are not. Nurses 
have to look for those bads, because part of making care 
good (again) is to be sensitive to friction and to be able to fix 
it. Nurses should therefore search for friction to maintain 
good care. 
In this article, we want to add to knowledge on how good 
telecare can function in a changed practice. We studied a 
mental health nursing care practice that uses a webcam to 
give patients the opportunity to make video contact with a 
nurse whenever they feel it is necessary. We specifically 
wanted to learn about the limits and constraints of good care 
and posed the following research question: What dilemmas 
and frictions on good care arise in a mental health nursing 
telecare practice? 
II. 
METHOD 
This article is based on our data collected from a nursing 
telecare team. This team consists of case managers from 18  
different FACT teams. FACT stands for Flexible Assertive 
Community 
Treatment. 
The 
members 
of 
these 
multidisciplinary teams are mainly case managers (almost all 
nurses) as well as psychiatrists, psychologists and sometimes 
social workers [27]. FACT teams supply care to patients 
with severe mental illnesses who live at home. Home care 
varies from daily visits to once every month. FACT teams 
aim to be able to scale up care very quickly when necessary, 
and likewise to scale care down as well, therefore adapting 
the care to the patient’s situation. The 18 FACT teams are 
part of one organization for mental health care that covers 
one region. Each team makes one case manager available to 
take one shift a week (from 8 am till 8 pm) at a health care 
post that provides care at a distance with a webcam. The 
telecare team handles all unscheduled webcam contacts 
(‘calls’) from patients throughout the region. After hours, 
calls are routed to various clinics in the region, which also 
have a webcam. Patients have a dedicated computer with 
touch screen and webcam. The system’s hardware and 
software is very user friendly: patients can talk to the case 
managers at a push of a button. The telecare team is available 
24/7, but most calls take place during office hours.  
We followed the telecare team for nine months, 
conducting ethnographic research [28][29][30] to open up 
the practice, see and recognize changes and discuss these 
with nurses. In the process, we sought to become part of the 
care practice, or at least to get as close to it as possible so 
that we could recognize and understand it better. We became 
acquainted with the telecare practice by talking with and 
observing case managers in various mental health care 
settings [31][32]. We read project documents on various 
telecare projects and participated in team meetings. Our field 
work then concentrated on the telecare team. We joined case 
managers on their shift. We took field notes while observing 
webcam contacts of case managers and patients. We 
conducted interviews after the webcam calls, asking case 
managers to reflect on the call, and these interviews were 
taped and transcribed verbatim. We also interviewed two 
patients, and observed webcam calls from their homes. 
Patients were informed of our presence in writing 
beforehand and the researcher left the room if they had not 
consented.  The independent ethics committee judged this 
project to be exempt from review [33]. The quotes in the 
results section of this article were translated from Dutch. We 
joined the team 27 times, for two to four hours each. We 
observed and talked to 11 case managers, who were in touch 
with 30 patients, some of them multiple times. Twice we 
were asked by patients to leave the room, as they did not 
consent to our presence.  
The observations and analyses were led by sensitizing 
concepts, which were shaped by the theoretical notions on 
good care we discussed in the introduction, guiding the notes 
and the coding process. The researchers articulated these 
notions during the analytical process, and applied them in the 
second round of observations and interviews with the case 
managers [34]. Data analysis focused on what work is done 
in the telecare practice and how the case managers talk about 
it. We used theories on good care to interpret the findings 
and reveal the areas of friction in good care in the practice of 
telecare. 
III. 
RESULTS 
We will discuss three practices in which webcam use has 
changed care. We show how this has led to frictions 
concerning good care. 
 
A. What care do case managers address? 
This section deals with how telecare leads to uncertainty 
about who needs to follow up on particular questions from 
patients. 
When a patient’s call on the telecare system is not 
answered, the system registers the call and gives an engaged 
signal. There are two kinds of unanswered calls: the ones 
that arrive when a case manager is busy talking to another 

216
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patient and the ones that come in after hours. For the first 
kind the custom is to return the call as soon as possible. 
Patients know that when there is no answer during daytime, 
this probably means the line is engaged. After hours calls are 
diverted to various clinics, but sometimes the staff in the 
clinic are too busy to answer. At the start of a working day, 
especially on Monday morning, when the team has been 
away for the weekend, the system shows a list of missed 
calls: 
 
Rien contacts one of the patients on the list of missed calls. 
Anja answers: I know you, but your hair looks different. 
They joke about hair gel. Then Anja asks: What’s up? 
Rien: I saw a missed call and knew you’d tried to reach the 
clinic. 
Anja: Yes, I felt depressed. I worry about my cat a lot and it 
takes up my mind. The cat needs meat twice a day and I 
can’t handle that. I’ve got to take it out of the fridge and give 
it at room temperature. I am all taken up by that cat. 
Rien: Well, all the best. 
Anja: Thanks. What’s your name again? 
Rien spells his name and tries to end the conversation. Anja 
talks a bit about the weather and finally says: Thanks for 
your interest in me and for returning my call. 
 
There is no protocol for missed calls after hours. Rien 
feels he should find out what the matter was. After all the 
patient tried to reach a care professional. Some colleagues 
disagree, like Taco: 
 
The telecare team doesn’t do scheduled care. If you promise 
one [caller], you have to promise them all. Then we have to 
call back a lot. You’ll see.. when you’re returning one of 
those calls, you’re in the middle of that conversation and 
then a new call comes in, so you have to return that one, and 
so on. So you’re actually creating calls. 
 
There are two routines for missed calls. The first is about 
returning only daytime missed calls, the ones caused by an 
ongoing call with another patient. This routine is not in 
dispute. The other one, returning after hours missed calls, is 
carried out very differently. Some case managers feel that 
each missed call needs following up. The idea is that telecare 
will ‘only work’ when it does as promised: provide a way to 
contact a care professional 24 hours a day. For Rien, good 
care means acting on the list of missed calls; for Taco only 
when the missed call appears when he engaged with an 
unplanned call. 
Telecare conversations tend to be diverse. Sometimes, as 
soon as the technology establishes the connection through 
image and sound, patients tell their stories: 
 
Case manager Taco talks about patient Tobias, who told 
very dark stories after his last admittance. For example, 
Tobias claimed that one of the nurses at the clinic had 
instructed him to ‘go grab that borderline bitch’. Taco tells 
how much such calls affect him and how difficult these 
conversations are on a webcam. We discuss this for a bit, but 
do not seem to get to the heart of the matter. Taco says such 
contact seems like a stopgap, like it is not part of the process. 
I ask Taco if it would have been different if he were Tobias’ 
case manager. Taco ponders on this, on how telecare is a 
part of the care offer and how it is part of the treatment, but 
that does not seem right to him after all…. It seems clear 
though that calls like the one with Tobias have more effect 
on Taco because they are by webcam. 
 
The immediate contact established by the webcam and 
the fact that he is not Tobias’ case manager make this 
situation hard for Taco to deal with. In some situations his 
colleagues find other solutions: 
 
Wende: They [patients] should arrange these things with 
their own therapist. [A call] can get very substantive on 
medication as well. Then I say: I can’t answer these 
questions! 
 
The case managers on the telecare team feel that they should 
not be replacing the patient’s regular care team (in which 
case they might feel obliged to answer all questions), but that 
the purpose of the telecare unit is to provide a first contact in 
(unscheduled) times of stress or social need. In the event of a 
crisis, the telecare team alerts the patient’s regular case 
manager. A non-crisis situation is just recorded on the 
electronic system and patients are referred to their action 
plan or their own case manager. This demonstrates that not 
all questions can be asked, or put better, will be answered. 
Another example of the issue on who takes care of what 
kind of questions from patients is the case of Maartje, one of 
the patients we interviewed. Case manager Hella told 
Maartje to use the webcam whenever she feels it is 
necessary. Maartje has a recurring belief that a man enters 
her house and leaves blood everywhere. Whenever she is 
frightened, she calls the team on screen and discusses her 
feelings and behavior. This service is very important for her, 
even when she is not delusional, because she can talk about 
what is going on in her life. A few times Maartje has 
discussed her delusion with the person on duty in the health 
care post, who in turn has called or mailed Hella, her regular 
case manager. Maartje’s story about blood and violence is 
upsetting to case managers who do not know her, and that 
makes them mobilize Hella. 
 
Maartje: I’m not supposed to go into details with other case 
managers, you know? When I do, Hella complains because 
she gets all these messages from her colleagues at the 
station. They report my questions and remarks, and then 
Hella gets telecare questions later on. So then the world’s 
upside down. 
 
Besides receiving the regular appointments at home, which 
steadily deal with her important issues, Maartje can mobilize 
help via telecare whenever she feels she needs it. This has a 
down side, though, as the issues that bother Maartje lead the 
case managers to warn Hella. Apparently Hella knows that 
these issues, although very serious, make the case managers 
undertake understandable, but mostly unnecessary, follow 
up. Hella might be used to regulating Maartje in their weekly 

217
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
talks at home, but now she feels she has to coordinate her 
telecare calls too. Maartje has noticed that Hella intervenes, 
because Maartje’s questions are not supposed to come 
through the back door, as it were, and she even thinks that 
the telecare option upsets the logical process of care for 
Hella: it is an ‘upside down’ world. 
Hella structured the logistics of Maartje’s webcam use 
without consulting others. There is no clear rule and no 
communication on the practice: 
 
Maartje called while Taco was engaged with another a 
screen call. Afterwards, he returns Maartje’s call. Maartje 
immediately states that she ‘does not want to go into the 
deep end’. She just wants to discuss social relations. ‘I met 
someone at the fellow sufferers group. And I ate with this 
person I met at church’. Maartje talks about her plans. 
 
After the call ends, Taco says he needs to examine whether it 
was Maartje’s initiative ‘not to go into the deep end’ and not 
talk about everything that is bothering her. He respects her 
choice, but states that she used to discuss everything. Maartje 
and Hella’s understanding on the content of telecare 
conversations has not traveled far. 
We saw how telecare contact (or lack of contact in the 
case of missed calls) raises questions on who needs to follow 
up on what. What questions need answers and which ones 
can be passed on? Are telecare case managers supposed to 
answer all questions and deal with all issues that stem from 
the technology (like missed calls) just because they offer 
availability? Underneath these practical questions lies the 
issue if it is good care to address all questions. Unanswered 
questions create friction in the telecare situation, as 
presumably the system was installed for patients to use 
whenever they feel the need to talk about any and every 
subject and it turns out they cannot.. 
 
B. A familiar difference in a new case 
Care professionals, of course, differ in their approach, 
opinions and knowledge. This section deals with the 
differences in webcam practices, revealing a dilemma related 
to good care. 
Many patients use the webcam regularly and are thus 
known to all the case managers. Bob is one such patient, a 
middle-aged man with an anxiety disorder. Sometimes, when 
he is having a tough day, Bob calls several times: 
 
Interviewer: What do you think is the purpose of telecare for 
people like Bob? 
Mary (case manager): Well, it’s for when people get stuck, 
for example. People who can’t start the day by themselves, 
they call their case manager every five minutes. With the 
screen, I feel they can learn to give themselves a signal, like: 
I’m stuck, I have to do five things and I don’t know where to 
start. Structuring your day, that’s a perfect way of using it. 
 
For Mary, Bob exemplifies the benefits of telecare. Bob is 
very insecure about many things, including organizing his 
days. The screen gives him an easy way to get in touch with 
a care professional so that he can ask for support for 
whatever is bothering him at that moment. However, there 
are other sides to this story too: 
 
Bob calls. He says: I want to talk a bit. 
Daniel: Why do you want to talk? 
Bob: I want to get rid of my tension. 
Daniel: You always do, but you have to talk to your 
psychiatrist, I can’t help you. 
Bob: I want to know what I can do about it. 
Daniel: What do you think? 
Bob: I think I’ll go for a ride on my bike. 
Daniel: Good idea! 
Bob, terminating the call: I’m hanging up now. 
 
Daniel has a different way of handling Bob’s recurring 
requests for support. Daniel’s intervention is based on the 
aim of letting patients develop their own resources. Bob has 
written an action plan of steps he can take when he is not 
feeling well. In this example, Bob suggests a bike ride, just 
as his action plan might indicate. 
For case manager Rudi even this might not be enough, as 
Bob seems unable to use the plan as intended. Rudi says that 
Bob’s frequent calls show that he cannot rely on his own 
resources. In Rudi’s opinion telecare is not supporting Bob, 
but therapy might: 
 
Field note: Bob has already called in once this morning. He 
knows what to do, but needs confirmation. Rudi thinks that 
Bob should be taught how to handle his thoughts himself, 
without the continuing intervention of others, for example 
with the help of cognitive behavior therapy. He does not 
know if that would be an option for Bob or if anything like 
that has been tried yet. 
 
We learn from the example of Bob, Mary, Daniel and Rudi 
how a familiar issue in mental health care is reinforced by 
the webcam. It questions whether Bob should be allowed to 
call in whenever he feels it is necessary or should he be 
encouraged to rely on other resources than nursing care? The 
issue is not new, but the webcam renews it, as it makes care 
more accessible. Bob can ask for help whenever he likes; he 
just has to press a button and someone is there to support 
him. With telecare the team is available for unplanned 
contacts. The webcam puts forward a normative question 
related to telecare: should care be accessible on demand? 
 
C. Good platforms? 
In the wake of the issue of care on demand is the 
question whether patients can vent about anything on their 
mind? Is it important to share everything? And is therefore 
each call equally important, including ones that do not seem 
to be about care? This section explores a specific aspect of 
telecare: social talk. 
Because most calls are unplanned, often the patient and 
care professional are unfamiliar with each other. Most case 
managers of team E find this unfamiliarity an asset in their 
work. It is a change from daily routine, they meet new 

218
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patients and being separate from regular care gives them the 
chance to participate in social talk. The case managers 
recognize that many patients are very lonely and understand 
that some need to chitchat regularly. Case manager Wende: 
 
Well, you’ve got the time to listen, you see, as you’re here 
anyway. And because you are not in a therapeutic 
relationship, you don’t have to do so much with these 
patients… That’s what they do with their therapist, with their 
own care professional. 
 
Wende regards telecare as an extra option for social talk, as 
patients do not have to ‘work’ with the members of the 
telecare team. Her colleague Taco adds another level of 
meaning to this. He actually sees that patients actively bond: 
 
Some callers appeal to us differently than to their own case 
managers. They do more … or sometimes less… It’s 
definitely different. You can tell that they know they can ask 
us questions. Some have great confidence in us, they know 
us, our faces. They discuss everything. But some don’t, they 
are more reluctant. 
 
Not all case managers find social talk not part of their job 
though, or as Rudi puts it: 
 
And what I do here, with telecare, is just show my face, chat 
a bit and listen to what someone says or wants. So that’s 
more like, well, it’s like being very understanding and not 
giving any old advice…. I don’t fully understand the 
situation nor do I know where the patient is heading, so it’s 
more like being available for a talk… Methodically it’s not 
much… Perhaps it’ll go somewhere, but that would still take 
a lot of work. 
 
The question this raises is whether social talk is a pastime or 
a therapeutic intervention? For Rudi a webcam conversation 
without a care context becomes chitchat, while Wende and 
Taco feel that providing social contact is important as 
patients can be very isolated. 
The matter of social talk is further complicated by an 
issue on the platform telecare offers. Is it a form of good care 
when patients get the opportunity of recurring conduct? Case 
manager Taco talks about the issue of handling the 
reappearing chitchats of the same patients: 
 
Yes of course, it gives patients an opportunity to complicate 
things. Give an extra option and people will take it. Maybe 
not to the extent we want, but you do give people…When you 
look at it from the recovery perspective telecare is actually 
quite nice. That people can decide for themselves whether 
they want to talk to someone or not. 
 
Sometimes it is difficult for case managers to handle, 
repeatedly listen to, or even look at the recurring stories. 
Taco tells about patient Sonja: 
 
Taco: Sonja calls whenever she hears voices. She uses 
telecare to tell us how she used her own interventions 
successfully. But it’s always the same conversation. Also, she 
always sits in the same way at her table. Always the same 
notification. Sometimes I find it a bit silly. 
 
On one of the shifts we attended, patient Titia called at least 
a dozen times. It turned out that she had had a lot to drink 
and Rudi, who was on duty, cut off every subsequent call 
until she stopped calling. During the conversations, Titia 
complained about mental health care. Rudi knows her 
concern is exacerbated by alcohol, something he sees more 
often: 
 
Rudi: You generate dysphoria with the screen… It becomes 
online grumbling. 
Interviewer: So the screen paves the way to that?  
Rudi: Yes, I think so. Many frequent users have an endless 
need to externalize everything without having any awareness 
of the part they play themselves. So with this lady, you can 
wonder if telecare is useful… But you don’t know. 
 
When is a call useful? Some case managers say that every 
form of contact is useful, whenever patients find it necessary. 
Others, like Taco and Rudi, have their doubts. Patients with a 
borderline disorder form a special group under debate. These 
patients often demand a great deal of attention and should be 
able to cope by themselves. Therefore, some case managers 
wonder if such patients benefit from a seemingly endless 
offer of care. Case manager Ab stresses this point by 
reminding us that the general vision of the organization is 
that caregivers should stimulate clients to undertake more 
things by themselves: 
 
And then what do we do? We give them 24/7 [tele]care. 
 
We have seen different ideas on the function of social talk in 
telecare. Some case managers find telecare a very good 
instrument for engaging in the important asset of social talk 
to prevent loneliness. Others find that talking without a care 
context, such as an action plan, is not very relevant. With the 
social talk comes a deeper friction: should telecare be a space 
in which everything can be discussed freely whenever 
necessary? And does telecare give stage to endless 
unnecessary chats, leading to a main dilemma: does 24/7 
telecare relate to the self-recovery perspective on care that 
drives the care organization? Some case managers define 
social talk as good care, but they have not discussed this with 
others. The same goes for the dilemma of round-the-clock 
care. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article we looked for dilemmas and frictions on 
good care that arise in a mental health nursing telecare 
practice and we discussed three different practices. In this 
section we discuss our main findings and relate them to 
theories on good care. We end by discussing how care 
professionals can deal with frictions in good telecare. 
Telecare leads to frictions on what questions can be 
asked at what moments. According to some nurses, just 

219
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
because telecare makes care available, that does not mean 
that all questions need (or should) be answered. In fact, it 
might even be necessary to prevent some questions, which 
takes place when missed calls are not returned or particular 
topics are prohibited in telecare conversations. The moral 
questions are on when you offer 24/7 care, should you 
regulate or even answer every call that comes in? And is it 
good care to follow up missed calls, as they might represent 
unanswered questions for help. Or in other words: if a patient 
calls, missed or answered, does it represent  self-control or 
does the stream of calls need any regulation? Case managers 
act differently in this situation, which can lead to 
uncertainties for patients.  
The webcam renews a familiar issue while it makes care 
more accessible: should patients rely on themselves or on 
care? For Bob, the question of what good telecare is, depends 
on whether it supports his need to be self-reliant. Self-
reliance is an important theme in mental health care. Patients 
are encouraged to solve things for themselves as much as 
possible. Does telecare, through its constant availability, 
really help Bob to develop self-reliance, when he can call for 
help whenever he wants? Or will Bob lean on (tele)care 
more, because it is constantly available? Does telecare create 
a missed opportunity for Bob to find his own solution first 
(on his action plan or his own social network)?  
Social talk, which has always been an aspect of care 
practice, becomes more extensive when telecare is used. 
Whether or not social talk is good care is not a new question. 
Care professionals and patients usually handle this in their 
daily practices. However, the webcam adds friction to the 
practice, as it takes social talk out of the context of prevailing 
care and turns it in a care practice on its own. For some case 
managers it is unclear if this is a good care practice. The 
availability of telecare plays quite a role here, leading to 
questions on the amount or frequency of contact. Is a daily 
webcam chat about the weather a form of support or should 
that not be part of care? And what about its ceaseless 
accessibility? That can lead to uninhibited expression of 
feelings and ideas, even when that is not good for a patient. 
The webcam might facilitate a free space for unbridled 
expression, which some case managers think is the actual 
benefit of social talk. 
We have seen patients using telecare to ask diverse 
questions or discuss subjects they regard as essential, 
whenever they feel it is necessary. Along the way they 
encounter care professionals with differing views on whether 
or not their needs should be met. Here we see where good 
care comes into being. The different practices described here 
could count as good care, as we stated that good care is 
situational and fluid. So why are the differences that we 
encountered a problem? Why do we call them dilemmas and 
frictions? Let us look at the case of Bob again. Let us say 
that nurse A and Bob have determined that for Bob good 
care means that he may call whenever he likes. Everything is 
fine during nurse A’s shift but a few hours later, nurse B is 
on duty. She thinks differently and treats Bob differently. So 
Bob will not get good care, or he has to renegotiate it with 
every new shift. And even when he has established this with 
all the team members, he now needs a system to remember 
what he has agreed with whom (whomever is on duty). 
Differences between care professionals are not unusual, but 
Bob now encounters them far more often than he ordinarily 
would, had the care been given only by his regular case 
manager and a sole replacement during holidays. If we take 
this a bit further: how would this practice look like if Bob 
decided that good care means he wants to call in every three 
minutes? Mostly likely, all nurses would agree that is not 
feasible, and they would not think it is good care. The 
example of Bob is exemplary for all frictions and dilemmas 
we have seen. They are not the same, but they share that 
good care could be established, but is not, as the changes in 
the practice through the technology, are not in favor of the 
patients. Moreover, for all of them counts that outcomes are 
not discussed. 
In the introduction we discussed how good care is 
established as it is being carried out. Conditional for good 
care is the intention, as care professionals strive for good 
care, as we saw when observing the case managers. When 
the telecare case manager on duty redirects a patient with 
queries about medication to his regular case manager, it is 
not because the case manager does not want to help. It is 
because she thinks she might not be the best person to 
answer these questions. Instead, she offers him contact and 
the opportunity to talk about other things, to give something 
extra to his day. She strives for good care, but it becomes a 
friction when the patient needs something else. Or when the 
dynamics of the telecare team, with an occupancy of two 
different case managers a day, creates too many differences. 
In our examples the frictions are not discussed between 
either case managers and patients, nor between case 
managers. It is difficult to discuss what the ‘bad’ of care is 
[26], but not discussing it at all, risks aggravation of 
frictions. Just because the ‘good’ in care is not uniform (as 
we not share all our ideas, convictions, passions, experiences 
or desires), it is important to discuss what patients need when 
striving for the good [23]. To reestablish good care when the 
circumstances change, patients, professionals (by themselves 
and together) and society at large have to think and talk 
about, strive for, and provide the good of care while trying to 
limit the bad. 
The different dilemmas and frictions on good telecare we 
have seen, all relate to an overall dilemma in mental health 
care: how does the policy of reinforcing self-reliant patients 
relate to 24/7 care? The webcam reinforces the dilemma as it 
enhances the accessibility of care. With the webcam come all 
new forms of the same dilemma to the front, leading to 
frictions on good care. It is difficult to recognize changes in 
good care in the changed care practice of telecare. In what 
way does this new practice contributes to what patients need 
and want? 
Good care is complex, as it consists of various goods [26] 
that rely on each other or are at least bound to each other. As 
good care is situational and established when enacted, it is 
also subject to some consensus, and so it might be best to be 
discussed often. Following the ideas on the importance of 
discussing ethical issues [35] and alongside the continuing 
development of empirical ethics [36], we would encourage 
professionals to deliberate on the care they give. Case 

220
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
managers should  look for complex examples, confer on the 
frictions, dilemmas and issues. In discussion the subject 
could be that following up on missed calls might turn out to 
be one of the goods of care. Or not. If it turns out not to help 
make care good, then it might as well be skipped. Case 
managers can also discuss if any boundaries for social talk 
are necessary. And for whom they are important.  Taking 
into account the workload of most care professionals, we 
want to stress that discussing good care can be done in 
workable solutions, fitting the case managers’ daily routines 
(think of phone calls, team meetings, forums, coffee breaks, 
corridor chats and lunches) and deliberate on the care given 
in daily telecare practices. The aim is to strive to uncover the 
(potential) frictions, in order to give good care. Exchange 
and discussion between care professionals, derived from 
their understandings with patients, will lead to applied 
knowledge, or even better, artisanal knowledge of good care.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are most grateful for the opportunity to observe and 
become part of the telecare practices of the professionals and 
patients we met. We would like to thank the care 
organizations that generously offered the settings for this 
research: Dimence, GGZ Drenthe, Lentis and GGZ Noord-
Holland-Noord The research described in this paper was 
made possible by a grant from Nationaal Regieorgaan 
Praktijkgericht Onderzoek SIA (grant number 2014-01-52P). 
Special thanks also to our colleagues with whom we worked 
closely on this project: Marjolein Verburg, Marijke Span and 
Aranka Dol. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. van Hout, R. Janssen, and M. Hettinga “Performing 
Telecare: Recognizing New Nursing Care Practices,” Proc. 
eTELEMED 2016, Feb. 2016, pp. 247-251. 
[2] L. van der Krieke, L. Wunderink, A.C. Emerencia, P. de 
Jonge, and S. Sytema, “E-mental health self-management for 
psychotic disorders: state of the art and future perspectives,“ 
Psychiatric Services. 2014 1:33-49. 
[3] S. Lal and C. Adair, “E-Mental Health: A Rapid Review of 
the Literature,” Psychiatric Services. 2014 1: 24-32.  
[4] D. Ekers, R. Murphy,  J. Archer, C. Ebenezer, D. Kemp, and 
S. 
Gilbody, 
“Nurse-delivered 
collaborative 
care 
for 
depression and long-term physical conditions: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis,” Journal of Affective Disorders. 
2013 149: 14–22. 
[5] G. Clarke and B. Yarborough, “Evaluating the promise of 
health IT to enhance/expand the reach of mental health 
services,” General Hospital Psychiatry. 2013 35: 339–344. 
[6] F. A. Moreno, J. Chong, J. Dumbauld, M. Humke, and S. 
Byreddy, “Use of StandardWebcam and Internet Equipment 
for 
Telepsychiatry 
Treatment 
of 
Depression 
Among 
Underserved Hispanics,“ Psychiatric Services. 2012 12: 1213-
1217.  
[7] GGZ Nederland (Dutch Association of Mental Health and 
Addiction Care), “Een analyse van de verwachte kosten en 
baten van eHealth. Blended behandelen en begeleiden (An 
analysis of expected costs and profits of eHealth. Blended 
therapy),”  Amersfoort.  2013.  
[8] F. Garcia-Lizana and I. Munoz-Mayorga, “What about 
telepsychiatry? A systematic review,” Prim Care Companion 
J Clin Psychiatry 2010: DOI 10.4088/PCC.09m00831whi. 
[9] B. Lindberg, C. Nilsso, D. Zotterman. S. Söderberg, and L. 
Skär, “Using information and communication technology in 
home care for communication between patients, family 
members and healthcare professionals: a systematic review,“ 
International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications. 2013: 
DOI 10.1155/2013/461829. 
[10] L. Barnes  and T. Rudge, “Virtual reality or real virtuality: the 
space of flows and nursing practice,“ Nursing Inquiry.2005 
12: 306-315. 
[11] K. England and I. Dyck, “Managing the body work of home 
care,“ Sociology of Health and Illness. 2011 33: 206-219. 
[12] B. Latour, Science in Action. Cambridge (MS): Harvard 
University Press, 1987. 
[13] J. Law, “Actor-network theory and material semiotics,” In: 
The New Blackwell Companion to Social Theory. BS Turner 
Ed. Oxford 2009: Blackwell, 141-158. 
[14] M. Akrich, “ The De-Scription of technical objects,“  in 
Shaping 
technology/building 
society. 
Studies 
in 
sociotechnical change. W.E. Bijker and J. Law, Eds.  
Cambridge (MS), London (GB) 1992: The MIT Press, 225-
258. 
[15] B. Latour, “Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a 
few mundane artefacts,” in Shaping technology / building 
society. Studies in sociotechnical change. W.E. Bijker and J. 
Law, Eds. Cambridge (MS), London (GB) 1992: The MIT 
Press, 225-258. 
[16] M. Winance, “Trying out the wheelchair: The mutual shaping 
of people and devices through adjustment,”  Science, 
Technology, & Human Values.  2006 31: 52-72. 
[17] J. Pols, Care at a Distance: On the Closeness of Technology. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press, 
2012. 
[18] I. Kamphof, “A Modest Art: Securing Privacy in 
Technologically Mediated Homecare,” Foundations of 
Science. 2015: DOI 10.1007/s10699-015-9448-5. 
[19] J. Pols, “How to Make Your Relationship Work? Aesthetic 
Relations with Technology,” Foundations of Science. 2015: 
DOI 10.1007/s10699-015-9449-4. 
[20] J. Pols and I. Moser, “Cold technologies versus warm care? 
On affective and social relations with and through care 
technologies,” ALTER, European Journal of Disability 
Research. 2009 3: 159-178. 
[21] I. Moser and J. Law, “Good passages, bad passages,” in Actor 
Network Theory and After. J. Law and J. Hassard  Eds. 
Oxford. 1999: Blackwell Publishers, 196-219. 
[22] A. van Hout, J. Pols, and D. Willems, “Shining trinkets and 
unkempt gardens: on the materiality of care,” Sociology of 
Health & Illness. 2015: 1-12. 
[23] A. Mol,  The logic of care. London: Routledge, 2008. 
[24] J. Pols, “Washing the citizen: washing, cleanliness and 
citizenship in mentalhealth care,” Culture, Medicine & 
Psychiatry. 2006 1: 77-104. 
[25] J. Pols, “Chapter 7: Conclusion: Enacting improvement,” in 
Good care. Enacting a complex ideal in long-term psychiatry. 
Utrecht 2004: Trimbos-reeks, 149-55. 
[26] A. Mol, “Care and its values. Good food in the nursing 
home,” in Care in Practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and 
farms. A. Mol, I. Moser and J. Pols Eds. Bielefeld. 2010: 
Transcript Verlag, 215-34. 
[27] J.R. van Veldhuizen and M. Bähler, “Manual Flexible 
Assertive Community Treatment,” Groningen, 2013. 
[28] T. Scheffer, “Event and Process: An Exercise in Analytical 
Ethnography,” Human Studies. 2007 30:167–197. 

221
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[29] J. Law, “Seeing like a Survey,“ Cultural Sociology. 2009 2: 
239-256. 
[30] S. Hirschauer, “Putting Things into Words. Ethnographic 
Description and the Silence of the Social,“ Human Studies. 
2006 29-4:413-441. 
[31] A. Mol, “Missing Links, Making Links. The Performance of 
some 
Atheroscleroses,” 
in 
Differences 
in 
Medicine: 
Unraveling Practices, Techniques and Bodies. M. Berg and A. 
Mol Eds. Durham, London. 1998: Duke University Press, 
144-65. 
[32] J. de Lange, “Vergeten in het verpleeghuis (Forgotten in the 
Nursing Home),” Utrecht. 1990: Trimbos-instituut.  
[33] Central Committee on Research Involving Human Subjects, 
“Your research: does it fall under the WMO?,” Available 
from: 
http://www.ccmo.nl/en/your-research-does-it-fall-
under-the-wmo. 
[34] H. Boeije, Analysis in qualitative research. London: Sage, 
2010. 
[35] T. Abma, B. Molenwijk, and G. Widdershoven, “Good Care 
in Ongoing Dialogue. Improving the Quality of Care Through 
Moral Deliberation and Responsive Evaluation,” Health Care 
Analysis. 2009 17: 217-235. 
[36] D. Willems, “Varieties of goodness in high-tech home care,” 
in Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. 
A. Mol, I. Moser and J. Pols Eds. Bielefeld 2010: Transcript 
Verlag 257-277.  

