66
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Promoting Effective Health Advocacy to Promote Global Health:  The Case of the 
Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA) 
Gary L. Kreps 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
gkreps@gmu,.edu 
 
Paula Kim 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
pkim12@gmu,.edu 
 
Lisa Sparks 
Health and Strategic Communication Program 
Chapman University 
Orange, CA, USA 
sparks@chapman.edu 
 
Linda Neuhauser 
Health Research for Action Center 
University of California, Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
linden@berkeley.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Carol G. Daugherty 
Department of Global and Community Health 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
cdaughe2@gmu.edu 
 
Mollie Rose Canzona 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
mcanzona@gmu.edu 
 
Wonsun Kim 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
wkim10@gmu.edu 
 
Jungmi Jun 
Department of Communication Studies 
University of Northern Iowa 
Cedar Falls, Iowa, USA 
jungmi.jun@uni.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Health advocacy can make significant contributions 
to promoting global health by shaping health promotion 
programs that are responsive to the needs of consumers. 
Health care consumers have a major stake in the health care 
system, yet have had difficulty influencing health policies and 
practices due to the limited power typically afforded them 
within the modern health care system.  Strategic health 
advocacy communication can help to recalibrate the balance of 
power in health care and health promotion efforts, facilitating 
important influences on health policies and practices,  Health 
advocates can help make health programs responsive and 
adaptive to consumer needs by communicating consumers’ 
perspectives in compelling ways to key audiences using a 
variety of key media.  This article describes the communication 
demands of effective health advocacy, the need to help 
advocates develop strategic communication knowledge and 
competencies, and presents a case study of the Global 
Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA) program designed to 
promote effective health advocacy. 
 
Keywords-patient advocacy organizations; leadership; media 
relations; corporate relations; health care systems; government 
agencies; 
stakeholders; 
personnel 
management; 
health 
promotion; media advocacy. 
I.     INTRODUCTION 
     Health care consumers around the globe have a major 
stake in the quality of health care, health education, and 
health promotion programs provided within the modern 
health care system.  Yet consumers have had difficulty 
shaping health policies and practices both locally and 
globally due to a major longstanding power imbalance 
within the modern health care system that accords far more 
authority to health care providers and administrators than to 
patients and family caregivers [1, 2, 3].  This traditional 
power imbalance limits consumer participation and 
influence within the modern health care system despite the 
fact that a large body of research demonstrates that increases 
in consumer participation in health care and health 
promotion efforts can significantly improve the quality of 
important health outcomes [4, 5, 6, 7].     
     Health advocates, whether working as individuals, or as 
parts of health advocacy groups and organizations, have the 
potential to recalibrate the traditional imbalance of power in 
health care and health promotion efforts as a powerful social 
mechanism for promoting consumer-driven participation 
and change within the health care system [1, 8].  Health 

67
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
advocacy leaders can actively represent the voices, 
concerns, and needs of consumers within the health care 
system.  Advocates have great opportunities to help make 
health care programs responsive and adaptive to consumer 
needs through the use of strategic health communication [1].  
Strategic health advocacy communication can promote 
important influences on the development and refinement of 
health policies and practices.  However, health advocates 
must learn how to communicate patients’ perspectives and 
needs in compelling ways to key audiences using a variety 
of different communication channels and media to influence 
often entrenched health policies and practices [9].  This 
article describes the important communication activities that 
health advocates can perform to effectively represent the 
needs of consumers for reforming modern health care 
systems.  The article also examines major communication 
challenges facing health advocates and suggests strategies 
for promoting effective health advocacy around the globe. 
 
II. THE NATURE OF HEALTH ADVOCACY 
 
     Health advocacy typically occurs on multiple levels.  The 
two most common levels for the delivery of health advocacy 
are the individual and the group levels.  On the individual 
level health advocates work directly with specific patients to 
promote quality of care and informed decision-making for 
these consumers, while on the group level advocacy groups 
and organizations represent the needs of many consumers 
confronting similar health challenges.  Both of these levels 
of advocacy depend on effective and strategic health 
communication to be successful. 
     Individual level advocacy is delivered both informally 
and formally.  At the informal level family members often 
serve as personal advocates for their own familial loved 
ones, particularly when these loved ones face serious health 
challenges or when the loved ones have difficulty 
representing their own health needs (perhaps due to reduced 
capacity related to their health conditions).  Family 
advocates regularly support the health needs of children and 
elderly family members, but all health care consumers can 
benefit from effective personal health advocacy.  There is 
tremendous potential for many people, particularly those 
who are well educated and those who are familiar with the 
health care system, to serve as advocates for their friends, 
relatives, and others who are seeking health care services.  
Personal health advocacy can also help others adopt healthy 
behaviors and reduce significant health risks through 
education, support, and encouragement. 
     Individual level health advocacy is increasingly being 
delivered by formally trained care professionals, including 
health navigators, consumer advocates, patient educators, 
home health nurses, personal trainers, and social workers 
who can be assigned to work with specific consumers to 
help promote the best possible health outcomes for these 
consumers.  Research has shown that these health advocates 
can dramatically enhance health consumer satisfaction, 
understanding, quality of care, and important health 
outcomes [10, 11].  Individual level health advocates 
provide invaluable support for health care consumers to 
insure these consumers receive the best care and advice to 
promote their health and well-being.  These advocates 
depend on their strategic communication skills to gather 
relevant 
information 
concerning 
consumer’s 
health 
concerns, interpreting health care recommendations and 
advice, 
and 
sharing 
this 
information 
clearly 
and 
compellingly with consumers. 
     There are also many different health advocacy groups 
and organizations that have been established to focus on 
promoting health and wellness for a large number of 
consumers experiencing specific similar health challenges, 
such as different cancers, heart disease, diabetes, and other 
health care issues.  These advocacy organizations encourage 
focused research on specific health issues, influence 
legislation to promote consumer rights and responsive 
health care regulations, and help to refine health care 
delivery system programs, practices, and policies.  Some of 
the larger and most well established health advocacy 
organizations have become familiar names such as the 
American Cancer Society, the Susan Komen Foundation, 
the Alzheimer’s Association, and the American Heart 
Association.  There are also numerous smaller (mom and 
pop) advocacy organizations and groups that are typically 
developed by consumers and/or their caregivers to address 
serious personal concerns they have had with the health care 
system based upon the care they (or their loved ones) have 
received.  The leaders of both the large and small health 
advocacy groups/organizations depend on strategic health 
communication to achieve their goals.  This article focuses 
primarily on the ways the leaders of health advocacy 
organizations can use strategic health communication to 
shape health policies and practices to support the needs of 
the health care consumers they represent.  
     There is a long history of health advocacy in the US that 
has powerfully influenced relevant health care research, as 
well as the development of important health policies and 
practices [8].  For example, the American Cancer Society 
which was founded in 1913 as the American Society for the 
Control of Cancer by a group of prominent physicians and 
business leaders, has developed many influential programs 
to enhance the quality of cancer care and provide support to 
cancer patients.  Prominent individuals have also had major 
influences on consumer advocacy by establishing influential 
health advocacy organizations.  For example, Mary 
Woodward Lasker, who founded the Citizens Committee for 
the Conquest of Cancer when her husband Albert Lasker 
died from intestinal cancer in the early 1950s, was 
instrumental in promoting the introduction of the National 
Cancer Act of 1971 in the US that was signed into law by 
then President Richard Nixon.  This landmark federal 
legislation initiated the national “War Against Cancer,” 
which has spurred the development of important health 
organizations (such as the National Cancer Institute), the 

68
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
expenditure of billions of dollars of federal funding for 
important cancer research, the development of new cancer 
treatment strategies and medications, as well as the 
establishment of myriad new programs to support cancer 
prevention and control.  However, it must be noted that it 
was not easy for individual advocates or their health 
advocacy organizations to accomplish such sweeping 
influences on public health policies.  It took concerted 
strategic communication efforts, including the development 
of effective media relations programs, fundraising efforts, 
lobbying strategies, and the establishment of powerful 
public/private partnerships to achieve these important health 
promotion goals.  Achieving similar health advocacy 
outcomes in other countries may be even more challenging, 
since there is not a long history of consumer advocacy in 
health care in many parts of the world. 
 
III.  THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION AND 
INFORMATION IN HEALTH ADVOCACY AND 
HEALTH PROMOTION 
 
     Communication is at the center of effective health care 
and health promotion, because communication provides 
consumers and providers with the relevant health 
information they need to get the best care and make their 
best health decisions [5].  Relevant and timely health 
information is a critical resource in health care and health 
promotion because it is the essential resource needed by 
practitioners who must guide strategic health behaviors, 
treatments, and decisions, as well as by consumers of health 
care who need to make important informed choices 
concerning the prevention of health risks, the promotion of 
their health, and the best health care treatments for them [4].  
Health information includes the knowledge gleaned from 
health care interviews and laboratory tests used to diagnose 
health problems, the precedents developed through clinical 
research and practice used to determine the best available 
treatment strategies for specific health threats, the data 
gathered in checkups used to assess the efficacy of health 
care treatments, the input practitioners and consumers need 
to evaluate bioethical issues and weigh consequences in 
making complex health care decisions, the recognition of 
warning signs needed to detect imminent health risks, and 
the direct health behaviors that have been determined to 
help individuals avoid these risks [5].  Health care providers 
and consumers depend on their abilities to communicate 
effectively to generate, access, and exchange relevant health 
information for making important treatment decisions, for 
adjusting 
to 
changing 
health 
conditions, 
and 
for 
coordinating health-preserving activities.  The process of 
communication also enables health promotion specialists to 
develop persuasive messages for dissemination over salient 
channels to provide target audiences with relevant health 
information to influence their health knowledge, attitudes, 
and behaviors.  Health advocacy organizations have 
developed to help support these critically important health 
information needs. 
     Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
promote health and well-being [12, 13].  This includes 
decisions about the prevention of health risks, health 
promotion behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health 
problems, health care treatment strategies, and best practices 
for living with health threats (successful survivorship) [12].  
Yet, health information is complex, with many different 
kinds of health risks, each with different causes, stages, 
symptoms, detection processes, and treatment strategies.  
Health care knowledge is rapidly evolving with advances in 
research and applications concerning etiology, prevention, 
detection, diagnosis, and treatment of health problems.  It is 
extremely difficult for consumer, as well as many health 
care providers, to stay on top of all the health information 
they need to make their best health decisions.  They need 
support to manage the complex and evolving health 
information environment. 
     A primary goal of health advocacy organizations is to 
help break through the complexity of health and health care 
by disseminating relevant, timely, accurate, and clear health 
information  to consumers and providers to help guide 
informed health decision making.  However, there are 
significant barriers to the dissemination of health 
information, especially for at-risk populations, due to 
limited access to health information, health literacy 
challenges, limited education levels, and the complexity of 
health research and health care processes [3; 14; 15].  Health 
advocacy leaders must develop strategic communication 
programs for gathering relevant health information, 
interpreting that information, and presenting the information 
in meaningful ways to those who most need that 
information for guiding important health decisions. 
 
IV.  MEDIATING THE COMPLEXITIES OF THE 
MODERN HEALTH CARE SYSTEM 
 
     Health advocates must learn about the complex 
structures and processes that have been developed for 
delivering care and promoting health in the modern world.  
These health care structures are likely to operate quite 
differently from one location to another, particularly across 
different national health systems.  Effective advocacy 
demands a detailed understanding of the different ways that 
health care delivery systems are organized and managed; the 
ways that health care services are financed; the ways that 
relevant treatments, medications, and technologies are 
developed, tested, and implemented; the ways that research 
programs are conducted to study health care and the 
promotion of health; as well as the ways that regulatory 
mechanisms and guidelines for governing the delivery of 
care are implemented.   

69
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
     This means that health advocates must be able to gather a 
great deal of complex information about health care systems 
and practices.  They must learn about a wide range of 
different relevant health industries, including health care 
delivery systems, pharmaceutical companies, insurance 
organizations, 
and 
medical 
technology 
and 
supply 
industries.  They need to learn about the many local, 
regional, and national government agencies that regulate 
heath care.  They need to understand the ways that research 
programs are conducted to study health care tools, 
treatments, and processes.  Moreover, they must learn the 
best ways to communicate with representatives of these 
different health care systems to promote cooperation and 
partnerships in for refining health care practices and 
policies.  In addition, health advocates need to understand 
the best ways to disseminate relevant information about the 
health care system to key audiences, particularly in 
reference to specific health consumers’ needs and concerns.  
There is clearly a lot of information for health care 
advocates to gather and make sense of, as well as to 
strategically communicate to key audience to effectively 
advocate for meeting the health needs of consumers! 
 
V.  COORDINATING ADVOCACY EFFORTS 
 
     There is also a daunting administrative communication 
demand to developing effective and influential health 
advocacy organizations.  Health advocacy group leaders 
cannot possibly accomplish the complex goals of 
influencing health care policies and practices to promote the 
goals of health care consumers all by themselves.  They 
need to actively recruit followers who will become 
advocacy group members and volunteers to carry the 
group’s messages and support group causes.  Advocacy 
group leaders need to motivate, train, direct, and supervise 
these members to make sure they work effectively and 
cooperatively on behalf of the advocacy group/organization.  
Effective and adaptive leadership communication skills are 
needed to recruit, motivate, train, direct, and supervise 
personnel and volunteers [1]. 
     Advocacy group leaders also need to learn how to raise 
funds effectively to support health advocacy efforts.  This is 
not an easy social influence process to accomplish!  Fund 
raising is a complex strategic communication activity.  Care 
must be taken to identify the most relevant audiences who 
are good potential sources for the donation of funds to 
specific health advocacy groups/organizations.  Health 
advocacy group leaders must learn how to develop strategic 
development campaigns to motivate potential donors to 
provide financial support to advocacy organizations.  These 
campaigns need to be strategically designed to capture the 
attention of key audiences of potential donors, elicit a strong 
sense of involvement with the advocacy organization among 
these audiences, and motivate commitment to provide 
needed financial support for health advocacy.  This intricate 
communication process for eliciting financial support for 
health advocacy is complex and challenging.  Moreover, 
there is tremendous competition between health advocacy 
groups for financial and material support.  Health advocacy 
leadership demands strategic communication to navigate the 
complexities of raising funds to support advocacy 
organizations and the important activities of these 
organizations. 
 
VI.  MEDIA AND HEALTH ADVOCACY 
 
     Popular media are primary tools for disseminating 
relevant health information concerning the health needs and 
issues affecting consumers.  The right media coverage using 
the best media channels can be instrumental in helping 
advocacy organizations reach and influence key audiences.  
For example, advocacy organizations can use popular media 
to reach people who are concerned about the issues being 
championed by the organization to encourage these 
audience members to serve as potential members and 
volunteers.  They need to reach potential donors to convince 
these audiences to provide financial and material support to 
the advocacy organization.  They need to use the media to 
motivate public support for relevant legislation and policies.  
They also need media to encourage support from key public 
officials.  However, it is not easy to control media messages 
and coverage.  Strategic communication is needed to 
influence media cooperation with advocacy organizations. 
     The most direct way to control media coverage is for 
advocacy organization leaders to purchase media spots and 
advertising.  Unfortunately, this can be very expensive, 
especially when paying for the use of the most dramatic and 
popular entertainment media, particularly television and 
film time, and to a lesser extent radio time.  Another 
strategy for getting media coverage is for advocacy 
organization leaders to ask for it.  For example, advocacy 
leaders often submit public service announcements to media 
outlets for free dissemination.  Unfortunately, these public 
service 
announcements, 
even 
when 
accepted 
for 
presentation, rarely gain much exposure because they are 
typically programed for inexpensive time periods.  It is 
much more cost effective for health advocacy leaders to 
encourage free media coverage by earning it through the use 
of media advocacy [16].   
     Media advocacy is an intricate communication strategy 
for motivating mass media representatives to cover key 
stories that enhance the visibility and legitimacy of health 
advocacy organizations issues because the stories are 
attractive to these media representatives and promise to 
appeal to key audiences.  In essence, advocacy leaders try to 
create news and encourage coverage of relevant and 
interesting stories.  They can do this by building cooperative 
relationships with media representatives, staging news 
worthy events, linking advocacy group issues to breaking 
news or existing stories, as well as by providing editorial 
pieces and commentary on relevant issues. 
     Advocacy leaders can also encourage media advocacy 

70
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
coverage by preparing relevant stories, materials, and media 
kits for media representatives that make it easy for these 
representatives to cover the advocacy group stories [17].  
They can provide succinct and persuasive summaries of 
advocacy organizations’ positions of key public issues.  
They can distribute relevant fact sheets that provide 
compelling data and evidence in support of key issues they 
want covered.  They can provide interesting press releases, 
with names and contact information of potential sources for 
the stories.  They can also provide relevant background 
articles to media representatives, as well as providing clear 
and compelling background information about the advocacy 
organization. 
     By encouraging voluntary media coverage the health 
advocate hopes to encourage key support for the advocacy 
organization.  The goal is to use free media coverage to 
influence and shape public debate, put pressure on policy 
makers, and encourage community support for the advocacy 
organization’s key issues.  Media coverage can help set the 
public agenda concerning health advocacy concerns by 
raising awareness about key issues, encouraging public 
discussion of these issues, and influencing private 
conversations about the issues to motivate support for social 
change [18].  
     Building active collaborations with media representatives 
is critically important for motivating effective media 
coverage of health advocacy issues.  There are several key 
questions that the health advocate needs to be able to 
answer.  Who are the media representatives for the media 
outlets you want to cover your health advocacy issues?  Are 
your messages right for the specific medium selected?  Who 
are the audiences these media channels serve?  What kinds 
of stories do these media outlets want to cover?  What 
problems do you want addressed by the media?  What are 
the ideal solutions to these problems?  Who has the power 
to address these issues and must be mobilized to enact 
relevant social change?  What messages would convince 
these key audiences to act on these issues?  Do your 
messages have “news value” for the audiences the media 
outlets serve?  How can you pitch your story to them?  Can 
you help the media representatives do a good job?  Are you 
responsive to media constraints (such as media time/space 
available for your story, the topics the media tends to cover, 
adjusting the level of complexity of ideas/language used to 
the appropriate level for the medium, the media outlets need 
for good visuals and/or sound-bites, and the need for good 
personal testimony to humanize the story)?  To utilize media 
channels effectively health advocacy leaders must be able to 
address these questions effectively.  They must be able to 
develop strategic health communication responses to these 
questions so they can design compelling messages and 
encourage media support for disseminating these messages 
to key audiences. 
 
 
 
VII.  HEALTH ADVOCACY AND NEW MEDIA 
 
     An increasingly important channel for communicating 
health advocacy messages in the use of new, digital, e-
health media [19].  For example, the website has become a 
ubiquitous and pervasive part of the communication mix for 
health advocacy organizations [20].  The website is critical 
in helping to establish an identity for the advocacy 
organization and it is also can serve as a primary portal for 
communication with key constituents if it is designed to be 
interactive.  Unfortunately, too many health organization 
websites do not effectively utilize strategic interactive 
ehealth communication features and fail to maximize 
communication with key audiences [21].  Many health 
websites fail to be particularly interactive, engaging, or 
dynamic [22].  To be effective, digital health programs must 
leverage the abilities of digital media to communicate 
vividly, interactively, and adaptively through the use of 
specialized mobile and interactive applications, video, 
tailored message systems, message boards, and social media 
[21].  For example, the use of tailored information systems 
allows health advocacy organizations to adapt online 
communication to meet the unique needs, interests, 
orientations, and backgrounds of specific individuals, 
ensuring that online communication is personal and relevant 
for users [23].  
     The website has morphed from being a mere repository of 
health information to being a portal to a range of exciting 
communication opportunities to connect, inform, and engage 
constituents of health advocacy groups.  For example, health 
advocacy websites are often an entry point for access to 
online support groups, discussion boards, webinars, news 
feeds, and social media.  Online support groups have become 
a staple health communication medium for many health 
advocacy organizations, enabling constituents who are 
confronting challenging health issues to connect with others 
confronting similar challenges to exchange ideas and to 
provide needed social support [24]. Evidence suggests that 
online support groups can be even more effective for 
supporting the needs of health care consumers than in-person 
support groups because they afford group members greater 
freedom to connect when they are in need, eliminate the need 
for travel to participate in the support group, and afford 
support group members a higher level of privacy and 
anonymity than in-person support groups [19].  Online 
support groups have even begun to drive research about new 
therapies for challenging diseases [25].  Perhaps one of the 
greatest opportunities to health advocacy organizations is to 
leverage the use of digital media to promote collaborations, 
through the sharing of relevant information and the building 
of social action partnerships to promote change [26]. As 
technology advances, there will be increasing opportunities 
to adopt new and powerful digital communication 
applications to promote the use of strategic communication 
to achieve the goals of health advocacy 
 
 

71
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VIII.  THE CASE OF THE GLOBAL ADVOCACY 
LEADERSHIP ACADEMY (GALA) 
 
The Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA) is a 
new public health educational initiative designed to facilitate 
needed training and support for leaders of health advocacy 
organizations around the world.   Leadership of health 
advocacy organizations is a complex enterprise that demands 
a tremendous amount of specialized knowledge about the 
health care system and constituent groups, adaptability to 
evolving health care systems, and the ability to reach, 
influence, and collaborate with a wide range of individuals 
from different sectors of the health care system through 
strategic health communication.  The GALA program is 
introducing a unique international training and support 
model to prepare health advocacy leaders to meet the 
challenges of building and sustaining strong consumer 
advocacy organizations to champion the needs of patients 
and their caregivers within the modern health care system.   
Effective leadership of health advocacy organizations is a 
demanding and complicated enterprise.  While many 
aspiring advocacy organization leaders are passionate about 
helping to improve the modern health care system and to 
represent the needs of health care consumers, they may not 
be particularly well prepared to meet the demands of 
achieving these goals.  The development of the GALA 
program grew out of the work of its founders (Gary Kreps 
and Paula Kim) in advising new health advocacy leaders 
from around the globe to achieve their goals.  We recognized 
the many challenges that advocacy leaders face in 
influencing health research, health care practices, and health 
care policies and decided the best way to assist these leaders 
was to develop a formal system (GALA) for building 
advocacy organization leadership capacity.  Moreover, we 
realized that health advocacy organizations were situated 
within a global health care system, concerning many of the 
same health care problems that affect consumers around the 
world.  There was a tremendous need to link health advocacy 
organizations within a global advocacy network to promote 
international cooperation and collaboration for achieving 
shared goals of consumer empowerment and support within 
an interdependent, challenging, and evolving global health 
care system [27].  This paper outlines the goals and strategies 
of the GALA program for supporting the development of 
effective and influential health advocacy leaders and 
organizations. 
IX.     MEETING HEALTH ADVOCACY CHALLENGES 
The GALA program is designed to help leaders 
understand the unique sociopolitical structure of the modern 
health care system, both on a broad societal level and also 
within the unique health issue communities that address the 
specific areas of direct interest to different health consumer 
groups (for example, communities interested in lung cancer, 
diabetes, Lupus, kidney transplantation, hemophilia, or other 
challenging health issues).  Strong and effective health 
advocacy organization leaders need to understand the lay of 
the land within the rapidly evolving health care system so 
they can help influence health care policies and practices to 
reflect the needs and goals of the health care consumers they 
represent.   
 
Health advocacy leaders also need to know which 
specific organizations and individuals exert influences in the 
delivery of care, development of health policies, conduct of 
health research, and translation of research into health 
practices within the health domains in which they want to 
support the needs of consumers.  Effective leaders must build 
collaborative 
relationships 
with 
key 
organizational 
representatives to exchange relevant information and 
cooperate on issues of importance to consumers.  There is a 
daunting amount of information to learn to prepare for 
effective advocacy group leadership and a vast number of 
relational connections to establish for new advocacy leaders.  
Often, new health advocacy leaders have serious information 
deficits and limited relational connections that limit their 
abilities to accomplish important consumer support goals. 
The GALA program is introducing new and relevant 
training, support, advising, and collaboration training 
programs to help health advocacy leaders build their 
knowledge base and learn how to work effectively with key 
representatives of different segments of the health care 
system.  GALA will help connect advocacy leaders to 
relevant health researchers, educators, government and 
regulatory agency officials, health care delivery system 
personnel, health product and services corporation leaders 
(pharmaceuticals, health equipment, medical devices, 
insurance companies, and health informatics firms), media, 
representatives, as well as leaders of other related advocacy 
and support organizations.  Not only is the GALA program 
designed to teach leaders about these different relevant 
segments of the health care system, but the GALA program 
will introduce health advocacy leaders to key representatives 
of these health sectors to initiate development of cooperative 
relationships for achieving advocacy goals.   
The GALA program is also designed to help educate 
advocacy leaders about the nature of health research, 
including how research is funded, who conducts health 
research, how research results are reported, how to make 
sense of health research findings, and how research is 
translated into relevant health care policies and practices.  
The GALA program will help advocacy leaders understand 
the intricacies of the modern health care system, including 
the design of health care delivery systems, the key roles 
performed by different professionals and support personnel 
working within the health care system, and the evolving 
policies governing health care delivery and reimbursement.  
The GALA program will also educate advocacy leaders 
about  the development of government legislation for health 
care policies, programs, and research, corporate influences 
on the health care system, and the unique roles performed 
within the health care system by professional associations, 
regulatory 
agencies, 
educational 
institutions, 
support 
organizations, foundations, and other assorted non-profit, 
for-profit, and government agencies. 

72
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
X.       HEALTH INFORMATION DEMANDS 
Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
promote health and well-being [28].  This includes decisions 
about the prevention of health risks, health promotion 
behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health problems, 
health care treatment strategies, and best practices for living 
with health threats (successful survivorship) [29].  Yet, 
health information is complex, with many different kinds of 
health risks, each with different causes, stages, symptoms, 
detection processes, and treatment strategies.  Health care 
knowledge is rapidly evolving with advances in research and 
applications concerning etiology, prevention, detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of health problems.   
Health advocacy organizations have the potential to help 
break through the complexity of health and health care by 
disseminating relevant, timely, accurate, and clear health 
information  to consumers to help guide informed health 
decision making.  However, there are significant barriers to 
the dissemination of health information, especially for at-risk 
populations, due to limited access to health information, 
health literacy challenges, limited education levels, and the 
complexity of health research and health care processes [30].  
The GALA program is designed to help health advocacy 
leaders develop a wide range of necessary knowledge and 
skills to enable them to achieve important consumer goals.  
For example, GALA can help health advocacy leaders learn 
how to support the information needs of the health care 
consumers they represent, providing these consumers with 
access to relevant, timely, and accurate health information.  
The GALA program is also designed to help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to promote and advocate for 
increased funding for relevant health research needed to 
improve prevention, detection, treatment, and survivorship 
for the consumers they represent.   
The GALA program will help leaders learn how to run 
effective advocacy organizations to serve the needs of their 
constituents and influence health practices.  Strategies for 
recruiting, 
mobilizing, 
and 
serving 
the 
needs 
of 
organizational volunteers and personnel will be examined.  
Fund raising, investment, and fiscal management demands 
will be carefully examined.  Strategies for using funds wisely 
for disseminating information, influencing legislation and 
policies, and planning and implementing influential health 
campaigns will also be examined. 
The GALA program will help advocacy organization 
leaders learn how to disseminate relevant health information 
through a variety of media to raise awareness and educate 
health policy makers, health care administrators, providers, 
and consumers about the health issues of concern to their 
constituents.  The GALA program will help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to lobby legislators, 
regulators, and health care administrators to improve health 
care policies and practices.  The health advocacy leaders will 
learn how to provide needed support and assistance to 
consumers confronting challenging health care problems, as 
well as to support the needs of their caregivers, family 
members, and loved ones.  Perhaps most importantly, the 
GALA program is designed to promote local and global 
cooperation within the health care system to support health 
promotion, prevention, early detection, the best treatments, 
and successful survivorship for the health issues of concern 
to their constituents. 
 
XI.     THE UNIQUE GALA DELIVERY MODEL 
The GALA program is designed to provide advocacy 
leaders with relevant information and strategies for working 
effectively with key internal and external groups.  For 
example, training programs will be conducted concerning 
development of effective relationships and collaborations 
with media representatives, government representatives, 
corporate leaders, researchers, and health care system 
representatives.  Moreover, the GALA program will provide 
advocacy leaders with ongoing information support, 
consultation, updates on new opportunities/constraints, and 
continuing education to meet changing needs and refine 
advocacy knowledge and skills.   
GALA programs will be delivered in several different 
complementary ways.  Advocacy leaders will be invited to 
attend training programs conducted at a centralized site 
(George Mason University), where they will also be 
introduced to relevant government, corporate, and health 
care system representatives, researchers and scientists, legal, 
fiscal, and administration advisers, campaign planners and 
fundraising experts, as well as experienced and successful 
health advocacy group leaders.  In addition to centralized 
training programs, GALA program educators will travel to 
advocacy organizations in different parts of the world to 
provide on-site training programs.  Arrangements will be 
made on demand to provide individual follow-up personal 
consultation with advocacy leaders to address specific 
emergent 
issues 
and 
concerns. 
 
Field 
experience 
opportunities will also guide advocates to participate in 
important meetings, conferences, and other relevant events, 
as well as to examine with GALA personnel the implications 
of these meetings.  GALA is also proposing to link advocacy 
leaders and their constituents with an online information 
system (a collaboratory) to provide continuous support, on-
line educational modules, repositories of health information 
documents, 
case 
studies, 
and 
media, 
as 
well 
as 
networking/collaboration opportunities for solving problems 
and developing new health advocacy initiatives.   
The GALA training programs will model effective health 
advocacy leadership strategies.  Leaders will learn how to 
establish and build effective advocacy organizations.  They 
will learn how to recruit volunteers, organization members, 
and support staff.  They will develop strategies for 
collaborating with other advocacy groups, locally, nationally, 
and internationally.  They will develop skills for establishing 
working relationship with government representatives, 
corporate leaders, media representatives, educators, and 
researchers.  They will also learn how to raise, manage, and 
invest funds for achieving advocacy goals. 
The global nature of the GALA program is designed to 
promote international cooperation and collaboration for 

73
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
addressing 
advocacy 
issues, 
sharing 
resources, 
and 
implementing new policies and practices within the health 
care system. Advocacy leaders from different parts of the 
world who may be addressing similar issues will be linked to 
share information and resources for addressing these 
common issues.  These leaders will be encouraged to build 
international collaborations for influencing global health 
practices and policies.  The GALA program will combine 
support for leveraging research, theory, policies, and 
innovative applications to promote development of robust 
and adaptive advocacy programs to support the needs of 
health care consumers and their caregivers. 
XII.     ESTABLISHING DEMAND AND CHARTING 
THE COURSE FOR GALA DEVELOPMENT 
The development of effective health communication 
intervention programs, such as GALA, depend on careful 
audience and needs analysis formative evaluation research 
efforts 
to 
guide 
evidence-based 
program 
design, 
implementation, and refinement [31, 32].  To this end, the 
GALA project team has conducted a series of in-depth, semi-
structured, qualitative personal interviews with a purposive 
sample of active health advocacy leaders and influential 
health promotion professionals representing a range of  
important health care domains (including different forms of 
cancer, cardiac-related diseases, neurological disorders, 
HIV/AIDS, and chronic disease problems) across selected 
global health communities to learn more about the concerns 
of health advocacy leaders and the unique issues they face.  
The survey data collected is being used to expand our 
understanding about the unique training needs of health 
advocacy leaders and the best strategies we can develop for 
meeting these training needs.   
In our first wave of survey data collection we conducted 
28 in-depth personal interviews, with representatives from 
four different continents, and five different countries (USA, 
Taiwan, Estonia, Japan, and New Zealand).  We described 
the GALA Mission Statement as “The Global Advocacy 
Leadership Academy (GALA) was established as a public 
health educational initiative of the Center for Health and 
Risk Communication of George Mason University to 
facilitate training, skills building and support for leaders of 
health advocacy organizations around the world.” After 
reading the mission statement of the Global Advocacy 
Leadership Academy, we asked whether the respondents 
agreed with the stated goals.  None of the respondents 
disagreed with the stated goals.  One respondent did not 
answer this question, 26 respondents agreed with the goals, 
and one was unsure whether to agree or disagree.  Overall, 
there was strong support for the stated mission of GALA, 
with one representative respondent explaining:  “GALA 
goals are relevant in Estonia.  Skills-building is essential to 
maximize our effectiveness in our work.  As we have a very 
small staff, we cannot afford to run programs that yield no or 
limited results.  Support from larger or more experiences 
organizations 
would 
give 
us 
the 
confidence 
and 
encouragement to continue our mission work and also 
provide the ammunition we need to show our partners the 
potential for positive results.”    Another respondent stated, 
“Yes, I think many health advocacy organizations are well 
meaning but lacking in skills and knowledge.”  Another 
respondent emphatically stated, “Yes!  There is a deep need 
for more educated consumer advocates to participate fully in 
health reform in the US.”   
We next asked the respondents to describe the primary 
goals of advocacy organizations.  All 28 respondents 
answered this question.  Goals identified included:   
 
breaking down barriers to care,  
 
promoting health education for consumers,  
 
identifying relevant treatment options,  
 
promoting patient-centered care,  
 
encouraging prevention,  
 
building capacity and access to quality health 
care, 
 
lobbying for health policy initiatives to improve 
the health care system,  
 
promoting the rights of patients,  
 
building positive partnerships between patients 
and providers,  
 
promoting cooperation and information sharing,  
 
explaining complex health care concepts to 
consumers,  
 
securing funding for health research, 
 
changing public policies, 
 
representing the needs of consumers, 
 
meeting patient/caregiver needs, 
 
improving health and wellbeing 
 
advancing the cause of patients and providers, 
 
improving prevention and treatments, 
 
identifying cures for health issues, 
 
raising awareness about diseases, 
 
supporting patients, 
 
making things better for patients/caregivers, 
 
promoting 
the 
agenda 
of 
pharmaceutical 
companies and research organizations, 
 
setting up new systems to promote health, 
 
encouraging governments to address health 
problems, 
 
improving the intersection between government 
and science, 
 
providing researchers and providers with 
information about patients’ perspectives, 
 
encouraging more participatory care, 
 
promoting more patient engagement in their 
care, 
 
educating the public about the health care 
system, 
 
promoting more effective health care processes, 
 
promoting their organizations, 
 
providing consulting services, 
 
helping consumers understand how to achieve 
the best health outcomes, 
 
promoting drug and health device safety, 
 
building socially coherent support networks, 
 
setting up standards for health communication, 

74
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
helping the health care system focus on patient 
needs, 
 
disseminating relevant health information 
We asked the respondents to identify challenges that may 
make it difficult for health advocacy organizations to achieve 
these goals.  Some of the primary challenges identified 
included the: 
 
need to develop programs to sustain and treat 
low income populations, 
 
lack of buy-in and support for advocacy 
organizations by physicians and clinical staff, 
 
cultural differences between participants within 
the health care system, 
 
resistance by consumers to confront their health 
care specialists, 
 
complexity and fast-changing nature of health 
information, 
 
difficulty to build group consensus, 
 
lack of needed communication skills by 
advocates, 
 
insufficient funds to sustain advocacy programs, 
 
difficulty in designing and implementing 
effective health campaigns, 
 
consumer apathy about health issues and 
screening, 
 
challenge to influence government policies and 
legislation, 
 
power discrepancies between consumers and 
providers in health care, 
 
lack of patient understanding, time, and 
resources, 
 
limited advocacy staff and resources, 
 
prioritization of limited public resources, 
 
disease war competition among advocacy 
groups, 
 
government inertia, 
 
need to build networks with other organizations, 
 
lack of knowledge, 
 
lack of experienced leadership, 
 
lack of strategy in advocacy organizations, 
 
the complexity of fundraising, 
 
resistance to change within the health care 
system, 
 
need to recruit volunteers, 
 
lack of traditions of effective advocacy, 
 
difficult economic climate, 
 
cynicism among the public, 
 
bureaucracy is difficult to overcome, 
 
lack of credibility with those in positions of 
power, 
 
need for training within advocacy organizations, 
 
opposing interests and lack of focus, 
 
need for research funding, 
 
need for support networks, 
 
lack of education, 
 
competition with food, drug, health care 
industries, 
 
difficulty 
building 
support 
for 
long-term 
solutions, 
 
lack of suitable information technology, 
 
pay for performance profit-driven US health 
care system, 
 
belief that collective solutions to health 
problems infringe on individual freedoms, 
 
expense of health promotion efforts 
We asked what the primary benefits were providing 
training for leaders of health advocacy organizations.  
Respondents described the following benefits: 
 
building a solid knowledge base concerning 
health care, 
 
enhancing patient care, 
 
reinforcing patient rights, 
 
learning new techniques to improve programs, 
 
promoting effective lobbying, 
 
developing good media relations, 
 
teaching leaders how to lead, 
 
communicating advocacy skills and standards, 
 
providing advocates with tools to build 
successful organizations, 
 
preparing advocates with tools to be successful, 
 
building effective support groups, 
 
leveraging knowledge to promote change, 
 
promoting 
collaboration 
among 
advocacy 
leaders, 
 
focusing the missions of advocacy groups, 
 
increasing awareness about important health 
issues, 
 
promoting changes and societal support for 
combatting health problems,  
 
promoting 
skill-building 
and 
collaborative 
problem solving, 
 
establishing 
professional 
standards 
for 
advocacy, 
 
increasing the credibility of advocates, 
 
making more compelling cases for supporting 
advocacy goals, 
 
amplifying the efforts of stakeholders, 
 
introducing new ideas to influence public 
policies, 
 
promoting more cooperation across advocacy 
organizations,  
 
empowering advocates, 
 
setting quality standards for advocacy, 
 
advancing the field of advocacy, 
 
increasing 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
advocacy 
organizations 
We asked the respondents to identify the biggest training 
needs of advocacy group leaders.  They suggested the 
following areas for developing useful training and support 
programs for health advocacy group leaders: 
 
access to a centralized database for assistance 
and networking, 

75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
easy access to different training programs, 
 
opportunities to interact with and educate other 
health advocates, 
 
workshops about sharing resources with other 
advocacy groups, 
 
strategies for gaining public and corporate 
support, 
 
best 
approaches 
for 
influencing 
health 
legislation at local and national levels, 
 
strategies for improving relations between 
patients and health care workers, 
 
leadership skills training, 
 
communication training, 
 
strategic thinking and long-range planning 
training, 
 
management skills and strategies, 
 
understanding public policy and politics, 
 
social influence strategies, 
 
fundraising training, 
 
how to build sustainable networks from grass 
roots activism, 
 
understanding regulatory and legal processes, 
 
staffing and management of volunteers, 
 
social media use training, 
 
new campaign and public influence strategies, 
 
understanding health care finance, 
 
grant writing skills training, 
 
social mobilization and empowerment training, 
 
new models of health advocacy, 
 
support for answering questions and providing 
recommendations, 
 
education about the economics of business and 
health care, 
 
not-for-profit management training, 
 
public speaking training, 
 
media relations training, 
 
team building and communication training, 
 
negotiation skills training, 
 
coalition building training, 
 
understanding the health care ecosystem, 
 
facilitation skills training, 
 
diplomacy skills training, 
 
government relations training, 
 
fiscal management training 
We 
asked 
the 
respondents 
whether 
their 
own 
organizational already providing training programs for health 
advocacy leaders.  Of the 28 respondents, 20 replied that 
their organizations did not provide any training for health 
advocacy leaders, 1 respondent was unsure about any 
training programs offered, and 7 other mentioned minimal 
training programs.  This suggests that there is an unmet need 
for training programs designed for health advocacy group 
leaders. 
We asked the respondents how researchers could help 
support health advocacy leadership.  They mentioned that 
researchers could help with: 
 
developing marketing strategies specific to 
community needs, 
 
developing 
productive 
partnerships 
with 
advocacy group leaders, 
 
educating advocacy leaders about promising 
medical and public health breakthroughs, 
 
educating advocacy leaders about applications 
of the scientific process, 
 
identifying best practices for health advocacy, 
 
describing recent grant funding programs, 
clinical trials, and new government initiatives, 
 
providing data on policymakers’ perspective on 
key advocacy issues, 
 
establishing case studies of best practices in 
health advocacy, 
 
providing updates on the political and policy 
environments, 
 
holding regular training sessions about health 
research, 
 
updating advocates concerning relevant new 
research and publications, 
 
participating on advocacy group advisory 
boards, 
 
educating advocacy leaders about learning 
styles, use of social media, and providing 
appropriate social support, 
 
demonstrating the benefit of research for 
patients, 
 
including patients in developing research 
priorities and trials, 
 
giving presentations about research findings, 
and new areas for relevant research, 
 
describing research finding that help answer 
real-world questions, 
 
providing evidence to support advocacy efforts, 
 
providing insights into evidence-based best 
practices, 
 
including health advocacy organizations in the 
design and conduct of relevant health research 
programs, 
 
sharing mega-trends in public health, 
 
helping to create communication/education 
programs to help the public navigate relevant 
health issues, 
 
translating complex research findings into 
layperson’s language, 
 
providing relevant case studies about health 
advocacy, 
 
training health advocates to understand and 
present research findings, 
 
conducting research on prevention, detection, 
treatment, and effective survivorship 
We asked the respondents to describe the roles that media 
representatives 
could 
perform 
for 
health 
advocacy 
organizations.  They suggested that media representatives 
could: 
 
increase awareness about relevant issues, 

76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
collaborate with health advocacy organizations, 
 
report on issues related to justice for health care 
consumers, 
 
deliver prevention messages to the general 
public, 
 
air health education film clips and public service 
announcements, 
 
publish news articles about health advocacy 
topics, 
 
distribute advocacy group campaign messages 
and media, 
 
report on advocacy group activities, 
 
deliver advocates positions on important issues 
to key opinion leaders, 
 
raise policy makers awareness about key health 
advocacy issues, 
 
increase 
the 
visibility 
of 
advocacy 
organizations, 
 
provide accurate information about health issues 
in collaboration with health advocates, 
 
customize information for different audiences, 
 
assist with the use of social media 
We asked the respondents what role leadership, 
teamwork, and skills building should play in developing and 
maintaining effective health advocacy organizations.   They 
agreed unanimously that these were important aspects of 
health advocacy and suggested that advocacy organization 
needed: 
 
marketing training, 
 
continuing education and certification, 
 
develop clear missions, 
 
leadership, teambuilding, and skills building 
training, 
 
strategic management training, 
 
communication, public speaking, consensus 
building, and listening skills training, 
 
change management training, 
 
collaboration skills training 
Finally, we asked the respondents whether there were any 
other issues or topics they wanted to mention.  They replied 
that: 
 
nurse navigators are an important part of 
effective health advocacy, 
 
love and sharing are important aspects of 
effective health advocacy,  
 
be aware that some pharmaceutical companies 
are developing similar initiatives for health 
advocates, 
 
take advantage of available experts to help train 
health advocates, 
 
provide a centralized forum for sharing 
information with health advocacy group leaders, 
 
expand training programs to the boards of 
directors 
that 
oversee 
health 
advocacy 
organizations, 
 
help advocacy group leaders understand that the 
primary role of advocacy organizations is to 
help consumers and not self-perpetuation of the 
advocacy organization, 
 
help advocacy group leaders keep overhead low 
and services to consumers high, 
 
help promote high quality in health advocacy 
groups, 
 
develop a strategy for positioning GALA to 
stand out from other training programs, 
 
a training program for nurturing health 
advocacy leaders would be of great value, 
 
let me know how I can help with GALA, 
 
train for multiple roles that different actors can 
perform 
The responses from the survey have clearly validated the 
need for training programs, like GALA, to support the 
development of effective advocacy group leadership.  
However, the list of issues that a comprehensive health 
advocacy training program should cover is daunting.  Health 
advocacy leaders have important needs to develop a deeper 
understanding of the health care delivery system, the legal 
and regulatory health care environment, the corporate players 
in the health care system, the health research environment 
and processes, as well as the influences of media on 
achieving health advocacy goals.  Moreover, the survey 
suggested that is critically important for health advocacy 
leaders to develop a number of important communication, 
leadership, 
team-building, 
fund-raising, 
and 
financial 
management competencies and skills.  There is also a strong 
demand for building collaborations across advocacy groups 
and with key partners from the health care industries, 
government agencies, research institutions, and media 
organizations.  To be effective, the GALA program must not 
only provide relevant training for health advocacy leaders.  It 
must also facilitate partnership building, collaborative 
problem solving, and effective media relations.  The GALA 
program 
must 
develop 
a 
forum 
for 
introducing 
representatives from different key organizations to advocacy 
group leaders.  It must provide ongoing consultation, 
advisory services, and problem solving support to health 
advocacy leaders.  It also must provide a repository for 
storing and disseminating key information about relevant 
research, best practices for health advocacy, and new 
opportunities and constraints that are relevant to health 
advocacy organizations.  The results of this survey have been 
instrumental in guiding the development of GALA program 
activities and resources.  We will continue to gather data and 
feedback from health advocacy leaders to help us refine and 
expand GALA programs, especially as the health care 
system evolves and the demands of effective health 
advocacy leaders and organization change.  In this way, the 
GALA program can grow, expand, and, continually be 
responsive to the needs of health care advocacy group 
leaders. 
To promote the ongoing growth and development of the 
GALA program, new strategies are being examined for 
seeking government and corporate support for GALA 
training and outreach programs.  GALA team members are 
identifying leading experts to work with the program to serve 

77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
as mentors and trainers for aspiring advocacy leaders.  New 
training modules, educational materials, and instructional 
guides are being designed and refined to use with the 
program.  The GALA online collaboratory system is being 
designed and information is being collected to include in the 
collaboratory’s online repository of documents, case studies, 
articles, research and funding opportunities, advocacy 
resources, and media programs.  Information about the 
GALA program is being disseminated to key individuals and 
organizations around the globe to increase awareness and 
support for the new and exciting GALA health advocacy 
leadership activities.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Strong support for this exciting new international health 
advocacy leadership training and support program is being 
provided by George Mason University’s Center for Health 
and Risk Communication and Translating Research Across 
Communities (TRAC), a global advisory consulting firm 
serving 
as 
trusted 
advisors 
to 
leading 
businesses, 
organizations, institutions, and governments.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G.  Kreps, P. Kim, L. Sparks, N. Neuhauser, C. Daugherty, 
M. Canzona, W. Kim, and J. Jun.  Introducing the Global 
Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA):  Training health 
advocates around the world to champion the needs of 
health care consumers.  In G.L. Kreps, & P. Dini, (Eds.),  
Global Health 2012:  The first international conference on 
global health challenges (pp. 97-100).  Wilmington, DE:  
International Academy, Research, and Industry Association 
(IARIA), 2012. 
[2] G. Kreps. Consumer control over and access to health 
information.  Annals of Family Medicine, 10(5).   
http://www.annfammed.org/content/10/5/428.full/reply#an
nalsfm_el_25148, 2012. last accessed 6-24-2013. 
[3] G.  Kreps,  Communication and racial inequities in health 
care.  American Behavioral Scientist, 49(6), 760-774, 2006.   
[4] S. Greenfield, S. Kaplan, and J. Ware Jr. Expanding patient 
involvement in care:  Effects on patient outcomes. Annals 
of Internal Medicine, 102, 520–528, 1985. 
[5] G. Kreps, The pervasive role of information in health and 
health care: Implications for health communication policy. 
In J.A. Anderson, (Ed,), Communication yearbook 11, 238-
276, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1988. 
[6] G. Kreps and D. Chapelsky Massimilla.  Cancer 
communications research and health outcomes:  Review 
and challenge.  Communication Studies, 53(4), 318-336, 
2002. 
[7] G. Kreps and H. D. O’Hair. (Eds.). Communication and 
health outcomes. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1995. 
[8] P. Kim.  Public advocacy for cancer care.  In H.D O’Hair, 
G.L. Kreps, & L. Sparks.  (Eds.).  The handbook of 
communication and cancer care. (pp. 111-124).  Cresskill, 
NJ:  Hampton Press., 2007. 
[9] G. Kreps.  Communicating to promote justice in the 
modern 
health 
care 
system. 
 
Journal of 
Health 
Communication, 1, (1), 99-109, 1996.   
[10] D. Dohan and D. Schrag. Using navigators to improve care 
of underserved patients: current practices and approaches. 
Cancer. 104(4):848–855, 2005. 
[11] A. Natale-Pereira, K. Enard, L. Nevarez, and L. Jones. The 
role of patient navigators in eliminating health disparities. 
Cancer. 117(15 Suppl), 3543-3552, 2011. 
[12] G. Kreps.  The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[13] G. Kreps and R. Sivaram. The central role of strategic 
health communication in enhancing breast cancer outcomes 
across the continuum of care in limited-resource countries.  
Cancer, 113(S8), 2331-2337, 2010. 
[14] G. Kreps.  Consumer control over and access to health 
information.  Annals of Family Medicine, 10(5).   
http://www.annfammed.org/content/10/5/428.full/reply#an
nalsfm_el_25148, 201. last accessed 6-24-2013.. 
[15] K-Y. Wen, G. Kreps, F. Zhu, and S. Miller.  Consumers’ 
perceptions about and use of the Internet for personal 
health records and health information exchange: Analysis 
of the 2007 Health Information National Trends Survey.  
Journal of Medical Internet Research.  12(4) e73, UR.   
http://www.jmir.org/2010/4/e73/, 
doi:10.2196/jmir.1668, 
2010, last accessed 6-24-2013. 
[16] L. Wallack, L. Dorfman, D. Jernigan, and M. Themba, M.   
Media Advocacy and Public Health: Power for Prevention. 
Newbury Park, CA:  Sage Publications, Inc., 1993. 
[17] A. Houston Staples.  Media advocacy:  A powerful tool for 
policy change.  North Carolina Medical Journal, 70(2), 
175-178, 2009. 
[18] L. Wallack, K. Woodruff, L. Dorfman, and I. Diaz.  News 
for a Change: An Advocate’s Guide to Working with the 
Media.  Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage Publications, Inc., 
1999. 
[19] P. Whitten, G. Kreps, and M. Eastin, M.  (Eds.)  E-Health:  
The advent of cancer online information services.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
[20] L. Gallant, C. Irizarry, and G. Kreps.  User-centric hospital 
websites:  A case for trust and personalization.  e-Service 
Journal, 5:2, 5-26, 2007. 
[21] G. Kreps and L. Neuhauser.  New directions in ehealth 
communication:  Opportunities and challenges.  Patient 
Education and Counseling, 78, 329-336, 2010.   
[22] L. Gallant, C. Irizarry, G. Boone, and G. Kreps.  Promoting 
participatory medicine with social media:  New media 
applications on hospital websites that enhance health 
education and e-patients' voice.  Journal of Participatory 
Medicine, 
3. 
 
To 
link 
to 
this 
article 
go 
to:  
http://www.jopm.org/evidence/research/2011/10/31/promot
ing-participatory-medicine-with-social-media-new-media-
applications-on-hospital-websites-that-enhance-health-
education-and-e-patients-voices/, 2011, last accessed 6-24-
2013. 
[23] G. Kreps.  The role of interactive technology in cancer 
communications interventions:  Targeting key audience 
members by tailoring messages.  Paper presented to the 
American Public Health Association annual conference, 
Boston, 2000. 
[24] K-Y. Wen, F. McTavish, G. Kreps, M. Wise, and D. 
Gustafson.  From diagnosis to death:  A narrative analysis 
of coping with breast cancer as seen through online 
discussion group messages.  Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 16 (2), 331-361, 2011.   
[25] G. Frydman.  Patient driven research:  Rich opportunities 
and real risks.  Journal of Participatory Medicine, 1, 
available 
at:  
http://www.jopm.org/evidence/reviews/2009/10/21/patient-
driven-research-rich-opportunities-and-real-risks/, 2009. 

78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[26] L. Neuhauser and G. Kreps.  Ehealth communication and 
behavior change:  Promise and performance.  Social 
Semiotics, 20(1), 7-24, 2010. 
[27] D. Kim, A. Singhal, and G. Kreps.  (Eds.).  Health 
Communication:  Strategies for developing global health 
programs.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, in-press. 
[28] J. Johnson and D. Case, Health information seeking.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, in-press. 
[29] G. Kreps. The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[30] G. Kreps.  Strategic use of communication to market cancer 
prevention and control to  vulnerable populations.  Health 
Marketing Quarterly, 25(1/2), 204-216, 2008. 
[31] G. Kreps. Evaluating health communication interventions.  
In D.K. Kim, A. Singhal, and G.L. Kreps, (Eds.).  Health 
communication:  Strategies for developing global health 
programs.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, n-press. 
[32] G. Kreps. Evaluating new health information technologies:  
Expanding the frontiers of health care delivery and health 
promotion.  Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 
80, 205-212, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

