Design, Creativity and Human Computer Interaction Design Education  
 
Alma L. Culén  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
Henry N. Mainsah 
Centre for Design Research 
School of Architecture and Design 
Oslo, Norway 
Henry.Mainsah@aho.no 
Sisse Finken 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
finken@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate ways to engage 
computer science students, majoring in design, use, and 
interaction (with technology), in design practices through an 
advanced graduate course in interaction design. We take a 
closer look at how prior embodied and explicit knowledge of 
HCI that all of the students had before their enrollment in the 
course, combined with better understanding of design and 
design practice, and in particular the emergence of creativity 
on both individual and team levels, shapes them as human-
computer interaction designers. We evaluate the results of the 
effort in terms of increase in creativity, novelty of ideas, body 
language when engaged in design activities, and in terms of 
perceptions of how well this course prepared the students for 
the work practice outside of the university, usually, in 
multidisciplinary settings.  
Keywords—HCI education; interaction design; creativity; 
studio; design education; multidisciplinary teamwork. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is an increased movement towards informing and 
embedding education practices from other disciplines into 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI). We have discussed in 
our paper [1] how design practice and design pedagogy may 
contribute to HCI education.  
Many authors have stressed a need for considering new 
pedagogical approaches to HCI education that creatively 
synthesize HCI theory and methods with design thinking-in-
action (see, for example, [2]–[5]). Faiola has argued for 
development of pedagogical models intended for teaching 
HCI that “provide students with knowledge domains that 
can account for understanding design, social context, and 
business strategies in addition to computing”, [6, p. 30]. 
Winograd and Klemmer, discussing the reasoning 
behind opening of the now famous d.school at Stanford, an 
innovation hub with a core in human computer interaction 
design, state:  “The basic premise of the d.school is that 
students need two complementary kinds of training. The 
disciplinary training provided by conventional departments 
provides them with depth in the concepts and experience of 
a specific field. This gives them intellectual tools, but often 
misses the larger context of relevance and integration with 
other kinds of knowledge, which are required to innovate 
effectively in the ‘real world’”, [7, p. 1]. Such 
multidisciplinary and effective learning arenas are not easy 
to create. They represent innovative thinking and innovative 
education, which has not yet been able to prove itself 
worthy over time. Thus, embedding innovative educations 
into traditional educational institutions is difficult. However, 
the evidence is there that the multidisciplinary approach, 
such as that of the d.school, has its merits. In line with how 
Bannon argues why HCI needs to change in the 21st century 
[8], we argue that the HCI educations needs to change in 
order to accommodate for new technologies, new interaction 
forms, new practices, and new areas of research. One 
practice outside the traditional HCI field, which has a strong 
influence on changes taking place within HCI, is the design 
practice. Many scholars have explored the relation between 
HCI and design. Some of the notable results of these 
explorations are: a proposition to consider HCI as research 
through design, see [9]–[14], a proposition to consider 
Human Computer Interaction Design (HCID) as a radically 
interdisciplinary dialogue [15], convergent - divergent 
questioning [16], HCI design studio [17], models, theories 
and frameworks toward a multidisciplinary science [18].  
Two of the authors, of this paper, work within 
department of informatics, teaching traditional HCI and 
qualitative research methods. The third author works at a 
traditional design institution, the school of architecture and 
design. Over the past few years, the two schools have 
cooperated and run a graduate course in interaction design 
together. The course took place at the school of architecture 
and students from both institutions worked on design 
projects in multidisciplinary teams. The cooperation 
recently came to an end, as the design school faculty felt 
that the differences in traditions and practices between the 
two schools were too far away from each other. This 
situation was the immediate motivator for exploring 
different venues and different approaches to teaching design 
practice and design thinking within the department of 
informatics. 
In this paper, we present the teaching approach that we 
have chosen and the results of applying the design oriented 
practices, more specifically, design thinking and design 
pedagogy in the context of an advanced HCID course in the 
department of informatics. Our goal was not to educate 
designers, but to teach HCI students about design practice 
through direct experience and reflection. Similar approaches 
have been advocated by other scholars, e.g., [3][10][19]. 
Our approach differs from those also in that we really 
wanted to keep the multidisciplinary in focus. Our intention 
was to prepare HCID students for better collaboration and 
97
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

participation in multidisciplinary teams, to bridge some of 
the differences in traditions, cultures, to learn, inspired by 
the d.school, about design thinking and design practice, and 
to understand a reflexive practice. In order to evaluate the 
success of our approach we have chosen the following 
criteria: emergence of creativity, novelty of generated ideas, 
body language when engaged in design activities and 
perception of how well the course prepared students for the 
work practice outside the university.  
The students, as mentioned, were master degree students 
who are about to graduate from computer science 
department with degree in design, use and interaction. They 
are soon to be considered as professionals specialized in 
HCI and with a choice of research, education or interaction 
design practice as their future work. Regardless what they 
choose, as Churchill, Bowser and Preece point out in [20], 
they would have to be progressionals – people who follow 
closely and persistently with technological progress and 
master new technical competencies, new design and 
evaluation methods, while keeping a solid base in HCI. 
Creativity is something that both scientists (also HCI 
practitioners) and designers need in their work.  However, it 
is cultivated and expressed differently within practices of 
science and design.  According to Owen [21], creative 
people tend to work in one of the two ways: by invention 
(makers) or by discovery (finders), see Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1. Creativity model according to Owen, from [21]. 
 In HCI practices, the insight is often confused with 
‘scientific’ creativity.  Similarly, within makers’ practices, 
originality is frequently identified with creativity; we find 
such identifications problematic, or worthy of further 
scrutiny.  Both insight and originality come about rarely, 
while, we believe, creativity is something that may be 
learned and cultivated [22][23]. In learning and cultivation 
of creativity, the environment plays an important role. As 
Csikszentmihaly points out, “It is easier to enhance 
creativity by changing conditions in the environment than 
by trying to make people think more creatively. And a 
genuine creative accomplishment is almost never the result 
of a sudden insight, a light bulb flashing in the dark, but 
comes after years of hard work [22, p. 7] ”.  
The modern study of creativity is making advances, 
[24]. Creativity, just like the HCI has moved through three 
waves. The first wave of creativity research focused on 
personalities of exceptional creators. The second wave 
investigated internal mental processes that occur when 
people are engaged in creative activities and behavior. The 
third, current wave is concerned with socio-cultural, 
interdisciplinary approaches and relates to social systems 
and groups of people performing acts of creativity together. 
It is this brand of creativity studies that best applies to HCI 
design students, and we tried to better understand it in the 
context of the course described in this paper. It is also the 
one that fits the third wave of HCI the best [25][26], the 
wave that addresses humans, their values, emotions, 
everyday lives and the role of technology in it. 
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
briefly describe the design model used by the school of 
architecture and design to teach interaction design and then 
the HCI pedagogical model that the students were familiar 
with. We proceed to explain in Section III, our case, where 
the new pedagogical model was applied to teach a course in 
HCID. In Section IV, we discuss our findings, and sum up 
the paper in the concluding Section V. 
II. 
PEDAGOGICAL MODELS: DESIGN AND HCI 
A. Design model 
Hoadley and Cox state: Design is an important class of 
human activity because it links theory and practice, 
bridging scientific activities with creative ones in order to 
deal with ill-structured, open-ended problems, [27, p. 20]. 
To solve problems for real-life contexts, designing 
combines formal knowledge, experience, practice and 
judgment, both through and in action. Schön proposes an 
“epistemology of practice implicit in the artistic, intuitive 
processes, which some practitioners bring to situations of 
uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and value conflict,” that 
he characterized as a “reflective practice”, [28]. Design 
pedagogy can be understood through a socio-cultural 
perspective on learning that is centered on developmental 
aspects occurring between cultural and socially mediated 
actions in contemporary and legacy contexts [29].  
 
Figure 2. The studio classroom gives opportunities for creative 
development, discussions, feedback and rapid prototyping.  
98
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Design studio learning (see Fig. 2) and teaching relies on 
the integration between people. The studio learning happens 
usually in small groups of students. Schadewitz and 
Zamenopoulos say: “The studio model has fostered the type 
of enculturation into practice that modern schemes for 
distributed situated learning are just coming to understand, 
[30, p. 1]”. Shaffer [31] presents the academic design studio 
as a coherent system where surface structures, pedagogy, 
and epistemology interact to create a unique learning 
community. Surface structures refer to components of the 
learning environment such as the space, furniture, 
assignments and so forth. Pedagogical activities include 
activities such as iterative design cycles, field research, and 
group discussions of work in progress. Epistemological 
understanding describes the beliefs and the nature of design 
knowledge and how it is constructed [3]. Brandt and 
colleagues draw upon Lave and Wenger’s concept [32] of 
“communities 
of 
practice” 
that 
describes 
learning 
communities where novices are first introduced as 
legitimate peripheral participants and integrated more 
centrally into the community through their participation in 
increasingly more complex tasks. Learning-in-practice is 
contextual and situated in time and space and is shaped by 
the historical dimensions of institutions and participants’ 
own life experiences that contribute to shape the manner in 
which the learning environment is enacted. In this way, it is 
similar to an “ecological approach” to understanding 
learning in a more holistic way that brings together a focus 
on practice, tools, learning environments, and social 
context; see [3, p. 336]. The teaching rarely involves 
research articles, books to teach from, or regular formal 
lectures.  
B. HCI model 
Many HCI pedagogical approaches include a mix of 
user-centered requirement analysis, design, implementation 
and evaluation [19]. This mix is exactly what our students 
have received through three HCI courses, which they had 
taken prior to the graduate class described here. All three 
courses are project based and in all three the students do 
work in teams. Their first course covers material from the 
book [33]. In the second course, students gain theoretical 
and practical knowledge on how to study situated use of 
technology and how such studies can inform design of 
technology.   
Reimer and Douglas [34] point out that such study 
program often falls short of teaching students good design 
of real-world artifacts, while engaging in real-world design 
processes. In order to address the real-world settings, the 
third course in HCI, using [35] as a course book, defines 
projects based on the needs of local companies and 
organizations, thus bringing real life project experience into 
the classroom. However, they use a classical teaching model 
consisting of two hour-long lectures, in a lecture hall (see 
Fig. 3), and two hour-long sessions in smaller groups. The 
later provides help with exercises from the book, questions 
around the material covered during the lectures, or issues 
related to the project work. The third course in HCI also 
offers an hour-long design feedback session with the 
instructor and a representative of a company that students 
are designing for. The projects are carried out in project 
teams of 3-4 students. Although the third HCI course 
addresses the issue of real-life problems, there is still a gap 
between multidisciplinary teamwork in professional circles 
and what students can experience in terms of teamwork in 
the context of this HCI course. 
 
Figure 3. Regular classroom lectures are still common when learning HCI. 
Another important aspect of learning, present in some 
design disciplines and often lacking within HCI, is related to 
approaches that emphasize speculative and inductive ethos. 
Lewis argues in [36] that technology education nowadays 
needs to promote more than simply knowledge of materials, 
mastery of special technical skills and techniques, or correct 
use of tools or instruments. It should move beyond these to 
pursue “more subjective and elusive goals”, [36, p. 35]. 
Among these goals he includes creative insight. According 
to Lewis, the teaching of design is ideally suited to uncover 
students’ creative potentials, because design allows open-
endedness [36, p. 45]. Design problems are ill-structured, 
solutions are not defined in advance, and pathways to the 
solution are open. Cropley, in [37], identifies these issues 
precisely as conditions that promote creativity. Creativity 
can be nurtured through a pedagogical framework that 
builds on an open-ended problem solving, using design 
processes for real-life contexts [38]. 
  While “HCI specialists still focus on the issues that 
gave birth to the field: Are technologies learnable, usable, 
useful, reliable, comprehensible, ethical? We are still 
concerned with assessing whether technologies serve, 
engage, and satisfy people and extend their capabilities, or 
frustrate, thwart, and confound them”, as the authors state 
in [20, p. 44], so does most of HCI education as well. In 
order to answer questions about users and technology, the 
focus is, naturally on users and what they do with the 
technology. The students of HCI are thus also trained in 
seeking the input from users, whether it is for research or 
design purposes.  However, as Bødker [26] points out, the 
so-called third wave of HCI includes broader consideration 
of cultural and historical embeddedness of technology, also 
in non-work contexts, where emotion and aesthetics play a 
much larger role. The third wave of HCI has, therefore, 
comes closer to traditional design disciplines, not only 
through aesthetics, but also focus on solving real-life 
problems through design of technological solutions. 
99
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We are now in a position to present our case and 
describe challenges and lessons learned from introduction of 
design studio practices into teaching an advanced HCI class. 
III. 
THE CASE: DESIGN PRACTICES IN HCI TEACHING 
A. Course Organization and Structure 
In implementing a design practice in the context of the 
class we chose to work in the lab, where it was possible to 
implement practice-based learning. The students had access 
to materials such as scissors, paint, fabric, paper, tools like 
sawing machine, hammers, pliers and like, as well as 
electronic components, such as Lilypads, GPS sensors, LED 
lights, wires, welding station, etc.  The number of students 
was restricted to ten. They were all advanced graduate 
students with three prior courses in HCI, as described in the 
previous section, including experience with user-centered 
and participatory design approaches. The teaching team 
consisted of the two in-house teachers and one teacher from 
the school of architecture and design. The later attended the 
class approximately every third week, providing feedback 
on the students’ design projects.  The authors of this article 
are the three teachers who have an insatiable curiosity about 
creativity and how it emerges.  Specifically, we are curious 
about what happens when HCI practitioners cannot rely on 
the usual ways of thinking and working – that is, when they 
do not have the support of users in the design process. It is 
commonly considered that HCI designers should design 
interactive 
products 
“to 
support 
the 
way 
people 
communicate and interact in their everyday and working 
lives”, [33, p. 9]. In order to design such products, HCI 
designers rely on user participation and user studies. These 
studies inform the design, but also split the responsibility for 
“good” design between designers and users who informed 
it. It could be said that users are a great support to HCI 
designers in, at least, the following ways: helping in testing 
products and prototypes, informing design processes, 
participating in them, allowing designers to observe them 
interacting with technology and last but not least, by making 
HCI designers feel that designs processes are not dependent 
on the mystery of creativity and creative processes.   
Throughout the course, the in-house teachers have 
uploaded literature of relevance to a dropbox. This literature 
covered a range of different subject matters such as: design 
thinking, 
design 
anthropology, 
differences 
between 
interaction design practices within design and HCI, service 
design, participatory service design, design research, and an 
article concerning design of wearable technology.  Some of 
the papers were chosen in response to students’ project ideas 
and others aimed at explaining the differences between 
practices of Interaction Design (ID) as thought at design 
schools and HCID.  
Instead of having the traditional lectures according to the 
earlier described model, which the students are used to, the 
shared time between the teachers and the students was spend 
on discussing various topics, design ideas, and on providing 
feedback on designs in progress. Some, perhaps unusual 
forms of stimulating students to be more open and creative 
were used. For example, in order to increase the energy 
level and engagement, we would form a circle, and in turn, 
everyone had to “design” a move that the whole circle then 
repeated for a while, and then the next person got engaged, 
see Fig. 4. Other times, we encouraged new ways of 
exploring the world [39]. For example, we brought artists 
with interesting ideas and products into the classroom; see 
Fig. 5. Altering the ‘lecture set-up’ in this manner was a part 
of the pedagogical aim of introducing new ways of 
conducting HCI teaching, with intention to increase the 
D(esign). In doing this, we aimed at making the students 
step outside of their comfort zone, as well as encourage 
bodily engagement and hands-on design practices. 
 
Figure 4. Students and a faculty member standing in a circle and “creating” 
new body movements. 
B. The Assignment 
In order to further support the bodily engagement and 
hands on practices, the students were asked to complete two 
projects during the semester. The aim of the first project was 
to design an exhibit addressing the activities and research 
interest of the group for design. The exhibit was shown at a 
Student Faire (held annually at the department of 
informatics), presenting the work of different research 
groups. The Faire also featured representatives from many 
local IT companies.  
The second project was to design an installation for the 
library. The interactive installation had as a goal to bring 
forward those resources and services, available through the 
department’s library, which usually remain hidden or under-
used. This second project is not described in this paper. 
Additionally, we handed out briefs with targeted 
questions concerning creativity, work effort in class, 
expectancies of outcomes from the course, and addressed 
issues concerning multidisciplinary work.  
C. The data collection methods 
During the first eleven weeks of the course, we carefully 
observed and documented the students’ work on their first 
design projects. In documenting the process we took 
photographs and collected Post-it notes, which we used to 
quickly note input (aim, what, how, do-ability) during a 
feedback 
session. 
Further, 
we 
took 
notes 
during 
conversations with students, or when they presented their 
work.  
100
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5. Amanda Steggell, on the far left, an artist who made the energy 
bank, showed her product (in the red square, see also [40]). 
Both in-house teachers and students have taken 
photographs as part of learning how to use visual 
methodologies, amounting to well over 300 images, which 
were shared in the aforementioned dropbox. The dropbox 
was made specifically for this class to share photos, 
presentations of the design projects, and other class related 
material, such as the literature. The photographs, used in 
this paper, are from the shared pool in the dropbox.  From a 
teacher’s perspective the photographs have been a way of 
documenting [41] the process from the first drafting of ideas 
to the materialization of the designs. In addition, the 
photographs have served as information, beyond mere 
documentation, and have been used as entrances to gain 
understandings about increase in creativity, novelty of ideas, 
and body language when students engaged in design 
activities, or presentation of design outcomes, see Fig. 4 and 
Fig. 7 – Fig. 11. Furthermore, a number of targeted 
questions were asked and answered either orally or in 
writing during the semester. Finally, each student has filled 
out a questionnaire at the end of the semester, where 
questions targeted student’s perception of their own 
creativity, ability to work in the multidisciplinary teams, 
learning outcomes and opportunities for the improvement of 
the course. 
IV. 
NURTURING CREATIVITY AND BLENDING MODELS 
Blending of pedagogical models was carried by 
introducing desk crits, allowing for bricolage and 
assemblages of skills and practices, where the usual HCID 
practice was naturally one of the components (reading 
academic papers, as well as actively using whatever 
knowledge from HCI was appropriate for the task at hand).  
A. “Re-cycling”ideas and materials 
It was clear that the students used “re-cycled” ideas, by 
taking ideas from one domain and applying them to another. 
This reflects a creative practice common in design processes 
often referred to as bricolage. The term bricolage (French 
for “tinkering”) is commonly associated with the French 
anthropologist Claude Levi Strauss [42], and it refers to the 
construction and creation of a work from a diverse range of 
things that happen to be available in order to create 
something new. 
In Fig. 6 we can see a picture of a white board with 
images on paper representing ideas of different concepts 
juxtaposed together. We see on the image how the students 
in the group took an old idea, “faces in places” and 
integrated it into a new one, a heated glove bicycle glove, to 
create a concept for warming the hands of cyclists during 
winter. Finding “face in places” (finding images that 
resemble faces, Fig. 6 upper right corner) was suggested as 
an extra activity during the exhibit. However, neither the 
faculty nor the students could find any faces in the building, 
making the task really hard and little fun as an activity on 
the day of the exhibit. The idea itself was not novel and 
neither was a way of using it [39].  
 
Figure 6. Among the initial ideas one can see many “re-cycled” ones, such 
as the “faces in places”, mixed with new ones, such as heated bicycle 
gloves for biking in harsh nordic weather conditions. 
In this context, the old objects carry a meaning, given to 
them by their past uses, and the creators’ experience, 
knowledge and skill, a meaning that can be modified by the 
requirements of the project and the creator’s intentions. 
In this case, the practice of mixing the old and the new 
fits well with the ethos of the theme of the students’ project, 
which was on sustainaible uses of energy. By “re-cycling” 
old ideas into new ones, the students are creatively “re-
cycling” ideas in the process of creating an artefact based on 
“re-cycled” materials.  
B. The desk crits 
In the course we drew on one of the most central 
component of design studio pedagogy, the desk crit 
(constructive critique). The desk crit is simply an extended 
and loosely structured interaction between the designer (in 
this case the HCI student) and a critic (teachers and fellow 
course mates) involving discussion and collaborative work 
on a design process, Fig. 7. 
In the course, this process involved the students 
displaying their work, presenting their plans, and getting 
feedback from their fellow students, teachers, and guest 
teachers. 
101
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7. The body language of those present during the first feedback 
session shows little excitement or passion. 
The students had never experienced studio work before 
and 
needed 
time 
to 
understand 
surface 
structures, 
pedagogical activities and epistemological beliefs. The 
HCID students’ work was never publically criticized before, 
nor was it ever exhibited for others to see. In addition, they 
have little practice in speaking about their work.  The 
experience with shifting from humbleness underway to pride 
in ownership of the work they did and the ideas that led to 
the final product, was also new. 
During the course, critiques, especially in the beginning, 
were often taken personally, as the students were not familiar 
with this practice. However, making things, such as the 
wearable technology embedded skirts, or cushions for the 
“iConfess” booth, slowly placed smiles on students’ faces, 
see Fig. 8. The act of making helped students to start 
unfolding some of internal processes leading towards 
increased creativity and willingness to learn new skills, or 
use the existing ones, in order to further the processes that 
the group was engaged in. We have reported on the 
emergence of creativity in this context, see [43], and used 
assemblages of skills as a framework for analysis.   
 
 
Figure 8. The process of making things for the exhibit. 
C. Final projects 
After the first six weeks, there was a breakthrough. The 
first assignment was solved and organized as exhibit 
consisting of three parts. 
 
Figure 9. The students working on the exhibit site, the exhibits 
representative of research on sustainable design, privacy and wearables.  
The first part built on the idea of sustainability, 
producing the energy while biking, to power blinkers built 
into the glove, as well as to heat gloves, light up the wheels, 
etc. The presentations now included sketches, material 
choices, and hand knitted gloves; see Fig. 10. 
 
Figure 10. Sketches of the prototype on the left, palette of material choices, 
as well as very handmade gloves, connected to a small dynamo. 
The second part was related to design group’s research 
projects regarding design for people with dementia. The skirt 
for dement ladies was the result, as as a counter-balance a 
“blinky” party skirt that lights up when the proximity sensor 
is activated; see Fig. 11 and [44][45]. 
 
 
Figure 11. On the left, the skirt with a proximity sensor. Remaining images 
are of the skirt for dementia: comfort balls, the GPS and a QR code. 
102
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The third part was an iConfession booth, a tool for 
exploring the anonymity and willingness of people to 
disclose a secret; see Fig. 9 and [46][47]. 
Finally, all three parts were put together. Fig. 12 and Fig. 
13 show making of the exhibit and the final result.  
 
Figure 12. Organizing the exhibit. The exhibit addresses sustainable design, 
anonymity and meaningful wearables. 
 
Figure 13. Students recruited participants for the part of the exhibit wearing 
Guy Fowler masks, a symbol of anonymity, as part of the exhibit activity. 
The ideas implemented, although inspired by one thing or 
another, were novel. The audience received the exhibit very 
well, and students have expereinced the sense of pride and 
satisfaction with the result. 
We now reflect over techniques used to nudge the 
creativity during the period of 9 weeks and the exhibit 
design, see Fig. 14. 
Photo documenting, as already mentioned, was used to 
document what was going on in the class. It then also 
became a practice that students learned and started 
implementing in their own projects. They learned to express 
through images processes that they participated in, objects 
they were working with as well as how the group distributed 
the work. Furthermore, it was easy to see, watching the 
pictures they took, through body postures and facial 
expressions how well they thrived while performing their 
tasks. 
We have tried to encourage convergent and divergent 
thinking. It was not easy and natural for the HCI students to 
come up with many prototypes and many ideas, it was much 
easier to converge and pay attention to details. Fig. 14 does 
not give a detailed picture. It shows the predominant way of 
thinking for the period, they, of course, could not be 
separated so neatly.   
In conjunction with divergent thinking, exploration and 
brainstorming were used. Body-storming was still to difficult 
to really engage in, but the students were encouraged to use 
it alongside other techniques to generate new ideas. 
Design thinking was very helpful when explaining and 
making students understand concepts of empathy and rapid 
prototyping. To a certain extent, abductive thinking was also 
accepted and the students learn to keep the best parts of 
diverse solutions and combine them into a single one. This 
was most evident with iConfess booth, which has gone 
through several prototypes and where abductive thinking 
proved itself to be useful. As the start, the iConfess booth 
was envisioned as a relaxation room, transitioned through a 
match-making box and a kissing-booth, with the best ideas 
from each of these concepts still visible in the final solution.  
Inspiration from reading about similar work, or local 
exhibits, was strongly encouraged. Some students have taken 
this part in, while others did not. 
We have tried to push them outside of their comfort zone, 
and here, we believe to have been successful. We can also 
state that this experience was mutual. 
D. Assemblages of skills and practices 
The last part, assemblages of skills and assemblages of 
practices was the most interesting part. We utilized the 
students’ other existing skills (i.e., skills learned outside the 
university campus, such as knitting and sewing) and made 
them play a crucial role for the very unfolding of creativity 
during the realization of their design ideas.  In his book 
Making, [48], the anthropologist Ingold observes that such 
creative practices of making highlight what is often obscured 
in much of discussions in visual culture and in material 
culture. In the study of material culture, the main focus is on 
finished objects. In the study of visual culture, the focus has 
been 
on 
relations 
between 
objects, 
images 
and 
interpretations. What is lost, in both cases, is the creativity of 
the production processes that brings the artefacts themselves 
into being, through activities such as knitting and sewing: on 
one hand, the generative currents of the materials that the 
skirt or the knitted gloves are made, on the other the sensory 
awareness of those who make them. In this process the 
conduct of goes along with, and continually answers to the 
fluxes and flows of the materials with which the students 
work. 
This coming-together of skills that different people have, 
as well as types of skills they have, we refer to as 
‘assemblage of skills’ in design efforts. Another coming-
together was facilitated and nurtured by the teaching staff.  
That is the ‘assemblage of practices,’ which entailed 
introducing the students to design practice, design thinking, 
makers’ practices, and reflective practice. Thus, through 
‘assemblage of skills’  and  ‘assemblage of  design practices’  
103
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the students needed both experiences of understanding (e.g., 
understanding new practices or the research interests of the 
Design-group), and ‘making’ experiences (e.g., producing 
both presentable and conceptually good physical 
representations). 
E. Students’ impressions 
The feedback on how it all worked for students was 
collected using a questionnaire. We were interested in 
collecting feedback on emergence of both individual and 
group creativity, whether students felt better prepared for 
multidisciplinary work and other relevant experiences. 
In order to get feedback directly from students around 
their perception of readiness to partake in multidisciplinary 
teams, we asked a direct question about their understanding 
of the difference between the usual HCI classes and this one. 
One of the students said: The course focused more on design 
thinking, and to get a finished product to exhibit. It was less 
literature, testing, and report writing than other HCI 
courses. All students expressed that they have better 
understanding of the design practice, and perceive this as 
something that prepares them better for future work together. 
In a short survey after the course was completed, we asked 
them if they thought that articles were helpful; half of the 
students answered that they thought so, while the other half 
thought that for this course the articles were not so 
important. When asked if they thought that design oriented 
practices (making things), have given them new skills, as 
HCID designers, six students agreed strongly, one did not 
reply and three were neutral. As for the perception of how 
well they are prepared after the course for work with 
designers, six students answered that they strongly feel that 
they are better positioned for such cooperation, and four did 
not have strong opinion about the issue, but were not 
negative.  
Our understanding is that the experience they gained may 
help them discover who they are as HCID designers [49] 
[50], both by understanding the difference between the HCI 
practice and the design practice, and by direct experience of 
the design practice. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The lessons learned and discussed in this paper show that 
HCID students could adopt and understand design practices, 
in spite of a rather long experience and a strong sense of 
being rooted in the HCI tradition. The teachers, the students, 
and the audience at the exhibit have all been satisfied with 
the exhibit in terms of adequateness of concepts in relation to 
design task, prototypes developed and organization of those 
into an exhibit. The students’ body language has changed 
from indifferent and closed to engaged and open. They all 
perceive this piece of learning to prepare them for the work 
as professional interaction designers better than the HCI 
courses alone could do. Thus, we conclude that this approach 
warrants further exploration. As future work, we would like 
to follow these students into their work life and see if this 
experience 
had 
an 
impact 
when 
working 
in 
real 
multidisciplinary teams with designers, on real-life projects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks go to all of our students: Andrea Gasparini, 
Henrik Kjersem, Lena Risvik, Paria Tahaee, Anja Simonsen, 
Sylvia Saxlund, Rita Johnsen, Ingrid Arnesen, Agnethe 
Heggelund and Rebekka Castro, and our guest lecturers Tom 
Igoe, Amanda Steggell and Lavrans Løvlie. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Figure explaining the main techniques used during the teaching to nudge students creativity.  
  
104
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] A. L. Culén, H. N. Mainsah, and S. Finken, “Design Practice 
in Human Computer Interaction Design Education,” The 
Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 300–306. 
[2] E. Blevis, “Design Challenge Based Learning (DCBL) and 
Sustainable Pedagogical Practice,” Interactions, vol. 17, no. 3, 
pp. 64–69, May 2010. 
[3] C. B. Brandt, K. Cennamo, S. Douglas, M. Vernon, M. 
McGrath, and Y. Reimer, “A theoretical framework for the 
studio as a learning environment,” Int. J. Technol. Des. Educ., 
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 329–348, May 2013. 
[4] J. Kolko, Thoughts on Interaction Design, 1st edition. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2010. 
[5] S. E. Lundgren, E. Hallnäs, L. Ljungstrand, and P. 
Torgersson, “Teaching Interaction Design: Matters, Materials 
and Means", WonderGround-2006 Design Research Society 
International Conference, Lisbon, 2006, pp. 1–4. 
[6] A. Faiola, “The design enterprise: Rethinking the HCI 
education paradigm,” Design Issues, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 30–45, 
2007. 
[7] T. Winograd and S. Klemmer, “HCI at Stanford University,” 
Interactions, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 30–31, September 2005. 
[8] L. Bannon, “Reimagining HCI: Toward a More Human-
centered Perspective,” Interactions, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 50–57, 
July 2011. 
[9] D. Fallman, “Design-oriented human-computer interaction,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors 
in computing systems, 2003, pp. 225–232. 
[10] N. True, J. Peeters, and D. Fallman, “Confabulation in the 
Time of Transdisciplinarity: Reflection on HCI Education and 
a Call for Conversation,” in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Human-Centred Design Approaches, Methods, Tools, and 
Environments, M. Kurosu, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013, pp. 128–136. 
[11] J. Forlizzi, J. Zimmerman, and S. Evenson, “Crafting a place 
for interaction design research in HCI,” Design Issues, vol. 
24, no. 3, pp. 19–29, 2008. 
[12] J. Zimmerman, E. Stolterman, and J. Forlizzi, “An Analysis 
and Critique of Research Through Design: Towards a 
Formalization of a Research Approach,” Proceedings of the 
8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 
2010, pp. 310–319. 
[13] J. Zimmerman and J. Forlizzi, “Research Through Design in 
HCI,” Ways of Knowing in HCI, J. S. Olson and W. A. 
Kellogg, Eds. Springer New York, 2014, pp. 167–189. 
[14] E. Goodman, E. Stolterman, and R. Wakkary, “Understanding 
interaction design practices,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, 
pp. 1061–1070. 
[15] P. Wright, M. Blythe, and J. McCarthy, “User Experience and 
the Idea of Design in HCI,” Interactive Systems. Design, 
Specification, and Verification, S. W. Gilroy and M. D. 
Harrison, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 1–14. 
[16] C. L. Dym, A. M. Agogino, O. Eris, D. D. Frey, and L. J. 
Leifer, “Engineering design thinking, teaching, and learning,” 
Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 103–120, 
2005. 
[17] P. Koutsabasis and S. Vosinakis, “Rethinking HCI Education 
for Design: Problem-Based Learning and Virtual Worlds at an 
HCI Design Studio,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 485–499, 2012. 
[18] J. M. Carroll, HCI Models, Theories, and Frameworks: 
Toward a Multidisciplinary Science. Morgan Kaufmann, 
2003. 
[19] K. Cennamo, S. A. Douglas, M. Vernon, C. Brandt, B. Scott, 
Y. Reimer, and M. McGrath, “Promoting creativity in the 
computer science design studio,” in Proceedings of the 42nd 
ACM technical symposium on Computer science education, 
New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 649–654. 
[20] E. F. Churchill, A. Bowser, and J. Preece, “Teaching and 
Learning Human-computer Interaction: Past, Present, and 
Future,” Interactions, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 44–53, Mar. 2013. 
[21] C. Owen, “Design thinking: Notes on its nature and use,” 
Design Research Quarterly, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 16–27, 2007. 
[22] M. Csikszentmih, Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of 
Discovery and Invention. London: Harper & Row, 1997. 
[23] A.-G. Tan, “Psychology of Cultivating Creativity in Teaching 
and Learning,” Creativity, Talent and Excellence, A.-G. Tan, 
Ed. Springer Singapore, 2013, pp. 27–42. 
[24] R. K. Sawyer and R. K. Sawyer, Explaining Creativity: The 
Science of Human Innovation. Oxford University Press, 2012. 
[25] S. Harrison, D. Tatar, and P. Sengers, “The three paradigms 
of HCI,” Alt. Chi Session at the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose, California, 
USA, 2007, pp. 1–18. 
[26] S. Bødker, “When second wave HCI meets third wave 
challenges,” Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on 
Human-computer interaction: changing roles, New York, NY, 
USA, 2006, pp. 1–8. 
[27] C. Hoadley and C. Cox, “What is design knowledge and how 
do we teach it?” Educating learning technology designers: 
Guiding and inspiring creators of innovative educational 
tools, pp. 19–35, 2009. 
[28] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action, Basic books, 1983. 
[29] J. V. Wertsch, Mind as action. Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[30] N. Schadewitz and T. Zamenopoulos, “Towards an online 
design studio: a study of social networking in design distance 
learning,” Iternational Association of Societies of Design 
Research (IASDR) Conference, 2009, pp. 18–22.  
[31] D. W. Shaffer, “Learning in design,” in Foundations for the 
future: The need for new mathematical understandings & 
abilities in the 21st century. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 2007. 
[32] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated learning: Legitimate 
peripheral participation. Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
[33] H. Sharp, Y. Rogers, and J. Preece, Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, 2nd ed. Wiley, 2007. 
[34] Y. J. Reimer and S. A. Douglas, “Teaching HCI design with 
the studio approach,” Computer science education, vol. 13, 
no. 3, pp. 191–205, 2003. 
[35] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[36] T. Lewis, “Coming to terms with engineering design as 
content,” Journal of Technology Education, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 
37–54, 2005. 
[37] D. Cropley and A. Cropley, Engineering Creativity: A 
Systems Concept of Functional Creativity. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates Publishers, 2005. 
[38] A. M. Hill, “Problem solving in real-life contexts: An 
alternative for design in technology education,” International 
journal of technology and design education, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
203–220, 1998. 
[39] K. Smith, How to be an explorer of the world: portable life 
museum. New York: Perigee, 2008. 
[40] “Energy 
Bank,” 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.energy-bank.org/. [Accessed: 21-Jan-2014]. 
105
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[41] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Los Angeles; 
London: SAGE, 2007. 
[42] C. Lévi-Strauss, La Pensee Sauvage, Paris: Pocket, 1990. 
[43] S. Finken, A. L. Culen, and A. A. Gasparini, “Nurturing 
Creativity: 
Assemblages 
in 
HCI 
Design 
Practices,” 
Proceedings of DRS 2014, Umeå, 2014, pp. 1204–1217. 
[44] R. Johnsen, S. Saxlund, and A. Simonsen, “Skirts with 
Meaning,” skirtswithmeaning, 2013. [Online]. Available 
from: http://skirtswithmeaning.wordpress.com/. [Accessed: 
30-Oct-2013]. 
[45] A. L. Culén and S. Finken, “A Skirt for Well Aged Ladies 
with Cognitive Loss,” in UAHCI/HCII 2014, 2014, pp. 325–
336. 
[46] A. Gasparini, R. Castro, L. Risvik, and A. Heggelund, 
“iConfess at dagen@ifi,” 2013. [Online]. Available from: 
http://folk.uio.no/andrega/iConfess/. 
[Accessed: 
31-Oct-
2013]. 
[47] A. L. Culén, S. Finken, and A. Gasparini, “iCONFESS,” in 
Social Computing and Social Media, G. Meiselwitz, Ed., 
Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 430–439. 
[48] T. Ingold, Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and 
Architecture by Ingold, Tim. Routledge, 100AD. 
[49] A. L. Culén, S. Joshi, and A. Atif, “HCID: Who is an 
interaction designer?” Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference for Design Education Researchers, Oslo, Norway, 
2013, vol. 4, pp. 1924–1937. 
[50] A. Culén and M. Kriger, “HCI in IT-facilitated Business 
Innovation: a Design Thinking Perspective,” HCI in 
Business. F. F. H. Nah, Ed., Springer, 2014, pp. 492–503. 
 
 
 
 
 
106
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

