Performance Modeling for Call Centers Providing Online Mental Health Support
Tim Rens de Boer
CWI
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: trdb@cwi.nl
Saskia M´erelle
113 Suicide Prevention
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: s.merelle@113.nl
Sandjai Bhulai
Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: s.bhulai@vu.nl
Rob van der Mei
CWI and Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Email: mei@cwi.nl
Abstract—Mental health helplines differ from other call cen-
ters, such as customer service call centers, in different aspects.
Many of the agents handling conversations are volunteers, the
conversations can be described as often more complex and/or
emotional, and many of the mental health helplines use a triage
system. More understanding is needed to improve staffing and/or
service of mental health call helplines. Motivated by this, we
propose a call center model that includes the specifics of online
mental health helplines, including features such as a triage system
for chats and the inclusion of service times consisting of warm-up,
conversation, wrap-up and cool-down periods. This call center
model is then validated using trace-driven simulation based
on various months of real-life (anonymous) call and chat data
provided by 113 Suicide Prevention. The model is validated by
comparing the waiting times found in the data with the waiting
times of the simulation. The results show that the model can
simulate the waiting-time performance of the helpline accurately.
Secondly, we focus on forecasting the number of arriving chats
and telephone calls. Our results show that (Seasonal) Autore-
gressive Integrated Moving Average ((S)ARIMA) models trained
on historical data perform better than other models in the case
of short-term forecasting (five weeks or less ahead), while using
linear regression works best for long-term forecasts (longer than
five weeks). We propose a method on how these daily predictions
can be quickly altered for hourly predictions, which can then
be used together with the understanding of the model to obtain
staffing advice.
Keywords—call
center
models;
queueing;
mental
health;
helplines; data analytics; forecasting; staffing
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extension of our previous research pre-
sented in [1], which was focused on the proposed call center
model and validation. The present paper provides a more
elaborate discussion on the analysis of real-life data, the
validation of the model using trace-driven simulation, the
error-term evaluation of demand forecasting, and how the
model and forecasting can be used for staffing purposes.
Mental health helplines are helplines that are concerned
with helping or assisting help seekers requiring mental health
help, instead of physical care such as emergency helplines.
There are many forms of mental health, with many countries
having one or multiple helplines. Examples of mental health
helplines in the Netherlands are 113 Suicide Prevention [2],
the helpline for help-seekers with suicidal thoughts, the listen
helpline (Dutch: luisterlijn) [3], and the Kindertelefoon [4]
for children. Recently, mental-support helplines have received
much attention due to the increase in call volumes related to
the (partial) lockdown to combat the spreading of corona [5],
[6]. This paper focuses on call center modeling for suicide
prevention helplines. However, we emphasize that the results
can also be used for modeling the waiting-time performance
of other mental health helplines.
Suicide is a worldwide health problem. In 2020, on average,
five persons died each day by suicide in the Netherlands alone.
Suicide is a leading cause of death among adolescents [7];
worldwide, more than 700,000 people die from suicide every
year [8]. In many countries, people struggling with suicidal
thoughts can contact a helpline to get support to prevent and
reduce suicidal thoughts [9]. In the Netherlands, persons with
suicidal thoughts can contact 113, either by telephone or by
chat [10], and are helped by volunteers and professionals. It
is crucial that help seekers are answered swiftly. Therefore,
it is important that adequate staffing is present to answer
telephone calls and chat requests, minimizing the waiting times
and abandonments (i.e., sudden termination of ongoing calls
or chats while waiting). In order to calculate proper staffing
levels (e.g., [11]), a good understanding of the processes of
the call center system for mental health is required.
Mental health helplines differ in various aspects from classi-
cal call centers. First, the subjects of conversations are mental
health concerns, e.g., loneliness and substance use [12]–[14].
Second, agents often have to handle complex conversations
with the patient-in-need, and may themselves require support
during or after a difficult conversation [17]. Therefore, an
important aspect is that agents often need some time to cool
down after emotionally difficult conversations. Third, when a
chat or telephone call enters the system, it has to be determined
which agent is best capable of handling the call, which results
in a warm-up time before the call is taken into service. Lastly,
chat conversations that enter the system first go through a
triage phase. The inclusion of triage plays an important role,
and functions as a filter [18] to chat requests, checking whether
these help seekers are at the right helpline or might require
emergency care. The triage employee can also estimate the
conversation’s difficulty to best match an agent with enough
experience to handle the chat. So, the model for such a mental
health helpline needs to meet the following requirements: (1)
the possibility of abandonments, (2) a service time consisting
of multiple phases, (3) a warm-up and cool-down time, (4)
inclusion of chats and telephone calls, and (5) triage.
Classic call center models were considered for modeling
this helpline, see [19] for an excellent overview of queueing
models for call centers. The Erlang-C model is proven to be in-
accurate when modeling call centers with abandonments [20].
The Erlang-A model includes abandonments [21], but does not
include multiple skills, triage, and warm-up times. Multi-skill
call center models, such as an N-configuration [19], were also
120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure. 1. The number of phone arrivals per year.
considered. The N-configuration model includes two types of
arrivals, which in this case would be telephone and chat, and
assumes that new chat arrivals can be picked up before triage.
However, in the mental health helpline of [2], it is crucial
that chats first go through triage. The importance of modeling
triage is already shown in the emergency domain [23], [24].
Therefore, in this paper, we modify the N-configuration model
in such a way that it includes the specifics of mental health
helplines.
This paper introduces a new queuing model to include the
possibility of triage. The model is built based on anonymized
real-life call and chat data, made available by [2]. The records
used cannot be traced back to individual callers, as only
timestamps and durations are used. The anonymous data is
also used to validate the model and determine different patterns
that can be helpful for forecasting demand. Lastly, a method
for determining staffing levels is explained for this specific
model.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discussed
related work done on either call center models or suicide pre-
vention helplines. Section III describes different patterns found
in the data. In Section IV, the proposed model is described. In
Section V, the model is validated using a combination of data
and trace-driven simulation. Next, Section VI explains how
the demand call volumes can be predicted based on historical
data. Section VII describes how the model and the forecast can
be used to construct staffing advice. Finally, in Section VIII,
the conclusion and discussion are given.
II. RELATED WORK
Call centers and/or helplines have been researched in differ-
ent fields of science. For this paper, we will mention some of
the research done on the modeling of call centers and research
done on specifically suicide prevention helplines. Various
research has been done on modeling call centers, Garnett et
al. [21] have shown how and why Erlang-B and Erlang-C
lack the feature of impatient customers. They introduce an
Erlang-B model, where customers abandon the system after
not being answered after their impatience has run out. Here,
impatience is drawn from an exponential distribution. This
research, however, lacks the inclusion of multi-skill. Gans et
Figure. 2. The number of chat arrivals per year.
al. [19] provide an overview of different types of skill routings,
where the skill may be based on training, compensation,
or time restrictions. Forecasting of arrivals has also been
researched, for example, Gijo et al. [22] have shown how
(S)ARIMA models can be used in forecasting the call volume.
Research done specifically at mental health helplines is often
limited to conversation topics and different types of callers.
Salmi et al. [14] show the change in conversation topics
during COVID-19. While Grigorash et al. [15] and O’Neill
et al. [16] have both studied different caller types and how
these caller types can be predicted. This paper aims to fill
the gap between research done on standard call centers and
that done on mental health helplines, specifically by applying
modeling and forecasting, that are normally seen in standard
call centers, to mental health helplines.
III. DATA ANALYSIS
The data for this research is provided by 113 Suicide
Prevention [2], referred to as ‘113’. Its mission is to prevent
suicides and break the taboo surrounding suicide. Help seekers
struggling with suicidal thoughts can contact 113 24/7 by
either chat or telephone. These help seekers are then helped
by counselors consisting of volunteers and paid employees.
Apart from that, 113 also provides online therapy, self-tests,
and self-help courses [25].
Call data is provided over the period 2016-2021 and consists
of around 250,000 chats and 175,000 telephone calls. The
distribution of the arrivals over the years can be seen in
Figures 1 and 2 for phone and chat, respectively. It should
be noted that data for 2016 and 2021 were incomplete at the
time, explaining the low number of arrivals in 2016 and 2021.
However, omitting 2016 and 2021, it can still be seen that
there is an increasing trend present in the number of arrivals of
phone calls as well as chats. The number of telephone arrivals
increased from almost 20,000 in 2017 to more than 50,000
in 2020, and chat arrivals increased from close to 40,000 in
2017 to almost 70,000 in 2020. Each call or chat has the
following elements: (1) the arrival time, (2) the time entering
the queue, (3) the time of acceptance by an agent, (4) the
disconnection time, and (5) the completion time, all elements
are denoted using a combination of date and time, using the
121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Queued
Arrival
Accepted
Disconnected
Completed
Pre-queue
Waiting time
Call duration
Wrap-up time
Figure. 3. Timeline of a call from the perspective of the caller.
Figure. 4. Decomposition of incoming calls and chats.
following formats dd-mm-yyyy and hh:mm:ss for date and
time, respectively. Each call also has a contact id and an initial
contact id, which may be different if a call is a forwarded
telephone call or chat.
Different features were added to the data to obtain more
understanding of the different durations found in the data.
The following durations were calculated: pre-queue duration,
waiting time, call duration and wrap-up time. The pre-queue
duration is the time between the arrival of a call and the
time entering the queue, and is the time spent by the caller
in a menu. This phase does not require resources from the
helpline and, therefore, falls outside the scope of this paper.
The waiting time is defined as the time between entering the
queue and the time that an agent accepts the call. The call
duration where the agent and the help seeker are actually
connected is defined as the time between acceptance of a
call and the disconnection time. Finally, after each call, the
agent has to fill in a wrap-up form, which is the time between
disconnection and completion. A visual representation of this
timeline is given in Figure 3.
Recall that there are two options for help seekers to contact
the helpline: via telephone or chat. These two contact types are
mostly handled by the same type of agents, but differ in some
important aspects. Traditionally, there used to be more chats
than telephone calls. However, the difference has diminished
in recent years, and the numbers are comparable. This can be
seen in Figure 4, which shows that in 2017 and 2018, most of
the arrivals were chats. In 2019, the difference between chat
and phone diminished, while since 2020, there are still more
chats, but the difference is not as large as before. However, the
chat and telephone calls do follow different patterns, which are
shown in Figures 7 and 8. Figures 5 and 6 show the weekly
patterns; in both cases, the weekends see a lower number of
calls. However, for chats, we see a clear dip on Saturday and a
Figure. 5. Weekly pattern of incoming telephone calls.
Figure. 6. Weekly pattern of incoming chats.
small increase on Sunday. We also observe that most telephone
calls arrive between 12:00 and 20:00, while chats have a clear
peak at 20:00. Both telephone and chat call arrivals show a
decrease during the night and early morning until around 5:00
in the morning.
Incoming chats are first handled by triage, this is needed
to filter chats that are at the wrong helpline. Only part of
the incoming chats after triage gets sent to another agent. The
percentage of chats that an agent handles after triage is around
50% during day shifts, but this differs over the day. During
the night shifts, fewer chats are forwarded to an agent. The
different nature of night conversations may cause this. The
triage plays an important role in filtering chats, as seen by the
percentage of chats that get through triage. Chats are filtered
out due to various reasons. For example, the chatter may be at
the wrong helpline and or is identified as a prank chatter [26].
In the data, we distinguish three service time distributions:
for the duration of (1) telephone calls, (2) chats during triage,
and (3) chats after triage. The empirical distribution of phone
call durations can be found in Figure 9. On average, a
telephone call takes around 18 minutes, with the longest phone
call in the data taking multiple hours. The duration of chats
in triage can be seen in Figure 10, and the duration of chat
conversations after triage can be seen in Figure 11. As can
be seen, the chats that have gone through triage tend to take
much longer than the chats during triage: on average, chats in
triage take 19 minutes versus 34 minutes after triage. This is
122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure. 7. Daily pattern of incoming telephone calls.
Figure. 8. Daily pattern of incoming chats.
also clearly visible in the histograms with durations of chats
in triage having a clear peak at around 400 seconds, while
chats after triage have a peak in durations at 4000 seconds.
Remark: The effect of the experience of agents
Mental health helplines often use a mix of paid professionals
and volunteers, where an agent’s responsibilities depend on ex-
perience and other factors. The assumption is that experienced
agents can handle more difficult conversations alone, while
inexperienced agents might require assistance when handling
a more complex conversation (this could be either a phone or
chat conversation), resulting in a longer service time. Analysis
of our data pointed out that there seems to be no significant
difference in service time distribution between different vol-
unteers and professionals. There might be a difference, but
this could be obscured due to many other factors, such as
experienced agents handling the more complex conversations
and assisting or coaching the less experienced agents. Based
on this observation, the call duration distributions are assumed
to be the same for all agent experience levels.
IV. MODEL DESCRIPTION
For the modeling step, we distinguish between two different
types of calls, namely: (1) chat calls, and (2) telephone calls,
which are handled differently. The incoming chat calls are
first handled by a triage system. The triage system consists of
Figure. 9. Histogram of telephone call durations.
Figure. 10. Histogram of chat triage durations.
Figure. 11. Histogram of durations of chat conversations after triage.
ctriage triage agents. Each triage agent can handle ntriage chats
simultaneously without perceivable slow-down. Together,
there are ctriage ∗ ntriage ’triage slots’ for incoming chats.
Arriving chats enter service at triage immediately if a triage
slot is available. If no triage slot is available, then chats enter
an infinitely sized queue and are helped first-come-first-served
(FCFS) or abandon the queue if the waiting time is longer
than their impatience. The service time of a chat call in triage,
denoted Bchat, is the convolution of four random variables:
Bchat = Bwarm-up + Bconversation + Bwrap up + Bcool-down.
123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

All variables are drawn from some probability distribution,
which can be estimated from the data. A visual representation
of the service time can be seen in Figure 12.
A key aspect of the model is the inclusion of impatience,
i.e., the maximum amount of time that a help seeker is willing
to wait before he abandons the system. The impatience of
a help seeker who enters the system via a chat is modeled
as an independent sample from some probability distribution
with mean µchat-impatience. After service completion at the triage
center, a chat is either sent through to the helpline (HL) for
assistance (with probability psent-through), or the chat leaves
the system. Note that during the warm-up period Bwarm-up,
the agent is busy, but the help seeker is not yet answered.
Therefore, help seekers may abandon the queue during that
period.
Different from chat calls, incoming telephone calls do not go
through a triage phase and arrive directly at the HL. This is the
core part of the system where most of the service processing
occurs. The HL is equipped with cHL agents, each of which
can handle both chat calls and telephone calls, not more than
one call at a time. When a telephone call finds an HL-agent
available, he enters service immediately. If the telephone call
arrives and no agent is available, the call enters an infinite-
sized queue that is handled on an FCFS basis. Here, phone
calls are able to abandon the queue if their waiting time is
longer than their impatience.
The HL processes both telephone calls and forwarded chat
calls (i.e., those that have passed through the triage phase).
Here, chat calls have non-preemptive priority over telephone
calls. Thus, when an HL-agent becomes idle, he first checks
whether there is a chat call pending (while keeping a triage slot
occupied), and if so, starts to service the longest-waiting chat
call. If no chat call is pending, the agent checks if telephone
calls are pending.
Similar to the modeling of chat sessions in triage, the dura-
tion of phone calls and chats after triage both consists of four
subsequent independent phases: (1) warm-up, (2) conversation,
(3) wrap-up, and (4) cool-down, where each phase has its
own probability distribution differently for phone and chat
after triage. The impatience of help seekers via telephone is
modeled as a sample from some probability distribution that
can be obtained from the data. Calls abandon the queue if
their waiting time exceeds the impatience. When service is
completed, the calls exit the system. Note that agents are busy
during the warm-up period, similar to abandonments at the
triage, but the help seeker does not perceive this and can,
therefore, still abandon the queue during the warm-up phase.
See Figure 13 for an illustration of the model.
V. MODEL VALIDATION
The model described in the previous section has to be
validated to confirm our modeling choices. The validation
was done using trace-driven simulation. For the simulation of
this model, the following values are needed for each arrival:
Acceptance 
of call
Ready
Disconnected
Completed
Ready
Warm-up
Call duration
Wrap-up time
Cooldown
Figure. 12. Timeline of call from the perspective of the agent.
Telephone calls
Chat calls
Triage
HL
Chats identified as at the wrong helpline
Sent to HL with priority
Helped chat and telephone conversations
Figure. 13. Illustration of the model.
(1) an arrival time, (2) service duration (consisting of warm-
up, conversation, wrap-up and cooldown), (3) impatience, and
(4) call type (chat or telephone) and if the call type is chat
information about triage (duration and if the chat is at the
right helpline) are also needed. Trace-driven simulation uses
values obtained exactly from the data, thereby giving a precise
comparison between reality and simulation. The data contained
some missing values, and these need to be filled in before
simulating, namely: (a) the conversation and wrap-up duration
of calls that were unanswered, (b) impatience of help seekers,
and (c) warm-up and cool-down durations.
The missing values of conversation and wrap-up durations
were filled in using hot-deck-imputation [28]. This method
samples from the known values to fill in the missing values.
The distinction was made between the different types of
conversations: telephone, chats during triage, and chats after
triage. The impatience of help seekers are mainly unknown
due to the limited availability. Only a small percentage of
telephone calls were unanswered, and for chats, even fewer
impatience data was available. Warm-up and cool-down du-
rations were not present in the data. Therefore, the missing
values of impatience, warm-up, and cool-down periods were
all drawn from exponential distributions.
The parameters were estimated using expert opinions from
paid professionals and volunteers. Impatience of chat conver-
sation is determined by the sum of a constant 300 seconds
and a duration drawn from an exponential distribution with a
mean of 300 seconds. The impatience of a telephone caller
is drawn from an exponential distribution with a mean of
240 seconds. The warm-up for both chat and telephone is
drawn from exponential distributions with means of 60 and
45 seconds for telephone and chat, respectively. Lastly, the
cool-down durations of chat and telephone are both drawn
from an exponential distribution with a mean of 120 seconds.
Moreover, based on current practice at 113, for the experi-
ments, we assume that ntriage = 5. Thus, each triage agent can
handle a maximum of five triage chats simultaneously. Further,
the simulations are trace-driven, and follow the realizations of
the time variations of (1) the arrival processes for chat and
124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure. 14. The average waiting time of telephone calls in the simulation and
the data of August 2021.
Figure. 15. The average waiting time of chat calls in the simulation and the
data of August 2021.
telephone, (2) the number of triage- and HL-agents, and (3)
the fraction of triage call that is forwarded to the HL system.
The simulation ran for almost 12,000 arrivals consisting of
around 6,500 chat arrivals and 5,500 phone calls during a
period of 1 month. The average waiting time of the simulation
and the data were then compared. Figure 14 shows both the
simulated and realized average waiting times for telephone
calls as a function of the cumulative number of call arrivals.
The results show that for a small number of calls, the average
waiting time is rather sensitive to outliers but quickly stabilizes
over time. The average waiting time of the data and simulation
both converge to the same value, around 80 seconds. This vali-
dation experiment is repeated for chat call arrivals, which show
similar convergence, see Figure 15. This process was repeated
over different months and showed similar convergences; an
example can be seen in Figures 16 and 17, which shows the
experiment repeated for September.
In summary, these validation results show that the model
works well in predicting waiting times and confirms the
modeling choices made in Section IV.
VI. DEMAND FORECASTING
Demand forecasting concerns itself with predicting the call
volumes for both telephone and chat calls. The performance of
the forecasts is dependent on several choices: the time window
and the aggregation level. The time window concerns itself
Figure. 16. The average waiting time of telephone calls in the simulation and
the data of September 2021.
Figure. 17. The average waiting time of chat calls in the simulation and the
data of September 2021.
with how long ahead the forecast is. Forecasting daily volumes
for tomorrow is often easier than the daily volume over 8
weeks. For this paper, we chose to predict 1 day ahead until
8 weeks ahead, since the schedule of the agents is made 8
weeks ahead but can be adapted over time. The aggregation
level concerns itself with the kind of volumes to be forecasted.
Hourly volumes are harder to predict than monthly volumes,
but are less useful for scheduling. In this paper, we chose
to predict daily volumes. However, later in this section, it is
explained how these daily volumes can be adapted to hourly
volume predictions. The choice was made to forecast chat and
telephone arrivals independently due to the difference in arrival
processes (also explained in Section III) and the difference in
handling.
The following forecasting models were considered:(1) Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM), (S)ARIMA [29], linear re-
gression [30], and different baseline models. The parameters
of (S)ARIMA models are chosen using auto-ARIMA [31],
which are (5, 1, 1) for ARIMA and (1, 1, 1)(0, 1, [1, 2], 7) for
SARIMA. As baseline, the prediction of day i is the volume
measured on day i−7 (baseline model 1) and i−58 (baseline
model 2). The following aspects were seen as important: trend
and seasonality. The provided data shows that there is an
increasing trend present and that weekly cycles seem to be
predominant. Therefore, it is chosen to focus on forecasting
125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure. 18. The MAPE error when forecasting telephone.
Figure. 19. The MAPE error when forecasting chat.
using historical data on call volumes. The models will be
evaluated using the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE),
the Mean Squared Error (MSE), and the Mean Absolute Error
(MAE). The MAPE is calculated using the following formula:
1
n
n
X
i=1
|Fi − Ai
Ai
| ∗ 100%.
Here n is the number of forecasts, Fi is the forecast of
day i, and Ai is the actually recorded number of arrivals on
day i. The found MAPE results can be seen in Figures 18
and 19. We find that (S)ARIMA models perform best (in
terms of the MAPE), especially when forecasting for five
weeks (or six in the case of chats) ahead or less. For longer
forecasting windows, it turns out that a simple linear regression
model might provide more accurate forecasts in the case
of telephone arrivals. However, both (S)ARIMA and linear
regression models have a MAPE that is lower than the MAPE
of the baseline models. The LSTM model has the highest error
term in this situation.
Next, the models are evaluated using MSE, which gives
more weight to large prediction errors. The MSE is calculated
as follows:
1
n
n
X
i=1
(Ai − Fi)2.
Figure. 20. The MSE error when forecasting telephone.
Figure. 21. The MSE error when forecasting chat.
The found MSE values can be found in Figures 20 and 21. The
results show that in terms of MSE, (S)ARIMA models have the
lowest error. However, for forecasting more than three weeks
ahead, the linear regression seems to have a lower error term.
This differs from the finding when comparing the MAPE error
terms, meaning that the (S)ARIMA models likely have more
large prediction error than the linear regression.
Lastly, for a complete comparison, the models are also
evaluated using MAE, which is calculated by the following
formula:
1
n
n
X
i=1
|Ai − Fi|.
The found MAE values can be found in Figures 22 and 23.
The graphs show similar findings when evaluating based on
MAPE, in the telephone calls as well as chat, (S)ARIMA
models perform best when forecasting for short-term windows,
and linear regression for longer-term forecasts. The MAE that
again forecasting chats is more accurate, and the window when
(S)ARIMA performs best is longer (around 40 days for chats
versus around 30 days for telephone).
Combining the evaluation of the three different error terms,
we can come to the following findings:
1) All error terms agree that for short-term forecasting
(S)ARIMA models perform best, long-term forecasting
126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure. 22. The MAE error when forecasting telephone.
Figure. 23. The MAE error when forecasting chat.
can best be done using linear regression, and LSTM
seems to perform the worst.
2) The different error terms differ on the time window of
when (S)ARIMA model performs the best. The MSE
graph of phone forecasting shows a shorter time window
in which (S)ARIMA performs best when compared to
that of the MAPE graph. This tells us that it is likely that
phone forecasting has more large errors influencing the
MSE. A similar picture can be seen for chat forecasting.
3) All evaluations agree that the LSTM model performs the
worst of all evaluated models at the moment.
The performance of (S)ARIMA models can be attributed to
the flexibility of the models. However, it could be the case
that with more time and optimization, the LSTM will perform
better. However, it is questionable if the model would perform
better than the (S)ARIMA models.
Hourly predictions
The results above concern the prediction of daily volumes.
Call centers, however, often use hourly volumes for staffing
purposes. Predicting hourly volumes can be done in several
ways,
namely
forecasting
hourly
volumes
directly
or
indirectly by using the predicted daily volumes. Forecasting
hourly volumes directly introduces more uncertainty in the
predictions. Therefore, it was chosen to forecast using the
daily volumes. The call volume of hour h on day i is
calculated as follows:
Figure. 24. Comparison between the actual and predicted number of phone
calls during the day shift (from 8.00 until 16.00).
Fi,h = Fi × Ph.
Here Ph is the mean percentage of arrivals on a day that arrives
in hour h. This method can be expanded to also include smaller
or larger intervals, such as shifts. An example of this can be
seen in Figure 24, again the prediction is able to follow the
actual number of arrivals.
VII. STAFFING
This section will briefly describe how the model of the
helpline can be used together with demand forecasting to
construct staffing advice. Staffing concerns itself with the
required number of agents per time interval and is, therefore,
different from a work schedule or planning of agents, for a
schedule often staffing advice is first needed. One of the most
well-known and often used rules is the square-root staffing
rule [32]. This is a formula used to calculate s, the staffing
level, and can be rounded up to an integer value. The formula
is given by:
s = ρ + β√ρ,
where ρ is the offered load calculated by multiplying the
arrival rate with the mean service time, β is a parameter
reflecting the service level, a higher beta corresponds to a
higher quality of service.
The given formula is based on M/M/C queues and can be
adapted to other queues. The model described in Section IV
needs two different staffing levels at Triage and at HL. The
staffing at Triage receives only chat arrivals, ρT riage is,
therefore, calculated by multiplying the chat arrivals with the
average service time of chats in Triage. Since staffing is done
ahead of time, the chat arrivals are predicted chat arrivals.
Together with the fact that agents at Triage can handle five
conversations simultaneously, the square-root staffing rule
therefore becomes:
sT riage = ρT riage + β × √ρT riage
5
.
127
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The staffing at HL can be determined using the square-root
staffing rule together with the facts that each agent can handle
one conversation and agents handle chats after Triage and
new phone calls. The formula then becomes:
s = ρHL + β√ρHL.
Here, ρHL is calculated by summing the chats after Triage
multiplied by the average chat service duration, and the phone
arrivals with average phone service duration, where again the
arrivals are done by forecasting.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper on call center modeling for mental helplines
has several contributions. The first contribution is a new call
center model for mental helplines. The modeling is based on
data and the experience of agents, the model is then validated
based on data from [2], the suicide prevention helpline in
the Netherlands. The validation is done using trace-driven
simulation, and the results show that the model is able to
accurately predict waiting-time performance for telephone
and chat arrivals at the call center. We emphasize that the
model is also applicable to other mental helplines with triage
and complex conversations requiring warm-up and cool-down
periods, possibly with minor modifications.
The warm-up and cool-down durations are estimated mostly
based on experience from agents. There is difficulty in accu-
rately measuring these durations. For future research, these
durations could be based on data and possibly correlated to
the duration of the call and wrap-up. This could be done by
measuring when agents log off and log back on.
In the model, we assume that ntriage = 5, meaning each
agent can handle a maximum of five triage chats simultane-
ously. Here, we assume that there is no slow down in service
time when an agent handles a triage chat more, but is unable to
handle a sixth chat. For future research this assumption could
be further explored, will the quality decrease and service time
increase when setting ntriage higher.
The second contribution of this research is centered around
demand forecasting. Various models were tested for forecast-
ing the number of arrivals per day and evaluated based on
MAPE, MSE, and MAE. All evaluations agreed that for short-
term forecasting (S)ARIMA models perform best and linear
regression in the case of long-term forecasting. However, the
tipping point at which linear regression performs better than
(S)ARIMA differs per evaluation. It is also discussed how
these daily volume predictions can be changed into hourly or
shift volumes.
Lastly, the third contribution is on how to combine the
previous two contributions (modeling and forecasting) for
staffing purposes. We explain how the model and forecast
can be used to adapt the square-root staffing rule, which
in turn can be used to generate staffing advice. Regarding
the real-life applicability of this paper, the staffing advice
and forecasts obtained can easily be combined into a user-
friendly dashboard, which can easily be used by the planning
department to possibly improve staffing.
It is also important to note that while the staffing advice
is important for the performance of the helpline, there are
also other ways to reduce the waiting time or increase the
percentage of answered telephone and chat calls. Some of
these methods are already used by 113 at the moment, such as
staff in a different time zone, shortening the menu a new help-
seeker has to listen, aiming for shorter conversations and staff
extra during the switch moments of different shifts and breaks.
For example, 113 Suicide Prevention was able to decrease the
waiting time in the night by using call center agents working in
a different time zone (Suriname in this case). Another method
is shortening the time until a help-seeker enters the queue, by
shortening the menu the help-seeker has to listen and fill in,
resulting in fewer help-seekers abandoning before entering the
queue. Lastly, by aiming for shorter conversations agents are
able to handle telephone and chat calls faster, and therefore
the overall service time decreases resulting in lower waiting
times with the same number of agents or requiring less agents
for the same performance.
This paper aims to provide a complete view, but some
aspects require follow-up research. For example, the level of
experience of volunteers and paid professionals might affect
call durations. Preliminary data analysis into this topic shows
no, or at best limited, correlation, but further investigation is
needed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Robin Costers, Sophie de
Vries Robles, Menno Zwart, and Kim Setkowski from 113
Suicide Prevention for their great support during this project.
REFERENCES
[1] T.R. de Boer, S. M´erelle, S. Bhulai and R. D. van der Mei, “A Call
Center Model for Online Mental Health Support,” in PREDICTIONS
SOLUTIONS 2022, International Conference on Prediction Solutions
for Technical and Societal Systems, 2022, pp. 1-6.
[2] “About us 113 Suicide Prevention.” (”Over ons—113 zelfmoordpre-
ventie.”) [Online]. Available: https://www.113.nl/over-113/over-ons (ac-
cessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[3] “The
listen
helpline.”
(“De
luisterlijn.”)
[Online].
Available:
https://www.deluisterlijn.nl/ (accessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[4] “The helpline for children.” (“Kindertelefoon.”) [Online]. Available:
https://www.kindertelefoon.nl/ (accessed Jun. 24, 2022)
[5] J. Scerri, A. Sammut, S. Cilia Vincenti, P. Grech, M. Galea, C. Scerri,
D. Calleja Bitar, and S. Dimech Sant, “Reaching out for help: Calls to
a mental health helpline prior to and during the covid-19 pandemic,”
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
vol. 18, no. 9, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1660-
4601/18/9/4505
[6] M. Br¨ulhart, V. Klotzb¨uucher, R. Lalive, and S. K. Reich, “Mental health
concerns during the covid-19 pandemic as revealed by helpline calls,”
Nature, vol. 600, no. 7887, pp. 121–126, 2021.
[7] J. Hoogenboezem and T. Traag, “Zelfdoding in Nederland: Een overzicht
vanaf 1950,” Aug 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.cbs.nl/nl-
nl/longread/statistische-trends/2021/zelfdoding-in-nederland-een-
overzicht-vanaf-1950?onepage=true
[8] WHO,
“Suicide.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide
128
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] M. S. Gould, J. Kalafat, J. L. HarrisMunfakh, and M. Kleinman, “An
evaluation of crisis hotline outcomes. part 2: Suicidal callers,” Suicide
and Life Threatening Behavior, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 338–352, 2007.
[10] J. K. Mokkenstorm et al., “Evaluation of the 113online suicide preven-
tion crisis chat service: outcomes, helper behaviors and comparison to
telephone hotlines,” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, vol. 47, no.
3, pp. 282–296, 2017.
[11] N. Izady and D. Worthington, “Setting staffing requirements for time
dependent queueing networks: The case of accident and emergency
departments,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 219, no.
3, pp. 531–540, 2012.
[12] M. E. Pratt, “The future of volunteers in crisis hotline work,” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2013.
[13] R. C. W. J. Willems, C. H. C. Drossaert, P. Vuijk, and E. T.
Bohlmeijer, “Mental wellbeing in crisis line volunteers: understanding
emotional impact of the work, challenges and resources. a qualitative
study,” International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-
being, vol. 16, no. 1, 2021, pMID: 34694979. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2021.1986920
[14] S. Salmi, S. M´erelle, R. Gilissen, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai,
“Detecting changes in help seeker conversations on a suicide prevention
helpline during the covid- 19 pandemic: in-depth analysis using encoder
representations from transformers,” BMC public health, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 1–10, 2022.
[15] A. Grigorash, S. O’Neill, R. Bond, C. Ramsey, C. Armour, M. D.
Mulvenna et al., “Predicting caller type from a mental health and well-
being helpline: analysis of call log data,” JMIR Mental Health, vol. 5,
no. 2, p. e9946, 2018.
[16] S. O’Neill, R. R. Bond, A. Grigorash, C. Ramsey, C. Armour, and
M. D. Mulvenna, “Data analytics of call log data to identify caller
behaviour patterns from a mental health and well-being helpline,” Health
informatics journal, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1722–1738, 2019.
[17] F. Sundram, T. Corattur, C. Dong, and K. Zhong, “Motivations, expec-
tations and experiences in being a mental health helplines volunteer,”
International journal of environmental research and public health, vol.
15, no. 10, p. 2123, 2018.
[18] M. D. Christian, “Triage,” Critical care clinics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
575–589, 2019.
[19] N. Gans, G. Koole, and A. Mandelbaum, “Telephone call centers:
Tutorial, review, and research prospects,” Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 79–141, 2003.
[20] T. R. Robbins, D. J. Medeiros, and T. P. Harrison, “Does the erlang
c model fit in real call centers?” in Proceedings of the 2010 Winter
Simulation Conference. IEEE, 2010, pp. 2853–2864.
[21] O. Garnett, A. Mandelbaum, and M. Reiman, “Designing a call center
with impatient customers,” Manufacturing & Service Operations Man-
agement, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 208–227, 2002.
[22] E. Gijo and N. Balakrishna, “Sarima models for forecasting call volume
in emergency services,” International Journal of Business Excellence,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 545–561, 2016.
[23] M. van Buuren, G. J. Kommer, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai,
“EMS call center models with and without function differentiation: A
comparison,” Operations Research for Health Care, vol. 12, pp. 16–28,
2017.
[24] M. van Buuren, G. J. Kommer, R. D. van der Mei, and S. Bhulai, “A
simulation model for emergency medical services call centers,” in 2015
winter simulation conference (WSC). IEEE, 2015, pp. 844–855.
[25] M. C. A. van der Burgt, S. M´erelle, A. T. F. Beekman, and R. Gilissen,
The impact of COVID-19 on the suicide prevention helpline in the
Netherlands. Crisis. 2022.
[26] A. Weatherall, S. Danby, K. Osvaldsson, J. Cromdal, and M. Emmison,
“Pranking in children’s helpline calls,” Australian Journal of Linguistics,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 224–238, 2016.
[27] R. Whitley, D. S. Fink, J. Santaella-Tenorio, and K. M. Keyes, “Suicide
mortality in Canada after the death of Robin Williams, in the context
of high-fidelity to suicide reporting guidelines in the Canadian media,”
The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 805–812, 2019.
[28] P. Verboon and E. Schulte Nordholt, “Simulation experiments for hot
deck imputation,” Statistical Data Editing, Methods and Techniques, vol.
2, pp. 22–29, 1997.
[29] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, and A. S. Namin, “A comparison of
ARIMA and LSTM in forecasting time series,” in 2018 17th IEEE
international conference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1394–1401.
[30] B. M. Pavlyshenko, “Machine-learning models for sales time series
forecasting,” Data, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 15, 2019.
[31] R. J. Hyndman and Y. Khandakar, “Automatic time series forecasting:
the forecast package for R,” Journal of statistical software, vol. 27, pp.
1–22, 2008.
[32] L. V. Green, P. J. Kolesar, and W. Whitt, “Coping with time-varying
demand when setting staffing requirements for a service system,” Pro-
duction and Operations Management, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 13–39, 2007.
129
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

