221
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Sustainable Growth Use of Renewable Energy Based on Spatial Energy 
Planning: Lithuanian Case 
 
Valentinas Klevas and Audrone Kleviene 
Laboratory for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
Lithuanian Energy Institute 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
Valentinas.Klevas@lei.lt; Audrone.Kleviene@lei.lt 
 
 
Abstract — The article summarizes the results of research, 
identifying the main challenges to increasing sustainable use of 
Renewable Energy Sources (RES)-technologies. The main 
obstacle to the widespread use of RES is the failure to address 
the key issue – to measure the benefits to the society - reduction 
of pollution, energy supply for the future generations, huge 
and never-ending potential of energy resources, such as solar 
and wind energy, when introducing RES-technologies. There 
are also controversial phenomena, especially in the heat sector. 
Unreasonably huge role is assigned to biomass in usage 
projections of RES. Huge disproportion of used RES 
technologies is a serious challenge to the sustainable 
development of energy and threat to forests and their 
ecosystems. The aim of the research is to apply the 
methodological approach enabling assessment of external 
benefit of the use of renewable energy sources, which is usually 
not assessed for individual projects. External conditions and 
current infrastructure for RES technologies are different, thus 
spatial planning, such as urban energy development plans, is 
the most appropriate tool for the external benefit assessment 
Regional programs may be appropriate tools for reducing 
renewable energy adaptation costs, increasing competitiveness 
in the market, promoting social development and should be the 
main form for combination of different types of RES and 
consolidation of investment funds. The sustainable growth of 
renewable energy is based on the formulated methodology, 
which enables to achieve maximal benefit with minimal 
support for beneficiaries as well as for the state. Modified 
levelized cost of energy method enables analysis of economic 
benefit for the selected project investor, as well as relates the 
achieved results to macroeconomic indicators using external 
parameters. Combination of different types of RES may create 
large external effect and make a significant impact not only on 
individual consumer of RES, but on the whole society as well. 
The main output of the research is background for the support 
policy to encourage investors, which may be created on the 
basis of external benefits. 
Keywords-renewable 
energy; 
sustainable 
development; 
evaluation principles; external benefits. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This publication is based on an article published in the 
IARIA conference proceedings “The Sustainable Growth 
Use of Renewable Energy Based on Spatial Energy 
Planning” [1]. The findings of this article are the result of 
many projects carried out by the authors. Like in other EU 
countries, so in Lithuania economic research of Renewable 
Energy Sources (further in the text – RES) has intensified in 
the recent years through implementation of European Union 
directives, with particular emphasis on the role of a 
territorial aspect (cities, districts). Incentives for wider use 
of RES are declared both in the European Union and in 
Lithuanian laws. Adoption of the Directive 2009/28/EC “On 
the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources” 
[2] required the development of a National Renewable 
Energy Action Plan for 2010-2020 and many other 
documents at the local level. This indicates that the 
development of RES takes an increasingly more significant 
role in the energy policy of all member states, including the 
Republic of Lithuania. 
The main obstacle to the widespread use of RES is the 
failure to address the key issue – to measure the benefits to 
the society (reduction of pollution, energy supply for the 
future generations, huge and never-ending potential of 
energy resources, such as solar and wind energy), when 
introducing RES-technologies and, on the basis of these 
benefits, to encourage investors. Therefore, when formally 
calculating, 
RES-technologies 
are 
not 
sufficiently 
competitive, compared to fossil-fuel technologies. This 
work deals specifically with the problem of the impact of 
RES-technologies both positive and negative. The impact 
analysis of RES-technologies on social welfare (on job 
creation) and on health (on the basis of environmental 
impact) has allowed the formation of a targeted, reliable 
methodology compatible with the status of existing 
statistical information. On the basis of it, algorithms 
calculating the impact for individual types of RES are 
formed [3]. 
Given that in the newly developed Energy Strategy high 
hopes to use RES-technologies are linked to the extremely 
low used energy sources, such as solar, wind and 
geothermal energy, significant efforts are needed to 
organize the accounting and statistics of decentralized RES-
producers. Apart from this important condition, it is difficult 
to expect the proper process management of mastering RES. 
The analysis of positive and negative impact of RES usage 
in the research of Lithuania and other countries has shown 
that major part of positive impact of the RES development 
is related to reducing Green House Gas (further in the text – 
GHG) and other pollutant emissions, job creation and rural 

222
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
development. The positive effects of biofuels, biogas and 
biofuel manufacturing sectors are mainly reflected on the 
increase of employment level in the regions, the reduction 
of heat prices and lower emissions of some fossil fuels, 
which in the long run could affect the decline in the 
incidence of certain diseases. The development of biogas 
production and use also plays an important role in solving 
the problem of organic waste management. The main 
positive effects of solar and wind energy technologies are 
the reduction of GHG emissions compared to the use of 
fossil fuels and biofuels as well as the creation of temporary 
jobs in Lithuania by installing new solar power plants or 
wind farms. Developing the manufacturing technology 
industry in Lithuania also has a positive effect on the 
creation of additional permanent jobs.  
Section II describes the concept of external utility of 
implementation of RES technologies. Evaluation of such 
utility may show the advantages, which are underestimated 
in the investment decisions. Section III presents a solution 
of the identified scientific problem; it is based on a system 
of territorial urban planning. In Section IV is presented a 
description of how RES programs can consolidate related 
urban development programs. This may serve to formation 
of 
financing 
assumptions 
and 
sources 
for 
their 
implementation. The methodology, which is based on 
spatial planning, identifies certain aspects that usually are 
not covered by routine investment evaluation techniques, 
namely, the existing problems in cities: high atmospheric 
pollution, unemployment, etc., may determine the validity 
conditions that allow interpolating results to assess 
technology for spatial energy planning for solving problems 
mentioned above. Long distances to centralized electricity 
and heat networks are defined by geolocation factors and 
may determine financial acceptability of small decentralized 
renewable energy technologies due to their technical 
benefits. 
II. 
CONCEPT OF EXTERNAL BENEFIT OF RES 
TECHNOLOGIES AND CHALLENGES TO SUSTAINABILITY 
In recent years, consumption of fossil fuel and 
mitigation of climate change have become major challenges 
for governments all over the world. To engage these 
challenges, 
many 
countries 
are 
pursuing 
research, 
development, and demonstration of RES [4]. In the past few 
years, usage of RES rapidly increased all over the world. 
RES have become important alternative energy sources to 
realize energy diversification. During the last few years, 
political support for renewable energies has been growing 
continuously both at the national and international level 
[5][6]. 
Increase of social and political pressure for fast 
development in clean energy, and financial crisis, which 
required adequate government measures to stimulate the 
economy. The industry of renewables could be important to 
generate employment and stimulate growth [7]. Investment 
in RES may bring considerable profits, so more and more 
enterprises will be involved in this field. The increased use 
of RES in the heat market can significantly alleviate the 
negative effects of high energy costs on the national 
economy. Successful commercialization of indigenous, 
renewable energy resources is expected to promote regional 
economic development and employment, enable to increase 
national energy security and to reduce a substantial portion 
of the increasing trade deficit necessity to import fossil fuels 
[8]. 
The use of renewable energy in rural as well as urban 
areas became the significant development thus adding to 
mitigation of climate change [9][10], reducing differences 
between rural and urban dwelling options [11], bringing 
new 
RES 
options 
for 
diversifying 
energy 
supply 
[12][13][14]. The role of local governance for energy and 
urban development appears highly important here [15]. 
However, there are also controversial phenomena, 
especially in the heat sector, where huge disproportion of 
used RES has appeared. Unreasonably huge role is assigned 
to biomass in usage projections of RES. Biomass is an 
energy resource that is the result of economic activity and 
depends on continuity of economic activity. Meanwhile, the 
use of an inexhaustible solar and geothermal energy 
potential is absolutely insufficient.  
At present renewable energy sources (RES) are treated 
as an integrated whole, and all the advantages and 
disadvantages are classified as generalized, but at the same 
time 
separated 
from 
specific 
conditions 
and 
the 
infrastructure that is possible to use.  
Therefore, one of the most difficult issues to be solved is 
that the utilization rate of RES in Lithuania (and maybe in 
other countries) is one-sided, focused on the use mainly of 
biomass for many reasons, which are not adequately 
investigated and identified. Meanwhile, other types of RES, 
such as solar, wind or geothermal energy, are scarcely used. 
Figure 1 shows the state of the use of RES technologies 
in Lithuania. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Disproportions of the use of RES-technologies in Lithuania. 
The data of Figure 2 show the percentage of RES 
technologies utilization by regions in the heat sector. Here is 
dominated biofuels, whose combustion somehow treats as 
neutral in terms of CO2 emissions. This is a serious 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
geothermal energy
Solar power
municipal waste 
biogas
hydropower
biofuels 
wind energy
solid biofuels 
Volumes of RES utilization by type of resources, ktoe
from 2014 to 2016
2016
2015
2014

223
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
challenge to the sustainable development of energy. There is 
also danger to forests and their ecosystems. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
region Vilnius
region Kaunas
region Klaipėda
region Šiauliai
region Panevėžys
region Alytus
region Telšiai
region Utena
region Marijampolė 
region Tauragė 
Structure of thermal power plant installed  
RES, %
Solar power 
geothermal  energy
straw
biogas
wood waste 
savory gas
municipal waste
 
Figure 2. Percentage of technology utilization by Lithuanian region s in 
the heat sector. 
It is shown in Figure 3, the situation in the electricity 
sector is better because different types of RES-E are used in 
a proportionate manner. This proves that it is possible to 
maintain a certain proportion of utilization of RES, with 
proper selection of economic and financial support 
measures. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
region Vilnius
region Kaunas
region Klaipėda
region Šiauliai
region Panevėžys
region Alytus
region Telšiai
region Utena
region Marijampolė
region Tauragė
Structure of power plant installed RES, %
wind energy
Solar power
straw 
biogas
wood waste 
savory gas 
municipal waste 
hydropower
 
Figure 3. Percentage of technology utilization by Lithuanian regions in 
the power sector. 
The stimulation of energy producers and consumers to 
use RES is one of the major goals of energy policy in 
Lithuania. Policies and measures that aim to enhance the use 
of RES are mainly driven by EU policy. Unstable state 
energy policy and changes of incentive measures destabilize 
the investment initiatives. The lack of economic evaluation 
on both demand and supply sides is the main challenge to 
achieve the expected goal.  
The scientific problem is evaluation of social utility of 
RES 
that 
can 
show 
the 
advantages, 
which 
are 
underestimated in the investment decisions [16]. The most 
important benefits of RES are inexhaustibility and 
possibility to ensure sufficiency of energy resources for 
future generations. Also, utilization of particular RES 
technologies, such as solar energy, solves environmental 
issues. Therefore, RES may be additionally financed from 
other sources. The main issue is the diversity of RES 
utilization opportunities and incentives. The energy 
phenomenon is inexhaustibility of RES that could change 
exhaustible types of fossil fuel, such as oil and natural gas, 
and could be replaced with few different types of energy. 
This could be solar, wind, and geothermal energy. On the 
other hand, social utility of RES differs from the social 
utility of oil and natural gas, because RES guarantees the 
supply of energy resources for future generations.  
Renewable energy policy is a complex system, where a 
balance 
among 
three 
aspects 
of 
sustainability 
– 
environment, economy, and social life – is needed. A good 
performance and well-balanced RES policy requires efforts 
from different stakeholders. Although each country has 
different starting conditions, namely, developed technical 
infrastructure and own energy resources, development of 
energy from RES should be shaped on the basis of long-
term macroeconomic policy [17]. This means that a good 
and scientifically-based theoretical background is needed as 
well as indicators reflecting economic development and a 
method for assessing the impact of certain type of energy 
from RES on these indicators are required. In other words, 
this is a reliable energy supply at an affordable price, which 
causes as positive environmental impact as possible.  
Support for RES is required to promote wider use of 
renewable energy. What is more, energy market failure is a 
serious obstacle to promote the development of RES. 
External positive benefits of using RES, such as public 
interest, are not evaluated here. This benefit is related to 
introduction of new technologies, their development, and 
positive impact on the environment [18][19]. Subsidies for 
RES must be based on a positive external utility. Therefore, 
one of the most effective methods could be integration of 
RES technologies into regional energy development [20]. 
Regional 
programs 
may 
be 
appropriate 
tools 
for 
subordinating market mechanisms (reducing renewable 
energy adaptation costs, increasing competitiveness in the 
market and promoting the development), which are required 
to overcome market barriers [21][22].  
As a rule, the impact of RES-technologies on economic 
and social indicators is supported by statistical correlation 
analysis based on historical trends in RES development and 
their impact on macroeconomic indicators. However, the 

224
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
anonymity of this method and the probability of a certain 
error cannot provide a clear understanding of the actual 
impact of specific parameters when analysing specific 
projects under individual RES-technologies [23]. Also, this 
method does not provide tools or ways to optimize the 
development of the RES-Sector or to put in place support 
measures to maximize macroeconomic benefits with 
minimal resources. Therefore, valuation is inseparable from 
the microeconomic analysis of the project chosen by the 
individual investor (taking into account the economic 
benefits to the developer), using external parameters for 
macroeconomic indicators [24]. Results obtained in one 
project may be interpolated to assess the potential impact of 
the support scheme at the urban level. 
Levelized Cost Of Energy (LCOE) is one of the most 
popular approaches for comparison of different energy 
generation options on equal basis – present value of total 
life-cycle cost. The modificated LCOE approach, which was 
applied in a paper of V. Bobinaite and D. Tarvydas [25] 
gives an opportunity to quantitatively assess the influence of 
certain RES support measures on the cost of energy 
production. Also, it provides the investors a tool which 
could be used to compare different RES investment projects 
concerning external benefit to society. 
This method with a broad interpretation was adapted to 
assess the use of wind energy in the macroeconomic 
framework [3]. 
III. 
SPATIAL ASPECT FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF BENEFIT 
FROM USING RES TECHNOLOGIES IN URBAN AREAS 
There is no consensus among scientists in the debate on 
who should take initiative and responsibility in addressing 
the issues of the dissemination of innovation as a 
precondition for economic development: the state, the city 
or private structures. The basic idea of the problem above 
has expressed prominent environmentalist: "Global must 
move towards a local one, because localities exist within the 
boundaries of nature, where global exists only in the offices 
of the World Bank and the ICF and in multinational offices. 
Global ecological space is the local integration of 
everything" [26]. More and more scientists say that 
decisions are needed in this area by territorial units. The key 
issue is, in the long term, to achieve the possibility that 
different types of RES would find a niche in the long run, 
which basically means the stability of energy prices and the 
assurance 
of 
all 
elements 
related 
to 
sustainable 
development. In essence, this means consolidating the 
knowledge system into an effective set of practical 
implementation. Reproduction of good practice in this 
regard is an increase in the competitiveness of the whole 
economy, since it eliminates many negative factors 
associated with fossil fuel combustion. Also, burning 
biofuels causes not only the air pollution problem in cities, 
but also the degradation of forests despite the alleged 
reforestation of the forests. 
The use of renewable energy in rural as well as urban 
areas became the significant development thus adding to 
mitigation of climate change, reducing differences between 
rural and urban dwelling options [27], bringing new RES 
options for diversifying energy supply [28]. The role of 
local governance for energy and urban development appears 
highly important here [29]. 
Policies and measures that aim at enhancing the use of 
RES are mainly driven by EU policy. The scientific problem 
is evaluation of social utility of RES that can show the 
advantages, which are underestimated in the investment 
decisions [30][31]. Moreover, it is transfer of their 
economic interpretations on uniform rules and economic 
laws into specified dimension, in this case trying to reduce 
different opinions as much as possible [32].  
The main indicators of external benefit are considered to 
be the use of domestic capital; taxes paid to the state budget 
and newly created job positions. Combination of different 
types of RES may create a large external effect and make a 
significant impact not only on individual consumers of RES, 
but also on the society. Therefore, the benefit from using 
RES, especially in urban areas, should be evaluated during 
the decision making process.  
At the moment, a very important scientific problem 
emerges, 
namely 
the 
performance 
of 
non-profit 
organizations, such as municipality in the context of a 
knowledge-based economy. The main feature is that 
knowledge, for example, related to the sustainable 
development of energy, in particular the widespread use of 
renewable energy sources, as vital for global climate change 
mitigation, is becoming less an expression of the desire for 
competitiveness as an object of implementation and 
dissemination of good practice. In the current new economic 
situation, the main emphasis is on knowledge dissemination. 
On the other hand, they become an effective tool in the non-
dispersed, random, but organized way to achieve a 
particularly important goal - massive absorption of RES 
technologies, which covers many positive additional effects 
– reducing environmental pollution, energy, in particular 
heat price stability, social issues, etc. 
Each RES has different value in terms of external 
benefit, thus respective promotion schemes can and must 
differ significantly. This depends on the environmental 
situation in certain area. External conditions and current 
infrastructure for RES technologies differ, thus spatial 
planning, such as urban energy development plans, is the 
most appropriate tool for the benefit assessment. All 
countries pay little attention to the support of RES 
technologies on the demand side. Support for the consumers 
is the most appropriate via support programs (and not by 
supporting scattered consumers), as it enables to achieve 
actual effect. The external benefit analysis for small wind 
power plants, geothermal heat pumps, and solar collectors 
was performed to find their niche in urban and rural areas. 
The external effect indicators for different scenario cases are 
shown in Table I. Data in Table I show the comparison of 
external benefit using different types and scale of RES 
technologies. The main indicators of external benefits are 
considered to be the use of domestic capital; taxes paid to 
the state budget and newly created job places. Avoiding air 
pollution is also one of the key factors that determine the 
external utility of RES-technologies.  

225
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. EXTERNAL BENEFIT OF USING SOLAR, WIND AND GEOTHERMAL 
ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES (CASE OF LITHUANIA) 
Indicators 
Wind power 
plants 
Geothermal 
heat pump 
and solar 
collectors 
in 
multifamily 
building 
Solar 
collectors 
in district 
heating 
system 
4 kW 
10kW 
126kW 
7000kW 
Production, MWh 
6,8 
17,5 
185 
4500 
Domestic capital, 
1000 EUR 
8.02 
21.08 
25.01 
1380.88 
Social insurance, 
1000 EUR 
0.81 
1.51 
9.27 
119.23 
Personal income 
taxes, 1000 EUR 
0.29 
0.55 
3.46 
44.46 
New jobs (man 
months) 
2.3 
4.2 
31.9 
409.4 
 
Combination of different types of RES may create a 
large external effect and make significant impact not only 
on individual consumers of RES, but on the society as well. 
Therefore, the benefit from using RES, especially in urban 
areas, should be evaluated during the decision making 
process. If direct support is applied for RES or 
environmental technologies, the impact will depend on the 
volume of support and the source of funding. For example, 
if the direct assistance is financed from the state budget, the 
promotion measures would increase the budget deficit in 
addition to the positive aspects mentioned above. Therefore, 
it is essential that the promotion would be cost-effective: the 
benefits should exceed the negative effects. Inexhaustible 
types of RES (wind, solar, and geothermal energy) enable 
greater benefit than the subsidies it might require, while 
penetration into the market is growing. 
Therefore, in the world and especially in the EU 
countries, many cities are taking initiatives to replace RES 
fossil fuels with RES technologies and thus greatly improve 
the living conditions of society cities that are committed 
over a period of time reaching 100 percent supply of energy 
from RES. There was a number of attempts to move in this 
direction. It seems that it requires billions of funds. 
However, the circular economy theory and facts that are 
supporting this theory shows that enhanced support and 
funds are necessary for the initial stage, especially during 
formation process of information systems. However respect 
for the environment is rarely considered the unconditional 
value of business relations. Educational activities are 
necessary, which would show the connection between 
human activity and eternal laws of nature. A special role in 
this process is attributed to smaller cities and rural or 
suburban communities. It will be a long process of 
transformation, but this is one of two alternatives: the 
continued destruction of the natural environment or the 
circular economy based on the above principles. 
The key elements are: the strategic goal set before 2050 
to achieve 100% supply of RES. (Lithuania has to provide 
23% of final energy consumption by 2020). This means that 
all RES and energy saving tools find their niche in the 
overall energy development. The tax policy, which is the 
main economic element, is characterized by the fact that 
significant energy taxes on fossil fuels are applied. This 
makes it possible to compare the competitive capabilities of 
fossil fuels and RES technologies by eliminating external 
costs that do not appreciate the use of fossil fuels in 
financial accounting. One of the key points is that 
infrastructure is optimally used, for example, centralized 
heating systems, which ensures a high level of utilization of 
RES-technologies. 
The idea of eco-villages has been analysed since the last 
decades of the XX century all over the world. Modelling 
methods were used for resources management and 
sustainability assessment [33]. The most recent research 
concentrates on eco-innovations, eco-efficiency and eco-
effectiveness, cultivations of eco-sustainability on various 
social-economic-environmental levels. The investigations 
also involve the role of eco-cultural diversity, renewable 
energy in eco-communities and understanding the eco-
complexity and ecosystem approach [34]. 
The principle of ecological movement can be expressed 
by the quote “think globally, act locally”. Progress in 
solving environmental problems can be achieved more 
quickly if the principles of our activities and the functions of 
natural laws system are harmonized. This was the main 
principle of the development of green settlements. The 
energy sector of green settlements duplicates the processes 
in the nature, which is a perfect example of waste-free 
technology. The volume of waste generated in energy sector 
can be reduced by increasing the usage efficiency of 
primary energy sources and promoting the use of RES. The 
negative impact to the environment can be mitigated 
through more efficient use of RES in energy sector 
developed under the circular economy model and 
bioregional development principles. The use of RES in the 
regions can create unique environment for resource 
utilization. The exploitation of energy resources must not 
exceed the nature’s resilience limits otherwise RES can be 
treated as non-renewable resources. The development of 
regional energy sector, according to the principles of 
circular economy, is encouraging the use of a wide range of 
local and renewable resources. 
IV. 
BALANCING OF RES SUPPORT FORMS BY USING 
SPATIAL PLANNING METHOD 
In the legal system of Lithuania, self-government has 
been given fairly broad opportunities to participate in the 
development of energy efficiency and the use of renewable 
energy resources. The Law on Local Self-Government of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Lithuania 
distinguishes 
between 
independent functions of municipalities, including the 
preparation and implementation of municipal planning 
documents and planning documents implementing them. 
Thus, municipalities are required to prepare and implement 
their 
territorial 
planning 
documents 
and 
have 
the 
opportunity to include in them measures for the 
development of energy efficiency and renewable energy 
sources (on the other hand, they also have a delegated 
function delegated by the Ministry of Renewable Energy 

226
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Act to develop renewable energy the resources of the 
development plan. Municipalities also administer the 
implementation of the measures of the rural development 
program in the form of a state-delegated function. However, 
these documents may only become a routine accumulation 
of unrelated obligations. Only an organized set of 
knowledge permits the conversion of these program 
documents into what their initiators motivate a special 
purpose - the massive use of RES reclamation. 
Exactly 
the 
municipalities, 
according 
to 
their 
responsibilities and functional structure, there are those 
organizations that could implement RES technologies on a 
large scale. However, it needs to be understood that the RES 
project will be one of many parallel programs and will only 
be figures if the benefits to other related programs at the 
state and municipal levels are not assessed. One of the major 
problems with the knowledge economy is the creation of 
separate programs with different goals and sources of 
funding.  
Different types of RES have a very broad and distinctive 
scale of use therefore, each renewable requires its own 
specific support. This topic has been focussed on the 
potential analysis of wind, solar, and geothermal energy for 
small scale applications. Every renewable has a wide 
developing scale of technologies, which is becoming 
cheaper due to the growth of supply. What is more, every 
renewable has different significance level in terms of 
external 
benefit, 
thus 
support 
schemes 
can 
differ 
significantly. This depends on the environmental situation in 
various areas. External conditions and current infrastructure, 
where RES technologies could be applied, differ as well; 
therefore, spatial planning via urban energy development 
plans is the most appropriate tool for benefit assessment.  
Most countries support RES technologies mainly on the 
supply side, while existing opportunities to use solar energy 
at the consumers’ side, such as small systems of solar 
collectors in multi-apartment buildings, are significant as 
well. Support for the consumers is the most appropriate via 
support programs (and not by supporting scattered 
consumers), as it enables achieving actual effect. 
Renovation of buildings by districts enables planned 
actions, which could solve technical and financial problems 
for district heating companies due to reduced consumption. 
Application of the schemes mentioned above for small 
producers increases administration costs and is often not 
acceptable due to high complexity level. Therefore, 
territorial administration is needed. The main problem is 
that the programs for implementation of legally delegated 
functions have no consolidating unity. This might lead to 
serious problems: renovation of multi-apartment residential 
houses would reduce the heat consumption significantly. As 
a result, the district heating tariffs would increase due to 
growing fixed heat generation and supply costs.  
Although the EU directives and national laws provide 
for the functions of the municipalities of the Republic of 
Lithuania in developing software documents for the energy 
sector in general and for RES-technologies are rather 
precise, in practice, plans are just beginning to be formed. 
Having analysed the current laws of the Republic of 
Lithuania, it is clear that they regulate in a sufficiently 
detailed manner the responsibilities of municipalities and 
the development of the use of RES. But the main problem is 
that separate programs are being developed for the 
implementation of individual EU directives, which do not 
have a consolidated unity. Meanwhile, functions such as the 
Special Needs Planning Development Plan, as well as future 
Environmental Protection 
Plans, 
which are already 
beginning to plan for the implementation of commitments 
made under the Paris Agreement, are directly linked to the 
development of RES, are formed separately. In this way, the 
financial resources and modest forces of specialists working 
in municipalities are dispersed. A stable and balanced 
program with carefully selected subsidizing, enabling the 
interaction between consumers and heat suppliers, is 
necessary for solving these problems, as proposed in Figure 
4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Methodology of the use of RES in large scale. 
Periodization of economic age and assessment of various 
RES support forms, with regard to the specifics, has 
Methodology of the use of RES in large scale 
A) Consolidation of 
energy programs on 
local basis 
B) Consolidation of the 
financing funds 
Funding of DH 
special plans 
The practical consequence: economic - organizational - 
financial assumptions for the use of RES technologies in 
large scale 
Consolidation of funds on the bases of spatial 
planning 
(on the basis of cities programs) 
Environmental funds 
RES support 
funds 
Programs of multi-
family buildings 
renovation 
Environmental 
programs 
RES programs 
DH special plans 
Heat sector plans of 
cities 
Support funds for 
renovation of 
buildings 
Private 
investment 

227
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
different goals and tasks from the macroeconomic 
perspective.  
There are two blocks of local programs and financing 
sources, which are to be described: A) and B). 
A. Consolidation of cities energy programs on the uniform 
basis of knowledge economy 
Lithuanian legal system of self-government has granted 
fairly broad opportunities to participate in increasing energy 
efficiency and development of renewable energy. Law on 
Local 
Self-Government 
in 
Lithuania 
distinguishes 
independent functions of municipalities, such as preparation 
and implementation of municipal strategic planning 
documents and planning documents implementing them. 
Law on Energy from Renewable Sources initiates preparing 
local 
RES 
development 
plans. 
Municipalities 
also 
administer the implementation of measures of Rural 
Development program such as carrying out the delegated 
function of the State. Law on Local Self-Government 
establishes that municipalities organize the heat supply 
within their territory. Law on Heat Sector regulates the 
special planning of heat, which is one of the implementation 
mechanisms of those obligations. In addition to broad 
responsibilities for the preparation of planning documents, 
the role of municipalities has been reinforced for renovation 
(modernization) of multi-family buildings in recent years. 
The need for single energy policy formation with an 
economic support system for RES (as one of the 
compounds) has been notified for several years already. 
Through the INTERREG RUSE project, we had the 
opportunity to get acquainted with examples of dozens of 
countries in the field of good practice in RES-industry. 
Particularly noteworthy is that the best results are achieved 
when municipalities play an active role in the field of 
implementation of RES projects. Several key moments are 
typical and characteristic: (a) the adoption of RES-
technologies is a key element of all environmental 
programs; b) state-owned funds can use cities for 
environmental protection according to the extent to which 
they plan to acquire RES-technologies: c) households are 
one of the most important objects in the installation of low-
power RES-equipment. 
This process has been going on for a long time and is not 
just a declaration and not just declarations. In parallel, in the 
world, and especially in Europe, long-term programs are 
being developed and implemented in order to ensure that 
cities and regions receive energy from purely RES-
technologies. There are about 40 such cities in Germany. It 
is worth noting that all cities that have announced these 
ambitious plans are focusing on a wide variety of R & D 
and the development of smart grid technologies. It would 
seem that this requires billions of EUR, but the theory of 
circular economics and the evidence of this theory show that 
more support and resources are needed at an early stage. 
Consolidation of programs according example presented in 
Figure 5 would be a good solution as RES have a significant 
impact on various aspects and especially in the formation of 
consolidated financing fund program.  
 
 
Figure 5. Renewable Energy Management Program Interface. 
Such program consolidation might be organizational and 
the integration of RES technologies could be financed using 
Structural Funds simultaneously solving the tasks of other 
related programs. 
They continue to become a normal business, except that 
respect for nature is rarely seen as an unconditional value in 
business relationships. Educational activities are needed that 
would demonstrate that the link between human activity and 
the eternal laws of natural evolution, which supports human 
viability, is interrupted. Particular role in this process is 
attributable to cities and smaller rural or suburban 
communities. And although this will be a long process of 
transformation, it is one of two alternatives - either further 
destruction of natural environment or the adoption of 
economy that would operate in circular economies. 
B. The second block shows consolidation of the financing 
funds program for sustainable development.  
It is necessary not only to foresee the results that are 
expected in the use of RES but also to form the best 
prerequisites and financial resources that it would be 
possible to realize positive external effects. However, 
considering the possibility of incorporating efficient use of 
resources 
and 
RES 
into 
planning 
documents 
of 
municipalities, there is an issue of financing. Independent 
functions of municipalities, including implementation of the 
program documents, are funded from local budgets. These 
funds are limited; therefore, it is difficult to expect a 
decision of allocating funds to these areas on a larger scale. 
Renewable Energy Management Program 
Interface 
 
DH  
special  
plans 
 
Multi-
apartment 
modernization 
programs 
 
 
Environmental  
plans 
 
Health  
programs 
Small and Medium 
Business Support Programs 
 
 
Renewable 
Energy 
Development 
Programs 
 

228
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Therefore, the main role of municipalities is organizational, 
which would allow mobilizing larger resources. A special 
issue is lack of energy specialists who could prepare 
complex programs. 
Scattered generation character and the fact that most of 
these installations can be implemented on demand side are 
left for private initiative. In order to involve hardly 
competing energy sources, the institution for investment 
management is required. Municipalities could act as 
institutions seeking for the development of wide scale RES 
technologies. Actual legislation in Lithuania shows that 
municipal powers and responsibilities regarding RES are 
regulated in detail. There are no barriers, except financing 
issues for the actions of municipalities. Some of them have 
signed the Covenant of Mayors; some have adopted RES 
development action plans, however, only a few of them are 
actually acting. 
The promotion of RES on wider scale was implemented 
in EU by creating green settlements or the so-called eco 
villages [35]. For example, the state funded project Climate 
Menu in Netherlands, which enabled towns to select sectors 
which needed exceptional attention in order to meet national 
obligations. Environmental policy is implemented by towns, 
where the best possibilities are concentrated and problems 
are the most visible.  
However, when considering the possibility of including 
efficient resource use and RES in municipal planning 
documents, there is a question of financing. The 
implementation of autonomous functions of municipalities, 
including the implementation of program documents, is 
financed from municipal budgets. These funds are limited, 
so it is difficult to expect decisions to spend on these areas 
at a wider scale. The functions transferred by the state to 
municipalities are financed from the state budget or state 
funds and transferred to municipalities as a special targeted 
grant. In any case, financial resources can only be very 
modest and dispersed according to individual programs, 
which is why the central role of city authorities is 
organizational, which would allow mobilization of larger 
resources. A particular problem is the lack of energy 
specialists who can develop complex programs. 
Therefore, the most important prerequisite for solving 
financing issues may be the public-private partnership - 
long-term cooperation between the public sector body and 
the private-sector partner in the implementation of the 
complex of activities (for example, the design, construction, 
reconstruction, 
repair 
and 
maintenance 
of 
the 
infrastructure). However, in our opinion, this concept needs 
to be extended to the justification for financing sustainable 
urban development programs, consolidating and managing 
the funds on this basis for implementation of the program. 
In the field of financing RES, it is possible to use examples 
of various regional and even global partnerships. They play 
an important role in financing the RES sector in developing 
countries (Figure 6). Financial resources of the private 
sector for RES projects implementation have become 
attractive in the last few decades. 
This diagram shows how cities can form consolidated 
funds on a public-private partnership basis. For this, 
essential conditions are required - the formation of city 
information systems and programs that are required to be 
drawn up by law into a long-term integrated urban 
sustainable development program that synchronizes and 
duplicate individual short-term plans. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Financing opportunities system 
for RES technologies in Lithuania 
 
In general, environmental programs in all parts of the 
world are based on wider use of RES, and the centralized 
heat supply plans could become the most rational instrument 
for combining various renewable energy projects into a 
coherent system, both on production and on the consumer 
side. 
These financial resources are used in the public sector 
for infrastructure construction and maintenance purposes as 
well as for industrial equipment installation. However, 
examples of developing countries show that RES sector 
funding by using internal private financing channels are 
limited. Liming and Behrens distinguish several reasons 
why the involvement of the private sector is insufficient: 
 
investments in the RES sector have characteristics 
of public goods (i.e., costs and benefits are not 
always experienced by the same economic entity); 
 
developing countries do not have effective legal 
regulation of environmental sector; 
 
initial capital costs of RES technologies are high; 
 
there are additional risks caused by long payback 
period of technologies; 
Special DH 
plans 
Establishment of cities 
information system 
RES 
programs 
Sustainable 
development 
programs of cities 
Business 
funds 
Money 
consolidation 
fund 
Environmental 
programs 

229
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
higher than normal investment risks (such as market 
and currency risks) require a higher return on 
investment in developing countries; 
 
transaction costs of small and medium-sized 
projects are relatively high. 
Therefore, the aforesaid reasons are due to the fact that 
RES sector is not always attractive to private investors in 
developing countries. In order to attract private sector 
investment, it is recommended establishing public-private 
partnerships. Moreover, the use of existing measures is 
recommended.  
Figure 3 shows that cities can form consolidated funds 
on the principle of public-private partnerships. This requires 
fundamental conditions, such as forming cities’ information 
systems and programs, which are mandatory by law, into the 
long-term unified urban sustainable development program 
that will synchronize and avoid duplication of individual 
short-term plans. Basically, environmental programs in all 
countries of the world are based on a wider use of RES, and 
special DH plans could become the most rational measure 
combining various RES projects into the unified system on 
both production and consumer sides. 
The role of Government in financing RES sector is 
ambiguous because the role of Government is highly 
dependent on economic, social, and political environment. 
Thus, the role of Government in financing RES sector could 
be both active and passive. The Government solves 
problems of energy security and access to energy, job 
creation, improving the competitiveness and economic 
growth; RES sector could greatly contribute to resolving 
such problems. Therefore, the Government in this case 
actively participates in financing RES sector. There are 
several reasons why the Government takes active role in 
RES sector. Firstly, the Government financial support 
allows filling in the gap between the private sector‘s supply 
of investment and demand for investment. Secondly, the 
Government understands that the 
social return of 
investments in the RES sector is significantly higher than 
the private (individual) return. As a consequence, the 
Government increases social returns by creating economic 
incentives for investors. Some authors emphasize that 
governmental funding remains the most important source of 
funding RES sector in developing countries. Active role of 
the Government starts during implementation of national 
programs, providing subsidies, soft loans, loan guarantees, 
and tax incentives. The Government assistance with a 
mobilizing investment of private sector into RES sector has 
been increasing in recent years. 
Partnership advantages are that the risks of implemented 
project are distributed among partners, according to their 
abilities 
to 
manage 
risks. 
Moreover, 
public-private 
partnerships ensure necessary investments in the public 
sector; 
 
ensuring timely and better quality public services; 
 
in many cases, projects are implemented on time 
and does not require additional unforeseen public 
expenditures; 
 
private sector entity is given an opportunity to 
ensure long-term income; 
 
during implementation of projects, private sector 
skills and experience are used; 
 
proper allocation of risks allows reducing costs to 
control them.  
 
Of course, there may be disadvantages, such as 
developed infrastructure, or services could be more 
expensive; 
 
delaying public sector payments of the partnership 
project to the future it could be adversely affected 
subsequent periods of public sector fiscal indicators; 
 
purchase of services through partnership takes 
longer and is more expensive compared with 
traditional public procurement; 
 
partnership projects are long-term, complex and 
relatively inflexible contracts because it is difficult 
to predict and assess all factors which may affect 
the future performance of the envisaged activities. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A particular obstacle to the widespread use of RES is the 
lack of evaluation of the benefits to society (reduction of 
pollution, energy supply of the future for generations, huge 
and never-ending potential of energy resources such as 
solar, wind energy) when introducing RES-technologies. 
Therefore, when formally calculating, RES-technologies are 
not sufficiently competitive compared to fossil-fuel 
technologies. This work deals specifically with the problem 
of the impact of RES-technologies.  
There are controversial phenomena, especially in the 
heat sector, where huge disproportion of used RES has 
appeared. Unreasonably huge role is assigned to biomass in 
usage projections of RES. Biomass is an energy resource 
that is the result of economic activity and depends on 
continuity of economic activity. Meanwhile, the use of an 
inexhaustible solar and geothermal energy potential is 
absolutely insufficient.  
The analysis of positive and negative impact of the use 
of RES on research in Lithuania and other countries has 
shown that major part of the positive impact of the 
development of RES is related to GHG and other pollutant 
emissions, job creation and rural development, increase in 
employment in the regions, the reduction of heat prices and 
the lower emissions of some fossil fuels. Investigation has 
allowed the formation of a targeted, reliable methodology 
compatible with the status of existing statistical information.  
Each RES has a different value in terms of external 
benefit, thus respective promotion schemes can and must 
differ significantly. This depends on the environmental 
situation in certain area. External conditions and current 
infrastructure for RES technologies differ, thus spatial 
planning, such as urban energy development plans, is the 
most appropriate tool for the benefit assessment.  
More and more scientists say that decisions are needed 
in this area by territorial units. The key issue is, in the long 
term, to achieve the possibility that different types of RES 
would find a niche in the long run, which basically means 

230
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the stability of energy prices and the assurance of all 
elements related to sustainable development. In essence, this 
means consolidating the knowledge system into an effective 
set of practical implementation. 
The methodology, which is based on spatial planning, 
identifies certain aspects that usually are not covered by 
routine investment evaluation techniques, namely, the 
existing problems in cities: high atmospheric pollution, 
unemployment, etc., may determine validity conditions that 
allow interpolating results to assess technology for spatial 
energy planning for solving problems mentioned above. 
Combination of different types of RES may create large 
external effect and make a significant impact not only on 
individual consumer of RES, but on the whole society as 
well. Therefore, the benefit from using RES, especially in 
urban areas, should be evaluated during the decision making 
process. 
Urban programs should be the main form for 
consolidation of investment funds and promotion on the 
basis of possible rational use of investment as a complex 
macroeconomic effect can be measured and achieved on the 
territorial basis. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Klevas and A. Kleviene, “The sustainable growth use of 
renewable energy based on spatial energy planning,” The 
Tenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Bioinformatics, 
Biocomputational 
Systems 
and 
Biotechnologies 
BIOTECHNO 2018 IARIA, May 20 - 24, 2018, ISSN: 2308-
4383. ISBN: 978-1-61208-639-2.  
[2] European Council. Directive 2009/28/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council on the promotion of the use of 
energy 
from 
renewable 
sources 
and 
amending 
and 
subsequently 
repealing 
Directives 
2001/77/EC 
and 
2003/30/EC. Off. J. Eur. Communities, 5.6.2009, L 140/16, 
2009. 
[3] V. Klevas, V. Bobinaite, M. Marciukaitis and D. Tarvydas, 
“Microeconomic analysis for the formation of renewable 
energy support policy: the case of wind power sector in 
Lithuania,” Engineering Economics, ISSN 1392-2785, vol. 
29, 
No. 
2, 
pp. 
188-196, 
2018, 
doi: 
org/10.5755/j01.ee.29.2.13626.  
[4] Y. C. Shen, G.T. Lin, K. P. Li, B. J. and C Yuan, “An 
assessment of exploiting renewable energy sources with 
concerns of policy and technology,” Energy Policy, vol. 38, 
pp. 4604–4616, 2010, doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.04.016 
[5] European Commission. State aid: Commission adopts new 
rules on public support for environmental protection and 
energy [Online]. Available from: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-14-400_en.htm. 2014 
[6] European Commission. European Commission guidance for 
the design of renewable energy support schemes, Commission 
staff working document, 2013 
[7] A. C. Marques, J. A. Fuinhasand and J. R. Pires Manso, 
“Motivations 
driving 
renewable 
energy 
in 
European 
countries: a panel data approach,” Energy Policy, vol. 38, pp. 
6877–6885, 2010, doi:10.1016/j .enpol. 2010.07.003. 
[8] R. Camagni, “On the concept of territorial competitiveness: 
sound or misleading?” Urban Stud., vol. 39, pp. 2395–2411, 
2002. 
[9] B. J. de Vries, D. P. van Vuuren and M. M. Hoogwijk, 
“Renewable energy sources: their global potential for the 
first-half of the 21st century at a global level,” Energy Policy, 
vol. 
35, 
pp. 
2590–2610, 
2007, 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2006.09.002. 
[10] N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari “Role of 
renewable energy sources in environmental protection: a 
review.” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 15, pp. 1513–152, 
2011, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.037. 
[11] A. Bergmann, S. Colombo and N. Hanley, “Rural versus 
urban preferences for renewable energy developments” Ecol. 
Econ.,  vol. 65, pp. 616–625, 2008, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon. 
2007.08.011. 
[12] J. Hofierka and J. Kaňuk, “Assessment of photovoltaic 
potential in urban areas using open-source solar radiation 
tools,” Renew. Energy, vol. 34, pp. 2206–2214, 2009, 
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2009.02.021. 
[13] W. T. Chong, M. S. Naghavi, S. C. Poh, T. M. I. Mahlia and 
K. C. Pan, “Techno-economic analysis of a wind–solar hybrid 
renewable energy system with rainwater collection feature for 
urban high-rise application,” Appl. Energy, vol. 88, pp. 4067–
4077, 2011, doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.04.042. 
[14] P. Droege, “Urban Energy Transition”, Elsevier, 2008, 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-045341-5.00029-3. 
[15] V. Castán Broto and H. Bulkeley,“A survey of urban climate 
change experiments in 100 cities,” Glob. Environ. Change, 
vol. 
23, 
pp. 
92–102, 
2013, 
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.005. 
[16] E. Strantzali and K. Aravossis, “Decision making in 
renewable energy investments: A review,” Renew. Sustain. 
Energy 
Rev., 
vol. 
55, 
pp. 
885–898, 
2016, 
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.11.021. 
[17] V. Klevas, “Justification of long-term economic policy of 
renewable 
energy 
sourcesNew 
York: 
Nova 
Science 
Publishers, 2015, ” ISBN 978-1-63483-203-8 (print), ISBN 
978-1-63484-020-0 (e-book), 
[18] G. Tanguay, J. Rajaonson, J. Lefevre and P. Lanoie, 
“Measuring the sustainability of cities: An analysis of the use 
of local indicators,” Ecol. Indic., vol. 10, pp. 407–418, 2010.  
[19] Y. Xing, R. Horner, M. El-Haram and J. Bebbington, “A 
framework model for assessing sustainability impacts of 
urban development,” Account Forum, vol. 33, pp. 209–224, 
2009. 
[20] V. Klevas, Regional approach for policies and measures 
aiming to sustainable energy development. In: Paths to 
sustainable energy, Rijeka: InTech, pp. 117-132, 2010, ISBN 
978-953-307-401-6. 
[21] V. Klevas, “Analysis of support assumptions and measures 
for promotion of renewable energy sources demand in 
regional aspect,” Advances in energy research, New York: 
Nova Science Publishers, pp. 99–122, 2012, ISBN 978-1-
61470-485. 
. 
[22] V. Klevas, K. Bieksa and L. Murauskaite, “Innovative method 
of RES integration into the regional energy development 
scenarios,” Energy Policy, vol. 64, pp. 324–336, 2014, 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.08.088. 
[23] R. Wang, D. Hu, F. Li and B. Larry, “Understanding eco-
complexity: Social-Economic-Natural Complex Ecosystem 
approach,” Ecol. Complex., vol. 8, pp. 15–29, 2011, 
doi:10.1016/j.ecocom.2010.11.001. 
[24] L. Dusonchet, E. Telaretti, “Economic analysis of different 
supporting policies for the production of electrical energy by 
solar photovoltaics in eastern European Union countries,” 
Energy 
Policy, 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
4011–4020, 
2010, 
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.025.  
[25] V. Bobinaite and D. Tarvydas, “Financing instruments and 
channels for the increasing production and consumption of 
renewable energy: Lithuanian case,” Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev., 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
259–276, 
2014, 
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2014.05.039. 
[26] V. Shiva, “The greening of global reach“, The Ecologist, vol. 
22(6), pp. 327–328, 1992. 
[27] I. 
Harmaajärvi, 
“EcoBalance 
model 
for 
assessing 
sustainability in residential areas and relevant case studies in 

231
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Finland,” Environ. Impact Assess. Rev., vol. 20, pp. 373–380, 
2000, doi:10.1016/S0195-9255(00)00048-2. 
[28] A.P. Palojarvi, “Experiences with ecological technologies and 
practices”, Vilnius: BMK Press, 2013. 
[29] K. Tzoulas et al., “Promoting ecosystem and human health in 
urban areas using Green Infrastructure: a literature review,” 
Landsc. Urban Plan., vol. 81, pp. 167–178, 2007, 
doi:10.1016/j.landurbplan.2007.02.001. 
[30] H. Bulkeley and M. Betsill, “Rethinking Sustainable Cities: 
Multilevel Governance and the Urban Politics of Climate 
Change,” 
Clean 
prod., 
vol.14, 
pp. 
42–63, 
2005, 
doi:10.1080/0964401042000310178. 
[31] C. Kalenda, “Ecological ethics” [in Lithuanian], Vilnius: 
Rosma, 2007. 
[32] B. Bayulken and D. Huisingh, “Are lessons from eco-towns 
helping 
planners 
make 
more 
effective 
progress 
in 
transforming cities into sustainable urban systems: a literature 
review,” 
Clean 
Prod., 
2015, 
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.099. 
[33] D. Hu and R. Wang, “Exploring eco-construction for local 
sustainability: An eco-village case study in China,” Ecol. 
Eng., Vol. 11, pp. 167–176, 1998, doi:10.1016/S0925-
8574(98)00032-9. 
[34] Y.Y. Zheng and S. Gao, “Exploration on the Eco-Village 
Planning from the Perspective of Low-Carbon,” Appl. Mech. 
Mater., 
pp. 
357–360, 
2013, 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.357-360.1945. 
[35] H. Barton, “Sustainable Communities: The Potential for Eco-
neighbourhoods”, London: Earthscan Publications, 2000. 
 
 
 

