Refining Advanced Professional Development for Online Teaching and Course 
Building: An Evaluation From the Faculty Perspective  
Vanessa Slinger-Friedman, Joe Terantino, Christopher K. Randall, Philip J. Aust, and Tamara Powell 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, United States of America 
{vslinger, jteranti, crandal2, paust, tpowel25{@kennesaw.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports the findings of a study conducted 
to assess an innovative online course building and instructor 
faculty development program offered at a major regional 
university. The training program, entitled “The Project,” was 
designed to enhance the knowledge and skills of university-
level instructors with previous online course development and 
instructional experience. At the conclusion of the five-month 
program, 
“Project” 
participants 
completed 
a 
20-item 
questionnaire to identify best practices of the program and to 
refine its content for future offerings. Main findings include  
(a) faculty learn most when faculty development materials  
model best practices of online teaching, (b) faculty perceive 
pedagogy and technology-related modules as the most 
important content of online training, and (c) online training 
programs must be updated regularly to keep pace with the 
rapidly changing landscape of online teaching and learning.  
Future research needs to examine the impact that similar 
programs have on student learning, evaluate the transfer of 
developmental training programs to faculty use of technology, 
and provide a broader sense of how advanced training impacts 
faculty development in a university setting. 
Keywords-e-learning, faculty perceptions, online course 
building, online teaching, professional development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Building on previous research conducted with a pilot 
implementation of “The Project,” which highlighted the need 
for an emphasis on pedagogy to further develop online 
teaching competencies within an online course development 
workshop [1], the main purpose of this article is to document 
the effectiveness of the refined program based on the 
perceptions of the faculty participants as determined by their 
responses to an end-of-program survey. This research comes 
as a response to the rapid increase in demand for more 
faculty training related to building and teaching online 
courses [2][3], which correlates directly to the considerable 
growth experienced in the number of online courses offered 
and their student enrollment [4][5]. In addition, the trend to 
offer more faculty training, such as the program described 
here, serves as a response to the increasing pressure from 
administration in institutions of higher education for faculty 
to provide more online course offerings [6].  
The distinguishing factor of this study is that it evaluates 
the implementation of an advanced faculty professional 
development program for online teaching and course 
building. Advanced is used to refer to the faculty members 
who have been trained in online course development and 
teaching, are experienced online course builders, and who 
have previously taught online courses. The paper begins with 
a review of the literature associated with advanced 
professional development for online teaching and course 
building and its role in developing online courses and 
programs. Then the design of the advanced faculty 
professional development program is detailed, including 
changes 
made 
to 
“The 
Project” 
since 
its 
initial 
implementation, along with the research method that was 
used for this study. Next, the results of the program 
evaluation and a discussion of the faculty perceptions are 
provided. Finally, the article concludes with broader 
implications of this research through a discussion of how the 
results from the program evaluation will inform future 
faculty development workshops. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Studies confirm a substantial increase in the availability 
of online courses and programs in recent years [4][5] and 
research related to online course development continues to 
be consistent with the creation, implementation, and 
facilitation of training for faculty new to online teaching. The 
motivation behind this line of research is the increasing 
requests for online course offerings and programs from 
students and, therefore, the increasing pressure for 
institutions to provide more online course offerings. 
Consequently, research about the effectiveness of online 
training models is also more in line with the needs of 
students [4][7][8][9] and the concerns of faculty new to 
online teaching. In the history of faculty development for 
online teaching, first, faculty development consisted of 
limited and specific opportunities to learn a task such as how 
to better use a learning management system. According to 
Meyer, the second stage consisted of assisting faculty with 
online-specific pedagogy/andragogy and instructional design 
[10]. There is little or no mention of advanced faculty who 
develop online courses [11][12][13][14]. However, it can be 
reasoned that advanced faculty are much more likely to be 
able to take advantage of self-directed learning in their 
faculty development experiences.  Quinney, Smith, and 
Gailbraith found that a self-directed program to assist 
librarians in gaining/updating technological skills increased 
their motivation to continue updating their skills and 
increased their likelihood of using their new skills on the job 
[15]. 
Furthermore, there is a considerable amount of research 
that examines the effectiveness of the transfer of learning 
(TAM) models and the ease of use among faculty when 
220
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

training for online teaching [12][16]. For example, Agarwal 
and Prasad [16] describe how training affects the 
participants’ perceptions of usefulness for the technology, 
and that people more highly educated or trained with the use 
of technology are more likely to adopt technology for 
teaching. More directly related to this study, Gegenfurtner, 
Veermans, Festner, and Gruber [17] found that the way the 
person perceives training may impact the decision to apply 
knowledge gained from the training. In an analysis of current 
and effective training strategies for preparing faculty to teach 
online Lackey concluded that online “preparation strategies 
should include both technical and pedagogical training” [18]. 
Meyer lists examples of 12 faculty development 
programs offered across the US. The programs come in a 
wide range of time spans and delivery modes. Meyer notes 
that some of the programs were offered with little or no in-
depth evaluations from participants. As Meyer advances, and 
the writers of this paper agree, the evaluation of a faculty 
development program is a great way to learn what is working 
in the program [10].  Meyer found that often faculty 
development programs are created using Adult Learning 
Theory, or andragogy, which originated with Malcolm 
Knowles [10].  
Knowles delineated several characteristics of adult 
learners: adult learners like to take charge of their own 
learning experiences, and they like to be respected for the 
knowledge they bring to the learning environment. In 
addition, they like to know why they are learning something 
and what they will do with what they have learned [19]. 
While adult learners like to take charge of their own learning 
experiences, institutions seeking to provide professional 
development opportunities must grapple with the fact that 
“individual faculty members have different learning styles, 
needs, knowledge, abilities, and attitudes with respect to 
developing online courses and teaching online.” The 
challenge with regard to faculty development is to provide “a 
spectrum 
of 
support 
and 
professional 
development 
opportunities for individual faculty members” [20, p. 21]. 
Also in relation to adult learning, Mezirow describes 
transformative learning, which he explains assists adult 
learners in “reach[ing] their objectives in such as way that 
they will function as more autonomous, responsible 
thinkers” [21, p. 8].  
Professional development for online instructors, in both 
online and face-to-face formats, can create effective informal 
learning whereby participants in the training collaborate, 
share, discuss, and reflect on different technologies, 
pedagogies and practices [22]. In this way, participants 
construct knowledge and transfer learning with each other. It 
is anticipated that this experience would be heightened and 
even more beneficial in an advanced faculty online 
professional development program where the participants 
already have online training and online teaching experience. 
Orr contends that as a faculty member gains more experience 
teaching online, his or her needs with regard to professional 
development change. Orr notes that faculty surveyed 
expressed a need for advanced faculty development, a need 
that institutions had not yet responded to [23, p. 265]. 
Additionally, researchers have not yet investigated such 
perceptions 
of 
implementing 
an 
advanced 
faculty 
professional development program, as addressed by this 
study. The specific research questions addressed in this 
article are the following: 
1. How do faculty perceive the effectiveness of an 
advanced 
professional 
development 
workshop 
designed for online course building? 
2. What changes do faculty recommend making to the 
advanced 
professional 
development 
workshop 
designed for online course building? 
III. 
METHODS 
To address the increasing demand for online and hybrid 
university courses and provide university-level faculty with 
the incentive, knowledge, and skills to develop and deliver 
well-constructed online and hybrid courses, a professional 
training program known as "The Project" was created in 
January 2013. “The Project” was created to provide faculty 
within a college who are already teaching online with 
advanced tools and pedagogy to develop future online 
courses. For the first iteration of “The Project” online 
modules were created, run, and analyzed by online 
coordinators, designated faculty representing nine academic 
departments in the College of Humanities and Social 
Sciences who act as a liaison between department faculty 
and the Office of Distance Education (ODE) in the college. 
Since faculty serving as online coordinators completed the 
alpha testing for “The Project” there was an element of 
‘creators bias’ in the study [1].  
In their role as program developers, the coordinators 
initially generated and tested 11 learning modules on various 
topics addressing online course building and instruction. The 
11 modules created for alpha testing over the course of five 
months, January to May 2013, are offered in Table I. 
 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF LEARNING MODULES INCLUDED IN 
THE’ALPHA TEST’ ITERATION OF “THE PROJECT” 
Learning Modules 
Module 1: Latest Research Into Successful Online Learning 
Module 2: Best Practices in Mobile Learning  
Module 3: Faculty Presence in Online Courses 
Module 4: Get Your Students’ Heads INTO the Clouds: Cloud 
Computing 
Module 5: Strong and Effective Types of Feedback 
Module 6: Taking the Long View: How Online Learning Has 
Changed at the University 
Module 7: Lessons Learned: Five Tips I Would Share with New 
Online Coordinators 
Module 8: Creative Assignments in the Online Classroom: The 
Virtual Classroom 
Module 9: Learner-Content Interaction in Online Courses 
Module 10: Real Online Programs at the University 
Module 11: Social Media in Online Teaching 
 
Based on the findings from the alpha test of “The 
Project” [1], a team comprised of two online coordinators, 
the CHSS ODE director, and a student worker revised “The 
221
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Project” in August 2013 by eliminating extraneous content, 
adding modules that were found valuable to those with 
online course building and instruction experience, and 
reorganizing the program’s content for other faculty who 
desired further training in online course building and online 
teaching. This version of “The Project” would run as the 
pilot test in fall 2013 with 12 faculty. The program’s 
finalized content is offered in Table II. 
 
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF LEARNING MODULES INCLUDED IN THE PILOT 
VERSION OF “THE PROJECT” 
 
Category of 
 Module 
Name of module  
Pedagogy/ 
Online Teaching 
Latest Research Into Successful Online Learning;  
“Faculty Presence” in Online Courses; Strong and 
Effective Types of Feedback; Learner -Content 
Interaction in Online Courses; Work Smarter, Not 
Harder*; Improving Retention in Online Courses* 
 
 
Trends 
Best Practices in Mobile Learning; Get Your 
Students’ Heads INTO the Clouds: Cloud 
Computing; Creative Assignments in the Online 
Classroom: The Virtual Museum; The Use of 
Social Media in Online Teaching 
Technology 
Panopto*; SoftChalk*; VoiceThread*; Tiki Toki*; 
Doceri* 
*New content added for the pilot version of “The Project” 
 
Faculty members were accepted into the program by an 
application process. Only faculty who had successfully 
completed the college’s “Build a Web Course” workshop 
and previously taught online or hybrid courses were eligible 
to apply. There were four expectations of the advanced 
faculty development training program: (a) Professional 
development modules must be completed on schedule, 
including participant or activity assignments; (b) An online 
or hybrid course must be built by the participant and 
delivered in one calendar year; (c) All of a participant's 
newly developed online or hybrid course must be submitted 
for college Quality Matters [24] pre-review nine months 
after starting the program; and (d) a participant’s online or 
hybrid course must pass a university Quality Matters Peer 
Review within one year of beginning “The Project”. 
Participants earned $1000 for completing all four tasks. 
“The Project” was hosted on the learning management 
system Desire2Learn from September 2013 to February 
2014. During the first three months of the program, 
participants had to complete 9 of 12 skills-update modules in 
one of three general topic areas: (a) pedagogy and online 
teaching, (b) trends in online teaching, and (c) technology for 
online teaching. By timeline, three modules had to be 
completed each month beginning in September and ending at 
the end of November. In terms of specific content areas, 
participants went through advanced online instructor training 
by covering such topics as successful student learning, 
faculty presence in online learning, improving retention in 
online courses, and best practices in mobile learning (Table 
II). 
During this skills training, participants were asked to 
relate their own experiences and methods of achieving a 
particular teaching goal when teaching an online class. For 
instance, one module addressed establishing instructor 
presence in an online course. At times participation required 
that faculty members share samples from their own courses. 
In other cases, self-assessment quizzes were used to verify 
content comprehension and retention. The aim was to have 
participants share information while learning from others at 
the same time. In this way, participants were not just 
presented with content but were offered the opportunity to 
engage in transformative learning. After learning about a tool 
or theory or pedagogical method, participants were asked to 
use the tool and share that work or to reflect upon the theory 
or pedagogical practice in their own teaching. These final 
exercises were shared with others on an asynchronous 
discussion board where fellow participants could view, 
comment on, and discuss results and observations. In this 
way, “the [n]ew information [was] only a resource in the 
adult learning process” [21, p. 10].  The participants engaged 
in transformative learning and were moved to consider and 
share 
whether 
various 
presented 
content 
could 
be 
incorporated into their current teaching practices, and if so, 
how. While the initial “Build a Web Course Workshop,” 
which was a pre-requisite for “The Project,” was crafted 
according to adult learning principles, “The Project” was 
created with an additional emphasis on transformative 
learning principles [21].  
Once 
the 
skills-update 
training 
was 
completed, 
participants next had to build an online or hybrid course. The 
course had to be fully functional, reflect the latest research in 
online teaching pedagogy, and be taught in the university 
within a year. In terms of particulars, participants were 
encouraged to incorporate such technologies as voiceover 
PowerPoint presentations, wikis, Panopto, SoftChalk, 
VoiceThread, Tiki Toki, Doceri, or social media in their 
course designs. Every module started with learning 
objectives. Modules routinely made use of discussion boards 
where participants were asked to reflect and interact by 
answering one or more directed questions relating to the 
material covered. 
The twelve faculty members participating in “The 
Project’s” first year rollout from Fall 2013 to Spring 2014 
consisted of seven females and five males. In terms of 
faculty rank, participants included two full professors, five 
associate professors, three assistant professors, one senior 
lecturer, and one part-time instructor. Collectively, the group 
had an average of 15.5 years of university-level teaching 
experience, 9.2 years of technology-enhanced teaching, and 
4.2 years of online teaching experience. At the conclusion of 
“The Project,” participants completed a survey to gauge 
perceptions of the professional development program, 
distinguish what they learned, and clarify what changes 
needed be made for future iterations of the program. Of the 
12 participating faculty, 9 responded to the survey. It should 
be noted that the relatively small sample size of this research 
(N=9) limits the generalizability of the findings. Therefore, 
222
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the presentation of faculty perceptions regarding the 
advanced faculty workshop for online course building should 
be considered in context and only applied to other contexts 
of comparable nature. To bolster the generalizability of these 
findings, larger samples should be studied over longer 
periods of time.  
This program afforded a unique opportunity to answer 
two emerging research questions in online instruction 
literature. These questions include (a) How do faculty 
perceive the effectiveness of an advanced professional 
development workshop for online course building? (b) And 
what changes do training program participants recommend 
for future advanced online course-building workshops? 
While “The Project” was principally designed to improve 
instructor online course-building and teaching abilities, it 
also served to gather information to refine an advanced 
course-building training program for future participants in 
the university it took place in as well as comparable settings. 
This inquiry-based research focused directly on faculty 
perceptions of advanced online teacher training. To answer 
the research questions advanced here, participants were 
administered a 20-item (Appendix A) questionnaire at the 
end of “The Project”. The questionnaire was electronically 
administered to the program's 12 faculty members. A general 
analysis of the open- and closed-ended survey responses was 
undertaken by focusing on the participants' satisfaction levels 
with “The Project” as well as by examining specific items 
addressing the program's components. The survey was 
designed with the Technology Acceptance Model in mind to 
ascertain whether the participants planned to use information 
and tools presented in the project. It was created and 
delivered via Qualtrics, a cloud-based application for 
surveys, which made the questionnaire more accessible. Nine 
of 12 participants completed the questionnaire, which was 
designed primarily to gauge the participants’ perceptions of 
having participated in and completed the professional 
development course. The analysis of the survey responses 
targeted the participants’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with 
the course and its specific components. This focus was 
adopted to gather information in an effort to answer the 
research questions and refine the course for future use. The 
results of participant feedback follow. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
“The Project” participants were generally positive about 
the ability of “The Project” as an advanced faculty 
development workshop to effectively serve faculty who have 
completed the beginning “Build a Web Course” workshop 
(Fig. 1). A majority (73%) of the respondents were very 
satisfied or satisfied with the workshop (Fig. 2), and 27% 
were somewhat satisfied with the workshop, and 91% of the 
respondents stated that the training materials provided during 
the workshop assisted them in creating their online course 
content. All of the respondents liked the fact that “The 
Project” was completely online.  This was the feature that 
most participants liked best about “The Project”. One 
participant stated, “I like that it could be done completely on 
your own time.” Ninety-one percent of the respondents 
stated that after completing “The Project” they were better 
equipped to teach an online or hybrid course (Fig. 3).  
Related to this question, participants felt that the updated 
information about online pedagogy, along with technology 
expertise that they obtained through the workshop 
specifically helped better equip them to teach online. 
Pedagogy, first, and then technology were the two categories 
of modules from the workshop that were considered the most 
helpful for the participants. The modules on trends were not 
selected as helpful to the participants. 
Some of the feedback indicated aspects of the workshop 
that the participants liked the least or felt that could be 
improved for future iterations of “The Project”. These 
included the need for more timely feedback and instructor 
presence in the modules and the perceived drawback of 
being limited to completing three of the five modules in each 
of the three sections of the workshop. Some participants 
mentioned that they did not like the way that the workshop 
was designed where after the deadline to complete a section 
of the workshop passed, access to the modules in that section 
were closed. Some participants suggested having all the 
sections of the workshop open the entire time of the 
workshop, thereby allowing participants to move through the 
modules at their own pace and perhaps do more than the 
three required modules if desired. One participant even 
recommended 
permitting 
“binge” 
learning, 
where 
participants could go through the entire workshop in a very 
short space of time and then spend the rest of the time 
developing their own online courses. 
All of the workshop participants stated that they would 
recommend “The Project” to other faculty. With the 
exception of one participant, the respondents to the survey 
about “The Project” felt that this workshop was designed at 
an appropriate level and that they were fairly compensated 
for the time and effort requirements of the workshop. While 
only one participant was not interested in participating again 
in any potential version of “The Project”, the rest of the 
participants expressed an interest in participating in future 
versions of “The Project”. Respondents were asked to what, 
if any, future version of “The Project” they would most like 
to see. The most popular potential version of the workshop 
was one in which “The Project” is completely updated every 
two 
years 
and 
opened 
to 
all 
faculty. 
223
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1. Responses to survey question # 1.
 
 
Figure 2. Responses to survey question # 20. 
Figure 3. Responses to survey question # 5. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
One of the concerns expressed about the feedback 
generated from our alpha test of “The Project” was the 
potential for biased evaluations from participants, given that 
these individuals also served as content developers for 
several of the project modules. While acknowledging that 
structure, content, and post-workshop survey questions were 
modified somewhat from the initial implementation, the 
feedback received from the pilot test participants closely 
mirrored that collected from the alpha test participants. 
Additionally, the post-workshop survey responses focus on 
three main findings: First, faculty in online workshops place 
similar value on the organization of content and immediacy 
of feedback. Second, participants perceive pedagogy and 
technology-related modules to be the most important content 
presented. Third, the revisions implemented were largely 
successful, but continual improvement is a necessary 
characteristic of any professional development programs in 
the rapidly changing landscape of online teaching and 
learning. A more detailed explanation of each of the findings 
follows. 
 
A. Characteristics of a Successful Online Professional 
Development Program 
 
Responses on the post-workshop surveys support the 
notion that modeling effective practices for online teaching 
and learning is arguably the preferred method for 
encouraging faculty to adopt those practices. Conversely, a 
poorly organized training environment with infrequent or 
uneven instructor presence does not appear to encourage 
faculty to reflect on and improve their own course design and 
online 
facilitation 
skills. 
Specifically, 
participants 
overwhelmingly reported that they liked the fact that this 
workshop was delivered entirely online. Qualitative 
responses to open-ended questions bemoaned the fact that in 
a few modules, or at various times during the workshop, 
instructor feedback was not as interactive or as prompt as 
participants would have liked. Similarly, several participants 
reported a desire for immediate acknowledgement of 
assignment submission and activity completion, which 
reinforces the suggestion that prompt feedback is important 
[25], and that may be especially true in the asynchronous 
online environment [26]. Finally, faculty as students did not 
0% 
36% 
64% 
0% 
 Question: Do you believe that "The 
Project" workshop will effectively serve 
faculty who have completed the "Build a 
Web Course" workshop and desire more 
professional development? 
No 
Somewhat 
Yes 
27% 
45% 
27%  0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 Overall, were you satisOied 
with the workshop? 
Very satisOied 
SatisOied 
Somewhat 
SatisOied 
91% 
0% 
9% 
After completing "The Project," do 
you believe that you are better 
equipped to teach an online/hybrid 
course? 
Yes 
No 
Don't know 
224
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

like the fact that the module availability was paced across the 
workshop period, thereby enforcing distributed practice and 
content mastery. Instead, survey responses reflected the 
participants’ desire for immediate access to all course 
materials so they could “binge’ learn (actual survey 
response) and focus only on their preferred learning modules 
from among those developed for The Project. This expressed 
preference to direct their own learning reinforces Knowles’ 
[19] earlier characterization of adult learners. Despite any 
real or perceived shortcomings of this second iteration/pilot 
version 
of 
this 
advanced 
professional 
development 
workshop, however, “The Project” continued to be quite 
positively received; all respondents reported that they would 
recommend it to other colleagues and reported that they 
would complete “The Project” again once the content is 
updated to reflect new research and technologies. 
 
B. Content Focus for an Advanced Professional 
Development Program 
A second finding that emerged from participant feedback 
is that they distinguished both pedagogy and technology 
modules as the most important content areas in the workshop 
for furthering one’s online teaching abilities. Indeed, 64% of 
participants noted that of the 12 modules in “The Project,” 
covering three online education topic areas  (i.e., pedagogy 
and online teaching, trends in online teaching, and 
technology for online teaching), the topic deemed most 
valuable to the program was pedagogy for online teaching. 
Ninety-one percent of respondents believed they were 
improved online teachers based on their “The Project” 
experience, due especially to content that emphasized 
pedagogy. These comments substantiated this finding: “I 
really liked the theory part of the course, because it allowed 
us to step back and get a look at the context of what we are 
doing.” And “The course made me think again about online 
pedagogy and how to teach an effective online class.” These 
responses are in line with Orr’s findings that experienced 
online faculty seek to create and deliver high quality courses 
and want feedback regarding how to improve their courses 
[23]. These responses also support Mezirow’s theory of 
transformative learning [21]. By being asked to revisit their 
online practices and discuss these practices online with other 
online teaching veterans—often also providing screenshots 
of their online courses with explanations of various 
practices—faculty were able to reflect on their goals and 
motivations for various activities. As a result, they often  
“arrive[d] at a transformative insight” [27, p. 20] that 
allowed them to transfer concepts presented in “The Project” 
into 
improved 
learning 
experiences 
for 
students. 
Additionally, a clear preference for the technology-focused 
modules and their relevance to pedagogy emerged via both 
the quantitative ratings of those modules and the qualitative 
comments, such as: “Use of better technology to mark online 
presence,” “I appreciated learning about SoftChalk and 
immediately incorporated into my online course,” and 
“SoftChalk and Panopto are two very useful softwares that I 
am using in creating my classes.” This second finding fits 
with Stephenson’s [28] perennial work on online education 
that emphasizes the importance of pedagogy to online 
instruction. This finding also supports the significance of the 
growing body of pedagogical theories being taught in 
training programs for online instruction and being referenced 
and tested in social scientific research (e.g., Technology 
Acceptance Model [16] and Theory of Action [29]). 
Specifically, the Technology Acceptance Model suggests 
that the perceived usefulness and ease of use of the 
technology will increase the users’ acceptance of the tool. 
Overall, these results lead us to concur with Lackey’s [18] 
previously stated view about the importance of including 
both techniques and pedagogy in online training strategies. 
 
C. Continual Improvement is Critical for a Successful 
Online Professional Development Program 
 
Assessment has been and will continue to be an essential 
component of “The Project”. The feedback generated during 
the first iteration of “The Project” underscored a need for and 
guided the revision process that resulted in the structural and 
content changes in the current version of the workshop. As 
evidenced by the qualitative feedback provided by the 
current participant group, the revisions were largely 
successful as “The Project” was well-received by a group of 
experienced faculty who were not involved in the 
development of the workshop content. Nevertheless, the 
most recent participants identified several areas for 
improvement 
and 
future 
enhancements. 
Additionally, 
participants continued to acknowledge the importance of 
continued skill development as part of their experiences in 
“The Project”. As Burke and Hutchins [12] as well as 
Gegaenfurtner, Veermans, Festner, and Gruber [17] note, 
emphasis on skill development is an important component of 
any effective instructor development program, especially for 
one focused on online teaching. Several responses support 
attention to online skills training: (a) “Learning about and 
practicing new technologies for online teaching,” (b) “I 
learned a bit more about online pedagogy (the importance of 
timely feedback and instructor presence, etc.) and a few 
techniques and tools to add to classes (like Tiki-Toki),” and 
(c) “It helps to keep "fresh" with this stuff! It's absolutely 
necessary actually!” In summary, “The Project” appears to 
serve as a meaningful experience and, with consistent 
assessment focused on continuous improvement and 
technological advances, this workshop model should remain 
a viable alternative for continuing professional development 
in the years to come. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The favorable results of this study make plain that “The 
Project” provides a formal structure for colleges and 
universities who have yet to establish a similar advanced 
faculty development program. Moreover, the study offers 
added insights to developers of teacher training programs. 
These insights include: (a) based on participant feedback, 
emphasis on pedagogy must be the cornerstone of any 
faculty-development online teaching program; (b) colleges 
and universities are justified in offering skill-development 
225
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

training to faculty with minimum and extensive online 
teaching experience, because new teaching technologies 
continue to emerge; and (c) developers are encouraged to 
seek regular feedback from program participants in order to 
assess and revise program components and, as a 
consequence, maximize faculty development. It is important 
to seek faculty input on faculty development opportunities 
both to gain feedback for real improvement and to encourage 
faculty buy-in [20]. In this respect, this research goes far in 
addressing an area of deficiency in faculty development 
programs – the lack of participant analysis and evaluation 
previously noted by Meyer [10].  
     As can be seen in Table II, five modules were added to 
The Project after it was alpha tested. Moreover, two modules 
on pedagogy were added: “Work Smarter, Not Harder” with 
timesaving tips for online teachers; and “Improving 
Retention in Online, Hybrid, and F2F Courses” with 
research-based strategies and templates for improving course 
retention. The ODE will continue to revise and modify 
modules so that faculty members with advanced online 
teaching experience will benefit from The Project.  
As noted in the introduction, this study provides a unique 
opportunity to examine faculty perceptions of an advanced 
development program for online course building. Although 
the findings of this research yield positive results, several 
areas merit future research. First, similar research should 
draw from a larger sample size.  Second, researchers should 
evaluate the transference of technology skills as a result of 
completing the workshop. Third and last, future research 
should examine the impact such workshops may have on 
student learning. Such future research will provide a fuller 
picture of how an advanced faculty development workshop 
impacts faculty teaching and students’ learning.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Kennesaw State University’s College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences Office of the Dean and its 
CHSS Office of Distance Education for its support of the 
college’s faculty development opportunities. We would also 
like to thank the faculty participants in “The Project” for 
taking the time to provide us with valuable feedback about 
the workshop.  
 
 
 
APPENDIX A: SURVEY ITEMS 
Question 1: Do you believe that "The Project" workshop will effectively 
serve faculty who have completed the "Build a Web Course" workshop and 
desire more professional development? 
o 
No  
o 
Somewhat  
o 
Can’t say/don’t know 
o 
Yes 
Question 2:  Do you like the fact that "The Project" was all online? 
o 
No  
o 
Somewhat  
o 
Can’t say/don’t know 
o 
Yes 
Question 3:  What category of modules was most helpful to you? 
o 
None 
o 
Pedagogy/online teaching 
o 
Trends 
o 
Technology 
o 
Other 
Question 4: What category of modules was least helpful to you? 
o 
None 
o 
Pedagogy/online teaching 
o 
Trends 
o 
Technology 
o 
Other 
Question 5:  After completing "The Project," do you believe that you are 
better equipped to teach an online/hybrid course? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 5a.  If you answered "yes," above, would you please share an 
example of how you feel you are better equipped to teach an online/hybrid 
course 
Question 6:  After completing "The Project," do you feel you are better 
equipped to incorporate technology into your face to face classes? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
o 
N/A 
Question 6a. If you answered "yes," above, would you please share an 
example of how you feel you are better equipped to incorporate technology 
into your face to face course 
Question 7: What did you like least about "The Project"? 
Question  8: What did you like most about "The Project"? 
Question 9: What changes would you make to better serve faculty who 
enroll in "The Project" workshop? 
Question 10: For each module below, if you did not participate in the 
module, click "not applicable." If you did participate in the module, please 
rank its value to you (usefulness, helpfulness) on a scale of 1-10, with 1 
being "I felt like I wasted my time" and 10 being "It changed my life." 
Quality Matters 
Tiki Toki 
Soft Chalk 
Social Media 
Hot Potatoes 
MicroPoll 
The Schedule Assignment 
Grade Mark 
The Virtual Owl 
Brain Shark 
Cloud Computing 
The Virtual Museum/Blogging 
VoiceThread 
Faculty Presence 
Mobile Learning 
Doceri 
Latest Research into Effective Online Learning 
Strong and Effective Feedback 
Panopto 
Question 11:  What would you add to "The Project"? 
Question 12:  Do you believe that “The Project” was an appropriate 
level/time requirement of faculty development for you‚you were asked to 
contribute an appropriate amount of time and work both on your own 
course and the professional development, you were compensated 
adequately, and you gained skills needed? 
Question 13: We have had suggestions for various ways to use “The 
Project” for advanced faculty development. Option 1: Run two versions: 
one focused on pedagogy and latest research, and one focused on tools and 
trends. Faculty can participate in each one once. Option 2: Run three 
versions: one focused on pedagogy, one focused on latest research, and one 
226
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

focused on tools. Faculty can participate in each one once. Option 3: "The 
Project" will be completely updated every two years, and all faculty will be 
eligible to participate in it again. Do any of these ideas interest you, or do 
you have other suggestions? 
Question 14: Would you recommend “The Project” to other faculty? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 15: Did the training materials provided to you during the 
workshop assist you in creating course content? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 16: Was the design of the workshop logical and clear? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 17: Did the facilitator provide adequate support as you created 
your online or hybrid course? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 18: During the QM evaluation portion of the course (as the QM 
rubric was applied to your course), were you and your course treated with 
care and respect? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 19: During the workshop were your questions related to designing 
and delivering online and hybrid courses answered adequately and 
respectfully? 
o 
Yes 
o 
No 
o 
Don’t know 
Question 20:  Overall, were you satisfied with the workshop? 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Terantino, V. Slinger-Friedman, G. Thomas, C. Randall, P. 
Aust, and T. Powell, “Faculty perceptions of “The Project”: 
An advanced faculty professional development for online 
course building,” The Sixth International Conference on 
Mobile, Hybrid, and Online Learning (eLmL 2014). IARIA 
March 23 – 27, 2014, pp. 69-74. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
elml_2014_3_40_50059.2014.12.01. 
[2] L.M. Lane, “An open, online class to prepare faculty to teach 
online,” Journal of Educators Online, vol. 10(1), 2013, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thejeo.com/Archives/Volume10Number1/Lane.pd
f. 2014.12.01 
[3] M. Northcote, D. Reynaud, and P. Beamish, “Teaching the 
lecturers: Academic staff learning about online teaching,” US-
China Education Review, vol. A(4), pp. 384-393, 2012. 
[4] I.E. Allen, J. Seaman, D. Lederman, and S. Jaschik, 
“Conflicted: Faculty and online education,” A joint project of 
the Babson Survey Research Group and Inside Higher Ed, 
pp.1-48, 
2012. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED535214.pdf 2014.12.01 
[5] I.E. Allen and J. Seaman, “Class differences: Online 
education in the United States,  2010,” The Sloan Consortium, 
pp. 
1-30, 
2010. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://sloanconsortium.org/publications/survey/class_differen
ces. 2014.12.01 
[6] C. Carlson, P. Aust, J. McNeill, T. Powell, and L. Witt, 
“Which technology do I use to teach online: New media and 
communication course instruction,” The Journal of Online 
Learning and Teaching, vol. 8(4), 2012, pp. 334-347, [Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol8no4/carlson_1212.htm. 2014.12.01 
[7] E.T. Jones, J.R. Lindner, T.H. Murphy, and K.E. Dooley,  
“Faculty philosophical position toward distance education: 
Competency, value, and educational technology support,” The 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, vol. 5(1), 2002, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/spring51/jones51.htm. 
2014.12.01 
[8] B. Means, Y. Toyama, R. Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones, 
Evaluation of evidence-based practices in online learning: A 
meta-analysis and review of online learning studies. (Contract  
No. ED-04-CO-0040) Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of 
Education, pp. 1-66, 2010. 
[9] M. Fetzner, “What Do Unsuccessful Online Students Want Us 
to Know?” Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, vol 
17(1), 
2013, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://onlinelearningconsortium.org/sites/default/files/2_What
_Do_Unsuccessful_Online_Students_Want_Us_to_Know_0.p
df 2014.12.01 
[10] K.A. Meyer, “An Analysis of the Research on Faculty 
Development for Online Teaching and Identification of New 
Directions,” Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, vol 
17 
(4), 
2014, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://onlinelearningconsortium.org/sites/default/files/8-
meyer.pdf 2014.12.01 
[11] A. Barker, “Faculty development for teaching online: 
Educational and technological issues,” Faculty Development 
for Teaching Online, vol. 34(6), pp. 273-278, 2003. 
[12] L.A. Burke and H.M. Hutchins, “Training transfer: An 
integrative literature review,” Human Resource Development 
Review, pp. 264-297, 2007.  
[13] S. Gold, “A constructivist approach to online training for 
online 
teachers,” 
Journal 
of 
Asynchronous 
Learning 
Networks, vol. 5(1), pp. 35- 57, 2001. 
[14] J. Terantino and E. Agbehonou, “Comparing faculty 
perceptions of an online development course: Addressing 
faculty needs for online teaching,” Online Journal of Distance 
Learning Administration, vol. 15(2), 2012, available from 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/summer152/terantino_
agbehonou152.html 2014.12.01 
[15] K.L. Quinney, S.D. Smith, and Q. Gailbraith, “Bridging the 
gap: Self-directed staff technology training,” Information 
Technology and Libraries, 29 (4), 2010. Available from 
http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/ital/article/viewFile/313
1/2746 2014.12.01 
[16] R. Agarwal and J. Prasad, “Are individual differences 
germane 
to 
the 
acceptance 
of 
new 
information 
technologies?,” Decision Sciences, vol. 30(2), pp. 361-391, 
1999. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5915.1999.tb01614.x 
2014.12.01 
[17] A. Gegenfurtner, K. Veermans, D. Festner,  and H. Gruber, 
“Integrative literature review: Motivation to transfer training: 
An 
integrative 
literature 
review,” 
Human 
Resource 
Development Review, vol. 8, pp. 403-423, 2009. [Online] 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1534484309335970 
2014.12.01 
[18] K. Lackey, “Faculty development: An analysis of current and 
effective training strategies for preparing faculty to teach 
online,” Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 
vol. 
16(2), 
2013, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/winter144/lackey144.
html 2014.12.01 
[19] M. Knowles, The Adult Learner: A Neglected Species. Gulf 
Publishing Company, Houston, Texas. 1973 
[20] M. Britto, C. Ford, and J. Wise, “Three Institutions, Three 
Approaches, One Goal: Addressing Quality Assurance in 
Online Learning,” Journal of Asynchronous Learning 
Networks, 17 (4), pp. 11-24, 2014. [Online] Available from: 
227
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

http://jaln.sloanconsortium.org/index.php/jaln/article/viewFile
/402/62. 2014.12.01.  
[21] J. Mezirow, “Transformative learning: theory to practice,” 
New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, vol. 74, 
1997, 
[Online] 
Available 
from:  
http://www.esludwig.com/uploads/2/6/1/0/26105457/transfor
mative-learning-mezirow-1997.pdf. 2014.12.01 
[22] S. Bolt, “Professional development: Then and now,” 
International Association for Development of the Information 
Society, pp. 287-290, 2012. [Online] Available from: 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED542831.pdf. 2014.12.01 
[23] R. Orr, M. William, K. Pennington, “Institutional efforts to 
support faculty in online teaching,” Innovative Higher 
Education, vol 34, pp. 257 – 268, 2009. 
[24] Quality Matters: Higher Education > Course Reviews. (n.d.). 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.qualitymatters.org/reviews 2014.12.01 
[25] A. W. Chickering and Z. Gamson (Eds.), Applying the seven 
principles for good practice in undergraduate education. (47th 
ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991. 
[26] A.W. Chickering and S.C. Ehrmann, “Implementing the seven 
principles: Technology as lever,” American Association of 
Higher Education Bulletin, October 1996, [Online] Available 
from: 
http://www.tltgroup.org/programs/seven.html 
2014.12.01 
[27] J. Mezirow, “Learning to Think Like an Adult,” in J. Mezirow 
(Ed.) Learning As Transformation: Critical perspectives on a 
theory in progress. San Franscisco, CA: Jossey Bass, pp. 3-34, 
2000.  
[28] J. Stephenson, Teaching & learning online: Pedagogies for 
new technologies. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing, Inc., 2001. 
[29] F. Davis, R. Bagozzi, and P.R. Warshaw, “User acceptance of 
computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical 
models,” Management Science, vol. 35(8), pp. 982-1003, 
1989. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982 2014.12.01 
 
228
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

