 
 
Exploring the Medical Caregivers' Perceptions of Technology Acceptance for an 
Online Speech and Language Assessment Application Among Stroke Patients 
 
Awais Ahmad 
Computer and Systems Science,  
Mid Sweden University, 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: awais.ahmad@miun.se 
 
Karin Ahlin 
Service research Centre, 
Karlstad University, 
Karlstad, Sweden 
e-mail: Karin.ahlin@kau.se  
 
 
Peter Mozelius 
Computer and Systems Science 
Mid Sweden University, 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: Peter.mozelius@miun.se
 
                                                                       Ali Hassan Sodhro 
Department of Computer Science 
Kristianstad University 
Kristianstad, Sweden 
email: ali.hassan_sodhro@hkr.se 
 
Abstract— Stroke is a globally increasing disease and speech and 
language deficiencies are common in stroke survivors. To 
facilitate medical caregivers in their professional work and to 
improve patients’ quality of life, technology can play an 
important role.  However, the use and acceptance of technology 
are uncertain and more research is needed in this direction. This 
study evaluates the technology acceptance and adoption of an 
online speech and language assessment application. The 
evaluation-focused Design Science Research strategy was 
adopted for that purpose. Two physiotherapists, one 
occupational therapist and three speech therapists participated 
in the study. The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT) was used as the theoretical base for 
interview questions formation and data analysis. The study 
findings show that the suggested application is useful and easy 
to use; however, it should be better synchronised with speech 
therapists’ daily work routines. The speech therapists stressed 
that the functionalities of the application should be designed in 
close collaboration with them, and it should be compatible with 
the already existing systems and services in place.  Due to 
impairments after stroke, the patients have some specific 
preferences for software and hardware; such as a tablet with a 
touch pen is the preferred hardware. Additionally, the interface 
should have bigger text fonts and pictures, and highly 
contrastive colours in the graphics should be used for patients’ 
convenience. The user’s privacy and security, the patient’s 
current health, and their previous knowledge and experience 
with technology were also found important determinants for the 
intention to use the given technology.  
Keywords-Technology 
acceptance; 
Speech 
and 
language 
relearning; Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT); eHealth; Stroke.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
This study serves as an extension of a previously 
published paper wherein we delved into the perceptions of 
medical caregivers regarding the acceptance of technology 
for an online speech and language assessment application 
among stroke patients [1]. In this current study endeavour, we 
have undertaken a comprehensive and detailed analysis of the 
data, specifically focusing on the perspectives of speech 
therapists. Furthermore, we have presented and discussed the 
related work more elaborately. 
In the rapidly growing proportion of older adults in the 
global population, age-related chronic diseases are increasing 
[1], [2]. Stroke is a disease where survivors often suffer from 
both physical and mental impairments [3]. The impairments 
after stroke have a serious impact on patients' overall daily 
life quality and often a patient's friends and relatives are 
affected [4], [5]. Stroke impairments and rehabilitation after 
stroke can be divided into motoric, cognitive and speech 
disabilities [6]. This study focuses on speech impairments 
and the use of a technology-enhanced system to assess speech 
and language impairment and to find a relevant rehabilitation 
plan. 
After a stroke, a patient's ability to read, write, speak and 
listen can be decreased to different degrees depending on how 
the stroke affected their brain [7]. Stroke patients' social and 
professional life is often severely affected, which can lead to 
an isolated and depressed state of mind.  An important part of 
a successful rehabilitation process is early assessment of the 
speech and language impairments and to start relearning as 
soon as possible. Speech therapists often work with pen-and-
paper-based assessment systems where calculating results, 
storing statistics, and measuring progress are time-
consuming tasks. This study evaluates a prototype of the 
digitalisation 
of 
the 
pen-and-paper-based 
language 
assessment system 'A-ning'. 
A-ning is a Swedish word that could be translated to 
English as a 'clue', symbolising the important idea of getting 
a clue to the mystery of which speech and language 
relearning activities the actual patient needs. The A-ning 
system has at least three user roles: stroke patients, speech 
therapists and health administrators. This first evaluation of 
the digital prototype only involves the speech therapist's 
perspective, and this must be followed up later by tests with 
the other user groups. Three speech therapists with long 
professional careers participated in the tests for this study, 
where interview questions and data analysis were based on 
the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) [8].  
1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Despite the fact that several advanced and sophisticated 
technologies are available in the health sector, the use and 
acceptance of these technologies are doubtful and more 
research is needed to find the critical factors that might affect 
technology acceptance [9]-[13]. UTAUT model [14] has 
been widely used in research to evaluate the effectiveness and 
adoption of technology-enhanced systems [12], [15], [16]. 
This study is aimed to access and evaluate the technology 
acceptances of an eHealth application by using the UTAUT 
as a theoretical model.  
The addressed research question was:  
What is the technology acceptance of a speech and 
language assessment application from medical caregivers’ 
viewpoint? 
This study contributes to technology-enhanced speech 
and language relearning by co-creating and evaluating an 
online speech and language assessment application. The 
speech and language relearning process starts with an initial 
assessment to diagnose the patient’s current speech and 
language deficiency. The manual assessment system is 
complex and time taking for speech therapists, which makes 
it difficult for already physically and mentally impaired 
patients to concentrate on the assessment exercises. 
Therefore, the assessment application was developed in close 
cooperation with speech therapists. The application was 
designed according to the gathered requirements from our 
previous study [17], and it was further developed according 
to the user’s feedback in the article [1].  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. An 
extended literature review is presented in Section II. In 
Section III, the UTAUT theory is presented as the theoretical 
framework of this study. An overview of the Speech and 
Language Assessment Application (A-ning) is given in 
Section IV. Section V describes the adopted methodology for 
this study, while the study results and the discussion about 
those results are presented in Sections VI and VII, 
respectively. 
Finally, 
the 
study 
conclusion 
and 
recommendations for future work are presented in Section 
VIII. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Several studies have been conducted previously to 
explore general technology acceptance factors in different 
areas of life [9], [17]-[21]. However, research on technology 
acceptance for speech and language relearning is scarce. 
Most of the studies have not considered the technology 
acceptance for patients with different types of disabilities. To 
our knowledge, this is the first study to find the critical factors 
for acceptance of speech and language relearning with the 
help of an interactive software application. X Zhou et al. 
argued in their study that the use of mobile applications is 
effective for speech rehabilitation after stroke [22], however, 
some other studies highlighted that the patient's eyes sight is 
infected after stroke [5], [23]; hardware with a bigger screen 
such as laptop or tablet is more efficient for the stroke patients 
with an impaired vision [23]. Our study has, therefore, a 
broader scope where different kinds of hardware and 
software are considered. Many studies focused on the 
acceptance of ICT among older adults [18], [24]-[26]. 
 Since stroke is most common in elderly people [16], 
some of our findings are similar to studies conducted for 
older adults. The notion of smart and pervasive healthcare for 
Swedish older patients is presented by [26]. It is further 
highlighted how much technology helps them to be active and 
alert in their daily normal routines. Authors in [27]-[29] 
emphasised the role of mobile devices for instance tablets to 
monitor people with aphasia, stroke, and neuron disorder 
diseases. It is easier to detect their falling position and get to 
know about location awareness in their homes and parks. 
Because mobile devices with sensors and gyroscopes and 
accelerometers in their bodies are more helpful in predicting 
such incidents.  In [30], [31], the technology-driven 
relearning mechanism for speech and language patients is 
highly demanding to come back and regain their lost 
memories. 
 In this regard, design science is the key role player in 
providing 
state-of-the-art 
strategies 
and 
patterns 
of 
information collection and proper methods for its utilisation. 
Technological tools and trends have reshaped the entire 
world and COVID-19's critical situation at homes and 
workplaces. Online software and digital tools such as Zoom, 
Teams, skype and so on are key sources for video and 
teleconferences [32], [33]. It is essential to provide 
knowledge about technology and its proper utilisation to 
elderly and unaware people or individuals with critical 
diseases [32], [33].  Authors in [32], [33] also addressed the 
different ways of healthcare quality improvement with the 
help of emerging technological tools and evolutions. 
Researchers in [34], [35] presented technology-driven 
healthcare devices for data collection, classification, analysis 
and plotting for the proper recommendation to the experts and 
patients at the hospitals and medical centres.  
Also, these wearable devices are helpful for the elderly 
and critical patients to measure their vital-sign signals for 
example, electrocardiogram (ECG), blood pressure and 
temperature.  The technology revolution has made the lives 
of patients and healthcare comfortable and convenient, 
similarly [36] and [37] presents and discusses the role of 
internet-enabled therapy for problem analysis and mixed 
methods for clinical and healthcare analysis. 
Healthcare experts in association with technology experts 
and data scientists interact and interpret the collected and 
classified data for better analysis and results which is quite 
necessary for smart medical uses-cases.  An extensive review 
of the needs and acceptance rate of technology in today's 
world is addressed in [38], authors widely investigated the 
different tools, techniques, and methods for better and 
suitable recommendations to the medical centres.  The role of 
mobile edge computing technology and IoT devices in 
healthcare for elderly and remote patients at cost-effective 
rates and simple ways is presented in [39], [40]. It is also 
2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
encouraged that the authors have proper training and 
awareness sessions for new users with clear benefits and 
consequences about the technology and its implications for 
the users.  
Overall, the acceptance of online speech and language 
assessment applications is likely to be influenced by a 
complex interplay of factors, including perceived usefulness, 
perceived ease of use, social influence, perceived credibility, 
and perceived compatibility. As such, developers of these 
applications need to consider these factors when designing 
and marketing their products. Additionally, providing 
adequate training and support to users may also help to 
improve technology acceptance and adoption. 
III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK: UNIFIED THEORY 
OF ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF TECHNOLOGY 
(UTAUT) 
The UTAUT model was designed to assess user 
behaviour and intention to use technology [13]. It is a 
synthesis of eight different theories and models that were 
previously designed for technology acceptance including the 
Technology 
Acceptance 
Model 
(TAM), 
a 
widely 
acknowledged model to identify the intention to use the 
technology [11], [14], [27].  
After comparing and synthesising those eight models, 
Venkatesh et al. [12] suggested that the intention to use 
technology depends upon four basic factors: performance 
expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence and 
facilitating conditions. Performance expectancy is explained 
in TAM as “perceived usefulness”, and effort expectancy is 
stated as “ease of use” in TAM. In other words, the UTAUT 
model can be seen as an extension of TAM as it adds two 
extra factors, social influence and facilitating conditions. 
Several studies highlighted that social influence such as the 
role of important others and facilitating conditions like 
education and training is important for technology 
acceptance [6], [23], [28], [29]. Therefore, the UTAUT 
model was preferred as the theoretical framework for this 
study. The UTAUT model suggests the following four 
technology acceptance elements. 
A. Performance expectancy 
Venkatesh et al. [12] defined performance expectancy as 
“the degree to which an individual believes that using the 
system will help him or her to attain gains in job 
performance” [13]. It is considered an important determinant 
of intention to use technology in many different studies [7]. 
Venkatesh et al. [12] highlight, the user should have a firm 
belief that the system will improve his/her productivity and 
performance, speed up the work tasks and it will make the 
work easier. 
B. Effort expectancy 
Effort expectancy describes the user’s belief in the ease 
of use of the system. Venkatesh et al. [12] stress that learning 
to operate the new system should be easy and quick, the use 
of the system should be effortless, and the interaction with 
the system should be understandable and clear. The system 
should take less time and effort to perform mechanical 
operations such as data input [7].  
C. Social influence 
Venkatesh et al. [12] described social influence as “The 
degree to which an individual perceives that important others 
believe he or she should use the new system”.  The beliefs of 
other influential and important people have a significant 
effect on the intention to use the system. In an organisation, 
the viewpoints of co-workers, supervisors and senior 
management play an important role in the acceptance of a 
technology-enhanced system.  
D. Facilitating conditions 
Venkatesh et al. [12] defined facilitating conditions as 
“The degree to which an individual believes that an 
organisational and technical infrastructure exists to support 
the use of the system”. The new system should be compatible 
and synchronised with the existing work routines and work 
style of the user. Guidance, clear instructions to use, and 
personalised support are the essential determinants for 
technology acceptance [7].  
IV. SPEECH AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT 
APPLICATION (A-NING) OVERVIEW 
Speech and language relearning start with an initial test of 
the patient’s communication loss after stroke; the test is 
called A-ning [30].  Despite the test being developed a long 
time ago (in 1995), it is still the most used and comprehensive 
test for language impairments in Sweden [31]. A-ning can be 
used by speech-language pathologists, teachers, and other 
professionals who work with individuals who have 
communication difficulties. The test is a standardised process 
conducted by speech therapists, and it consists of different 
assessment tasks. For example, the patient is asked to look at 
an image (see Figure 1) of an outdoor restaurant and describe 
the different activities there.   
 
 
Figure 1.  An example of a Patient’s task  
     
Speech and language assessment applications typically 
use a range of assessment tools and techniques to evaluate 
3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
different aspects of an individual's speech and language 
skills. For example, these tools may include standardized 
tests, observation, and analysis of the individual's spoken and 
written language. During a session with the patient, the 
speech therapist gives some points from 0 to 5 on each task. 
Those points are then calculated according to different 
language categories and the average of all those categories is 
calculated to summarise the assessment, which is quite a time 
taking process. Figure 2 presents the manual evaluation after 
the test.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Manual and paper-pen-based evaluation 
 
The speech therapists (Participants 1-3, Table 1) 
emphasised the need of converting this old paper-pen system 
to an online application. The application was co-created in 
close cooperation with speech therapists. As presented in 
Figure 3, after the session with the patient, the application 
presents auto-generated graphs.  
 
 
Figure 3. Digital Speech and Language Evaluation System  
 
Each graph presents a set of exercises that are related to a 
specific category. Different colours in the graphs present a 
patient's deficiency level; the green colour presents minor 
impairments, the yellow colour presents mild impairments 
and the red colour presents some major impairments. 
V. METHOD 
To explore and evaluate the technology acceptance of an 
online aphasia assessment application, the Evaluation 
Focused Design Science Research strategy was followed 
[32]. The assessment application was developed in 
collaboration with speech therapists at regional municipality 
rehabilitation. Six therapists participated in the study. Their 
location and years of experience in speech and language 
rehabilitation are presented in the following Table 1. 
 
TABLE I.  STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Participants 
Professional role 
Region 
Years of 
experience 
Participant 1 
Speech Therapist #1 
Stockholm 
25 
Participant 2 
Speech Therapist #2 Mid Sweden 
Region 
4 
Participant 3 
Speech Therapist #3 Mid Sweden 
Region 
5 
Participant 5 
Occupational 
Therapist 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
5 
Participant 6 
Physiotherapist #1 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
8 
Participant 7 
Physiotherapist #2 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
3 
 
Participants 4-6 work at the mobile stroke-rehabilitation 
team at the regional hospital. They offer rehabilitation 
services at the patient's home for those who are living within 
the 70 Km range from the hospital. The main reason to 
involve these participants was to explore the effect of social 
influence on technology acceptance.  
Following design science, the evaluation is conducted in 
two steps. First, the artefact was demonstrated for an initial 
evaluation and a detailed evaluation was conducted in the 
next step.   
A. Demonstrate artefact 
The purpose of this activity was to demonstrate and test 
the artefact in one case. In this activity, the application was 
tested and evaluated for technology acceptance with only one 
speech therapist (Participant 2). This type of initial 
4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
demonstration gives us an idea about how well the artefact 
addresses the identified 
problem in one scenario.  
Johannesson and Perjons [21] argue, if an artefact performs 
well in one case, there are some good possibilities that it 
might perform the same in many other cases.  
Figure 4 presents an overview of the artefact 
demonstration activity. The activity was carried out in two 
sub-activities. First, a test case was designed that contains 
five tasks followed by some interview questions (see 
APPENDIX I). The interview questions were developed 
using UTAUT as base knowledge [7], [13].  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Demonstrate artefacts Activity  
 
The activity was performed at the local municipality 
rehabilitation centre, one speech therapist (Participant 2) and 
all three researchers participated in this activity. After the 
session, the researchers discussed and analysed the data, and 
found that the application was effective for aphasia 
assessment; however, some changes and additional functions 
were 
suggested. 
The 
application 
was 
updated 
by 
implementing the suggested alterations and it was ready for a 
detailed evaluation. 
B. Evaluate artefacts 
After demonstrating the artefact, the next step was to 
make a detailed evaluation of the artefact. As suggested by 
Johannesson and Perjons [21], this activity aimed to evaluate 
whether the developed artefact solves the defined research 
problem or not. As presented in Figure 5, the activity was 
conducted in three sub-activities; analyse the context, select 
goals, and finally conduct the evaluation. The old aphasia 
evaluation system was paper-pen based while the new system 
is technology-enhanced; therefore, technology acceptance 
was analysed as a context and exploring technology 
acceptance of the new system was highlighted as an 
important goal for conducting the evaluation. As described in 
the artefact demonstration activity, UTAUT was used as 
theoretical base knowledge for data collection and analysis. 
Four sessions were conducted with all three speech 
therapists. In both demonstration and evaluation activities, 
the same interview questions and evaluation tasks were used 
(See APPENDIX I). Because of Covid-19, some participants 
were working from home, therefore, three sessions were 
conducted at the municipality rehabilitation centre, where 
two researchers participated online and only one researcher 
conducted the session at the rehabilitation centre. However, 
the last interview was entirely online where all the study 
participants and the researchers participated online. For data 
collection and recordings, the Zoom Meetings Platform was 
used [33].  
 
 
Figure 5.  Evaluate artefacts Activity  
 
 
Deductive thematic analysis was performed for data 
analysis [34]. First, the transcripts and audio recording were 
thoroughly examined and initial codes that were relevant to 
the technology acceptance of the artefact were selected. The 
defined codes were then categorised according to the 
determinant factors of the UTAUT model as initial themes. 
Thereafter, the important findings that were relevant to 
answer the research question were identified and presented in 
the findings section. 
C. Ethical considerations  
The rules and regulations from the Swedish Research 
Council (Codex) were followed for ethical considerations 
[35]. Before the interviews started, all the participants were 
informed that they could refuse to answer any question and 
cancel the interview at any time (before or during the 
interview). The privacy and anonymity of the study 
participants are also important to consider in research ethics  
where people are involved [36]. The interviews were 
recorded with the participants’ permissions and their 
anonymity was ensured. The interview recordings were 
stored in a secure database at the university that is only 
accessible to the relevant study researchers. 
 
VI. RESULTS 
To evaluate the technology acceptance, the results were 
thematically analysed and categorised according to the 
UTAUT model’s determinants: performance expectancy, 
effort 
expectancy, 
social 
influence 
and 
facilitating 
conditions. However, these categories were not enough to 
cover the contents of the interviews. Therefore, privacy and 
security, and previous knowledge and experience about 
technology were added as extra categories.   
5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
A. Performance expectancy 
This category explains the perceived usefulness of the 
online assessment application. All the study participants 
mentioned that the online application is beneficial for speech 
and 
language 
assessment 
(Participants 
1-3). 
The 
automatically generated points-based evaluation of language 
impairment was the most valued function in the application. 
The paper-pen-based and manual assessment involves 
several calculations that take a lot of time after the assessment 
session with patients (Participants 1, 2).  Speech therapist 3 
described,  
“The manual evaluation system was time taking and 
boring; it takes 40 minutes for me to conclude the evaluation 
and to transfer it to the hospital journal system”.  
The old paper and pen-based speech and language 
assessment system takes a lot of time to calculate the 
assessment points manually. After a session with the patient, 
the speech therapists have to do several calculations for 
diagnosing the patient’s impairment level. Thereafter, they 
transfer the gathered data to the hospital journal. Since the 
suggested online application makes these calculations 
digitally, it might be easy for speech therapists to transfer the 
patient's data to the hospital journal. Speech therapist 1 
suggested that the application should be automatically 
connected to the hospital journal system so that manual data 
entry into the journal system could be avoided. 
Speech therapist 1 mentioned, “The assessment tasks and 
exercises with the patients are performed in a different order 
and the final evaluation is categorised in a totally different 
sequence of exercises. Therefore, it is quite hectic to 
rearrange everything after the session with the patient and to 
calculate every point in a different sequence.” Figure 2 gives 
an overview of the paper-pen-based evaluation.   
In the existing paper-and-pen-based system, the sequence 
of performing events is different from the categorisation of 
exercises for the final presentation which makes it difficult to 
calculate the evaluation points. Since the new system makes 
the calculation automatic and the speech therapists do not 
have to do it manually, it might ease their job. However, the 
same sequence of performing the exercises and calculating 
the points might increase the ease of use of the application. 
Speech therapists 1 and 2 also suggested; there should be 
separate folders for different categories with descriptive 
names and all the exercises related to the same category 
should be presented in their dedicated folder. Hence, it will 
be easy for them to manage and conduct the test. 
Based on the speech therapist’s input during a session 
with the patient, the new calculation system diagnoses speech 
and language deficiency automatically. Participant 3 
described that the new system will help her with point-based 
diagnosis, and save data digitally. Figure 3 demonstrates the 
new digital assessment system. All the speech therapists 
acknowledged the usefulness of these coloured graphs as they 
make it easy to discuss with patients their health conditions 
(Participants 1-3). The patients will get a better idea of their 
impairments in different language categories and it will be 
easy for speech therapists to highlight in which category the 
patients need to put some more effort (Participant 3). 
B. Effort expectancy 
This category explores the ease of use of the software 
application. Speech therapists 2 and 3 found the application 
easy to use and navigate, however, speech therapist 1 found 
it difficult to navigate through the different functionalities of 
the application.  
Speech therapist 1 described, “The system is easy to use, 
interactive and self-descriptive; I can perform the tasks 
without any help or guidance. However, all the sub-tasks 
need more tailor-made alterations to synchronise the system 
with the existing system.” 
Speech therapist 2 used the application for the first time 
and it was easy for her to navigate throughout the entire 
process. She was able to perform the functions easily without 
any help or guidelines; however, she emphasised better 
synchronisation with the workflow of the existing system. 
For example, the sub-tasks in each exercise should be 
designed according to the previous paper and pen-based 
system. In a later interview, speech therapist 1 also said that 
the application should be altered to fit their daily work 
routines. 
An early user’s participation in system development and 
design also plays an important role in the technology 
acceptance of that system. During the interviews, it is 
observed that speech therapists 2 and 3 who were involved 
earlier (from the requirements identification phase), showed 
more interest and intention to use the system as compared to 
speech therapist 1 who participated only in the evaluation of 
the developed application.   
A continuation of the performance expectancy is the new 
calculation system, where participants 1-3 discussed the 
necessity of individualising the traffic light metaphor as well 
as interpreting it. There is a need for individualising the 
speech training, both relating to the patient's current health 
condition and goal with the speech training. Based on the 
latter, the system should allow follow-ups and comparisons 
between the various test occasions. Speech therapists 1 and 2 
declared that they hoped for the patient to improve, as shown 
in the statistics, and that the system should help them to 
increase the degree of difficulty at each test occasion. The 
ultimate goal should be to get a detailed assessment system 
that could find more linguistic defects. Speech therapists 1 
and 2 declared that such a system would take at least five 
years to develop, but as brought up by Participant 1, there are 
several words and expressions in A-ning that today are 
obsolete and difficult to understand for younger patients and 
patients with a foreign background. An alternative is to 
update the existing A-ning system, or as suggested by 
Participants 2 and 3, the digitalisation could be carried out 
based on A-ning, but with the possibility to replace the A-
ning tests with some other test system in the future.       
The aforementioned is that statistics are the obvious gain 
of digitalising the assessment. To gain more efficiency should 
there be an overall workflow, with a starting point and the 
next 
assignment 
showing 
up, 
without 
interference. 
Participants 1 and 2 emphasise that they should be the ones 
choosing the assignments and that the order should be shown 
on an overview. All participants emphasised that there should 
6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
be possibilities to add individual notes, both for each 
assignment and on a general level, e.g., when an assessment 
is completed. Another important aspect of the system is that 
each category should be marked with one colour, improving 
the possibility to interpret the test results. One suggestion 
from Participants 1 and 2 is therefore to create folders with 
descriptive headlines, where assignments from each category 
could be stored 
C. Social influence 
This category explains the other co-workers’ views about 
the usefulness of the system. The viewpoints of speech 
therapists' colleagues (Participants 4-6) were used to assess 
the social influence. Moreover, speech therapist 2 discussed 
the usefulness of the applications with their fellow therapists; 
all the co-workers acknowledged the usefulness and a 
positive intention to use the assessment application 
(Participant 2). Stroke patients feel comfortable and 
motivated by getting treatment in their home environment 
and 
living 
independently 
(Participants 
4-6). 
The 
rehabilitation process is faster and more effective when the 
patients are at home with their significant others (Participants 
3, 4-6). Since the application provides the possibility of 
online sessions, the application will be useful for the patients 
as well as for the speech therapists (Participant 1). 
D.  Facilitating conditions 
This category discusses the availability of facilitating 
conditions such as technical infrastructure, education and 
training about the application functions, and personal support 
for the system. The requirements on technical infrastructure 
are several and focus on not solely converting the assessment 
from a paper-based assessment to a digital system. One 
example is the participants' emphasis on having different 
views for the patient and the speech therapist on every given 
occasion. Therefore, the patient's screen should show, e.g., 
one image, while the speech therapist should see several 
images and pick one for the patient. Another aspect is the 
possibility to change the size of the patient’s image to offer 
him/her the best possible resolution.     
One part of the assessment is for the patient to write, e.g., 
what is shown on the screen. Therefore, a touch pen is 
necessary, preferably on a tablet (Participants 1 - 3). The 
tablet’s size should allow both the patient and speech 
therapist to write on it. On occasion, the speech therapist 
needs to give written instructions, adding requirements on 
immediate digital interaction. Another patient assignment 
describes what is shown on the screen and creates a story, 
preferably recorded. The recording also needs to be played 
for further evaluation by the speech therapist.  
Previously described is that stroke patients often suffer 
from brain fatigue, offering small time slots of total energy. 
Therefore, there is a need to save the solved assignments and 
continue at another session not related to a specific speech 
therapist. Related to partly finished or fully finished 
assessment is the integration into any journal system. 
Participant 3 emphasises the importance of this requirement, 
describing that it takes 40 minutes of administration to cover 
this manually. 
E. Privacy and security 
Trust in the privacy and security of the users’ data was 
also a matter of concern for the participants. One part of 
privacy and security is that other speech therapists should be 
able to see the results from one assessment to create 
efficiency in the flow of patients. Still, the patient’s privacy 
and security should be in focus for the system. Somewhat 
contradictory to the patient’s privacy and security is the 
involvement of relatives or other secondary users. The 
secondary users are essential, depending on the patient’s 
condition and the wish for distance use. They should be able 
to help the patient, still not affecting the results of the 
assessment. 
F. Previous knowledge and experience 
The user's previous knowledge and experience with 
related technologies was another important factor for 
technology acceptance. During the interviews, it was 
observed that the participants who have previously used 
relearning applications in their work showed more interest in 
using the suggested application. The user’s participation in 
the design and development also enhances their knowledge 
and interest in the given technology. The speech therapist 
(Participant 2) who was involved throughout the process of 
the application’s co-creation showed the most enthusiasm 
and intention to use the application. However, the speech 
therapist (Participant 3) who was involved only in the 
evaluation phase, showed the least interest in using the 
application. 
 
VII. DISCUSSION 
The study aimed to explore the technology acceptance of 
the speech and language assessment application from 
medical caregivers’ viewpoints. The technology acceptance 
evaluation conducted on the speech and language assessment 
application has shown promising results for its usefulness and 
efficiency in aiding speech therapists. One of the significant 
benefits of the application is the automated diagnosis system 
that has significantly reduced the workload of speech 
therapists. Additionally, the system has provided an instant 
tool for speech therapists to discuss impairments with their 
patients, resulting in a more comprehensive and efficient 
treatment process. 
Furthermore, the online treatment functionality of the 
application has the potential to improve the quality of life and 
independent living for patients and their loved ones. The 
remote accessibility of treatment sessions eliminates the need 
for patients to travel, which can be particularly challenging 
for individuals with speech and language impairments. 
However, despite the advantages of the application, the 
study revealed some critical factors that can impact its 
technology acceptance and adoption. The usability and 
usefulness of the application for speech therapists can be 
enhanced by proper synchronization with the existing system 
in place. This means that all tasks and sub-tasks in the 
application must align with the existing workflow, and they 
7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
should be designed and developed in close collaboration with 
speech therapists. 
Moreover, the intention to use the technology is also 
influenced by early user participation in the system's 
development and design. Speech therapists who have been 
involved from the start of the application's development 
process have shown more interest in using the system 
compared to those who were only involved in the technology 
acceptance evaluation. Therefore, user participation and 
empowerment are crucial for the effective implementation of 
a technology-enhanced system. 
Since the medical caregivers (speech therapists in the 
study context) play an important role in the patient’s recovery 
and relearning, their viewpoints and participation in the 
system development are important [37]. The same 
phenomena are observed in this study; the participants with 
the most participation showed the most intention to use the 
application. The technology acceptance also depends upon 
the expected benefits of using the system. The unawareness 
of the potential benefits of a given technology and a fear to 
use that technology negatively affect the medical caregivers’ 
performance 
expectancy 
[38]. 
Therefore, 
continuous 
technical support and training are of great importance.  
There are several options while creating a digital version 
of the A-ning assessment system. One is to convert the paper-
based system to a digital version, adding the feature of 
creating better possibilities for speech therapists to use 
statistics, both for individual patients or synthesising statics 
for specific categories of patients or on an assignment level. 
The prototype adds such features, improving parts of the 
work for speech therapists. Another option is to, still based 
on the involvement of the speech therapists, create an online 
system, separating features for the speech therapists and the 
patient. Examples are immediate written interaction between 
the speech therapists and the patient’s screen or showing 
different images. The development could be done in steps, 
where one initial step could be integrated into various journal 
systems, offering immediate efficiency for the speech 
therapist. Creating an online system relies on various 
technical solutions, like recording or writing on one screen 
and reading on another. The interaction of being in the same 
room simultaneously needs to be replaced by other 
interactions and be based on the patient’s varying condition. 
A-ning is the most frequently used and comprehensive 
test for speech and language impairment in Sweden, and all 
participants find the system to be of high quality. However, 
natural languages like Swedish are entities that change over 
time and the test vocabulary involves some words that today 
must be classified as obsolete. Important for the younger 
generation of patients in a country where 20% of the 
population has a foreign origin. In the same way, as a 
thesaurus needs continuous updating, a language test system 
also needs updating. This looks like the most realistic 
alternative for the moment since the development of a new 
test system would be both costly and time-consuming. 
Authors find the analogue A-ning system to be a thorough 
and high-quality test system and a good foundation for further 
digitalisation. Some obvious contributions to the language 
relearning process in a further digitalised version of the 
system would be features for statistics and for measuring 
relearning progression.    
The relationship between a user’s personality and his/her 
behavioural intentions to use a given technology is complex 
and it depends upon several different factors. Such factors 
are, among others, trust in personal data security, personal 
integrity and privacy, previous experience with technology, 
and the willingness to learn new technologies. Moreover, the 
developed systems must be in line with social needs, highly 
compatible and flexible with clear guidance and coherent 
technology involvement [39], [40].  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The study explored the acceptance of an online speech 
and language assessment application. The factors that might 
affect the adoption and use of technology were also discussed 
in the study. The online evaluation seems more effective and 
efficient than the traditional manual system for speech 
therapists and it enables independent living for the patients. 
To enhance the performance expectancy, the potential users 
(speech therapists) should be involved throughout the 
application development process and all the application 
functionalities should be comprehensively discussed with 
them. The intention to use the application depends upon 
patients’ medical condition, active users’ participation in the 
application development, trust in the privacy and security of 
personal data, and providing users with proper education and 
training about the system.  
This evaluation was carried out with a speech therapist 
and caregiver perspective, which is an important part of the 
process. The next important step is to get the patient's 
perspective, in an evaluation that preferably also should 
involve some patients' relatives and friends. Furthermore, the 
multi-stakeholder approach should include administrative 
staff at health centres and hospitals to get their view on 
statistical features and security aspects. Finally, what seems 
like the most valuable contribution of a further digitalised 
system would be to implement more features for test result 
statistics, and for visualisation of relearning progression.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We are grateful to stroke rehabilitation therapists and the 
communal rehabilitation centre for co-creating and 
evaluating the speech and language relearning application 
with us. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ahmad, K. Ahlin, and P. Mozelius, “Technology 
Acceptance of an Online Speech and Language Assessment 
Application for Stroke Patients-the Medical Caregivers’ 
Viewpoints,” in Tenth International Conference on Global 
Health Challenges (GLOBAL HEALTH 2021), Barcelona, 
Spain, October 3-7, 2021. 
[2] M. Freund et al., “Effectiveness of information and 
communications technology interventions for stroke survivors 
and their support people: a systematic review,” Disability and 
Rehabilitation, pp. 1–16, 2021. 
8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[3] S. Palmcrantz et al., “An interactive distance solution for stroke 
rehabilitation in the home setting–A feasibility study,” 
Informatics for Health and Social Care, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 303–
320, 2017. 
[4] Y. Guo et al., “The Unmet Needs of Community-Dwelling 
Stroke Survivors: A Systematic Review of Qualitative 
Studies,” International journal of environmental research and 
public health, vol. 18, no. 4, p. 2140, 2021. 
[5] P. Mozelius, K. Ahlin, and A. Ahmad, “A game-based 
approach for motoric stroke rehabilitation: defining the 
requirements,” in ECGBL 2019, vol. 13. 
[6] K. Ahlin, A. Ahmad, and P. Mozelius, “Determining Testbed 
Requirements for Technology Enhanced Speech Rehabilitation 
after Stroke-the Informed Co-workers’ View Point,” in IARIA 
GLOBAL HEALTH International Conference on Global 
Health Challenges, 2019. 
[7] M. Tousignant et al., “Satisfaction with in-home speech 
telerehabilitation in post-stroke aphasia: an exploratory 
analysis,” Journal of the International Society for Telemedicine 
and eHealth, vol. 6, pp. e11-1, 2018. 
[8] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. Thong, and X. Xu, “Unified theory of 
acceptance and use of technology: A synthesis and the road 
ahead,” Journal of the association for Information Systems, 
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 328–376, 2016. 
[9]  A. Ahmad and P. Mozelius, “On the Importance of Tailor-
made    Speech Relearning Software for Stroke Rehabilitation,” 
in ICT4AWE 2020, vol. 6. 
[10] S. H. Fischer, D. David, B. H. Crotty, M. Dierks, and C. Safran, 
“Acceptance and use of health information technology by 
community-dwelling elders,” International journal of medical 
informatics, vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 624–635, 2014. 
[11] A. H. Zai, J. G. Ronquillo, R. Nieves, H. C. Chueh, J. C. 
Kvedar, and K. Jethwani, “Assessing hospital readmission risk 
factors in heart failure patients enrolled in a telemonitoring 
program,” 
International 
journal 
of 
telemedicine 
and 
applications, vol. 2013. 
[12] A. Kohnke, M. L. Cole, and R. Bush, “Incorporating UTAUT 
predictors for understanding home care patients’ and 
clinician’s acceptance of healthcare telemedicine equipment,” 
Journal of technology management & innovation, vol. 9, no. 2, 
pp. 29–41, 2014. 
[13] A. Ahmad, Å. Cajander, B. Johansson, Y. Tiblom Ehrsson, and 
U. Langegård, “Designing for Human Well-Being: A Case 
Study with Informal Caregivers of Individuals with Cancer,” in 
Challenges of Trustable AI and Added-Value on Health, IOS 
Press, 2022, pp. 214–218. 
[14] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
“User acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified 
view,” MIS quarterly, pp. 425–478, 2003. 
[15] A. J. De Veer, J. M. Peeters, A. E. Brabers, F. G. Schellevis, J. 
J. J. Rademakers, and A. L. Francke, “Determinants of the 
intention to use e-Health by community dwelling older 
people,” BMC health services research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 
2015. 
[16] V. L. Hanson, “Influencing technology adoption by older 
adults,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 502–
509, 2010. 
[17] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, and K. Ahlin, “Speech and Language 
Relearning for Stroke Patients-Understanding User Needs for 
Technology Enhancement,” in Proceedings of Thirteenth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine (eTELEMED 2021), Nice, France, 2021. 
[18] S. T. Peek, E. J. Wouters, J. Van Hoof, K. G. Luijkx, H. R. 
Boeije, and H. J. Vrijhoef, “Factors influencing acceptance of 
technology for aging in place: a systematic review,” 
International journal of medical informatics, vol. 83, no. 4, pp. 
235–248, 2014. 
[19] C. Scott Kruse, P. Karem, K. Shifflett, L. Vegi, K. Ravi, and 
M. Brooks, “Evaluating barriers to adopting telemedicine 
worldwide: a systematic review,” Journal of telemedicine and 
telecare, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 4–12, 2018. 
[20] C. K. Or and B.-T. Karsh, “A systematic review of patient 
acceptance of consumer health information technology,” 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 
16, no. 4, pp. 550–560, 2009. 
[21] L. de Vries, “Stroke Survivors general use of technical devices 
in their home environment and likelihood of using a potential 
digital application in their rehabilitation: A survey following 
Early Supported Discharge.” 2020. 
[22] X. Zhou, M. Du, and L. Zhou, “Use of mobile applications in 
post-stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review,” Topics in 
stroke rehabilitation, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 489–499, 2018. 
[23] M. B. Garcia, “A Speech Therapy Game Application for 
Aphasia Patient Neurorehabilitation–A Pilot Study of an 
mHealth App,” International Journal of Simulation: Systems, 
Science & Technology, vol. 20, 2019. 
[24] A. Ahmad and P. Mozelius, “Critical factors for human 
computer interaction of ehealth for older adults,” in 
Proceedings of the 2019 the 5th International Conference on e-
Society, e-Learning and e-Technologies, 2019, pp. 58–62. 
[25] S. H. Fischer, D. David, B. H. Crotty, M. Dierks, and C. Safran, 
“Acceptance and use of health information technology by 
community-dwelling elders,” International journal of medical 
informatics, vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 624–635, 2014. 
[26] L. T. Vassli and B. A. Farshchian, “Acceptance of health-
related ICT among elderly people living in the community: A 
systematic review of qualitative evidence,” International 
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 
99–116, 2018. 
[27] S. Wiklund Axelsson and A. Melander Wikman, “Ready for 
eHealth. Older Swedes’ perceptions of eHealth Services: Using 
the PIADS scale as a predictor for readiness,” Technologies, 
vol. 4, no. 3, p. 29, 2016. 
[28] K. Mallet et al., “RecoverNow: A patient perspective on the 
delivery of mobile tablet-based stroke rehabilitation in the 
acute care setting,” International Journal of Stroke, vol. 14, no. 
2, pp. 174–179, 2019. 
[29] J. Marshall et al., “Technology-enhanced writing therapy for 
people with aphasia: results of a quasi-randomized waitlist 
controlled study,” International journal of language & 
communication disorders, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 203–220, 2019. 
[30] E. Lindström and C. Werner, A-ning: neurolingvistisk 
afasiundersökning. Protokoll. Ersta högsk, 1995. 
[31] A. Ahmad, K. Ahlin, and P. Mozelius, “Technology-enhanced 
speech and language relearning for stroke patients-defining 
requirements for a software application development,” in 11th 
Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems 
(SCIS2020), Sundsvall, Sweden, 2020. 
[32] P. Johannesson and E. Perjons, An introduction to design 
science. Springer, 2014. 
[33] M. M. Archibald, R. C. Ambagtsheer, M. G. Casey, and M. 
Lawless, “Using zoom videoconferencing for qualitative data 
collection: perceptions and experiences of researchers and 
participants,” International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 
vol. 18, p. 1609406919874596, 2019. 
[34] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Thematic analysis,” 2012. 
[35] S. Eriksson, CODEX-Regler och riktlinjer för forskning. 
Forskning som involverar människan, 2015. 
[36] Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2014). Den kvalitativa 
forskningsintervjun. Lund: Studentlitteratur.  
[37] T. Simic, C. Leonard, L. Laird, J. Cupit, F. Höbler, and E. 
Rochon, “A usability study of internet-based therapy for 
naming deficits in aphasia,” American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 642–653, 2016. 
9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[38] A. Vaezipour, D. Aldridge, S. Koenig, D. Theodoros, and T. 
Russell, “‘It’s really exciting to think where it could go’: a 
mixed-method investigation of clinician acceptance, barriers 
and enablers of virtual reality technology in communication 
rehabilitation,” Disability and Rehabilitation, pp. 1–13, 2021. 
[39] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. Thong, and X. Xu, “Unified theory of 
acceptance and use of technology: A synthesis and the road 
ahead,” Journal of the association for Information Systems, 
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 328–376, 2016. 
[40] A. Ahmad et al., “Positive Design Framework for Carer 
eSupport: Qualitative Study to Support Informal Caregivers 
of Patients With Head and Neck Cancer in Sweden,” JMIR 
Cancer, vol. 9, no. 1, p. e45748, May 2023, doi: 
10.2196/45748. 
 
 
    
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
A. Evaluation Tasks of A-ning application 
1) 
Task 1 
Preplanning for a new patient 
• 
Create a new patient by giving information: 
• 
First name: Awais 
• 
Last Name: Ahmad 
• 
Personal no. : 8111150000 
• 
Speech therapist Name: Tove  
• 
Select the exercises 
2) 
Task 2 
Performing the exercises A2, A6, A7, A8 
• 
Complete the tasks for all the  
• 
Select an exercise 
• 
Write some comments in the comments box 
• 
Give some points 
3) 
Task 3 
Describing the evaluation 
I.Select the graph sign from the main page 
II. Describe the evaluation for different categories 
III. Describe the overall aphasia evaluation 
4) 
Task 4 
Changing the selected exercises during an ongoing evaluation 
• 
Select some exercises, which are not selected  
• 
Deselect some exercises, which are selected 
• 
Update the Information 
5) 
Task 5 
• 
Resuming a previously started evaluation 
B. Technology acceptance Interview questions 
1) 
Question 1. 
How easy-to-use was the system as compared to the old 
system? 
2) 
Question 2 
Which feature was difficult to use and what was easy to use? 
3) 
Question 3 
What are your recommendations to improve the interface? 
4) 
Question 4 
How do you see the usefulness of this system for patients and 
other speech therapists? 
5) 
Question 5 
What help do you need for the use of this system in terms of: 
• 
Infrastructure 
• 
Education/training 
 
 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

