Improving the Codification of Hospital Discharges with an ICD-9-CM Single-page 
Application and its Transition to ICD-10-CM/PCS 
Cecília Coimbra, Marisa Esteves, Filipe Miranda, Filipe Portela, Manuel Filipe Santos, José Machado * and 
António Abelha 
Algoritmi Research Centre 
Department of Informatics, University of Minho 
Braga, Portugal 
 e-mail: {id6881, id6884, id6883}@alunos.uminho.pt, {cfp, mfs}@dsi.uminho.pt, {jmac, abelha}@di.uminho.pt 
* Corresponding author  
 
Abstract—In recent years, in Centro Hospitalar do Porto 
(CHP), there has been felt an increasing need for a computerized 
clinical coding tool to aid in the codification of the episodes of 
hospital discharges from patients admitted to its healthcare 
units. The process was slow and performed manually by the 
coding professionals, so there was neither the centralization nor 
the unification of the information and processes associated with 
the clinical coding of a hospital discharge. Hereupon, in the 
context of this study, the aim of the present work was to design 
and develop a clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM to support the 
clinical practice in healthcare units. It additionally included its 
subsequent transition to the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS coding 
version. In short, the codification of hospital discharge processes 
enables the grouping of episodes into diagnosis-related groups 
(DRGs). The main motivation for the implementation of this 
classification system is that it provides a financial and patient 
classification system to contain the costs and waste associated 
with healthcare services. Thereby, a single-page application 
(SPA) for ICD-9-CM was designed in order to help health 
professionals of CHP in their daily work, namely the clinical 
coding of the episodes of hospital discharges, and it was 
subsequently updated to the ICD-10-CM/PCS coding version 
that predominantly improved specificity in describing clinical 
situations. The main advantages and contributions of the 
development and use of this Web application are the 
centralization of information and tasks associated with the 
coding of hospital discharges, the increase of productivity, and 
the reduction of wastes of time. Consequently, the ambition is 
sought to mainly improve the quantity and the quality of work 
performed by coding professionals at CHP. 
 
Keywords—ICD-9-CM; ICD-10-CM/PCS; Hospital Discharge; 
Diagnosis-related Group; Single-page Application; Proof of 
Concept. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The health sector represents a delicate situation for the 
professionals and the systems responsible for the storage and 
the processing of clinical data. The main problem with those 
processes is not in the lack of data but in the diversity and the 
complexity of the healthcare sector. Since an hospital offers a 
wide range of services for each patient and clinical condition, 
it leads to the creation of hundreds or even thousands of 
specific and unique situations for each one of them. It is then 
of utmost importance to find a way to measure a hospital 
productivity and aggregate the multiple activities performed at 
a healthcare unit.  
This specific situation led to the adaptation of the DRGs to 
this scenario. These kind of classification systems rely on a 
prior coding system that translates all the diagnoses, 
procedures, external causes, and morphologies into universal 
codes like ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM/PCS, increasing the 
semantic interoperability and highly reducing the ambiguity of 
a discharge report. DRGs are clinically coherent and similar 
groups that are expected to use the same level of hospital 
resources. 
The introduction of new Web frameworks and solutions for 
Web development resulted in a new wave of codification 
platforms for these types of coding systems. With modern 
layout and intelligent helping tools, it is possible to reduce 
considerably the codification errors, but also increasing the 
efficiency associated with the realization of those processes.  
Therefore, this paper presents an insight into the 
development, implementation, and impact analysis of a Web 
application directed to the ICD-9-CM codification in a major 
Portuguese hospital located in the north of the country – CHP 
[1]. On the other hand, it also includes its subsequent update 
to the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS coding version. This scientific 
research has been undergoing since the end of 2016. 
Thereby, the focus of this paper is mainly to highlight the 
differences between the prior method (by hand) and the new 
one with a computerized clinical coding tool, and the 
transition of the system from the ICD-9-CM coding version to 
ICD-10-CM/PCS. 
In Section II, the state of the art and similar works related 
to this topic are described. Thereafter, in Section III, the 
research methodologies adopted are presented in detail. 
Section IV – “Single-page Application” – presents the work 
developed and its main results regarding the two versions of 
the Web tool, followed by a brief Strengths Weaknesses 
Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis in Section V. In 
Section VI, the conclusion and future work conclude briefly 
this paper. 
II. STATE OF THE ART 
The present section intends to highlight the main theoretical 
topics addressed throughout this manuscript, and the theory 
behind the realization of this work, as well as the main studies 
from the scientific community regarding medical codification, 
including the subsections “Diagnosis-related Groups”, “ICD-
23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

9-CM Clinical Coding”, “ICD-10-CM/PCS Clinical Coding”, 
and “Interoperability: AIDA and AIDA-PCE”. 
A. Diagnosis-related Groups 
A patient classification system is a method in which the main 
objective is to group patients or disease episodes in order to 
make it possible to identify their similarities and differences, 
and therefore allowing that those who belong to the same class 
are treated similarly. 
In this context, DRGs consist of a patient classification 
system of patients hospitalized in acute hospitals that was 
developed in response to the rising costs and waste in the 
healthcare industry [2]–[4]. It groups patients into classes that 
are clinically consistent and similar in terms of resource 
consumption [2], [5]. Developed at the Yale University in the 
United States of America (USA) in the 60’s, it is used since 
1983 by Medicare to calculate the compensation in cases of 
hospitalization [6]. 
This classification system allows defining the set of goods 
and services that each patient receives according to his needs 
and the pathology that led to his hospitalization, as well as the 
defined treatment process. Thus, it is possible to relate the 
type of patients treated with the resource consumption [2]–[4], 
[7]. 
On the other hand, the concept of clinical coherence defines 
that the pathologies of the patients included in each DRG are 
related to an organ or system, or even with the etiology, and 
that the care provided is similarly the same for all the patients 
in that DRG [7]. A predetermined amount of money is 
disbursed to hospitals for the treatment of patients belonging 
to a given DRG, regardless of actual costs associated with the 
healthcare services provided to them [3], [4], [6], [8].  
Thereby, the main motivation behind the grouping of 
patients from health institutions into DRGs is that it provides a 
financial and patient classification system that uses the 
diagnoses, surgical interventions, age, gender, destination 
after discharge, and other related factors, as grouping criteria 
[2], [4], [8]. They were introduced in several countries, 
including Portugal, as a strategy for cost containment, 
planning, budgeting, management, and follow-up of the 
healthcare services provided to patients, reducing the 
disparities and errors [3], [6], [7]. 
The DRG requires a minimal dataset (MDS) in order to 
attribute one of the 25 main diagnosis categories to the 
discharge report [2]. So, the MDS includes, as follows [9]:  
• The main diagnosis responsible for the patient 
admission; 
• Other diagnoses; 
• Procedures performed on the patient during the 
internment; 
• Gender, age, and height; 
• Destination after discharge (transferred, death or 
discharged against medical order). 
Each DRG group has an associated relative weight and 
weighting coefficient, as well as an exception threshold for the 
number of hospitalization days that helps convert each case 
into equivalent patients [9].  
Wilm Quentin and colleagues in “Hospital Payment Based 
on Diagnosis-related Groups Differs in Europe and Holds 
Lessons for the United States” highlights the differences 
between the original DRG and the one that countries like 
France, England or even Portugal implement. This adaption is 
the basis of most European countries method to finance 
hospitals, proving to be less cost worthy with a high quality of 
services [3]. 
Carina Fourie et al. present in “Systematically Evaluating 
the Impact of Diagnosis-related Groups on Healthcare 
Delivery: A Matrix of Ethical Implications” a study of ethical 
implications and importance of the DRGs in diverse Swiss 
hospitals [6].  
On other hand, in order to highlight the diversity of the 
subject, Yantao Xin presented a comparison of the amount of 
medical waste generated in major healthcare units using as 
basis the DRGs [4].  
B. ICD-9-CM Clinical Coding 
For the purpose of coding hospital discharges in terms of 
diagnoses and procedures, in order to allow the subsequent 
grouping of those episodes in DRGs, the clinical coding 
“ICD-9-CM” is applied [8]. In short, it consists of a set of 
diagnosis and procedure codes used for the classification and 
coding of the morbidity and mortality information for 
statistical purposes, and for the indexing of hospital records by 
disease and surgical interventions. The information is then 
used for storage and research purposes. 
Thus, the DRG classification process is performed by a 
coding professional who must know the system and the 
classification structure of the ICD-9-CM clinical coding, 
understand the organization of the indexes and their use in the 
coding of diseases and procedures, as well as how to apply 
correctly the principles and rules of the clinical coding ICD-9-
CM [8]. 
Each time a patient is discharged from a healthcare unit, a 
discharge report is issued from the daily logs by the physician 
in charge of the patient. The ICD-9-CM clinical coding is a 
perfect fit to encode diagnoses, medical procedures, external 
causes, and morphologies, consisting in a universal list of 
codes recognized in any country across the world.  
As the name states, it is an adaptation of the ICD-9 
codification system defined and implemented by the U.S. 
Department of Health in collaboration with the Medicare and 
Medicaid Service Centres [10]. With more than 13,000 
diagnoses and 3,500 procedures, it is essential to develop tools 
or systems focused on the codification process.  
Some Web applications like “Find-A-Code” or the work of 
Marisa Teresa Chiaravalloti et al. in “A Coding Support 
System for the ICD-9-CM Standard” are examples of systems 
developed for codification purposes [11]. The late one 
processes text in natural language using text mining 
algorithms, returning a list of possible codes for each case.  
After the codification process, every discharge report can 
be read and perfectly understood in every country that adopts 
the same terminology.  
For the purpose of the present work, and as stated by 
international directives, the ICD-9-CM codes are the basis of 
24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the DRGs decision [3]. Thereafter, the ICD-9-CM SPA coding 
tool was updated with the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS coding 
version, initially released in order to replace the ICD-9-CM 
version. 
C. ICD-10-CM/PCS Clinical Coding 
Firstly, it is important to note that ICD-10, unlike its precursor 
(ICD-9), is divided into two different parts, namely: [12], [13] 
• ICD-10-CM for diagnosis coding; 
• ICD-10-PCS for inpatient procedure coding. 
When ICD-10 was defined, it was projected that ICD-10-
CM would become a standard for all USA healthcare settings, 
whereas ICD-10-PCS would be required in inpatient settings 
only [12].  
The ICD-10-CM/PCS clinical coding was mainly designed 
to offer notable advantages over ICD-9-CM, such as 
generating higher-quality clinical data. This would result in 
major improvements in the quality and the use of data in a 
significant number of healthcare settings, including driving a 
better healthcare management and improving significantly 
outcomes [12]. 
Supporters of ICD-10-CM/PCS defend that it incorporates 
greater specificity than its precursor in describing healthcare 
problems, but also clinical data, offers the addition of 
information relevant to ambulatory and managed care 
encounters, and impressively expanded injury codes that 
reflect the location of the injury [12], [14]–[16]. Thus, they 
praise its undeniable ability to provide a more detailed 
description of clinical situations, and substantially increasing 
the level of detail that can be captured [12], [13], [16], [17]. 
Furthermore, the structure of ICD-10-CM/PCS enables the 
possibility of greater expansion of code numbers, including 
risk factors that are regularly encountered in a primary care 
setting, instead of allowing the classification of diseases and 
injuries only [14].  
In addition, while ICD-9 uses numeric codes (e.g., 001-
999), ICD-10 uses an alphanumeric classification system 
which consists essentially of 1 letter followed by up to 3 
numbers at a 4-character level (e.g., A00.0-Z99.9) [17], [18]. 
Thus, the alphanumeric format of ICD-10 offers a better 
structure than ICD-9, which allows a significant space for 
future revision without disruption of the numbering system 
[19]. 
On the other hand, the overall number of codes and 
diagnoses has increased significantly: about 17000 codes for 
ICD-9-CM to more than 155000 codes for ICD-10-CM/PCS 
[12], [13], [15]–[17], [20]. Thereby, the newer version 
includes previously unavailable codes since it enables a more 
detailed description of clinical situations, including for 
instance codes to distinguish between different types of 
diabetes or even the location on the patient’s body of the 
health condition (e.g., left or right limb) [12]. 
Thus, while the main axis for ICD-9 is the nature of the 
health condition itself, the main axis of ICD-10 is the body 
region of the health condition with the highest level of 
specificity reachable [21].  
In the long run, due to this improved level of detail, it is 
expected that ICD-10-CM will decrease medical fraud and 
abuse [12]. For instance, since even the location on the 
patient’s body is registered in the codification process, it will 
reduce the possibility of coding professionals repeatedly 
reporting the same procedure on the same location of the 
body. 
D. Interoperability: AIDA and AIDA-PCE 
Nowadays, with the continuous growth of the clinical 
information stored into the hospital information systems 
(HISs), one of the major interests in the Medical Informatics 
field 
is 
to 
ensure 
interoperability 
between 
different 
information systems in health institutions [22], [23]. Thus, 
interoperability is increasingly considered a requirement in 
HISs rather than an option in order to implement an adequate 
communication and cooperation between distinct systems 
[24]. 
In short, the concept of interoperability can be defined as 
the ability of a system to communicate and share information 
with another system that arises in order to overcome the 
heterogeneity and distribution of several different sources of 
information. In the healthcare industry, the main goal of 
interoperability is to connect applications and data so that they 
can be shared across the organization and distributed to health 
professionals [22], [24]. 
Thereby, in this context, there is a need to implement 
dynamic platforms, such as multi-agent systems that allow the 
access and sharing of information between different 
information systems, in order to connect them, standardize 
distributed clinical systems, and thus reduce the delays 
normally generated in the process of sharing information [25]. 
The register of clinical information in CHP is ensured by a 
few HISs, namely the “Sistema de Apoio ao Médico” (SAM) – 
Medical Support System, the “Sistema de Gestão de Doentes 
Hospitalares” (SONHO) – Hospital Patient Management 
System, the “Sistema de Apoio à Prática de Enfermagem” 
(SAPE) – Nursing Support System, and the “Processo Clínico 
Eletrónico” (PCE) – Electronic Medical Record [23], [26]. 
In this context, the AIDA (“Agência para Integração, 
Difusão e Arquivo de Informação Médica”) platform emerges. 
Some Portuguese health systems are equipped with the AIDA 
platform, including CHP, which uses proactive intelligent 
agents that ensure the interoperability between different and 
heterogeneous HISs, and other entities such as the 
complementary systems, including SAM, SONHO, SAPE, 
PCE, 
RIS 
(“Radiology 
Information 
System”), 
LIS 
(“Laboratory Information System”), DIS (“Department 
Information System”), and AIS (“Administrative Information 
System”), among others [22]–[26].  
AIDA is a complex system consisting of simple and 
specialized subsystems, defined as intelligent agents, which 
are responsible for tasks such as the communication between 
heterogeneous systems, the sending and receiving of 
information (for example, clinical reports, medical images, 
and prescriptions), as well as the management and storage of 
data [22]. 
25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thus, directly from AIDA it is possible to integrate, 
disseminate, and archive large sets of data from different 
sources (for example, services, departments, healthcare units, 
computers, and medical devices) [22]. In this way, the AIDA 
platform provides an easy access and sharing of registered 
information, facilitating medical research and the application 
and development of other computational tools, such as the 
ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM/PCS clinical coding tools 
described in this manuscript, in order to optimize the 
healthcare services provided by the health institution. 
The electronic health record (EHR) is responsible for the 
safe and organized storage of all the information regarding a 
patient, from personal data to diagnoses and procedures [27]–
[30].  
The constant update is vital in this scenario, so the same 
research team from the Algoritmi Research Centre (University 
of Minho, Braga, Portugal) that developed AIDA put together 
the AIDA-PCE. Following the Problem Oriented Medical 
Record (POMR), all the patient information regarding 
symptoms, medical observations, diagnoses, and treatment 
plans are stored inside that structure.  
Although these systems allow the insertion of free text and 
other non-universal information, the AIDA and AIDA-PCE 
present innovative and novel solutions to accomplish 
interoperability. On the other hand, the incorporation of the 
ICD-9-CM codes, and subsequently the ICD-10-CM/PCS 
codes, into the EHR represents an important feature in order 
to accomplish a cross-border medical record. The storage of 
ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM/PCS coded discharge reports 
saves space on the AIDA-PCE databases, and reduces medical 
errors. 
The next section presents the main research methodologies 
followed to implement this work. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES 
The realization of any study in the field of Information 
Technologies (ITs) includes the scrutinized research and 
analysis of the set of methodologies and technologies 
available and feasible in the design of the defined IT 
solutions. The choice of the most appropriate methods and 
tools is mostly based on the advantages pointed out, as well as 
on associated limitations and compliance issues with related 
systems. 
Thus, the achievement of the SPA for ICD-9-CM, and its 
transition from the ICD-9-CM codification to the newer ICD-
10-CM/PCS version, are based on the research methodology 
Design Science Research (DSR), mostly used in the 
construction and evaluation of useful and rigorous IT 
solutions. Each of the design phases presented in this study 
included the choice and use of the most appropriate 
methodologies, technologies, and tools for the definition and 
elaboration of the desired solution. Finally, a Proof of Concept 
(PoC) was also carried out corroborating the viability and 
usefulness of the clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM designed 
and developed, and its update to the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS 
version, which consisted essentially of a SWOT analysis 
(Section V). 
Thereby, a brief description of these two research 
methodologies are presented in this section, namely Design 
Science Research and Proof of Concept, in subsections A and 
B, respectively. 
A. Design Science Research 
In the area of ITs, the main objective of the use of the research 
methodology Design Science Research is the construction and 
evaluation of objects, also called "artefacts", that allow 
professionals to process organizational information and 
develop actions to solve a problem [31], [32]. 
Thus, the methodology that drove the realization of this 
project is the DSR. It consists of a rigorous method of 
scientific research used to develop successful artefacts [33]. It 
focuses on the IT artefact with a high priority in its relevancy 
in its application domain. Thus, in the context of solving real-
world business problems, it is critical to try to improve the 
relevance and usefulness of the artefact [34], [35]. The 
designed appliance must correspond to a viable technological 
solution for solving important and relevant business problems, 
and its usefulness, quality, and effectiveness must be 
rigorously demonstrated through well-executed evaluation 
methods. In addition, research should provide clear and 
verifiable contributions, and should be based on the 
application of rigorous methods in its construction and 
evaluation process [34], [35]. 
In Figure 1, the research methodology DSR is outlined, 
that is, its different interconnected steps that synthesize the 
steps to be followed through the DSR in the construction of 
scientific IT artefacts, namely the steps of “Identify Problem 
& Motivate”, “Define Objectives of a Solution”, “Design & 
Development”, 
“Demonstration”, 
“Evaluation”, 
and 
“Communication”. These are the phases adopted in the design 
of this case study. 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the research methodology Design 
Science Research (adapted from [33]). 
 
In short, in the first steps, the problem and the motivation 
are defined, as well as the objectives of the solution found. 
Then the artefact is designed and developed, directed to an 
important business problem to be solved that must be relevant 
to the solution of the same. Its development must follow a 
rigorous scientific process based on the knowledge and the 
theory already explored. Finally, the solution must be 
demonstrated, evaluated, communicated, and propagated 
efficiently to the target audience [31], [36]. 
26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thus, the case study described in this manuscript follows 
the DSR research methodology because the IT solution 
defined meets the needs of health professionals of CHP, that 
is, a new clinical coding tool to support clinical practice 
assisting in their work, meeting the challenges currently 
existing at CHP’s facilities. 
Therefore, it provides the health institution with an 
appropriate and well-founded solution, based on methods and 
technologies that have already been explored and adapted to 
solve the problem in question, and also stimulate new 
knowledge for the organization and the scientific community. 
Thus, the development of this project additionally included 
the dissemination of the IT artifact to CHP’s professionals, as 
well as the writing of scientific papers. 
Finally, it is important to note that the clinical tool 
developed, including its update to the ICD-10-CM/PCS 
version, was duly evaluated through a SWOT analysis. It 
should also be pointed out that the application of the Proof of 
Concept research methodology to prove the feasibility, 
usefulness, and usability of the tool, which included a SWOT 
analysis, is briefly described in Subsection B. 
B. Proof of Concept 
The Proof of Concept research methodology consists of a 
practical model that can prove or validate the concept 
established through analysis or even technical articles. Hence, 
it goes on to verify whether a concept or theory is successful 
and feasible and, on the other hand, is thus susceptible of 
being exploited in a useful way [37]. 
Therefore, a PoC is often pointed out as one of the most 
important steps in the design, development, implementation, 
and proposal process of a prototype of a IT solution, mainly to 
establish if an IT solution fulfills its purpose, that is, it meets 
the requirements and defined objectives for which it was 
originally designed. On the other hand, it also allows the 
identification of potential failures or errors in the IT solution 
developed [38]. 
Summarizing, a PoC allows to demonstrate in practice the 
concepts, methodologies, and technologies involved in the 
elaboration of a given project and thus validate the proposed 
solution by proving its feasibility and usefulness for the 
purpose for which it is intended by defending its potential. 
In this study, the defense of the viability and usefulness of 
the clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM went through the 
application of the Proof of Concept research methodology, 
including its subsequent transition to the newer ICD-10-
CM/PCS coding version. Thus, a SWOT analysis was carried 
out for the Web application. 
The proof of concept of this project is briefly described in 
Section V of this article. 
The next section presents the SPA developed and 
implemented for the ICD-9-CM coding version, as well as its 
transition to ICD-10-CM/PCS. 
IV. SINGLE-PAGE APPLICATION  
The codification of the discharge reports was made manually 
in CHP, making the process too slow and with a high error 
probability. Therefore, it emerged the need to create a process 
that would reduce the codification time. Thus, it was 
developed a SPA through which the health professionals are 
able to perform the codification process, and at the same time 
to consult patients’ data, such as the discharge report, the 
personal information, and the hospital services where the 
patient was admitted.  
The first version was created based on the ICD-9-CM 
coding version. However, there was a need to adopt a more 
advanced coding system, namely the ICD-10-CM/PCS 
codification. 
A. SPA Version 1 
The purposed layout in this scenario encompasses a solution 
with three main components: the patient information, the 
codification area, and the discharge report. The codification 
area is divided into five frames: diagnoses, external causes, 
procedures, tumor morphology, and observations. All the 
boards, with exception of the observations board, which is the 
only one that allows free text insertion, are composed by rows 
divided mainly in priority, description, and code.  
The dynamic and aided search leads to a faster process than 
the already existing one. When a word is typed in the 
description field, a list of all the ICD-9-CM codes is 
presented, and when the user picks one of them on the 
description, the respective code is automatically filled. On the 
other hand, when the user enters the code, the description is 
also automatically filled.  
When a codification is finished, the user sends it to an 
evaluator. If the codification fails in this evaluation phase for 
any reason, it is sent again to the list of codifications that 
needs to be done. Thus, the application was developed with 
three different modules. One to be used in the first 
codification, another to be used when a discharge report was 
already codified and for some reason failed in the evaluation 
phase, and one final module to be used when the user only has 
view permissions. In this last module, the users are not able to 
change any field present in the codification. 
The application development leaned on the LAMP 
architecture. It uses Linux as the operative system, Apache as 
the Web server, MySQL as the relational database 
management system (RDBMS), and PHP as the object-
oriented language. 
In order to develop a fluid and dynamic application, the 
AngularJS framework greatly contributed. The modularity and 
extensibility of this JavaScript framework allows the 
development of diverse and futuristic applications.  
The database storages all the data related to the codification 
codes, the discharge reports, user information, and all the 
information generated by the codification process. The 
RESTful Web service mediates the communication between 
the SPA and the database. 
B. SPA Version 2 
In the second version of the SPA, all the SPA architecture 
remained the same. The difference from the first version to the 
second was only the use of a different codification system, 
which consequently forced a layout change in the codification 
27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

area. In this version, the codification area only presents three 
frames: diagnoses, procedures, and observations. 
The dynamic and aided search is still present in this 
version. 
Once the ICD-10-CM/PCS codification presents a 
hierarchical structure, it is easier to find a code since the order 
is followed, so, it was added the help button in the code 
insertion. When the user selects this button, it opens a new 
frame with dynamic search. This frame is divided into seven 
parts: section, body system, root operation, body part, 
approach, device, and qualifier. At first, all components are 
empty except for the component section. Since this is the root 
of coding, it represents the first character of the code. When 
the user selects a section, the body system is automatically 
filled with options that are related with the section selected. In 
turn, when the body system is selected, it automatically fills 
the root operation options. When the three components 
section, body system, and root operation are selected, a board 
with all the other components is filled. And after all seven 
parts have been selected, the code is finally complete and, 
thereafter, it is sent to the main frame to the row where the 
user clicked in the help button. It should additionally be noted 
that a process of validation for the code exists. 
Although this second version also use MySQL as the 
RDBMS, the tables of the database needed to be changed in 
order to be able to store the new coding system. 
The next section presents the SWOT analysis of the Web 
application developed. 
V. SWOT ANALYSIS 
To test the viability, the utility, the quality, and the efficiency 
of the application, a PoC was necessary, in this case, a SWOT 
analysis. This analysis allows to analysis the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of the application [39].  
With the update of the coding system for the ICD-10-
CM/PCS codification, a weakness of the project was 
eliminated, thus, becoming a more up-to-date project. 
Therefore, it was made a SWOT analysis of the second 
version of the project. 
 
Strengths: 
• High usability, intuitive, and easy to learn (user-
friendly); 
• Easy access to the data of patients, as well as the hospital 
services in which the patient was; 
• High scalability; 
• Easy of reissue of coded discharge reports; 
• Decrease of the codification time of the discharge 
reports; 
• Decrease of human error; 
• Easy adaptability to different health institutions. 
  
Weaknesses: 
• Requires internet connection. 
  
Opportunities: 
• Modernization and organizational development; 
• Increasing expectation of the hospital administration to 
obtain methods that facilitate the hospital financing 
calculation; 
• Provide the tool to help in the calculation of the hospital 
financing. 
 
Threats: 
• Lack of acceptance to resort to new technologies by 
health professionals. 
 
The next section presents the conclusion and future work 
of this study. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Finally, the realization of this case study allowed the 
development of a clinical practice tool, namely a user-friendly 
clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM, and its subsequent 
transition to the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS coding version. The 
Web application is currently implemented in a production 
machine of CHP, and it is currently being used by the coding 
professionals of the hospital in order to perform the clinical 
coding of the episodes of hospital discharges from patients 
admitted to CHP. This will then facilitate the grouping of 
processes into DRGs, that is, a financial system that can 
manage the costs and waste associated with healthcare 
services. In the coming years, the expansion of the Web 
application is expected. 
Trained professionals using the ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-
CM/PCS clinical coding tools reported significant differences 
in time consumption and committed errors when using a 
computerized system to perform their tasks. It represents an 
asset to its users, since it facilitates the work of health 
professionals, and increases their capacity and speed of work 
by reducing the number of tasks required to perform a certain 
codification. In this way, the development of the clinical tool 
allows the centralization of a set of tasks and information in a 
SPA, greatly benefiting its users. 
When comparing the SPA for ICD-9-CM codification with 
its update to the newer ICD-10-CM/PCS version, health 
professionals defend that the advantages are much greater, 
including a better specificity in describing clinical situations, 
leading to an improved level of detail. They also defend that it 
is easier to find a code in the new update due to the help 
bottom. Thus, they do not need to remember all the codes or 
their entire description, making it more intuitive. 
Regarding future work, the addition of a Business 
Intelligence (BI) module in the clinical coding tool for ICD-
10-CM/PCS is foreseen, that is, the addition of a module with 
clinical and performance indicators [40]. Its principal aim is 
the visualization of indicators that show the association 
between the number of coded processes and each coding 
professional, as well as the temporal evolution of the number 
of processes encoded by each coding professional. Thus, the 
main objective of the insertion of this module is to study and 
analyze the performance of the coding professionals, that is, to 
identify, for example, the coding professionals who codify the 
most, and also those who are coding the least. In this way, it is 
28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tried to encourage even more the increase of the production of 
health professionals at CHP.  
Finally, in early 2018, the research team already began the 
implementation of the system in more health institutions in 
Portugal. It is thus confirmed our strong desire to continue to 
expand the system across the country due to its undeniable 
advantages, which were defended throughout this paper. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work has been supported by Compete POCI-01-0145-
FEDER-007043 and FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e 
Tecnologia within the Project Scope UID/CEC/00319/2013. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Coimbra et al., “Improving Diagnosis-related 
Groups with a Computerized Clinical Coding Tool for 
ICD-9-CM Codification,” in eTELEMED 2017: The 
Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2017, pp. 33–36. 
[2] 
M. M. Bellanger, W. Quentin, and S. S. Tan, 
“Childbirth and Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs): 
Patient Classification and Hospital Reimbursement in 
11 European Countries,” Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 
Reprod. Biol., vol. 168, no. 1, pp. 12–19, May 2013. 
[3] 
W. Quentin, D. Scheller-Kreinsen, M. Blumel, A. 
Geissler, and R. Busse, “Hospital Payment Based On 
Diagnosis-Related Groups Differs In Europe And 
Holds Lessons For The United States,” Health Aff., 
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 713–723, Apr. 2013. 
[4] 
Y. Xin, “Comparison of Hospital Medical Waste 
Generation Rate Based on Diagnosis-related Groups,” 
J. Clean. Prod., vol. 100, pp. 202–207, 2015. 
[5] 
M. Barrento, “Sistema de Business Intelligence 
Aplicado aos Grupos de Diagnósticos Homogéneos,” 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2010. 
[6] 
C. Fourie, N. Biller-Andorno, and V. Wild, 
“Systematically Evaluating the Impact of Diagnosis-
related Groups (DRGs) on Healthcare Delivery: A 
Matrix of Ethical Implications,” Health Policy (New. 
York)., vol. 115, no. 2–3, pp. 157–164, 2014. 
[7] 
R. Busse et al., “Diagnosis Related Groups in Europe: 
Moving Towards Transparency, Efficiency, and 
Quality in Hospitals?,” BMJ, vol. 346, 2013. 
[8] 
P. Jorge, “Plataforma de Dados de Saúde - Portal 
Institucional,” Instituto Superior de Engenharia do 
Porto, 2013. 
[9] 
S. B. Rimler, B. D. Gale, and D. L. Reede, 
“Diagnosis-related Groups and Hospital Inpatient 
Federal Reimbursement,” RadioGraphics, vol. 35, no. 
6, pp. 1825–1834, Oct. 2015. 
[10] 
M. 
Rouse 
and 
D. 
Fluckinger, 
“ICD-9-CM 
(International Classification of Diseases, Ninth 
Revision, Clinical Modification),” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/definition/ICD-9-
CM. [Accessed: 31-Jan-2017]. 
[11] 
M. T. Chiaravalloti, R. Guarasci, V. Lagani, E. 
Pasceri, and R. Trunfio, “A Coding Support System 
for the ICD-9-CM Standard,” Proc. - 2014 IEEE Int. 
Conf. Healthc. Informatics, ICHI 2014, pp. 71–78, 
2014. 
[12] 
M. Topaz, L. Shafran-Topaz, and K. H. Bowles, 
“ICD-9 to ICD-10: Evolution, Revolution, and 
Current Debates in the United States,” Perspect. Heal. 
Inf. Manag. / AHIMA (American Heal. Inf. Manag. 
Assoc., vol. 10, no. Spring, 2013. 
[13] 
R. Mills, R. Butler, E. McCullough, M. Bao, and R. 
Averill, “Impact of the Transition to ICD-10 on 
Medicare Inpatient Hospital Payments,” Medicare 
Medicaid Res. Rev., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–13, 2011. 
[14] 
A. Hazlewood, “ICD-9 CM to ICD-10 CM: 
Implementation 
Issues 
and 
Challenges,” 
The 
American 
Health 
Information 
Management 
Association, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://library.ahima.org/doc?oid=59978#.WUqLXMZ
OrVo. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2017]. 
[15] 
J. A. Hirsch et al., “ICD-10: History and Context,” 
Am. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 596–599, 
2016. 
[16] 
A. G. Fiks and R. W. Grundmeier, “Elucidating 
Challenges and Opportunities in the Transition to 
ICD-10-CM,” Pediatrics, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 169–
170, 2014. 
[17] 
J. Armstrong, P. McDermott, G. R. Saade, and S. K. 
Srinivas, “Coding Update of the SMFM Definition of 
Low Risk Cesarean Delivery from ICD-9-CM to ICD-
10-CM,” Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol., 2017. 
[18] 
N. Jetté et al., “The Development, Evolution, and 
Modifications of ICD-10,” Med. Care, vol. 48, no. 12, 
pp. 1105–1110, 2010. 
[19] 
S. Bowman, “Why ICD-10 Is Worth the Trouble,” 
The American Health Information Management 
Association, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://library.ahima.org/doc?oid=78673#.WUqMIMZ
OrVo. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2017]. 
[20] 
R. Caskey et al., “The Transition to ICD-10-CM: 
Challenges for Pediatric Practice,” Pediatrics, vol. 
134, no. 1, pp. 31–36, 2014. 
[21] 
J. R. Lowe, G. Raugi, G. E. Reiber, and J. D. 
Whitney, “Changes in Classifications of Chronic 
Lower - Limb Wound Codes in Patients with 
Diabetes: ICD-9-CM Versus ICD-10-CM,” Adv. Skin 
Wound Care, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 84–92, 2015. 
[22] 
L. Cardoso, F. Marins, F. Portela, A. Abelha, and J. 
Machado, 
“Healthcare 
Interoperability 
through 
Intelligent Agent Technology,” Procedia Technol., 
vol. 16, pp. 1334–1341, 2014. 
[23] 
H. Peixoto, M. Santos, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, 
“Intelligence in Interoperability with AIDA,” in 
Foundations of Intelligent Systems, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 264–273. 
[24] 
L. Cardoso, F. Marins, F. Portela, M. Santos, A. 
Abelha, and J. Machado, “The Next Generation of 
Interoperability Agents in Healthcare,” Int. J. Environ. 
29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Res. Public Health, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 5349–5371, 
2014. 
[25] 
A. Abelha, C. Analide, J. Machado, J. Neves, M. 
Santos, and P. Novais, “Ambient Intelligence and 
Simulation in Health Care Virtual Scenarios,” IFIP 
Int. Fed. Inf. Process., vol. 243, pp. 461–468, 2007. 
[26] 
J. Machado, A. Abelha, J. Neves, and M. Santos, 
“Ambient Intelligence in Medicine,” in IEEE 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, 2006, 
pp. 94–97. 
[27] 
M. Salazar et al., “Step towards Paper Free Hospital 
through Electronic Health Record,” in Advances in 
Information Systems and Technologies, Springer 
International Publishing, 2013, pp. 685–694. 
[28] 
J. Duarte et al., “Data Quality Evaluation of 
Electronic Health Records in the Hospital Admission 
Process,” in EEE/ACIS 9th International Conference 
on Computer and Information Science, 2010, pp. 201–
206. 
[29] 
J. Duarte, C. F. Portela, A. Abelha, J. Machado, and 
M. F. Santos, “Electronic Health Record in 
Dermatology Service,” in ENTERprise Information 
Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 156–
164. 
[30] 
F. Portela et al., “Electronic Health Records in the 
Emergency Room,” in IEEE/ACIS 9th International 
Conference on Computer and Information Science, 
2010, pp. 195–200. 
[31] 
S. T. March and V. C. Storey, “Design Science in the 
Information Systems discipline: An introduction to the 
special issue on Design Science Research,” MIS 
Quartly, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 725–730, 2008. 
[32] 
M. Bilandzic and J. Venable, “Towards Participatory 
Action Design Research: Adapting Action Research 
and Design Science Research Methods for Urban 
Informatics,” J. Community Informatics, vol. 7, no. 3, 
2011. 
[33] 
K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. 
Chatterjee, “A Design Science Research Methodology 
for Information Systems Research,” J. Manag. Inf. 
Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 45–77, 2007. 
[34] 
 a. R. Hevner, S. T. March, and J. Park, “Design 
Science in Information Systems Research,” MIS Q., 
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, 2004. 
[35] 
A. R. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, “Design Research in 
Information Systems,” Des. Res. Inf. Syst., vol. 28, pp. 
75–105, 2004. 
[36] 
V. K. Vaishnavi and W. Kuechler, Design Science 
Research 
Methods 
and 
Patterns: 
Innovating 
Information and Communication Technology, 2nd ed. 
CRC Press, 2015. 
[37] 
A. B. Sergey, D. B. Alexandr, and A. T. Sergey, 
“Proof of Concept Center — A Promising Tool for 
Innovative 
Development 
at 
Entrepreneurial 
Universities,” in Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 2015, vol. 166, pp. 240–245. 
[38] 
B. Schmidt, “Proof of Principle Studies,” Epilepsy 
Res., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 48–52, 2006. 
[39] 
R. Pereira, M. Salazar, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, 
“SWOT Analysis of a Portuguese Electronic Health 
Record,” in Collaborative, Trusted and Privacy-
Aware e/m-Services, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013, pp. 169–177. 
[40] 
A. Brandão et al., “A Benchmarking Analysis of 
Open-Source 
Business 
Intelligence 
Tools 
in 
Healthcare Environments,” Information, vol. 7, no. 4, 
p. 57, Oct. 2016. 
 
30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

