 
 
Applying the Theory of Constraints to Health Technology Assessment  
Johan Groop, Karita Reijonsaari, and Paul Lillrank 
Institute of Healthcare Engineering, Management and Architecture (HEMA) 
Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
johan.groop(a)tkk.fi, karita.reijonsaari(a)tkk.fi, paul.lillrank(a)tkk.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Applying assessment methods commonly used in 
healthcare, such as randomized, controlled trials, and 
financial analysis, often proves challenging when assessing 
technologies that strive to improve productivity. The 
traditional 
way 
of 
seeking 
the 
procurement 
and 
implementation of process-improving technology is based on 
financial analyses. These are often not only laborious, but also 
based on weak assumptions about the interrelationship 
between 
technology, 
processes, 
and 
the 
institutional 
environment. There is a need for a more pragmatic 
managerial approach. This paper suggests an alternative 
means, based on the theory of constraints (TOC), arguing that 
the primary focus of technology assessment should be on the 
ability of technologies to remove or alleviate organizational 
constraints, in order to increase throughput rather than 
reduce costs. Ultimately, the latter will happen as a 
consequence of the former. The suggested approach is 
illustrated through a case study of a home care organization, 
in which improved productivity is sought through the 
implementation of a mobile solution. Although conventional 
financial reasoning held that the implementation would save 
time and therefore be beneficial, the TOC approach showed 
that the implementation would in fact have an adverse effect 
under the current mode of operation. 
 
Keywords—Theory of Constraints, technology assessment, home 
care, healthcare operations management, mobile technology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Most healthcare providers are urged to improve their 
productivity to cope with increasing demand under resource 
constraints. There is a rising trend of seeking improvements 
in productivity through the use of technology, ICT 
(information and communication technology) in particular. 
This paper does not discuss clinical technologies, since their 
assessment follows a different logic and their methodologies 
are well developed. Instead the paper focuses on 
technologies that seek to improve productivity through 
process improvements (henceforth process technologies), 
following an OM (Operations Management) perspective. 
The number of different process technologies on the 
market is accumulating fast. Decision makers would like to 
base their decisions on hard numbers, such as net present 
value (NPV), cost-benefit, and payback time. Data allowing 
such analyses are, however, rarely available. Evaluating the 
financial measures of health technologies properly is 
difficult, for the following reasons [1]: 
• 
Technology solutions often impact on processes and 
may alter a service as a whole. Therefore it is 
difficult to evaluate the influence in advance, 
particularly if the operational mechanisms of a 
service are not fully understood. There may be 
opportunity costs and system effects, such as an 
improvement in one part of a process being offset by 
adverse impacts on other parts.  
• 
The gold standard of intervention assessment is the 
randomized, controlled trial (RCT), commonly used 
in clinical research (e.g., [2]). RCT requires detailed 
methodological design, including a statistically 
significant sample and a coherent control population. 
It can only be done for one technology at a time; 
once the technology has been implemented. RCT is 
often too time-consuming and expensive for fast-
paced process technology evaluation. 
There is a need for a more pragmatic, managerial 
approach to evaluating process-improving technologies. 
Such an approach would need to focus on the ability of a 
particular technology to move the organization towards its 
goal. Every organization has a goal and defining it clearly is 
of great importance. The generic goal of any for-profit 
business organization is to “make money now as well as in 
the future” [3],  “without violating the necessary conditions 
of providing a satisfying work environment for employees 
and ensuring customer satisfaction” [4], e.g., by offering 
quality products or services. The two prerequisites should 
not be confused as separate goals. They are threshold 
conditions which need to be satisfied at least to some 
minimum level, above which their impact on performance 
diminishes. The goal, on the other hand, has no upper limit, 
and it is something that should constantly be pursued.  
In public healthcare, defining the goal is more 
ambiguous, because of the inherent complexities. Several 
authors have suggested defining the goal of healthcare in 
terms 
of 
different 
outcome-related 
measurements 
[5][6][7][8][9], while others have chosen to define the goal 
in terms of tangibles, such as money [10][11], and the 
volume of services produced [12] or patients treated [13]. 
There is no obvious correlation between the volume of 
procedures and actual health outcomes; sometimes less is 
more [14]. However, the question of which volume and 
combination of treatments leads to the optimal outcome is 
beyond the scope of OM. Therefore efficiency studies must 
be based on the assumption that a certain clinically justified 
115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
level of service of a given quality is necessary, and the 
challenge is to produce those at the lowest (or optimal) cost.  
Taking on an OM perspective, Wright and King [13] 
build on the generic goal, suggesting that the goal of public 
healthcare systems is to “treat more patients, better, sooner, 
now and in the future”. The authors choose the definition of 
Ronen et al. [12], who propose that the highest-level goal of 
a not-for-profit organization, such as a publicly financed 
health organization, is to “maximize quality healthcare 
services provided to its customers, subject to budgetary 
constraints”. Both definitions assume that the two necessary 
conditions are satisfied. The condition of satisfying 
customers presumes that the right level and quality of 
service is provided to patients who need it. The authors also 
find that both definitions implicitly incorporate the pursuit 
of better health outcomes. 
In order to measure an organization’s performance 
relative to its goal, the goal needs to be translated into 
operational language through clear, simple and appropriate 
performance measures [15]. Thus, the goal should be 
defined as something easily measurable [3]. Financial 
measures, such as net-profit or ROI (return-on-investment), 
are affected by operational performance measures; therefore 
focusing on cost measures without a proper analysis of 
operational indicators is misleading. A certain technology 
can promote the operational performance measures derived 
from the organizational goal.  
Organizations should focus on throughput, defined as 
the rate at which the organization achieves its goal [3]. In a 
for-profit organization where the goal is to make money, 
throughput is defined as “the rate at which a system 
generates money through sales” [3]. In not-for-profit 
organizations defining throughput is more complex and 
varies according to the specific characteristics of the 
organization. For instance, in elective surgery throughput 
can be defined as procedures performed (output) minus 
rework. Arguing that “attainment of the financial goal [i.e., 
making enough money to cover expenses] provides for the 
realization of the clinical goal” (i.e., high-quality care), 
Gupta and Kline [10] define throughput as the income 
generated from patient care. 
Throughput is not the same as output, although the 
concepts are related. In manufacturing a finished product is 
considered output, which is turned into throughput once it is 
sold [3]. As services are produced and consumed 
simultaneously, the distinction between output and 
throughput is less obvious, particularly if payment is made 
prior to production and consumption. The practical 
definition of throughput depends on how we define the goal, 
e.g., money earned, patients treated, or service time 
produced. As a crucial operational indicator, it is important 
that throughput be defined as something manageable by a 
producer, serving its purpose, and that it is easily 
measurable. In public healthcare, throughput is therefore 
often defined as something tangible, such as the number of 
patients treated [13], services rendered [12], or money 
generated through patient care [10]. 
This paper takes a healthcare operations management 
approach, focusing on the managerial aspects of health 
technology assessment (HTA). The framework follows the 
management philosophy of the theory of constraints (TOC), 
in that it focuses on the impact of technologies on 
organizational constraints. A constraint is generally defined 
as “anything that limits a system from achieving higher 
performance versus its goal” [3]. By exploiting or breaking 
a system’s constraints, performance can be improved. The 
suggested approach explains how constraints management 
can be used as a tool for technology assessment.   
Section 2 provides an introduction to the theory of 
constraints. The objective is to clarify the logic behind TOC, 
and to provide reasoning about why it would be a suitable 
tool for HTA. First, the TOC philosophy and its main 
principles are explained, and different kinds of constraints 
presented. The more traditional strategy of reducing 
operational expense is contrasted with the TOC approach to 
maximizing throughput.  Section 3 describes how TOC can 
be used as a tool for technology assessment. Section 4 
illustrates this approach using an example from an ongoing 
case study of a home care unit, regarding a decision as to 
whether or not to invest in a certain mobile platform-based 
technology solution. In Section 5, we discuss the limitations 
of the study, the suitability of the TOC approach, and how it 
relates to financial analysis. Section 7 provides a conclusion 
and presents suggestions for further research.   
II. 
THEORY OF CONSTRAINTS 
Originally developed by Eliyahu M. Goldratt [15], 
“TOC views every organization as a chain of interdependent 
events (or processes) where the performance of each event 
(or process) is dependent upon the previous event” [5]. TOC 
is based on the assumption that every organization has at 
least one (but no more than a few) constraint(s) that keeps it 
from reaching a higher level of performance. Without a 
constraint the system’s performance would be infinite [16]. 
Although there is a tendency to think of constraints in 
physical terms, e.g., a lack of hospital beds, inadequate MRI 
capacity, or a shortfall in staff, it has been shown that the 
majority of constraints are not physical but policy 
constraints, such as operational procedure or management 
policy [11], which in turn may cause resource constraints. 
TOC argues that the system can only be improved by 
strengthening its weakest link, i.e., the system’s constraint. 
While an organization may experience several difficulties, 
some problem (constraint) has to be the most significant for 
the organization’s ability to reach its goal [4]. Therefore any 
improvement effort should target the system’s constraints. 
In this respect TOC differs from other management 
philosophies, such as Total Quality Management (TQM) 
and Just-In-Time (JIT), which consider any improvement in 
a process as being an improvement of the system as a whole 
[17].  
116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1. A three-step process and its capacity and constraints (adapted 
from Ronen et al. [12]) 
Figure 1 illustrates the logic of TOC through a 
simplified example. It shows a three-stage process and the 
capacity of each stage, as well as its demand and output. 
The demand on the system is for 100 units (e.g., the 
treatment of 100 patients). The first department can handle 
100 units per day, the second department 50 units, and the 
final department 75 units per day. Department 2 constitutes 
the system constraint because it can only process 50 patients 
per day. The system throughput, or in this case the system 
output, can only be increased by improving the performance 
of the constraint [3]. “An hour lost at the constraint is an 
hour lost to the whole system” [15]. Departments 1 and 3 
have an overcapacity of 50 and 25 units respectively per 
day. Fully utilizing the capacity of either department will 
not impact on the output of the system, but will build up 
patient-in-process (PIP) inventory [18] (PIP is the healthcare 
equivalent to work-in-process in manufacturing). The PIP 
will lengthen the time it takes for patients to get through the 
system (lead time), as well as increase the ability of the 
system to respond to new or altered medical needs (response 
time). This has a negative effect on patient satisfaction. It 
may also affect clinical quality and thereby increase the 
operating expenses of the system. Rather than aiming for 
greater efficiencies through full resource utilization of 
departments 1 and 3, the system should aim to keep the 
production flow at a steady rate (determined by the 
constraint), by ensuring that department 2 can process its 
full capacity (50 patients per day). 
TOC distinguishes between constraints and everything 
else, which is referred to as non-constraints. According to 
the above-mentioned logic, the ability of the system to 
produce is not improved by increasing the efficiency of non-
constraints. 
A. The Five Focusing Steps of TOC 
Much like the other OM philosophies, TOC includes a 
process of continuous improvement, incorporating five 
focusing steps [3][19]: “1) identify the constraint(s); 2) 
exploit the constraint(s); 3) subordinate everything else to 
the decision taken in step 2; 4) elevate the constraint(s), and 
5) if a constraint is broken, go back to step 1. Do not let 
inertia be the cause of a constraint.” Step 2 refers to making 
sure the constraint is fully utilized at all times (provided it is 
a resource constraint), and eliminating policy constraints. 
Step 3 means that the constraint determines the pace of 
production. The main priority of the non-constraints is to 
keep the constraint(s) fully utilized at all times, their own 
utilization being of much less significance. Step 4 means 
improving the performance of the constraint(s) (e.g., by 
increasing its capacity, eliminating unnecessary work etc.). 
Step 5 expresses the need to repeat the process. 
B. The Need for a  Stable System 
A widely held assertion of OM is that a swift even 
production flow increases performance [20][21]. Other 
widespread OM philosophies such as TQM, Lean, and Six 
Sigma seek to balance the production flow by balancing the 
capacity of the system, so that every step produces at the 
same rate [22]. Efficiency is pursued though waste 
reduction; the capacity of each step should equal demand 
(e.g., a capacity and production rate of 50 units per 
department in the above-mentioned example). An even flow 
is sought by emphasizing the reduction of both internal and 
external fluctuations, in terms of poor quality, the 
processing time of each production step, quality, worker 
absence, lateness etc. 
TOC, on the other hand, recognizes that fluctuations can 
never be completely removed. This is particularly true in 
open systems, such as healthcare, which includes 
considerable customer-induced variability [23]. Because of 
the inevitable existence of fluctuations, TOC argues that a 
balanced 
system 
ultimately 
becomes 
inefficient. 
Fluctuations at steps that have no protective capacity cause 
inventory to build up, prolonging lead times, and reducing 
responsiveness etc. [24]. The fluctuations are caused by the 
combination of two phenomena: 1) internal fluctuations, i.e., 
the statistically inevitable fluctuations inherent in each step, 
and 2) cumulative fluctuation, caused by dependent events, 
i.e., the existence of a process. The fluctuations of each step 
accumulate, rather than level out, causing greater 
fluctuations downstream [15].  
TOC strives for an even production flow, but by means 
of an unbalanced system. This refers to the existence of at 
least one constraint. Contrary to the conventional view of 
constraints – something negative that should be eliminated – 
TOC regards constraints as pace setters, around which the 
rest of the system should be managed, or subordinated. The 
basic premise is that, by managing the whole system 
according to the production rate of the constraint, a stable 
flow can be reached (as opposed to by balancing the 
capacity and production rate). 
According to TOC, before the performance of a system 
can be improved it must first be stable. This requires the 
constraint to be identified, so that the non-constrained steps 
can be subordinated to the constraint, creating an 
unbalanced stable system. If no constraint exists, TOC 
suggests creating one, preferably one that is as natural as 
possible, e.g., an expensive piece of equipment. The 
positioning of the constraint is an important strategic 
decision [25]. 
117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
C. Traditional Focus on Cost 
Many healthcare organizations tend to follow a cost 
reduction policy, seeking to reduce all costs while 
simultaneously improving the efficiency of resources [5]. 
Although this is an intuitively logical approach, practice has 
shown that the measures, decisions, and behaviors this 
approach leads to can have quite the opposite effect 
[3][12][15][11]. If greater efficiency of all the steps in a 
process, instead of the constraints, is sought, PIP builds up, 
leading to longer waiting times, lead times, and response 
times, which in turn increases operating expenses. 
Traditional 
cost 
accounting 
creates 
incentives 
that 
encourage high efficiencies [3]. One reason for is that it is 
based on the false assumption that all resources are fully 
utilized at all times [15]. 
Cost accounting was first developed to deal with the 
accounting complexities stemming from the rise of mass 
production in the 1920s. At the time “direct wages were a 
major component in costs and were considered real variable 
costs […] The indirect costs were low and assigning them to 
products based on real direct wages (or another volume-
based variable such as machine hours) was a reasonable 
approximation for making business decisions such as 
continued production of a product, investment decisions, 
buy-or-make decisions, and so on” [12]. In those days, 
indirect costs (i.e., overhead) constituted around 5-10 
percent of the total costs of production. Today the indirect 
costs are 20-80 percent. Assigning them to products or 
services on the basis of the cost accounting formula creates 
severe distortions [3][12][15]. For instance, it fails to 
distinguish 
between 
constraints 
and 
non-constraints, 
creating incentives to improve the efficiency of non-
constraints, which will not increase the throughput of the 
system as a whole. In fact, it may cause throughput to 
decrease, as the flow becomes unstable. This is also known 
as “the efficiencies syndrome” [12]; a situation where 
increasing the efficiency of every production step, 
“emphasizing the utilization of inputs instead of focusing on 
outputs”, reduces the efficiency of the whole system. 
D. Focus on Throughput 
TOC holds that the most important performance measure 
of an organization is its performance relative to its goal, i.e., 
the throughput in terms of the number of “units of the goal” 
[5]. To improve performance, TOC focuses on maximizing 
throughput rather than reducing operational expense. This is 
also known as “throughput orientation” [4][26] or 
“throughput-world thinking” [26]. The logic is based on the 
assumption that the change in operational thinking will lead 
to behavior and decision making that reduces costs, through 
reduced lead time, response time, and PIP, as well as 
improved service quality [12]. Operating expenses can only 
be reduced to a certain level, while throughput, in theory, 
can be increased infinitely [3].  
As the production rate of the primary constraint 
determines the throughput of the system, the cost of the 
constraint is the cost of the entire system divided by the 
available number of constraint hours [15]. This approach is 
also referred to as throughput accounting (TA) [3][27]. It 
reduces the complexity by focusing on the production 
capacity and cost of the production step that matters, i.e., the 
constraint, instead of all steps separately. 
III. 
AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH TO HEALTH 
TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT 
When health technologies are being assessed, the focus 
should first be on the technologies’ impact on throughput, 
then on costs.  When estimating the time-saving effect of a 
new technology, it is tempting to evaluate the saved cost in 
terms of cost per hour. If the time was saved at a constraint 
this approach might be valid. However, if the time saved 
does not affect the capacity of the constraint, it is unlikely to 
increase throughput [1]. 
Most healthcare organizations have large fixed costs, 
mainly the cost of personnel. Typically, only 10-15 percent 
of the budget is variable costs [3]. Saving the time of non-
constrained labor (mainly a fixed cost) does not affect unit 
costs, unless the time saved can be allocated elsewhere (e.g., 
moving excess capacity to the constraint to increase 
throughput) or less labor is required as a consequence, while 
still maitaining full utilization of the constraint. Unit costs, 
on the other hand, can be reduced by improving the 
throughput of the organization, as this spreads the fixed 
costs of the organization over more produced units. 
By concentrating on assessing the impact health 
technologies have on the system’s constraints, and thereby 
on throughput, it is possible to avoid some of the 
complexities associated with technology assessment in 
healthcare. If throughput can be increased at a reasonable 
cost, the additional expense is likely to be more than offset 
by the increase in throughput. 
The first step is to identify the system’s constraints using 
the five focusing steps [3]. Second, the effect of the 
alternative technologies on the constraints is evaluated. 
Which constraints does a certain technology affect and how 
does it improve throughput? Will the technology remove or 
alleviate the constraint to allow increased throughput? Does 
the implementation of a certain technology, and the 
accompanying process changes it makes possible, affect the 
constraint directly, or only in combination with some other 
technology or improvement effort? 
If it is determined that a technology can remove or 
alleviate a resource constraint (a policy constraint is not 
likely to be affected by technology), the marginal return on 
an investment in the constraint should be examined [25]. In 
other words, how much additional throughput can the 
investment achieve? Here, again, focusing on the constraint 
can reduce complexity.  
When assessing different technologies it is not 
uncommon to encounter a situation where there are several 
118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
constraints, as well as alternative technological solutions 
that may affect more than one constraint. Such a situation is 
illustrated in the following case study. 
IV. 
THE STUDY 
This section descibes the TOC approach in use through 
an empirical example. The investigation illustrated in this 
paper was performed as part of a larger ongoing study, 
aiming to explore ways of improving productivity in home 
care. 
A. Aim 
Prior to the investigation the subject organization was 
seeking to improve productivity through the implementation 
of mobile ICT technology. The objective was to ‘save time’ 
on a scarce resource, caregiver time, to be used for coping 
with an increasing demand for services. With the use of a 
mobile platform-based technology (henceforth ‘solution’), 
certain office tasks (e.g., charting) were to be transferred to 
the field, speeding up and improving the efficiency of the 
caregivers’ administrative work routines. 
In order to avoid investing in a solution that would not 
increase throughput, while simultaneously increasing 
operating expenses, the authors sought to investigate the 
potential solution’s effect on system constraints.   
B. Home Care Operations 
Home care (or domiciliary care) refers to regular 
healthcare or supportive services provided in a customer’s 
own home by a visiting caregiver. Home health care, 
meaning skilled nursing, is sometimes distinguished from 
home care, meaning non-medical care. Here they are treated 
jointly under the term home care. The services range from 
medical (e.g., health care and hospice) to supportive (e.g., 
bathing) and social services (e.g., transportation).  The 
purpose of home care is to enable people in need of 
assistance to continue living in their own homes by 
improving, maintaining, or reducing the natural stagnation 
of their health conditions and autonomy. Although age is 
not a basis for service discrimination, the vast majority of 
the clientele is typically made up of older adults, whose 
autonomy is reduced. 
The frequency of home visits varies with customers’ 
specific needs, ranging from occasional monthly visits up to 
4 visits per day, averaging 1.56 daily visits on weekdays in 
the organization that was studied. Although the absolute 
majority of the customer encounters constitute home care 
visits, occasionally services are provided over the phone, or 
a customer visits the office.   
The demand for services is based on an evaluation, 
performed by the caregivers, typically a nurse and a social 
worker, in collaboration with the potential customers. 
During the process, a care plan is made out for the accepted 
customers. The care plan is revised biannually or when 
changes in a customer’s condition so require.  
The output is the volume of procedures or service units 
performed (the provider perspective). An outcome is a 
change in a patient’s medical condition, which carries some 
health value (the patient perspective). The outcome (or 
value) is therefore the ultimate goal. The outcome cannot, 
however, be used as an operational indicator in situations 
where the outcome is significantly affected by factors 
beyond the service provider’s control, such as patients’ 
health behavior, placebo effects, or random events. The 
throughput is therefore the provider’s contribution to the 
creation of outcomes (health value). It was decided that the 
most appropriate definition of throughput was not the 
number of customers served, but the service time produced. 
Defining throughput as the number of customers or visits 
may risk constructing incentives to maximize the volume of 
encounters, rather than the effectiveness of the service. 
The schedule of the caregivers is based on the demand, 
as stated in the care plan. In home care, the demand for 
services is typically greatest in the morning [28]. The 
caregiver capacity is staggered into two 7.5-hour-long shifts. 
The morning shift workers start around 7-8 a.m., finishing 
around 3-4 p.m., while the evening shift staff comes on after 
2 p.m., finishing as late as 10 p.m. Although there is a slight 
variation in the starting and finishing times, the caregiver 
capacity is quite stable throughout the shifts, with a clear 
drop between the morning and evening shifts, the capacity 
of the evening shift being approximately 25% of that of the 
morning shift. 
C. Methods 
The inquiry adopted both qualitative and quantitative 
methods. The qualitative part was conducted to gain a rich 
understanding of the service operations of the home care 
organization that was studied. It included interviews and 
regular meetings with management, an ethnographic study 
of the service process and work routines, and several 
workshops with staff. Some results from the qualitative part 
of the study were first presented in Groop et al. [1]. 
The management team that was interviewed included the 
head of Home Care, a service manager, two ICT specialists, 
and one financial specialist. The objective was to get an 
overview of the service production system and its dynamics. 
Once the quantitative study was in progress, regular 
meetings were held with the management team for the 
purpose of feedback and analysis of findings. For the 
ethnographic study, the first author observed a staff member 
at work for an entire shift. A total of three staff members 
were observed on three separate occasions. The first two 
were registered nurses working in separate teams, while the 
third was a foreman. The first workshop was held at an early 
stage of the investigation. Its objective was to strengthen the 
comprehension of everyday services through a facilitated 
discussion with representatives from all levels of the home 
care organization. Once the quantitative study was finished, 
four workshops were held to disseminate and validate the 
findings. The first two workshops included all the foremen, 
119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
while the latter two targeted two separate home care teams, 
chosen by the management.   
The purpose of the quantitative part of the study was to 
quantify the home care operations, focusing on throughput 
and caregivers’ workload. The investigation consisted of a 
longitudinal analysis of operational data. Data illustrating 
the distribution of throughput, i.e., the amount, duration, and 
timing of realized home care visits, were collected for a 
period of six weeks, from February 9th to March 22nd 2009. 
This enabled analysis of the caregivers’ workload, i.e., 
services performed in terms of time, over a period of time.  
The data consisted of two consecutive three-week 
scheduling periods, and they were chosen in collaboration 
with management. According to the management team, the 
chosen period exemplified the most “normal” conditions, as 
it was least affected by staffing exceptions as a result of 
holidays. The data represented a total of 43,716 home care 
encounters amounting to a total of 21,934 hours of service. 
D. Participants 
The organization that was studied, Espoo Home Care 
(EHC), is a large public health organization. It is responsible 
for providing statutory home care services for the City of 
Espoo, one of the largest municipalities in Finland. The 
organization is divided into service homes and field-based 
services (Regional Home Care). Since the potential 
technology implementation targeted only the field-based 
services [29], the service homes were excluded from the 
analysis. Some services, such as night-time care (10 p.m. to 
7 a.m.), customer transportation, and meal and grocery 
deliveries, as well as care for certain severely disabled 
customers, are outsourced. These services were also 
excluded from the analysis. Services performed by 
temporarily 
leased 
caregivers, 
covering 
for 
absent 
employees, were included. 
Regional Home Care employed a field-based staff of 
326 (as of Feb 27th 2009), of whom 53 (16.2%) were part-
time employees, and 19 primarily office-based foremen, 
who were trained registered nurses or social workers. Out of 
the field-based personnel, roughly 23% were registered 
nurses, 61% practical nurses, and 15% home care assistants. 
The home services provided during the six-week period 
included services rendered to 2587 customers, by 293 
caregivers, for an average of 801 customers per day (STD 
40) on weekdays, and 389 (STD 12) on weekends. This 
corresponds to 1189 (STD 55) customer encounters on 
weekdays and 671 (STD 44) on weekends. 
The clientele of ECH consisted of both temporary 
customers, who exit the system once their health/autonomy 
improves, and regular customers, exiting the system either 
through death or transfer to a more comprehensive form of 
care, e.g., sheltered accommodation or long-term care.  
During the period of the study temporary customers 
received only 0.34% of the total services.  
V. 
FINDINGS 
This section first explains the process changes that 
certain technologies make possible, and provides reasons 
why these changes might help to improve productivity. 
After this, the TOC framework is adopted to evaluate 
whether the suggested process changes would in fact have 
the intended effect on productivity. 
A. Time and Location Constraints 
The home care service delivery process is field-based, 
which implies that there are constraints related to time and 
location [30], which have a great impact on the production 
flow. In the ECH the caregivers visit the office each 
morning, to collect their work list specifying which 
customers to visit, when, and which types of services to 
perform. The caregivers also pick up the keys to the homes 
of several of their customers, and company cars, if assigned 
one. Once the caregivers have completed their rounds, they 
return to the office to bring back the customers’ house keys 
and to perform office tasks, such as data entry into the EMR 
(electronic medical record)  (i.e., charting: visit summaries, 
updating patient information and care plans, placing 
customers’ grocery and meal orders etc.). All of these 
activities are subject to time and location constraints that 
can be broken using technology. The time constraint means 
that certain tasks have to be performed in a certain order 
(e.g., getting the keys before entering a customer’s home), 
and at certain times when the customer and caregiver meet. 
The location constraint means that certain services need to 
be performed at locations where the customers (home) or 
equipment (office computers) are located. The time and 
location constraints force caregivers to spend time moving 
between locations, rather than spending time serving their 
customers, which reduces throughput. 
Mobile solutions that allow data entry and the retrieval 
of patient information to and from the electronic medical 
record (EMR) can reduce the need to visit the office.  Data 
can be charted in the field rather than using a computer at 
the office, thereby eliminating a step in the process. This 
would be true if data entry were the only reason why 
caregivers visited the office. There may, however, be other 
time and location constraints. In this case, the caregivers 
also have to collect and return the customers’ home keys. 
This causes another time and location constraint that offsets 
the potential of the mobile data entry and retrieval system. 
There are, however, technologies that allow a mobile 
platform to turn into a door-opening device, combining two 
technologies that together may have the power to break the 
constraint. 
The constraints matrix (Figure 2) is an instrument that 
helps visualize the relationship between technologies and 
constraints, once these are identified. Figure 2 shows an 
example of the matrix based on the observations from the 
case study, including the previously presented time and 
location constraints that constitute major everyday obstacles 
120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
to a swift even flow [20]. There are other reasons for 
visiting the office as well, such as team meetings or 
collecting and sorting customers’ medication. These 
activities, however, differ from the constraints used in the 
example in that they do not have to be performed every day, 
and can be scheduled. 
The technologies are wireless mobile platform-based 
solutions. The technologies have different capabilities, each 
breaking some of the constraints. Technology 1 affects 
constraints 1, 2, and 4, while technology 3 only affects 
constraint 
1. 
The 
technologies 
considered 
for 
implementation included software applications which make 
possible either one-way or two-way charting of the EMR, 
i.e., wireless data entry, or both wireless data entry and 
retrieval, as well as flexible mobile scheduling, i.e., mobile 
work lists. One technology was a Bluetooth-based solution 
for wireless door-opening. The solution can be integrated 
into any Bluetooth-equipped mobile device. The capabilities 
of the technologies are: 
• Technology 1: two-way charting and scheduling 
• Technology 2: two-way charting and scheduling 
• Technology 3: one-way charting (data entry) 
• Technology 4: Bluetooth-based wireless door-
opening 
Not all constraints have the same impact on the system. 
Some are more severe than others. It is likely that the home 
key constraint will have a lesser impact on the system’s 
throughput than the mobile data entry and retrieval 
technology. 
The 
caregivers’ 
information 
processing 
activities consume considerably more time than customers’ 
home keys logistics. However, due to synergy advantage, 
together the technologies are bound to contribute more than 
the sum of their parts, as they can remove an entire process 
step. 
 
 
Figure 2. Constraints matrix showing which constraints the alternative 
technologies affect. 
 
Unfortunately, not all technologies are equally easy to 
implement. The technology, and the ease or difficulty of 
implementation, is termed feasibility. It incorporates the 
following variables: a technology’s usability; the cost of the 
investment; the process changes involved, and their ease of 
implementation. There may be considerable differences both 
in terms of operational feasibility and in the amount of 
education 
and 
training 
required. 
Technologies 
by 
themselves rarely have the capability to increase throughput 
and improve productivity. Their power lies in their ability to 
allow the redesigning of the way in which tasks are 
performed, so that more can be done with less. 
For 
example, 
mobile 
data 
entry 
and 
retrieval 
technologies can allow home care caregivers to spend more 
value-adding time with their customers, improve the quality 
of the EMR information as a result of timely data entry, and 
remove the need for double data entry. Most activities will 
still need to be performed, only now at a more desirable 
time and place, which in turn may improve the operational 
flow and process throughput (quality improvement), or the 
same amount of customers can be treated with a smaller 
workforce (increased productivity).  
When evaluating technologies it is imperative that the 
process redesign be accounted for. Thus, before evaluating 
new technologies on the basis of financial measures such as 
ROI and payback time, the ease of implementing the 
accompanying process changes should be evaluated. Even if 
the time and location constraints which currently force the 
caregivers to visit the office were to be removed, will the 
caregivers stop going there? There might be other reasons 
for visiting the office, such as social purposes. By 
implementing certain technologies the constraints can be 
eliminated, but the true benefits will not be realized before 
the operating procedures and practices change. 
Goldratt et al. [31] explain that constraints force 
organizations to create rules (policies or routines) to cope 
with or work around exisiting constraints. Apparently, it is 
not uncommon for these rules to remain after the constraint 
has been removed. Failure to revise the rules has been 
shown to keep organizations from realizing the benefits of 
new technologies. The authors believe routine changes can 
be brought about by implementing suitable incentives. 
B. Constraints vs. Non-Constraints: Timing Matters 
The quantitative analysis of operational data showed the 
existence of considerable peaks in the workload. Figure 3 
shows the fluctuation in the workload throughout the day, in 
terms of the total amount of service time. Roughly fifty 
percent of the services are performed during peak hours, 
from 8-11 a.m. This causes a peak time resource constraint 
during the morning rush hour, throughout which the system 
has trouble coping with demand.  
121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Hour of the Day
Total Service Time (h)
 
Figure 3. The caregivers’ workload distribution. The figure shows the 
accumulated service time per hour of the day over a six-week period. 
    
The intended mobile technology implementation sought 
to improve productivity by saving time on office tasks. 
However, the office tasks are performed in the afternoon 
during a period of low demand. Because of the uneven 
workload distribution, the time would be saved during hours 
of excess capacity (i.e., a non-constraint). TOC tells us that 
throughput can only be increased by alleviating or breaking 
the constraint, not by increasing the efficiency of non-
constraints. In practice, saving time in the afternoon would 
not allow the organization to serve more customers. 
Consequently, implementing the solution in the current 
system is unlikely to save time during the peak time 
constraint.  
By examining the home care operations through the 
TOC lens, we concluded that the sought technology 
implementation would not have the desired affect on 
productivity. The analysis also gave us the insight that the 
workload distribution was constraining the productivity of 
the system. However, once the workload is more level, 
alleviating 
the 
time 
and 
location 
constraints 
by 
implementing the technology is disposed to enable the 
organization to service more customers, improving 
productivity.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Assessing the technologies from a traditional cost 
perspective – comparing the costs of the investment with its 
potential time savings multiplied by cost per hour – would 
not have provided a true representation of the effects on the 
system. First, reducing the required caregiver time in the 
afternoon does not reduce the organization’s operating 
expenses, since labor is a fixed cost. The capacity remains 
unaffected, but capacity utilization is reduced, which 
spreads the fixed costs over less service time. Second, an 
investment in technology increases operating expenses. 
Third, in the current mode of operation, as time saved in the 
afternoon cannot be used to treat more customers (there is 
already overcapacity in the afternoon), no additional 
throughput is gained. Consequently, there is no added 
throughput to offset the increase in operating expenses. This 
reduces productivity, the complete opposite of what the 
planned investment sought to achieve. 
A. Limitations of the Study 
As a result of a lack of accurate data on the timing and 
duration of office tasks – unlike customer encounters, back-
office activities, such as office tasks and transit, are not 
recorded – the contribution of office activities to the total 
workload could not be accurately quantified.     
The capacity utilization rate (CUR) of the caregivers 
would have been a more appropriate measure than 
throughput for analyzing the workload. The distribution of 
throughput (i.e., service time) was therefore used as an 
approximation of the workload. From a previous activity-
based costing investigation it was known that the office 
tasks consume less than 20 percent of the caregivers’ total 
working time. Transit accounts for approximately 12 
percent, and is naturally distributed alongside the 
throughput. At the time of the study, the ratio of service 
time to back-office time was less than forty percent. From 
this it can be construed that currently there is excess 
capacity in the afternoon, even though it is not quite as 
remarkable as Figure 3 would suggest, as the figure does not 
account for back-office activities. 
Because of 
the 
problem-solving nature of 
the 
investigation, only one organization was studied. Both the 
literature [28] and the authors’ experience, however, suggest 
that the morning demand peak is a common but poorly 
understood characteristic of home care operations.  
B. A Note on  Financial Analysis 
When constraints and their priorities are understood, 
organizations can proceed to financial evaluation. Financial 
evaluation methodology has been widely discussed in the 
literature [32][33][34][35][36] and basic concepts can be 
applied to healthcare technology evaluations. We briefly 
present two commonly used methods, cost-benefit analysis 
and cost-effectiveness analysis, as examples of basic 
financial evaluation tools. Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) uses 
a monetary frame of reference to evaluate both outcomes 
and costs. Both the costs of interventions and the values of 
outcomes are assessed in terms of money. This analysis is 
particularly useful if the outcomes exceed costs and the 
solution with the largest net benefit (outcomes subtracted 
for costs) should be selected. Unlike CBA, the focus of cost-
effectiveness analysis (CEA) is on the non-monetary 
outcomes of an intervention, such as a health improvement. 
CEA compares the cost of alternative (intervention) 
outcomes. “Alternatives are calculated and presented in a 
ratio of incremental cost to incremental effect” [37]. CEA is 
therefore more suitable for assessing technologies that 
122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
aspire to improve health outcomes than for evaluating 
process technologies. 
Depending on the definition of throughput (money, 
visits, customers, service time etc.), these methods can be 
used to evaluate the financial implications of a change in 
throughput. The focus should, however, be on the 
throughput of the primary constraint, not the non-
constraints’. Following TA, technologies could be assessed 
on the basis of their ability to increase the measure 
‘throughput per constraint minute’ [3]. 
C. When is the TOC Approach Appropriate? 
Prioritizing throughput over cost is particularly suitable 
for organizations that have sufficient demand to absorb the 
increased throughput. If, however, demand is a constraint 
(market constraint [12]), organizations should shift the focus 
to producing the same services with fewer resources, i.e., 
maintaining 
throughput 
while 
reducing 
operational 
expenses. Subject to a market constraint, the bottleneck 
resource that governs throughput, to which the rest of the 
system should be subordinated, is the resource with the 
highest utilization after market demand is satisfied [38]. As 
such, the TOC approach can help improve productivity even 
in the absence of an actual resource constraint. 
The framework provides a rough, easy, and simple 
approach to ranking alternative technologies, according to 
their ability to affect the true operational limitations, i.e., the 
constraints. It is advisable to use this framework as a first 
step in the right direction. The suggested approach stresses 
that increasing throughput will reduce costs, while reducing 
costs will ultimately reduce throughput. Therefore the 
primary focus of technology assessment should be on the 
ability of technologies to increase throughput rather than 
reduce costs, so that existing resources can be used to their 
full potential. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
New technologies are traditionally assessed on the basis 
of simplified financial estimates, with the operational 
impact being overlooked. This paper suggests an alternative 
approach based on Operations Management (OM), 
following the theory of constraints (TOC). The TOC 
approach is more pragmatic and suitable for technology 
evaluation in a fast-paced and growing health technology 
market. It holds that the performance of the system can only 
be increased by improving the performance of the primary 
constraint. Therefore technologies should be assessed on the 
basis of their ability to improve the performance of the 
constraint. The suggested approach further stresses that 
prioritizing throughput over cost will reduce costs, while 
focusing on cost reduction will ultimately reduce 
throughput. Once the operational aspects have been 
assessed, financial methods are bound to be more reliable 
and useful. 
The empirical study showed that the time and location 
constraints were not the organization’s primary constraint, 
as originally conceived. Alleviating or removing these 
constraints would therefore not have the desired affect. This 
provided the insight not to invest in the planned mobile 
solution, under the current mode of operation. The analysis 
further prompted the need to alleviate the impact of the peak 
time workload in Espoo Home Care by leveling service 
provision. An investigation of the causes behind the uneven 
workload distribution is currently taking place.  
Suggested future work includes further development of 
the methodology and empirical testing of the presented 
framework in other settings, particularly those in which a 
technology is actually implemented. Comparing the use of 
this instrument to evaluations performed with other methods 
would be a valuable contribution. 
Further testing and reporting on the suitability of the 
suggested framework for evaluating investment decisions 
outside healthcare is encouraged. Although TOC aspires to 
be the basis for all decision making, there seems to be a lack 
of published empirical studies on using it for this type of 
investment analysis. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
J.G., K.R, and P.L. were responsible for the conception 
of the study and drafted the manuscript. J.G. performed the 
empirical investigation, gathering and analyzing the data.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to express their gratitude to the staff of 
Espoo Home Care, who were instrumental in making the 
study possible. In addition, Teemu Mustonen of Jyväskylä 
University and Ecomond Ltd. deserves special recognition 
for assisting in processing the quantitative raw data. The 
authors would further like to thank Professor Erkki 
Vauramo and Dr. Anu Helkkula of Aalto University, as well 
as the anonymous reviewers, for their valuable comments, 
which greatly helped to improve this paper. 
During the preparation of the manuscript, J.G. and K.R. 
were visiting researchers at Stanford University (California). 
J.G. was affiliated with the Mechanical Engineering Design 
Group and K. R. was affiliated with the Stanford Prevention 
Research Center (SPRC). Both departments deserve 
acknowledgment for providing a stimulating research 
enviroment.  
This study (PARETO) was funded by the European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. J. Groop, K. H. Reijonsaari, and P. M. Lillrank, “A Theory of 
Constraints Approach to Health Technology Assessment,” in 
eTelemed 2010, Second International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, St. Maarten, Netherlands 
Antilles, pp. 147-152, February 10-16, 2010. 
[2] 
J. Concato, N. Shah, and R. I. Horwitz, “Randomized, Controlled 
Trials, Observational Studies, and the Hierarchy of Research 
Designs,” The New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 342, no. 25, 
pp. 1887-1892, Jun. 2000. 
123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[3] 
E. Goldratt, What is this thing called theory of constraints and how 
should it be implemented? Croton-on-Hudson, NY: North River 
Press, 1990. 
[4] 
M. Gupta and L. Boyd, “Theory of constraints: A theory for 
operations management,” International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 991-1012, 2008. 
[5] 
A. M. Breen, T. Burton-Houle, and D. C. Aron, “Applying the 
Theory of Constraints in Health Care: Part 1-The Philosophy.,” 
Quality Management in Health Care, vol. 10, no. 3, p. 40, 2002. 
[6] 
M. G. Hunink, “In search of tools to aid logical thinking and 
communicating about medical decision making,” Medical Decision 
Making, vol. 21, no. 4, p. 267, 2001. 
[7] 
R. A. McNutt and M. C. Odwazny, “The theory of constraints and 
medical error: a conversation with Robert A. McNutt,” Quality 
Management in Healthcare, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 183, 2004. 
[8] 
J. Schaefers, J. Colin, R. Aggoune, and M. Kucina, “A contribution 
to performance measurement in the healthcare industry: the 
industrial point of view,” International Journal of Business 
Performance Management, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 226–239, 2007. 
[9] 
S. Sadat, Theory of constraints for publicly funded health systems. 
Dissertation: University of Toronto (Canada), 2009. 
[10] 
M. Gupta and J. Kline, “Managing a community mental health 
agency: a theory of constraints based framework,” Total Quality 
Management & Business Excellence, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 281–294, 
2008. 
[11] 
J. Motwani, D. Klein, and R. Harowitz, “The Theory of Constraints 
in Services: Part 2 - Examples from Health Care,” Managing 
Service Quality, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 30 - 34, 1996. 
[12] 
B. Ronen, J. S. Pliskin, and S. Pass, Focused Operations 
Management for Health Services Organizations. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2006. 
[13] 
J. Wright and R. King, We All Fall Down: Goldratt's Theory of 
Constraints for Healthcare Systems. Great Barrington, MA: North 
River Press, 2006. 
[14] 
J. E. Wennberg, Tracking Medicine: A Researcher's Quest to 
Understand Health Care. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2010. 
[15] 
E. Goldratt and J. Cox, The Goal. Croton-on-Hudson, NY: North 
River Press, 1984. 
[16] 
S. U. Rahman, “Theory of constraints: a review of the philosophy 
and its applications,” International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, vol. 18, pp. 336-355, 1998. 
[17] 
J. Motwani, D. Klein, and R. Harowitz, “The Theory of Constraints 
in Services: Part 1 - The Basics,” Managing Service Quality, vol. 6, 
pp. 53–56, 1996. 
[18] 
J. Kujala, P. Lillrank, V. Kronström, and A. Peltokorpi, “Time-
Based Management of Patient Processes,” Journal of Health 
Organization and Management, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 512–524, 2006. 
[19] 
J. H. Blackstone, “Theory of Constraints - A Status Report.,” 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 
1053-1080, Apr. 2001. 
[20] 
R. Schmenner and M. Swink, “On theory in operations 
management,” Journal of Operations Management, vol. 17, no. 1, 
pp. 97-113, 1998. 
[21] 
R. Schmenner, “Manufacturing, service, and their integration: 
Some history and theory,” International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 431-443, 2009. 
[22] 
D. Jacob, S. Bergland, and J. Cox, Velocity: Combining Lean, Six 
Sigma and the Theory of Constraints to Achieve Breakthrough 
Performance-A Business Novel. New York: Free Press, 2009. 
[23] 
A. Morton and J. Cornwell, “What's the difference between a 
hospital and a bottling factory?,” British Medical Journal, vol. 339, 
no. 20, p. b 2727, 2009. 
[24] 
E. Goldratt and R. E. Fox, The Race, 1st ed. Croton-on-Hudson, 
NY: North River Press, 1986. 
[25] 
B. Ronen and Y. Spector, “Managing system constraints: a 
cost/utilization approach,” International Journal of Production 
Research, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 2045–2061, 1992. 
[26] 
L. Boyd and M. Gupta, “Constraints management: What is the 
theory?,” International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 350 - 371, 2004. 
[27] 
E. Goldratt, The haystack syndrome: Sifting information out of the 
data ocean. North River Press Great Barrington, MA, 1990. 
[28] 
P. Eveborn, P. Flisberg, and M. Rönnqvist, “Home Care 
Operations,” OR/MS Today, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 38–43, 2004. 
[29] 
S. Agnihothri, N. Sivasubramaniam, and D. Simmons, “Leveraging 
technology to improve field service,” International Journal of 
Service Industry Management, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 47–68, 2002. 
[30] 
K. H. Ilvonen, P. J. Groop, and P. M. Lillrank, “Mobile Services 
Provide Value by Decoupling the Time and Location Constraints in 
Healthcare Delivery,” in eTelemed 2009, First International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
Cancun, Mexico, pp. 216-219, February 1-7, 2009. 
[31] 
E. Goldratt, E. Schragenheim, and C. A. Ptak, Necessary But Not 
Sufficient. Croton-on-Hudson, NY: North River Press, 2000. 
[32] 
T. T. Edejer et al., “WHO guide to cost-effectiveness analysis,” 
WHO, Geneva, 2003. 
[33] 
M. Johannesson and B. Jönsson, “Economic evaluation in health 
care: is there a role for cost-benefit analysis?” Health Policy, vol. 
17, no. 1, p. 1, 1991. 
[34] 
H. E. Klarman, “Application of cost-benefit analysis to health 
systems technology,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 172, 1974. 
[35] 
K. E. Warner and R. C. Hutton, “Cost-benefit and cost-
effectiveness analysis in health care: Growth and composition of 
the literature,” Medical Care, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1069–1084, 1980. 
[36] 
A. E. Boardman, D. H. Greenberg, A. R. Vining, and D. L. 
Weimer, Cost-benefit analysis: concepts and practice, 3rd Ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall 2006. 
[37] 
J. Brazier, J. Ratcliffe, and A. Tsuchiya, Measuring and valuing 
health benefits for economic evaluation. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2007. 
[38] 
J. Balakrishnan, C. H. Cheng, and D. Trietsch, “The Theory of 
Constraints in Academia: Its Evolution, Influence, Controversies, 
and Lessons,” Operations Management Education Review, vol. 2, 
pp. 97–114, 2008. 
 
124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

