14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Exploring Caregivers’ Perceived Stress with Their Need-Factors 
 
Ah-Choo Koo 
Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Malaysia 
ackoo@mmu.edu.my 
 
Sian-Hoon Teoh 
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Puncak Alam, Malaysia 
teohsian@salam.uitm.edu.my 
 
Tenku Putri Norishah, Peter Charles Woods 
Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Malaysia 
tengku.norishah@mmu.edu.my, p.woods@mmu.edu.my 
 
Kok-Yew Ang 
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Sungai Long, Malaysia 
angky@utar.edu.my 
 
Wei-Fern Siew 
International Medical University, Bukit Jalil, Malaysia 
weifern_siew@imu.edu.my 
 
Weng-Ping Chin 
Puchong, Malaysia. 
lydiadigitalclassroom@gmail.com 
Abstract - Caregivers face numerous challenges in providing 
care for a wide range of illnesses and health conditions 
associated with communicable diseases or non-communicable 
diseases. Pandemics, ageing populations, environmental health 
concerns, lifestyle changes, and other factors contribute to 
health issues, which lead to a greater demand for caregiving. 
This warrants further research on caregivers’ wellbeing. The 
study reported six need-factor of caregivers, which are the 
needs for regular communications, personal well-being, basic 
healthcare, access to information, coping with change and 
learning about caregiving. This paper explores these 
objectives: 1) To determine perceived stress level of caregiving 
among the caregivers; 2) To determine perceived stress level of 
caregiving among caregivers based on gender, age, duration of 
caregiving, and frequency of using internet for information 
seeking; 3) To determine the relationship of the need-factors of 
caregivers with their perceived stress level. A total of 84 
caregivers responded in a survey by using questionnaire. The 
t-test, analysis of variance, and correlation were used in data 
analysis. Findings reveal a normal distributed perceived stress 
level with a weak relationship with the need for information on 
caregiving. Caregivers should be able to access and acquire 
reliable information about the care guides which would aid in 
the provision and management of care, especially in this 
unprecedented time due to COVID-19.  
 
Keywords- Caregiver; perceived stress; information need; factor 
analysis; care model. 
I.   INTRODUCTION 
The rise of noncommunicable diseases over the years has 
resulted in an increasing disease burden in our society, with 
people suffering from life-limiting chronic illnesses. Their 
debilitating illness necessitates the assistance of caregivers. 
As a result, there is a greater demand for caregivers to 
provide care informally or professionally. Caregivers 
frequently faced with a range of challenging circumstances 
that they must handle while doing their jobs, and stress 
becomes unavoidable for them. In a study published in 
Global Health 2020 Contribution 70025, Koo et al. [1] 
identified six need-factors that facilitate caregivers in 
carrying out their responsibilities and making care decisions. 
The six needs-factors are regular communications, personal 
well-being, basic healthcare, access to information, coping 
with change and learning about caregiving. In this study, the 
authors proceeded to determine if caregivers’ perceived 
stress level of giving care influenced by these factors, 
particularly in a case study of cancer caregivers.  
Caregiver is defined as “someone who performs hands-
on care and/or provides emotional support to patients, such 
as a partner, relative or friend” [6, p. 388]. “Formal 
caregivers typically undergo training and certification and 
may inherently have greater health literacy capacities 
compared to informal caregivers” [26, p. 12]. The term 
“caregivers” used in this study is to encompass both partners 
and family caregivers, who are inherently informal 
caregivers.  
Caregivers to elderly recipients have a significant 
influence on their treatment [17]. If the caregiver is 
depressed or lacks resilience, the care recipient may not be 
able to get the most of care, thus affecting the quality of life 
for both parties. Support is needed for caregivers, such as 
physical, psychological, social, and spiritual [4][20] and 
encompass many decades of care for patients with chronic 
neurological 
conditions, 
such 
as 
multiple 
sclerosis, 
Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s disease, stroke, and Parkinson’s 
disease [22]. However, the capacity of informal caregivers to 
source and utilize information for them to perform their tasks 
is not well understood [24]; the roles of family caregivers are 
multifaceted and challenging. Health and social well-being 
have been an issue for the current society, hence care 
services (informal or formal) play an increasing role, and 
therefore the motivation of conducting this study. 
Yuen et al. [26. p. 12] mentioned that “accessing 
information from the internet may entail additional demands 
and capacities compared to traditional health literacy due to 
the factor of competing sources, identifying accurate and 
trustworthy resources, technological and internet literacy, as 
well as access to technology and the internet”. They propose 
future research could examine various strategies in providing 
information to caregivers through eHealth modalities. 
Ribeiro et al. [18] suggested that innovative health education, 
such as mobile learning applications will further expand the 
context of a smart learning ecosystem for cancer education.  

15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The objectives of this paper are as follows: 1) to 
determine perceived stress level of caregiving among the 
caregivers; 2) to determine perceived stress level of 
caregiving among caregivers based on gender, age, duration 
of caregiving, and frequency of using internet for 
information seeking; and 3) to determine the relationship of 
the need-factors of caregivers with their perceived stress 
level. 
Section II reports relevant literature based on various 
aspect of caregiving, especially informal ones, and the 
challenges faced by caregivers. Section III reports the 
methods of the study which include the process of data 
reduction analysis using factor analysis. Section IV provides 
analysis and findings for the research questions. Section V is 
discussions based on findings and finally, Section VI is 
conclusion, and future works.   
II. LITERATURE REVIEW  
A. 
Types of caregiver 
The need of caregiving in society is ever increasing. 
According to WHO’s Global Health Observatory [3] on a 
global scale, the life expectancy of a person is 73.3 years in 
2019. For South-East Asia is 71.4 year; Europe being the 
highest, 78.2. Persons could expect a healthy life of 63.7 
years. According to [3], the gap between healthy and 
unhealthy life is about 9 years, which the populations may 
need care services for that duration.  
Generally, the relationship of informal caregiver and care 
recipient is family members relationships. Reference [7] 
reported that, 5.1% (95% CI = 4.45, 5.87) of adults (from the 
data of National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019 with 
11,160 adults involved, estimated to represent 21.3 million 
adults aged 18 years and above) in Malaysia reported to be 
informal caregivers. [7] provided two levels of caregiving - 
high and low intensity. Those high ones were likely to be 
actively employed and provide longer duration of care 
compared to the low intensity ones. For low intensity 
caregiving, females, those aged 35–59 years, and those with 
long-term condition were more likely to have negative 
effects on health. For high intensity caregiving, caregivers 
aged 60 and over, those received training and those without 
assistance were more likely to have negative effects on 
health [7]; the research team further suggested that 
"caregiving, regardless of intensity, has a significant impact 
on caregivers" (p. 1). To reduce the negative effects of 
caregiving duties, all caregivers need some assistance from 
the supporting environments such as, the community and 
government to support their needs. [8] revealed that the issue 
of social care, particularly the role of informal caregivers and 
their wellbeing were often neglected or missing in the 
discussions. In the UK today, 6.5 million people are 
caregivers, to care for different type of care recipients 
including seriously ill persons. Providing care, especially 
long-term care, can impact on a person’s health, finance, and 
relationships [8]. Many caregivers provide care in long hours 
or many years which affect their wellness. The survey 
conducted by [8] reported that 25% of caregivers 
experienced bad or very bad physical health and 29% of 
them reporting bad or very bad mental health; 81% of all 
caregivers reported to have felt lonely or isolation. Since 
many countries are having a development of an ageing 
population, shrinking of family sizes, and increased of 
women participated in workforce has posted many 
challenges in social care. 
B. 
Framing caregiving based on triadic model 
There are some models related to caregiving. [10] has 
come up with a triadic model, namely Figure 1, which shows 
the factors influencing the three groups of stakeholders in 
caregiving. This paper highlighted the importance of 
caregiving has only recently been acknowledged by the 
nation, such as, the US, as an important topic to the nation. 
 
 
Figure 1. “A triadic model of caregiving: factors influencing 
the care recipient, family caregiver, and professional caregiver 
team” (Source: [10]). 
 
Figure 1 shows that caregiver’s type/group is identified 
to be either a family caregiver or a professional caregiver. A 
family caregiver could be an immediate or extended family 
member. Care recipients can be inflicted with any illness, 
and at any age or age that requires care from others. 
Caregiving resides in the domain of public health. Figure 1 
shows a care triad within a complex system of variables that 
influence the system of caregiving from a larger 
environment. The triadic is influenced by the complex force 
from societal, political, and scientific issues that shape the 
context of care, such as global disease burden, demographic 
changes, 
health 
insurance 
coverage, 
and 
scientific 
discoveries. Care triad deals with a variety of internal as well 
as external variables that facilitate or inhibit the care 
situation, enhancing the chances for success or hindering 
them. More studies should be conducted in understanding 
various factors influencing the wellbeing of caregivers, 
particularly the family caregivers. 

16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. 
Care model during COVID-19 
Digital technology has transformed the care model in this 
unprecedented challenge time for healthcare systems 
internationally (the whole world) [11]. Caregiving during 
COVID-19 have affected the caregiver’s burden and mental 
health [13]. Subsequently, this affected the parents and 
children relationship. Digital health transformation has been 
the rapid development and implementation of new models of 
care which incorporate digital technology health [11]. The 
forces to shield people from COVID-19 have resulted in an 
increased in information seeking using telemedicine 
consultation approaches, as well as the rapid rollout of digital 
apps, digital education / training, etc. Reference [11] 
concluded that the human costs of COVID-19 will be high 
and long remembered; the change of the use of new ways of 
remote and digital health and sustained these care models 
(extended even for caregiving) will be the future 
developments (p. 2). 
D. 
Information technology for seamless learning and 
the infodemic phenomenon: A mixed blessing 
The blessing for caregivers is that they are privileged in 
this era to receive healthcare information at their fingertips. 
The idea of a Seamless Learning Model in context of 
caregivers’ informal learning and information seeking 
pursuits, implemented seamlessly via the internet and social 
media, which impacts their public and private learning 
spaces.  Many activities of learning and information seeking, 
especially for caregivers are inherently informal, self-
directed, independent, and critical as they frequently 
influenced by online technologies and social media.   
There are many internet-based information platforms for 
supporting and developing skills in caregiving and social 
care, for example [27][28][29]. It is also recognized as an 
authentic and just-in-time learning (or training), especially 
for caregivers or informal caregivers who need some help 
and guidance. For catering the needs of receiving guidance, 
there are formal caregiving courses or websites created 
caregivers (such as, MOOC courses that promote lifelong 
learning). [14] proposed a Seamless Learning Framework as 
shown in Figure 2. It explains the learning environments or 
dimensions experienced by most of the learners. The 
learning space is no longer defined by a “physical / formal 
class” but by “learning unconstrained by scheduled class 
hours or specific locations” [14, p.156], thus promoting 
seamlessness, with informal learning and information access 
at ones’ fingertips.  
The seamless environment is labeled as “community” 
which comprises different categories of people such as, 
teachers, experts, and learners. The community has access to  
any relevant sources of knowledge through cognitive tools, 
within the dimension of time (anytime), space (anywhere), 
and artefacts (any learning artifacts / contents).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. A Seamless Learning Framework [14]. 
 
This concept can be applied to fulfil the informal learning 
needs of cancer caregivers since caregivers interact with all 
kinds of information and materials seamlessly.  They interact 
with internet support groups or cancer survivors through 
social media, and conduct discovery learning about the 
disease from the cancer journeys shared by others. There are 
also professional cancer learning and sharing materials, 
which can be accessed with ease.  [25] suggested that public 
health information campaigns could be conducted using 
social media. This new means of communication, especially 
for prevention purposes, will complement other methods of 
communication.  
However, according to [2, p. 627], the importance of 
these online media and technologies has not been clearly 
revealed in previous studies, especially on the information-
seeking behavior of family caregivers. Not a blessing part is 
the current infodemic. The Internet and social media are a 
‘mixed blessing’ for the healthcare sector. However, the 
challenge will be to adhere to the legal framework that 
preserves the quality of the healthcare information provided 
on the internet and consume by the caregivers / patients. 
Infodemic challenges have even become a ‘disastrous’ than 
the pandemic itself. According to [15] that “…a global 
epidemic of misinformation—spreading rapidly through 
social media platforms and other outlets—poses a serious 
problem for public health”. Fighting infodemic and 
misinformation is a joint effort. This is because fighting 
every outbreak will be accompanied with tsunami of 
information and misinformation, rumors, etc., and social 
media amplifying it [15].  Users, such as caregivers must 
critically analyze and select information posted on YouTube 
to make effective healthcare decisions. Moreover, diagnostic 
information online is sometimes used to confront doctors 
[12][15].  
Consumption of online healthcare information and 
services is increasing [15] and has empowered caregivers 
(and patients) to enhance their health and digital literacy for 
improved decision-making [9]. Hence, getting more insights 
on the proper way of obtaining useful and informative inputs 
for caregivers is essential. 
 

17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. 
Identifying challenges and needs of an informal 
caregiver 
Among the bigger challenges faced in long term 
caregiving are the need to give up their personal life or 
career and becoming a full-time caregiver, this is normally a 
case for Asian culture [16]. Most caregivers will be coming 
from family members who are informal mostly, and conflict 
may happen between them with care recipients or the other 
family members who are not able to empathize the roles and 
feeling of caregivers. Another challenge that they faced, is 
the ‘shrink’ of social life to be just in the circle of family and 
a gradual distant from their career life [16].  
Seattle Cancer Care Alliance (SCCA) [19] listed the 
challenges of caregiving such as, caring for themselves (self-
care), supporting and caring patients emotionally and 
physically, maintaining the home environment for patients, 
gathering information, helping with decision-making on 
cancer care or treatment, arranging patients’ hospital visits 
and patient’s financial support. According to Wingate and 
Lackey cited in [2], family caregivers need knowledge, 
information, or understanding that can be gained through 
education, experience, study, or through explanations by 
qualified specialists. Chen [2] reported a qualitative study 
that discloses the information needs of cancer family 
caregivers are varied along the cancer journey, and they used 
diverse 
information 
sources, 
including 
healthcare 
professionals, hospital booklets, interpersonal networks, 
besides the internet, mass media, and books - to satisfy their 
needs. Her study found that demographic variables of 
caregivers (such as, gender, age, level of education, 
socioeconomic 
status, 
and 
culture) 
affected 
their 
information-seeking behaviors. Girgis et al. [6] measured the 
psychometric properties to capture the multidimensional 
supportive care needs of cancer caregivers. The instrument 
used was given to 547 cancer caregivers. Psychometric 
analyses found four dimensions of need: healthcare service, 
psychological and emotional, work, and social, and 
information. Caregivers with anxiety and depression were 
more likely to report, “at least one unmet moderate or high 
need in comparison to non-anxious participants”; younger 
caregivers faced at least one unmet moderate or high need 
around “psychological and emotional”, and “work and 
social”, as compared to the older participants. Girgis et al. 
[6] suggested the findings can be used to prioritize healthcare 
resources and tailor supportive cancer care service 
accordingly. The model and framework reviewed above 
facilitated the conception of need-factors as reported by [1].  
This study focuses on investigating significant factors 
that correlate to caregivers’ perceived stress levels. The 
contributing constructs provide guidelines on further plans or 
actions to reduce stress among caregivers.  Cancer caregivers 
were chosen as the study's setting due to the rising number of 
cancer patients in Malaysia [21] and the need for improving 
cancer management, which certainly requires greater focus in 
research, such as, on the caregiving aspect. 
III. METHODS 
A survey was conducted in a hospital with two cancer 
specialist clinics run by National Cancer Society Malaysia 
(NCSM), an NGO for cancer awareness and cancer care. 
Permission was granted from NCSM to conduct this study at 
the waiting lounge of the two cancer clinics. The population 
of the study involved all cancer clinics run by NCSM across 
the country. However, only two cancer clinics were 
purposively selected to participate in this study due to their 
strategic location in the center of Kuala Lumpur city. A total 
of 84 participants were involved in this study. Majority of 
them were Malaysian Chinese. This is because the hospital is 
traditionally or historically relevant and popular among 
Malaysian Chinese community.  
A. Instrument 
The instrument of the survey was adapted from [6] to 
study needs of accessing information in the context of 
informal learning environments. Items related to this context 
were added to the instrument. The instrument was then 
reviewed by three experts in wellness and preventive 
medicine (Expert 1), management of a cancer wellness 
center (Expert 2), and healthcare informatics (Expert 3) 
respectively. Items were reviewed; some were dropped and 
merged because of overlapping meaning; some were 
rephrased for the suitability of local caregivers in Malay and 
English. A comprehensive factor analysis was conducted to 
establish the factors. The items were analyzed in a 
comprehensive factor analysis. It involves two stages as 
below. 
1)  Stage one: Extracting factor 
In PCA, the suitability and adequacy of data in terms of 
variability of data were tested based on Kaiser-Mayer-Olkin 
(KMO) measure of sampling adequacy. In this study the 
value of KMO is 0.842 which is greater than 0.7 which 
indicates a very good condition to proceed with the factor 
analysis. In normal practice, value of KMO should be larger 
than 0.5 for achieving condition of satisfactory.   
On the other hand, the Barlett’s Test of Sphericity takes 
consideration of testing of correlations among the variables. 
This value is referred to ensure that there are sufficient 
correlations among the variables. The sufficiency of 
correlations is indicated in the associated probability in the 
chi-square. If the p value of the associated chi-square statistic 
is less than 0.5, it shows the items are sufficiently correlated 
for further analysis in PCA. In this study, the results of 
Barlett’s Test of Sphericity show that value of chi-square is 
2470 with df=703 and p-value < 0.05, indicating that the 
variables were sufficiently correlated to form the specific 
components and factors. 
TABLE 1.  KMO AND BARLETT’S TEST 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of 
Sampling Adequacy. 
.842 
Bartlett's 
Test 
of 
Sphericity 
Approx. Chi-Square 
2470.094 
Df 
703 
Sig. 
.000 
 

18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An examination of the scree plot of the Eigenvalue 
versus Component has shown a clear “knee point / elbow”, 
that is at the point of component number of 6 (refer to Figure 
3). Other components have lower value of eigenvalue, which 
will not be considered for the next step.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Scree plot showing the elbow at the point of the 
sixth component at the value of Eigenvalue >= 1. 
The six components which have eigenvalues more than 
one (namely 16.714, 2.483, 2.211, 1.504, 1.270, 1.187 as 
observed in the analysis of the total variance explained by 
components) indicate there are six factors or constructs in the 
extraction process. 
 
2) Stage two: Factor rotation 
The final step of PCA is to examine the factor loadings of 
each item in relation to the first six components. The factor 
loading presents the results of component rotations and 
interpretation of components.  
The factor rotation method used in the analysis is 
Viramax rotation, a method used frequently in social science 
and psychological study. A check on oblique based rotation 
has also produced the similar set of items according to these 
components. In determining the factors from the factor 
loading, the loading of absolutes 0.4 is used as a cut-off 
value. For practical significance, loadings of absolutes0.4 
and above, but less than 0.5 are considered just enough to be 
significant. Loadings above 0.5 indicates highly significant. 
On the other hand, if the factor loading difference between 
two factors across a particular item is less than 0.2, the item 
should be dropped. 
Table 2 is a matrix table showing the rotated components 
and their related items shows the loading value of each item 
which are greater than 0.4 in relation to the six identified 
components in the factor extraction, and other components 
(i.e., Components 7 and 8).  The bold loading values are the 
selected items according to components; items which loading 
values are italicized due to the difference of loading values 
less than 0.2 were discarded (i.e. Item 18, 35, 26, 33 and 32). 
Components 7 and 8 were also not considered for 
interpretation. 
TABLE 2. A MATRIX TABLE SHOWING THE ROTATED 
COMPONENTS AND THEIR RELATED ITEMS WITH 
FACTOR LOADINGS. 
Item # 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Differe
nce of 
two 
factor 
loading
s with 
nearest 
values 
Decision 
on item#  
14 
0.819  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
0.809  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
0.658  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
0.641  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
0.622  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
0.575  
 
 
0.433  
 
 
0.142 
(<0.2) 
Item 18 is 
dropped  
15 
0.469  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
0.769 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
0.766 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
0.701 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
0.679 
 
 
0.456  
 
 
0.223 
(>0.2) 
Item 28 is 
maintaine
d 
25 
 
0.638 
 
 
0.424  
 
 
0.214 
(>0.2) 
Item 25 is 
maintaine
d 
10 
 
0.611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
0.593 
0.467  
 
 
 
 
0.126 
(<0.2) 
Item 35 is 
dropped  
26 
 
0.546 
 
 
0.448  
 
 
0.098 
(<0.2) 
Item 26 is 
dropped  
9 
 
 
0.656  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
0.605  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
0.54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
0.411  
0.518  
 
0.426  
 
 0.015 
(<0.2) 
Item 33 is 
dropped  
32 
 
 
0.515  
0.486  
0.432  
0.054 
(<0.2) 
Item 32 is 
dropped  
8 
 
 
0.476  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
0.462  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
0.45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
0.44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
0.783  
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
0.781  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
0.706  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
0.425 0.64 
 
 
 
 
0.215 
(>0.2) 
Item 4 is 
maintaine
d 
24 
 
 
 
 
0.787  
 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
0.732  
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
0.506  
 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
0.814  
 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
0.809  
 
 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
0.594  
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.757  
 
 
31 
 
 
0.429  
 
 
0.444  
0.015 
(<0.2) 
Item 31 is 
dropped  
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.624  
 

19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
16 
 
 
 
 
0.418  
 
0.5 
0.082 
(<0.2) 
Item 16 is 
dropped  
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser 
Normalization. Rotation converged in 10 iterations.  
Note: The minimum loading score accepted is 0.4, loadings below 0.4 are not shown; items with 
loading difference <0.2 are discarded from further analysis / interpretation. Extraction 
Method: Principal Component Analysis.  Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser 
Normalization.  A. Rotation converged in 10 iterations. 
 
The bold items were retained and used for interpreting 
the need factor. In total, there were 29 items to explain six 
(6) components of need factors.  Table 2 is a matrix table 
showing the rotated components and their related items. A 
total of 9 items were discarded, and not included for further 
interpretation of the construct or need factors.  
The internal reliability analyses with the Cronbach’s 
Alpha values for the items emerged for six components / 
factors are stated in column 3 of Table 4: Factors with items 
loaded to the six-factor of needs (Refer to the last page of 
this paper). All factors have the alpha values greater than 0.7 
(α > 0.7), indicating an acceptable internal reliability 
measure for the factors. 
Collectively, none of the factors scored ‘high need’ and 
there is no factor indicating “no need”. The need for 
communication is at the level of ‘moderate’. Other need 
factors such as, personal well-being, basic healthcare, access 
to information, coping with change are between ‘low’ to 
‘moderate need’. The need for learning through online 
information and connection is ‘low’.  
 
B. Results of the Factor Analysis 
The needs-factors are identified as F1-F6 and are detailed 
as follows: 
• Factor 1 (F1): Regular communication for better 
understanding and balance of needs between 
caregivers and person with cancer.  
• Factor 2 (F2): Personal well-being especially on the 
control of emotion, communication, and spiritual 
beliefs mainly on the quest of meaning of life and the 
faith in the healing process. 
•    Factor 3 (F3):  Basic healthcare, counselling, and 
service.  
•    Factor 4 (F4): Access to information related to 
cancer or patient care information and services. 
•    Factor 5 (F5): Coping with change especially the 
change of life routine and perspective on life. 
•    Factor 
6 
(F6): 
Learning 
through 
online 
information and connection with others on cancer 
care. 
The items were analyzed using factor analysis. Factors on 
the needs of cancer caregivers were then identified in the 
analysis (This part of analysis was reported in [1]). The 
instrument also collected data of profiles, caregiving 
experiences and online activities behavior, caregivers’ 
perceived stress level. The instrument also measures the 
perceived stress level of caregivers according to a scale of 1 - 
10. Respondents were freely to mark their level of stress 
guided by the simple semantic such as, minimal stress, some 
stress and higher stress (in which data is gathered from a 
scale bar from 1 to 10, where 1 represents minimal stress, the 
middle scale represents some stress and 10 represents the 
higher stress (Refer to Figure 4) 
 
 
Figure 4. Scale of perceived stress level. 
C. Procedures 
The caregivers in the waiting lounge were invited to 
participate in the survey. The researcher assistant took turns 
to be in the waiting area for two or three days in a week for 
two months. The data collection process stopped when there 
were very few new caregivers in the waiting area. Caregivers 
who agreed to participate in this study were asked to sign a 
participation consent form. They were briefed that at any 
time, they could freely withdraw from the study. Some 
caregivers were assisted by the researchers to clarify the 
meaning of items. Overall, the total number of usable 
responses was 84 out of 91; seven responses were not 
included due to incompleteness. 
IV. ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 
Two parts of analysis were conducted, firstly is Part A - 
demographic information and perceived stressed level, and 
Part B - probing caregivers’ profile such as, age, gender, 
duration of caregiving, frequency to be online for accessing 
information, and the six need-factors with perceived stress 
level among the group of caregivers. 
D. Description of the demographic information 
The total participants were 84. More than half were 
females, most of them were Chinese (83%) with their 
religion Buddhism or Taoism, middle income or lower 
(77%), holding diploma and above (59%), aged more than 30 
years old (73%). More than half of them (62%) have been 
caregiving for 6 months and above, mostly the care 
recipients were affected with female related cancer (54%). 
The caregivers were quite active online to look for health 
information and connection with others via online. About 
60% of them were in this category.  
Profile of caregivers, especially their age, gender, 
duration, and frequency of online access to information are 
further examined, whether these variables influence 
caregivers’ stress levels.   
 
RQ1 – What are the caregivers’ stress levels?  
Figure 5 presents the distribution caregivers’ stress 
levels. The bell shape of the distribution depicts the data is 
normally distributed. Further testing of normality is 
conducted by calculating the Z-score.  The Z-score value (as 
shown below) is calculated from the skewness statistic 
(skewness statistic= -0.359) and standard error (standard 
error = -0.269) of it (refer to Table 3). 

20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE 3.   STATISTIC AND STANDARD ERROR FOR THE 
CALCULATION OF Z-SCORE 
 
Z-score = skewness statistic/ standard error=  -0.359/-0.269 = -1.386 
 
The Z-score = -1.386 is located between –3.29 and +3.29 
shows a fulfilment of requirement of normality. It is 
indicated the medium sample size (50< n < 300), a threshold 
value of Z score is 3.29 to determine the distribution of data 
is normal. In this case, the null hypothesis (H0: the data is 
not distributed normally) is rejected at alpha level of 0.05. 
Hence, the data is distributed normally. In addition, the data 
satisfies normality since the ratio of standard error (-0.269) 
to its standard error is in between -2 and +2.  
Refer to Figure 5, overall, the caregivers were averagely 
stressed on their caregiving task, with most of them having 
middle stressed level ranging at the mean value of 5.68 (Std. 
Dev. = 1.826). Majority of them have some stress (within the 
range of scale of 4 – 8), i.e., some stress in caregiving. The 
distribution of stress level is showing a normal distribution 
(Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. Histogram of perceived stressed level. 
Scale for perceived level is 1 – 10. * Note: 4 missing values reported. 
 
RQ2: Is there any difference in perceived stress level 
between/among the grouping variables (namely gender, age, 
period of caregiving, frequency of using internet for 
information seeking)? 
Table 4 shows descriptive data for four grouping 
variables.  The t-statistic and F-statistic are referred to 
examine whether the grouping variables has an influence on 
perceived stress level. The findings show that the perceived 
stress level does not shows difference between/ among each 
of the grouping variables (in Table 4) since all the p-values 
of the statistical test (t-test and ANOVA) exceed 0.5. Thus, it 
has sufficient evidence that there are no differences in 
perceived stress level among different groups (gender, age, 
period of caregiving, frequency of using internet for 
information seeking) of caregivers.   
 
TABLE 4. COMPARING DEMOGRAPHIC AND EXPERIENCE 
VARIABLES WITH PERCEIVED STRESS LEVELS 
Grouping Variables 
Mean (Std. 
Dev.) 
Statistical 
Test  
P value 
Main measure  
Perceived 
Stress Level 
 
 
Gender 
  Male 
  Female 
 
5.94 (1.722) 
5.48(1.894) 
t = 1.122 
(df = 78) 
0.265 (not 
significant) 
Age 
  < 30 
  30-49 
  50-69 
 
 
5.21(1.865) 
6.09(1.505) 
5.50 (2.259) 
 
 
F = 1.734 
0.184 
Duration/Period of 
caregiving 
  <0.5 year 
 
  0.5 year-1 year 
 
  1– 2 year 
 
  >2 year 
 
 
6.04 (1.503 ) 
 
5.43 (2.507) 
 
5.71 (1.978  ) 
 
5.00 (2.000) 
 
 
F = 1.302 
 
 
0.281 
Frequency of using 
internet for information 
seeking:- 
 
Very frequently 
(everyday and almost 
everyday) 
 
Weekly, fortnightly or 
seldom 
 
Never 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.54 (1.584) 
 
 
5.88 (2.748) 
 
 
6.69 (1.653) 
 
 
 
 
 
F = 1.6695 
 
 
 
 
 
.176 
 
Note: The dependent variable is caregivers’ perceived stress level. 
RQ3: Is there any relationship between caregivers’ need 
factors with their perceived stressed on caregiving? 
Table 5 shows the correlations of Perceived Stressed 
Scale with the six need-factor identified in [1], where the 
bivariate correlation coefficient values are displayed with the 
indication of p-value. The findings show that the need for 
‘access to information’, ‘basic healthcare’ and ‘personal 
wellbeing’ are among the significant factor that correlate 
positively (have positive relationships) with perceived stress 
level since the p-values are less than 0.05. The correlation 
coefficient for the one variable which is the need for 
accessing information is the highest (r=0.341, p-value < 
0.05) among these variables.  Another three need-factor 
(regular communication need, need to cope with change, and 
the need for learning through online information and 
connection) were not correlated with perceived stress.  
 
TABLE 5. CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CAREGIVERS’ NEED 
FACTORS WITH THEIR PERCEIVED STRESS ON 
CAREGIVING 
Need-factor (with 
reference to [1])  
Correlation 
Coefficient, r  
 
 
  
p value  
Sig. (2-tailed) 
 
F1_Communication 
0.193 
.087 
F2_Personal 
wellbeing 
0.221 
.049* 

21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
F3_Basic 
healthcare 
0.317 
.004* 
F4_Access to info 
0.341 
.004** 
F5_Cope with 
change 
0.179 
.112 
F6_Learning 
through online 
0.173 
.126 
Correlation of six need-factor with perceived stress; n = 84 
V. DISCUSSION 
The need for basic healthcare, personal wellbeing and 
information access are the three crucial factors which have 
some correlations with caregivers’ perceived stress level. 
The personal wellbeing (in the form of positive feeling, 
counseling, spiritual) has often been neglected in modern 
care model. Personal wellbeing and the access for the basic 
healthcare for caregivers is vital for stress relief and to build 
a more robust and holistic model for patient care system. The 
number of caregivers is increasing due to the unprecedented 
pandemic situations.  
The information seeking behaviors (push and pull for 
information) is now seamlessly a part of the life for 
caregivers. The information areas can be referred to online or 
offline channel. The infodemic viral or fake news are also a 
key challenge for everyone, especially more critical for those 
with low literacy in digital skills and health knowledge. The 
findings have shown that, information access to caregivers 
on appropriate information on healthcare, caregiving, etc. has 
a stronger relationship to perceived stress. This was also 
evidenced in the descriptive findings (mean and standard 
deviation) of the group of caregivers who never access 
information via internet to be higher stress compared to other 
group of users.  
The seamless learning concepts by [14] are adapted to 
suit the needs for caregivers and keeping them informed and 
empowered while at the same time learning to acquire skills 
and knowledge for their caregiving tasks from various 
resources and people. Keeping caregivers well-informed and 
information-literate is vital in this age. In recent years, the 
rapid shift of digital technologies has put a toll on caregivers, 
particularly those who are health-illiterate and would not 
know how and where to acquire information as technology 
advanced. Most information is sought online these days. 
Those who never online due to many reasons (illiterate, no 
access to mobile data or devices, etc.) had reported higher 
stress level. Caregivers should be provided training or 
education on information seeking skills, digital and health 
literacy skills. They will be more empower when dealing 
with the new world of information era.  
The current study and analysis finding is also aligned 
with [6] which reported that, “more caregivers experienced 
unmet needs varied across cancer types for the Health Care 
Service Needs and Information Needs domain.” The unmet 
needs may result uneasiness in caregiving across cancer 
types, and these two factors contributing to some stress. [6] 
further stressed that by experiencing any one of the factors, 
“even if just one unmet need, can be quite distressing”. [2] 
explained that caregiving needs for information is not as 
simple as we thought. There are these information needs 
related to these areas: treatment, dietary, disease specific 
information, homecare, psychological support, health, 
insurance and social welfare and funeral arrangement. These 
categories of information are complex, demanding, and 
unfamiliar to many caregivers, could be unmanaged by just 
one or solely one caregiver.  
Information to guide new family caregivers can be 
provided early by healthcare bodies which can reduce the 
anxiety and uncertainty exhibited by caregivers [2]. 
A. Limitations 
The study has sampling limitations, the caregivers are 
mostly from one ethnicity and the number of respondents is 
less than 85. The convenience sample for this study comes 
from one hospital. The sample of the study are caregivers 
who were selected purposively from cancer clinics in a 
hospital, they were affected by different kinds of cancer. All 
these limitations are acknowledged. Future research is 
proposed to incorporate more participating hospitals and 
caregivers. 
VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall, the caregivers involved in this study perceived 
that they have some stress with a few said they have minimal 
stress or higher stress.   
Future directions of this research will consider studying 
on one or two aspects of need factors, especially on the needs 
for information during caregiving by informal caregivers. 
Interaction and communication of family members and 
decision-making processes are all quite relevant or maybe 
different at different stages of caregiving.  
Future research will consider the different duties of 
caregivers and the level of quality of treatment received by 
patients. These variables may influence the requirements of 
needs by caregivers and subsequently affecting the quality of 
care provided by them, especially to their loved ones. [23] 
proposed an urgent need for research directions on the 
impact of COVID-19. Among the highlighted directions are 
the general issues with special considerations, i.e., role of 
technology as the ‘oxygen’ (as vital medium), and the 
importance of contextualization of research. [2] stressed 
about the culture aspect in caregiving; the influence of 
culture in health information studies requires further 
research.  This understanding will move toward better ways 
of living and coping with COVID-19. Although caregiving is 
a routine task, it is however, a very challenging task with 
stress and emotion. Ethnographic method for this research 
area can be used to enhance understanding of the 
information-seeking behavior of family members. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express gratitude for the 
support given to the research team by Malaysia Ministry of 
Higher Education (MOHE)’s Fundamental Research Grant 
Scheme (FRGS) support to this research work. Our 
appreciation also goes to National Cancer Society Malaysia 
(NCSM) for their support to data collection process. Thanks 
to all the research respondents who were going through the 

22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
experiences of giving care to their loved ones. Finally, we 
also would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for 
providing constructive feedback to this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1]    A. C. Koo et al., “Cancer caregivers’ needs for their well-
being in information era,” The Ninth International 
Conference on Global Health 2020 Contribution 70025, 25-
29 October, 2020, pp. 9-12.  
[2] 
S. Chen, “Information needs and information sources of 
family caregivers of cancer patients,” Aslib Journal of 
Information Management, vol. 66(6), 2014, pp. 623–639. 
[3]  WHO, “Global health observatory data repository: Life   
expectancy and healthy life expectancy,” World Health 
Organization,2020. https://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main-
searo.SDG2016LEXREGv?lang=en%0Ahttp://apps.who.int/
gho/data/view.main.SDG2016LEXREGv?lang=en 
[retrieved: August, 2021]. 
[4]  M. K. Barton, “Earlier adjuvant therapy is beneficial in 
patients with breast and colon cancer,” CA: A Cancer 
Journal for Clinicians 0(0): n/a-n/a. 2015. [Online]. 
Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.3322/caac.21296 
[retrieved: September, 2021].   
[5]   J. Li et al., “Communication needs of cancer patients and/or 
caregivers: A critical literature review,” Journal of 
Oncology, vol. 2020, Article ID 7432849, pp. 1-12. 
[6]   A. Girgis, S. Lambert, and C. Lecathelinais, “The supportive   
care needs survey for partners and caregivers of cancer 
survivors: Development and psychometric evaluation,” 
Psycho-Oncology, vol.  20(4), 2011, pp. 387–393. 
[7]   S. Jawahir, E. H. Tan, Y. R. Tan, S. N. Mohd Noh, and I. Ab 
Rahim, “The impacts of caregiving intensity on informal 
caregivers in Malaysia: findings from a national survey,” 
BMC Health Serv. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, 2021, pp. 1-16. 
[8]   Carers, U. K. "State of caring: A snapshot of unpaid care in 
the UK." State of Caring Report, London, 2019. 
[9] 
M. Househ, E. Borycki, and A. Kushniruk, “Empowering 
patients through social media: The benefits and challenges,” 
Health Informatics Journal, vol. 20(1), 2014, pp. 50–58.  
[10]  R. C. Talley and J. E. Crews, “Framing the public health of 
caregiving,” American Journal of Public Health, vol. 97, no. 
2. 2007, pp. 224–228, doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2004.059337. 
[11]  T. Robbins et al., “COVID-19: A new digital dawn?,” Digit. 
Heal., vol. 6, 2020, pp. 1-3. 
[12] K. Krishna, “A heavy responsibility for Dr H. Krishna 
Kumar,” Fit for Life “People” Sunday Star, 3 August, 2014, 
p.10. 
[13]  B. S. Russell, M. Hutchison, R. Tambling, A. J. Tomkunas, 
and A. L. Horton, “Initial challenges of caregiving during 
COVID-19: Caregiver burden, mental health, and the parent–
child 
relationship,” 
Child 
Psychiatry 
& 
Human 
Development, 51(5), 2020, pp. 671-682. 
[14]  C. K. Looi, P. Seow, and B. Zhang, “Leveraging mobile 
technology for sustainable seamless learning: A research 
agenda,” British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 
41(2), 2010, pp. 154–169. 
[15]   J. Zarocostas, “How to fight an infodemic,” Lancet, vol. 395, 
no. 10225, 2020, p. 676.  
[16]  S. H. Tey, “Long term caring journey: How to comfortably 
be yourself?”[translated from Chinese] AiFM, July 12, 
2021.https://web.facebook.com/watch/live/?v=11622019809
60056&ref=watch_permalink [retrieved: August, 2021]. 
[17] R. M. Razali, P. C. Bee, and G. G. Gan, “Survey of   
willingness 
to 
accept 
chemotherapy 
among 
elderly 
Malaysian patients,” Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer 
Prevention, vol. 14(3), 2013, pp. 2029–2032. 
[18]  N. Ribeiro, L. Moreira, A. M. P. Almeida and F. Santos-
Silva, “Mobile seamless learning tool for cancer education,” 
In Ó. Mealha, M. Divitini, M. Rehm (eds) Citizen, Territory 
and Technologies: Smart Learning Contexts and Practices. 
SLERD 2017. Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, 
vol. 80, 2018, Cham: Springer. 
[19]  Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, “Caregiver companion guide,” 
2018.   https://www.seattlecca.org/sites/default/files/inline-
files/Caregiver%20Guide_1.pdf 
[retrieved: 
November, 
2021].  
[20]   P. Sercekus, D. B. Besen, and N. P. Gunusen,,  “Experiences 
of 
family 
caregivers 
of 
cancer 
patients 
receiving 
chemotherapy,” Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention : 
APJCP, vol. 15, no. 12, 2014, pp. 5063–5069. 
[21]  WHO, “Cancer country profile 2020: Malaysia burden of 
cancer,” 
2020. 
https://www.who.int/cancer/country-
profiles/MYS_2020.pdf  [retrieved: October, 2021]. 
[22]  A. B. Sullivan and D. Miller, “Who is taking care of the 
caregiver?”, Journal of Patient Experience, vol. 2(1), 2015, 
pp. 7–12. 
[23]  V. Venkatesh, “Impacts of COVID-19: A research agenda to 
support people in their fight,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., vol. 2020, 
no. 55, 2020, pp. 1–6. 
[24  E. Y. N. Yuen, S. Dodson, and R.W. Batterham, 
“Development of a conceptual model of cancer caregiver 
health literacy,” European Journal of Cancer Care, vol. 25, 
no. 2, 2016, pp. 294-306.  
[25]  I. Veuillotte, G. Morel, and S. Pitois, “General practice and 
the Internet revolution. Use of an Internet social network to 
communicate information on prevention in France,” Health 
Informatics Journal, vol. 21, no. 1, 2015, pp. 3–9. 
[26]  E. Y. N. Yuen, T. Knight, L.A. Ricciardelli, and S. Burney, 
“Health literacy of caregivers of adult care recipients: A 
systematic scoping review,” Health and Social Care in the 
Community, vol. 26, no. 2, 2018, pp. e191- e206. 
[27] Cancer.Net Website https://www.cancer.net/ [retrieved:  
August, 2020]. 
[28]  Skill For Care Website     
         https://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/About/About-us.aspx  
         [retrieved: August, 2021]. 
[29]  Dignity In Care Website.  
         https://www.dignityincare.org.uk/About/ [retrieved: August, 
2021]. 

