156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Evaluating an Evidence-Based mHealth Application, MS Assistant, for Individuals 
Aging with Multiple Sclerosis 
Ljilja Ruzic, Harshal P. Mahajan, and Jon A. Sanford 
The Center for Assistive Technology and Environmental Access (CATEA) 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA, USA 
e-mail: ljilja@gatech.edu, harshal.mahajan@design.gatech.edu, jon.sanford@design.gatech.edu
 
 
Abstract—A majority of individuals diagnosed with MS 
experience major decline in their abilities due to the 
progression of MS, five years post-diagnosis and after age 40. 
Following this period, they need to learn how to cope with the 
functional limitations and disabilities caused by the condition 
and how to age with MS due to an early onset of age-related 
problems. In addition to the signs of early aging caused by MS 
symptoms and consequent impairments, these individuals 
experience increased disability due to the physical effects of 
aging and comorbidities. As a result, they have to manage the 
effects of the condition on their lives every day. Self-
management can help mitigate the symptoms associated with 
MS. mHealth applications offer potential holistic support for 
self-management of the condition as they represent more 
robust technologies that have potential to include all the 
interventions proven to be useful to manage multiple health 
problems. This research paper describes the evaluation of the 
mHealth app, MS Assistant, an evidence-based app that 
provides the daily support and self-management of the 
condition to individuals aging with MS, which was developed 
based on the Universal Design Mobile Interface Guidelines, 
UDMIG v.2.1. mHealth application was evaluated by the 
expert reviewers. Moreover, the paper presents an app 
refinement based on the suggestions of the experts who tested 
the effectiveness of the app and its design features and 
provided possible recommendations for its redesign. 
Keywords- aging; mHealth; multiple sclerosis; universal 
design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This research paper details the evaluation of the mobile 
health (mHealth) application for individuals aging with 
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) by the expert reviewers. The study 
tested the effectiveness of the mobile app and its design 
features and resulted in the recommendations for the user 
interface redesign [1].  
MS is a complex inflammatory disorder of the Central 
Nervous System (CNS) [2]. This chronic and progressive 
disease is affecting around 400,000 individuals in the US and 
2.5 million people worldwide, with approximately10,000 
newly diagnosed cases of MS annually [2]. MS is 
characterized by a large number and variety of symptoms 
[3]. Cognitive changes and mobility limitations (e.g., 
spasticity, weakness in one or more limbs, gait difficulties) 
are the most significant ones related to disability [3].  
A majority of individuals diagnosed with MS experience 
significant declines in their abilities due to the progression of 
MS after five years post-diagnosis and especially after age 
40 [4]. Following this period, they need to learn how to cope 
with the functional limitations and disabilities caused by the 
condition and how to age with MS due to an early onset of 
age-related problems [4][5]. In addition to the signs of early 
aging caused by MS symptoms and consequent impairments, 
these individuals experience increased disability due to the 
physical effects of aging and comorbidities [6][7]. 
As a result, these individuals have to manage the effects 
of the condition on their lives every day [3]. More 
specifically, they need a continuous disease, symptom, and 
medication management, coupled with education and 
effective strategies for addressing the exacerbations (i.e., a 
worsening of old symptoms or an onset of new symptoms for 
at least 24 hours, also called a relapse) [8]. They need to 
understand their condition to take charge of managing MS 
and related impairments [8]. 
Self-management can help mitigate the symptoms 
associated with MS [8]-[12]. To support self-management, 
access to pertinent information, resources, and education 
about the nature of MS, the treatment, and methods for 
improving quality of living (QOL) delivered in an 
appropriate way could considerably improve lives of 
individuals with MS [13]. Additionally, research studies 
[14]-[16] suggested that self-management interventions 
using telehealth (i.e., remote-patient monitoring) have a 
potential for overcoming access barriers in MS. Social 
support is another way of enhancing the QOL in people with 
MS. Moreover, the World Health Organization (WHO) [13] 
and the Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis Centres [17] advise 
that individuals with MS take control of decisions affecting 
their wellness and life and self-manage their condition as 
often as possible. As a result, there is a great need for 
efficient tools to support the health and wellness self-
management of daily activities for individuals with MS. 
mHealth apps offer potential holistic support for self-
management of the condition as they represent more robust 
technologies that have the potential to include all the 
interventions proven to be useful to manage multiple health 
problems [18]. These health and wellness self-monitoring 
applications offer a range of tools to assist with health and 
wellness daily organization, communication with healthcare 
providers, and education [18]. 

157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This research paper details the evaluation of the mHealth 
app, MS Assistant, an evidence-based app that provides daily 
support and self-management of the condition to individuals 
aging with MS. mHealth application was evaluated by the 
expert reviewers, who provided recommendations for app 
redesign. Moreover, a summary of an app refinement based 
on the suggestions of the expert reviewers is presented here. 
The paper is organized into six sections. Section I 
provided a background. Section II reviews the related work 
about technological support for people with MS and other 
chronic conditions that share similar symptoms with MS. 
Section III describes the initial design of MS Assistant. 
Section IV summarizes the evaluation of the effectiveness of 
the design features and the app through an expert review. 
Section V presents the refinement of MS Assistant based on 
the recommendations of the experts. Section VI provides a 
conclusion and proposes future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The majority of individuals with MS use modern 
communication 
technology 
regularly 
(i.e., 
personal 
computer, internet, email, mobile phone) [19]-[21]. They 
have high levels of acceptance for using electronic 
communication methods for exchanging information with 
health care providers. Ninety-six percent of them possessed 
mobile phones, and older participants used it less frequently. 
However, there is a lack of relevant previous research on the 
needs and concerns of individuals aging with MS [6] to 
inform the design of the mHealth apps for this group of end-
users.  
There are only nine current mobile applications 
(described below) available to this group of users, which 
primarily focus on providing basic information about latest 
research, news, and practical tips on health, nutrition, and 
fitness, self-recording of health status, medication adherence, 
daily activities, symptoms, mood, and similar, and/or sharing 
the data with healthcare providers. Multiple Sclerosis 
Association of America (MSAA) released a mobile phone 
app for health self-reporting, My MS Manager, for 
individuals with MS and their caretakers [22]. Similarly, MS 
self app offers a journal that can be later easily accessed by 
the user who can share their data with the healthcare team 
[23]. Another self-reporting app is called MySidekick for 
MS [24], which also provides medicine reminders and a 
memory exercise. My MS Conversations provides an 
interactive group session with experienced virtual patients on 
selected topics [25]. MS Journal is an injection reminder tool 
for individuals with MS and their caregivers limited to UK 
market only [26]. My Multiple Sclerosis Diary [27] is 
another injection reminder mobile app that offers injection 
location and time set up. SymTrack was designed as a health 
self-reporting tool that stores shares the health charts with 
healthcare providers [28]. Social app MS Buddy [29] pairs 
individuals with MS with another person with MS to chat 
daily. MS Attack app [30] helps users learn about MS 
symptoms, how these present themselves during the MS 
attack and provides a location of the UT MS Clinic and the 
Neuro Eye Center.  
These nine mobile apps provide only basic functionality 
with the limited set of features compared to the other health 
and wellness apps for the general population and individuals 
with other chronic conditions (e.g., iHealth mobile app 
provides telehealth [31], Headspace: Meditation app 
introduces the users to the practice of meditation [32], 
Mango mobile application gamified the medication 
adherence [33], Syandus provides simulation learning 
technology for patients and students [34]).  
We conducted two formative studies [35][37] that 
assessed the usability and utility of the current mHealth apps 
to understand the existing state of the arts and provide the 
recommendations for the design of mobile health and 
wellness apps for individuals aging with MS. The two 
studies revealed that the current mHealth applications were 
not usable to the end-user population and did not provide 
holistic health and wellness support for the self-management 
of the condition. Hence, there is a need for a new evidence-
based mobile application for people with MS, which would 
provide all the functional features that would help with the 
comprehensive health and wellness self-management and 
address their specific needs. 
III. 
MS ASSISTANT 
MS Assistant is an evidence-based app, which provides 
the 
health 
and 
wellness 
self-management-based 
functionality, allows for personalization, assists with 
medication adherence and other daily tasks with alert and 
reminder systems, and sends alerts to the caregivers, family 
members, and healthcare providers in a case of an 
emergency. mHealth app was developed based on the results 
of the two formative studies [35][37] that evaluated the 
usability and utility of the current mHealth apps for 
individuals aging with MS. Its eight functions were selected 
based on the findings of a previously completed qualitative 
study [35], which was conducted to identify the specific 
needs for self-management of health and wellness among 
people aging with MS and to recognize the opportunities to 
meet those needs through mobile apps. The functions include 
diary, reports, MS friends, games, education, goals, vitals, 
and emergency. In addition, profile and settings were 
designed to offer personalization and customization. 
A. Functionality 
Diary provides a comprehensive tool for understanding 
the disease on a daily basis and over time, and how best to 
manage it through everyday self-management tasks, such as 
mood, symptoms, energy level, activity, sleep length and 
quality, and diet. Reports allows users to compile their health 
management data into useful reports that can be shared 
electronically with healthcare providers and caregivers. MS 
Friends is a social support feature that connects users with 
other people with MS to share their experiences and 
everyday challenges. Games features VR games that would 
enable users to perform real-world activities that they might 
find challenging. In addition, this feature has cognitive and 
classic games that help people with MS with cognitive 
functioning, and physical games, which help them with the 
balance.  Education provides the latest news and research 

158
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
about MS as well as health and wellness tips. Goals enables 
users to set up their personal health and wellness goals to 
keep them motivated and inspired. Vitals offers remote 
health and wellness monitoring through the Bluetooth 
connected devices, such as blood pressure monitoring 
devices, scales, sleep and activity trackers (e.g., Fitbit), and 
similar. Emergency lets users place calls directly to their 
healthcare providers, caregivers, and emergency phone 
number (e.g., 911 in the USA). 
The mHealth app sends alert messages to the caregivers, 
family members, and/or healthcare providers in a case of an 
emergency (i.e., when the values of certain vitals go above 
the threshold, such as blood pressure, self-reported 
depression, extreme values of the symptoms severity). 
B. Navigation 
MS Assistant provides two types of navigation: linear 
and random access. Linear interaction allows users to go 
through the pages by making or skipping a selection and 
pressing the Next button. Users can go through the whole 
interface in a linear fashion by using the Next and Back 
buttons on every page, which provides consistency and 
simplicity. After a selection is made, the Next button takes 
users to the following page of the interface.  When the user 
taps on any button, the button changes to the selected colored 
background and white text that visually emphasizes the 
selection. To change the selection, user can tap the button 
again to deselect it (Figure 1). Random access allows 
skipping the options and provides a faster pace of the 
navigation through the direct selection (Figure 2). 
Figure 1.  Linear navigation on Reports page. 
C. Design Decisions 
MS Assistant was designed based on the Universal 
Design Mobile Interface Guidelines, UDMIG v.2.1 and 
corresponding design criteria, which has been previously 
reported [36]-[39]. For example, the design goal was one 
mobile app for all users, rather than accessible design for 
people with disabilities, and avoidance of specialized design 
and language (Same means of use). Consistent sequences of 
actions are required in similar situations (Consistency with 
expectations). Complexity is eliminated by having simple 
screen designs that require a small number of tasks per 
screen (Simple and natural use).  
 
Figure 2.  Random access on Diary page. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE DESIGN 
FEATURES 
For the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness of the 
design features as those were applied based on the UDMIG 
v.2.1 to the design of MS Assistant, we conducted an expert 
review in which expert evaluators rated the UDMIG-based 
design features that were implemented in MS Assistant, 
identified design elements that needed improvement, and 
recommended possible refinements. We collected user 
outcome measures, such as the ratings of the effectiveness of 
the application of the UDMIG design criteria to the app, and 
number and frequency of reported usability problems 
categorized 
based 
on 
their 
design 
features 
and 
characteristics. Additionally, we collected all verbally 
identified usability problems during the administration of the 
“talk aloud” protocol and categorized the data into the 
common themes to determine the main issues with the app 
[1][39]. 
A. Methods 
Ten researchers and/or designers with experience in 
aging, accessibility, human-computer interaction, human 
factors, industrial design, universal design, and/or usability 
participated in the study. Inclusion criteria were that 
participants be of age 18 and older and that they have more 
than three years of experience in one or more of the areas of 
expertise in accessibility, usability, aging, human factors, 
universal design, human-computer interaction, and/or 
industrial 
design. 
Participants’ 
expertise 
included 
accessibility (n=8), usability (n=8), aging (n=7), human 
factors (n=6), universal design (n=6), human-computer 
interaction (n=5), and industrial design (n=2) respectively. 
The mean number of years of their working experience was 
13±8.82 years. 

159
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Experts rated their familiarity with the user interface 
design for people with MS, dexterity, cognitive, and visual 
limitations from being “not familiar” to “somewhat familiar” 
to “very familiar” (Table I). 
TABLE I.  
RATINGS OF FAMILIARITY WITH THE USER INTERFACE 
DESIGN FOR PEOPLE WITH MS, DEXTERITY, COGNITIVE, AND VISUAL 
LIMITATIONS. 
Familiarity with the user 
interface design for: 
Not 
familiar 
Somewhat 
familiar 
Very 
familiar 
People with MS 
3 
10 
0 
People with dexterity 
impairments 
1 
5 
4 
People with cognitive 
impairments 
0 
8 
22 
People with visual 
impairments 
0 
3 
7 
1) Procedures 
After signing the informed consent form approved by the 
Georgia Tech IRB, experts completed a demographic 
questionnaire about their areas of expertise and a number of 
years they have worked in the field. Experts rated their 
familiarity with user interface design for people with MS, 
dexterity, cognitive, and visual limitations on a scale from 
“not familiar” to “somewhat familiar” to “very familiar.” 
They then performed directed tasks using MS Assistant 
without any training or assistance. Experts received a simple 
script with ten tasks that included entering health and 
wellness data (i.e., mood, symptoms and related difficulties, 
energy level, daily activity, sleep length and quality, and 
diet), emailing the reports, calling MS friend, finding virtual 
reality games, reading the MS news, setting up the weight 
goal, inputting the blood pressure, calling the healthcare 
provider, entering the personal information, and increasing 
the text size. Experts then used the UDMIG v.2.1 
questionnaire to rate each guideline through its design 
characteristics, 
identified 
design 
elements 
needing 
improvement, and provided recommendations for their 
refinement.  
a) UDMIG v.2.1 Design Criteria Questionnaire 
Prescriptive design guidelines and standards are easy to 
interpret and to objectively assess. Assessment of 
performance guidelines is multidimensional since it 
incorporates both activity and participation [36]. All 
performance-based guidelines are subject to interpretation by 
experts as well as end-users to a certain extent, which makes 
objective measurement slightly difficult. UDMIG v.2.1 
design criteria questionnaire rates agreement with achieving 
each of the design guidelines using the 5-point Likert scale 
where 1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree with each 
of the applicable design criteria. The versions of this 
questionnaire that correspond to the appropriate design 
criteria are intended to be used by end-users and to assist 
designers to think about the needs of the potential users who 
would interact with their mobile touchscreen applications. 
The complete UDMIG v.2.1 design criteria questionnaire 
used for this expert review has 45 items (i.e., design criteria). 
An example of the questionnaire based on some of the 
design criteria (e.g., one design criteria per guideline) used 
for the expert review was previously published [35]. 
2) Data Collection and Analysis 
We calculated the mean and standard deviation of the 
rating for each guideline and the mean and standard 
deviation of ratings for each participant. Fourteen ratings for 
one of the participants were excluded because they skipped 
the page with ratings of the guidelines.  
Additionally, we analyzed the audio files during the 
participants’ use of MS Assistant and administration of the 
talk aloud protocol to extract more usability problems they 
encountered during the interaction with the app. We used an 
inductive approach for data analysis. 
As primary researchers, two authors independently coded 
the transcripts and generated a preliminary set of codes. We 
coded for the themes (i.e., design features and related 
characteristics based on the identified problems) that 
participants reported in the UDMIG v.2.1 design criteria 
questionnaire. Another research team member then reviewed 
the sections of the transcript and associated codes.  Next, we 
met to discuss the themes and refine the coding taxonomy. 
Labels (miscategorization), buttons (layout), keyboard (on-
screen verification), too many clicks (physical effort), and 
lack of direction (navigation) were added themes. The 
coding had inter-rater reliability (i.e., Cohen’s kappa) of 
79.0%. The team met again to discuss, further refine, and 
expand some of the themes and related categories. Buttons 
and pages (navigation) and layout of the buttons themes were 
expanded, and feature request, page layout (lack of 
consistency), and lack of confirmation of an activity 
(navigation) emerged as themes. For example, buttons and 
pages (navigation) included a problem with Next and Back 
buttons, in addition to other navigation problems participants 
talked about (e.g., confusion with going to the other News 
pages and suggestion to use “Page 1 of 2”). Moreover, the 
layout of the buttons theme incorporated the layout of the 
View Reports and Email Reports buttons category from the 
questionnaire in addition to the problems with the other 
buttons. We developed a list of themes, and each coder 
resampled an additional 20% of the data. Inter-rater 
reliability (i.e., Cohen’s kappa) of 81.0% was achieved 
between the two researchers. 
B. Results  
The results reporting the effectiveness of the design 
features in MS Assistant, and the effectiveness of the 
mHealth app are detailed in this section. 
1) Effectiveness of the Design Features 
Ratings of the design features as those were applied to 
the design of the mobile app following the UDMIG design 
criteria and usability problems, which were identified and 
reported by the expert users following each rating, are 
detailed in this section. 
 

160
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a) Ratings of the Design Features 
Ten participants rated 45 items on the UDMIG design 
criteria questionnaire. The total number of responses was 
436, with 14 missing responses that were not used in the 
analyses. The range of ratings was 2 – 5 with the mean of all 
the ratings for design features was within a range of 3.90 
(SD=1.10) – 4.89 (SD=0.33) (Table 36). Frequency of 
“Agree” and “Strongly Agree” ratings, which is a percentage 
of 4 and 5 ratings per design feature, was 60% - 100%. The 
design feature represented by DE6b (i.e., This app provides 
the system which can detect the error and offer a prompt 
message for handling it; if an entry for weight is skipped, 
provide a text message “Please enter a target weight”) had 
the lowest mean of the ratings equal to 3.90 and the lowest 
frequency of 4 and 5 ratings, F=60%. This was the only 
mean value for design criteria that was lower than 4. 
Participants stated that the app provided a prompt message 
for handling an error. However, the prompt should “offer 
options to submit data without all responses submitted.” 
Current prompts informed the users that they need to enter 
missing information and did not offer an option to skip 
certain fields. They made users fill out all the information on 
the page.  
Out of a total of 436 ratings, 67% (n=292) of the design 
criteria was rated as 5 (“Strongly Agree”).  An additional 
27% (n=118) were rated as 4. The lowest rating for any 
criterion was 2 (1.3%, n=6) and an additional 4.6% (n=20) 
were rated as 3. 
Among the 10 participants, mean ratings ranged from 
3.87 – 4.91. The participant with the lowest overall mean 
ratings (M = 3.87) did not give a rating higher than 4 to any 
individual criterion with 39 rated as 4 and 5 rated as 3, and 1 
as 2. 
The mean values of the ratings were equal to 3.90 and 
above. Only one design feature had a mean rating of 3.90 
(DE6b), and all other features had mean ratings of 4 and 
above. Therefore, expert users rated all design features 
highly usable in MS Assistant. 
Design feature represented by DE6b “the system which 
can detect the error and offer a prompt message for handling 
it” was rated the lowest because some participants thought 
that the prompt informed the users that they need to enter 
missing information and did not offer an option to skip 
certain fields (N=4) and rated it very low (rating=2, N=1; 
rating=3, N=3). The second lowest mean rating was given to 
two design features because of the lack of tactile feedback in 
an app due to the lack of the Taptic Engine in iPhone 6 
model (M=4.00). Two participants rated DE2a “feedback 
about a confirmation of my activity and a current state” low 
(rating=2, N=1, rating=3, N=1), and only one participant 
rated the design feature characterized by DE5a (i.e., different 
modes of feedback, such as sound or vibration) lower than 4 
(rating=2, N=1). The next lowest mean rating was equal to 
4.20 and was given to DE2b “system feedback for my 
actions, such as a beep when pressing a key,” due to the lack 
of the tactile feedback as well (rating=3, N=1). Two design 
features had mean rating of 4.22: IC8 “choice of linear 
navigation vs. random access” was rated by two participants 
lower (rating=2, N=1; ratings=3, N=1), and IC13b 
“minimized steps (i.e., basic tasks)” was rated low by two 
participants (rating=3, N=2). Design feature represented by 
IC7b (i.e., the use of technical language is avoided) had 
mean rating of 4.33 (rating=2, N=1; ratings=3, N=1). All 
other mean ratings of the design features were equal to 4.40 
and above.  
The highest mean rating (M=4.89) was given to three 
design features: IC6d “cursive and decorative fonts and use 
of all uppercase letters are avoided,” IC9 “personalization to 
change my skill level from a “novice” to an “expert” user,” 
and IC10a “configuration of the display settings to my needs 
and preferences.” The second highest mean rating (M=4.80) 
was given to eight design features: DE1a ‘large enough 
button size,” DE4c “buttons in colors that stand out, and 
arranged in linear order,” DE6a “easy reversal of my actions 
if I make a mistake,” IC4a “the use of the picker is avoided,” 
IC4b “scrolling text, especially horizontal formats, is 
avoided,” IC5a “clear indication on the top of the page where 
the user currently is at any point of time,” IC14a “visible 
spacing between the small buttons,” and IC15 “main 
navigation buttons of equal importance at the bottom of the 
screen.”  
The difference between the lowest mean rating (M=3.90) 
for DE6b and the highest mean rating (M=4.89) for IC6d, 
IC9, and IC10a was statistically significant (t(9)=2.951, 
p=.016). This result suggested a redesign of the prompt to 
allow users flexibility in navigation and an option to enter 
data they want, and not necessarily all data.  
The second lowest mean rating (M=4.00) for two design 
features represented by DE2a and DE5a was significantly 
different than the highest mean rating (M=4.89) for IC6d 
(t1(9)=2.667, p1=.026; t2(9)=4.216, p2=.002, respectively), 
IC9 
(t1(9)=2.667, 
p1=.026; 
t2(9)=4.216, 
p2=.002, 
respectively), and IC10a (t1(9)= 3.162, p1=.012; t2(9)= 
4.216, p2=.002, respectively). Both design features that 
correspond to DE2a and DE5a were rated lower due to the 
lack of tactile feedback. Participants would appreciate having 
vibratory feedback implemented within an app, but they 
understood the limitations of iPhone 6 models and the lack 
of the Taptic Engine. The next lowest mean rating (M=4.20) 
for DE2b and the highest mean rating (M=4.89) for IC6d, 
IC9, and IC10a (t(9)=2.981, p=.015) were significantly 
different as well. This design feature was rated low due to 
the lack of tactile feedback in iPhone 6 model as well. 
There was a significant difference between the mean 
rating (M=4.22) for IC13b “minimized steps (i.e., basic 
tasks)” and the highest mean rating (M=4.89) for IC6d 
“cursive and decorative fonts and use of all uppercase letters 
are 
avoided” 
(t(9)=2.434, 
p=.038) 
and 
for 
IC9 
“personalization to change my skill level from a “novice” to 
an “expert” user” (t(9)=2.434, p=.038), respectively. 
b) Usability Problems 
After rating the design features, ten participants 
commented about the specific features and suggested design 
recommendations. We listed all usability problems with the 
app, grouped those issues into themes related to their design 
features and characteristics, and reported the number and 
frequency of participants reporting the problem (Table II). 

161
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Total of 3 participants (F=30%) reported low contrast on 
the instructions pages where white text on a grey background 
and “Do not show this again” button in a selected state with 
green text on a grey background did not provide high enough 
contrast (Table II). 
1. Navigation: Seven participants reported problems with 
navigation due to having “to press on Next after a choice is 
made,” (P1) which “was not clear at first.” They either 
“expected to double click” (P6) or click on the selection to 
open that particular page. Moreover, 2 participants reported 
that “Next” and “Back” buttons look like a part of the 
specialized use and design. However, all of them understood 
that Next and Back buttons are typical of linear navigation, 
which is beneficial to an aging population that uses this app 
in a novice user mode only. Two participants were not sure 
whether there is more than one way to go to different pages 
(i.e., linear navigation using the Next and Back buttons and 
random-access). 
2. Labeling: Labeling of buttons included a number of 
different usability problems and related suggestions. Four 
participants reported that “Education” should be renamed 
into “Digest,” “Resources,” or similar because “News” 
category did not belong in there. It was not clear that a 
healthcare provider would be listed under the functional 
feature named “Emergency” (N=2), but there was no 
agreement on the alternative location for it. P3 suggested that 
it should be moved under Reports as an additional sub-
feature named Contacts. P1 stated they “didn’t want to click 
on it because I thought it would call 911,” but did not think 
any other location would be more suitable for it. Mood page 
had an “Energized” icon, which was confusing to 1 
participant Diary had a category “Energy level.” They 
suggested that “Anxious and Excited are missing” (P3) and 
that “Energized could be elsewhere.” Another suggestion 
was to rename “Input” and “Output” categories of Settings 
into a non-technical language (N=2). 1 participant reported 
that “Speech” should be renamed into “Voice.”  
3. Design of UI elements: Design of a number of user 
interface elements included 3 participants who reported that 
Profile and Settings did not look like buttons (P9) and that 
those should be redesigned to “stand out” (P6) and look 
more prominent (P6, P9). Design in Adobe Illustrator 
presented in this paper followed the guidelines strictly and 
made a distinction between the name of the app, MS 
Assistant, and Profile and Settings buttons on the first page. 
However, because of the limitations of iOS and the size of 
the top navigation bar, there was no space for the Profile and 
Settings icons because of the minimum font size dictated by 
the UDMIG v.2.1. Participants suggested that those two 
buttons should “look like buttons” (P9) with possibly adding 
a black border to them, relevant icons, or background color 
so that those look like the other buttons on the home page. In 
addition, 2 participants reported that top navigation bar icons 
that represent a title of the current page, including the 
weather icon, “look clickable” (P6). During the design phase, 
Adobe Illustrator prototypes made a clear distinction 
between the design of the home button and the title of the 
current page (e.g., Diary, Mood, Vitals). However, since the 
iOS limited the size of the top navigation bar and there was 
no compromise on the side of the font size, those two looked 
the same. P4 recommended that “header should look 
different than the home button.” Moreover, 2 participants 
commented that the design of the slider used on the 
symptoms, difficulties, and sleep pages probably needs a 
redesign because of the problems with motor control in 
individuals with MS, and their possible use of the stylus. 1 
participant commented that the “numbers on the bottom 
should be on top of the slider” (P9). 
4. Buttons: Three participants reported a lack of vibration 
while tapping the buttons even though they understood the 
limitations of iPhone 6 due to the lack of the Taptic Engine, 
which provides the vibration while tapping the buttons that 
was included in later iPhone versions. P6 “expected to 
double-click” (N=1). However, the single tap was 
implemented throughout the app due to the design criteria 
IC13a (i.e., Use a single tap throughout the app instead of 
double-clicking). 
5. Keyboard: One participant reported that spell check 
should be provided with the use of a keyboard. Lack of page 
scrolling while using a keyboard was found problematic to 2 
participants. Participants recommended to “add scrolling 
where additional input is needed.” Scrolling was disabled 
throughout the interface because of the IC4c design criteria 
requirement. 
6. Page layout: Total of three participants had problems 
with the page layout. For example, P5 reported that “View 
Reports” button should be placed above the “Email Reports” 
button (N=1). Two participants reported that spacing 
between the top navigation bar and large buttons (e.g., 
Manual entry, Week, Month, Year buttons) should be 
increased. 
7. Contrast: Two participants reported 3 times low 
contrast on the Instructions pages during the use of the app. 
8. Prompt: Two participants reported that “Sometimes (it 
is) not clear what info is missing but did get a general 
message about missing info” (P5) after getting the prompt 
message, and that the app should “offer options to submit 
data without all responses submitted” (P7).  
9. Font size: One participant thought that the font size of 
the News articles was too small. 
2) Effectiveness of the app 
While using MS Assistant, participants verbally 
identified specific usability problems, and positive aspects of 
MS Assistant via “talk aloud” protocol and in some cases 
recommended design solutions. Audio transcripts were used 
to identify usability problems and positive feedback. 
a) Usability Problems 
We categorized all the issues with the app into the 
themes to identify usability problems, and we reported 
related design features and their characteristics (Table III). 
1. Navigation: Seven participants reported 12 times 
problems with navigation due to having to press on Next 
after a single choice is made and the appearance of Next and 
Back buttons as specialized use.  
2. Labeling: Labeling of a total of eight buttons was not 
clear to a number of participants. Seven participants reported 

162
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
7 times that “News” category did not belong in “Education” 
and that it should be renamed. It was not clear to 2 
participants that a healthcare provider would be listed under 
the “Emergency” (n=2), but they could not think of an 
alternative location for it. Two participants thought that an 
“Energized” icon on the Mood page was confusing because 
Diary had a category called “Energy level” (n=2). Their 
suggestion for a replacement was to name it “Excited.” 
Seven participants stated 9 times that “Input” and “Output” 
categories in Settings sound as a technical language and that 
those would be confusing to a regular user. Four participants 
thought that “Speech” should be renamed into “Voice” 
(n=4). In addition to these relabeling suggestions reported 
with the UDMIG v.21. questionnaire, there were 3 more 
labels reported during the interaction with the app. One 
participant suggested once to rename “News” into “MS 
News,” another proposed once to rename “Diary” into 
“Daily feelings” or “Daily something” (P6), and the third one 
recommended to rename “Do not show this again” button 
into “Hide” (P10).  
3. Design of UI elements: Participants had problems with 
the design of 5 user interface elements, which is 2 more than 
reported in the questionnaire. Five of them stated that Profile 
and Settings did not look like buttons and suggested to 
redesigned them to look more prominent and like buttons by 
adding a black border around them, icons, and/or a 
background color (n=5). Three participants thought that the 
top navigation bar icons that have a function of a header look 
like buttons (n=4). Five participants commented 7 times that 
the design of the slider should be changed. P3 and P6 
thought that an easier design element should be used instead 
because the individuals with MS would have problems using 
it due to their limitations with motor control and the use of 
the stylus. P9 thought that the numbers on the slider should 
be on top of it, and P10 suggested to change the font of the 
selected number compared to the range provided (i.e., 1 to 
5). In addition to these design elements present in the results 
based on the questionnaire, 3 participants reported 5 times 
problems with the design of the icons. For example, Output 
icon in Settings looked like a sound (P5) and audio (P9), P9 
suggested to replace Input icon with Speech icon and to 
change Speech icon itself, and P10 stated that Seeing icon in 
Difficulties looks happy and that it should be changed. 
Moreover, P9 commented once that the comment section for 
MS type was not visible and that it could be replaced with a 
drop-down menu offering the names and abbreviations of the 
four types of MS. 
4. Page layout: The total number of 6 participants 
commented 13 times about the problems with the layout of 
the buttons, including View Reports and Email Reports 
buttons. Two participants reported that the View Reports 
button should be above Email Reports button (n=2). In 
addition to the layout of the Email/View Reports buttons, 5 
participants reported 11 problems with the layout of other 
buttons. For example, P3 thought that Tips would be of great 
importance and interest to the target population, and that 
Tips should be placed first on the list, followed by News and 
Research. They and P7 suggested having the listing of all the 
headlines of the articles on the News page. Week, Month, 
and Year buttons on the Reports page were not clear at first 
to this participant, and P6 suggested to “maybe change the 
color of the (Week,) Month, Year buttons.” P4 suggested 
placing the “Read more” button on the News page on the 
bottom of the page. P10 said that the “names for the games 
are too long” and that we should “maybe change the layout 
to vertical buttons.” They thought that “overall, the design is 
nice, but I would make it more dynamic.” This participant 
did not understand the sequence on the 2 by 3 layout of the 
buttons on the Symptoms page. They thought that “if 
meditation (button) moves from the first place after a certain 
amount of (usage) time, would that be confusing?” in a case 
of a smart app. Reports pages should have “Page 1 of 2” on 
them. The small spacing between certain buttons (e.g., the 
Manual button in Vitals and Week, Month, Year buttons in 
Reports) and the top navigation bar was reported by 4 
participants (n=4). 
5. Keyboard: Five participants reported lack of page 
scrolling while using a keyboard 6 times.  
6. Prompt: Three participants stated 4 times that when 
missing to fill out all the data on one page, the corresponding 
prompt makes them fill out all the information and lacks the 
flexibility to offer them the option to submit data without 
submitting all the responses. P10 suggested changing the text 
of the prompt to “Are you sure you want to skip X and Y?” 
The font size of the News articles was too small to 2 
participants (n=2).  
7. Other: Two participants thought that the font size of 
the News articles was too small. Two participants reported 3 
times low contrast on the Instructions pages during the use of 
the app. One participant thought that the drawback of using a 
single tap is that it requires too many steps. P10 complained 
that the app requires too many clicks and that they are 
“wondering how much effort I am saving” (n=1).  
8. Additional usability problems: Additionally, there are 
6 themes of problems identified during the interaction with 
the app, which were not reported on the questionnaire. Six 
participants requested 11 times that certain features could 
benefit the app. For example, P1 asked if there is any way to 
specify the body area in Difficulties. P3 suggested that in a 
case of two selections in Symptoms, after making the one 
selection the app takes you to that symptom’s page, and then 
it takes you to the one-screen selection again to make the 
second one. They added that the weight goals should have 
displayed the user’s current weight with the text “This is 
what your weight is right now.” P5 requested a louder sound 
feedback with the use of the buttons, adding the MS 
experience within the Profile, adding the Resources to the list 
of News, Research, and Tips because “older adults don’t 
know where to find resources,” and adding the info box to 
the View Reports page that would say “Select one or more 
buttons and choose whether you want Reports.” P6 
suggested to have the option to check the email address of 
the person who would get the reports sent by the user, to 
“make it clear in the description of a friend who he/she is by 
listing the symptoms or something else” in MS Friends, and 
to clarify on the top of the Instruction page “what this page 
is” by possibly adding "Getting started". P7 thought that after 
the prompt about sharing the personal information, Profile 

163
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
page should have that information written again on the top of 
the page. P10 commented that in MS Friends “I would 
expect something about Mike to show up in a case of two 
people with the same name.” 
Five participants commented 10 times about the 
miscategorization of the certain labels. For example, P1 did 
not know where to enter data for numbness and where to find 
personal information. P6 thought that “Medications should 
be separate; not under Profile.” P7 commented that it is “not 
intuitive” to look for “non-emergency contacts under 
Emergency; Emergency is 911”, and that this “call should go 
under MS Friends.” P9 “was not sure if Difficulty was on 
another page” and thought that Personal Information “would 
probably be in Diary.” P10 added that “I would go to Diary 
for my Mood, symptoms. For energy level, because it is 
quantitative data, I would go to Reports.” This participant 
stated that “I wouldn’t link difficulty to symptoms.” When 
looking for Reports, P10 said that “I could think also 
whether to go to MS Friends.” P10 was not sure where to 
call a doctor, but after thinking about the available features, 
they thought that “Emergency and MS Friends makes sense.” 
Two participants reported lack of consistency in the page 
layout 2 times regarding the selections on two pages in the 
View Reports and Email Reports.  P9 said that on-screen 
keyboard is problematic with verification because “I was 
looking for a back button. I don’t see any indication that the 
focus is there (keyboard).” 
Buttons and pages (navigation) theme was present 12 
times in 6 participants. For example, P3 suggested that in the 
case of multiple selections, one at a time can be selected with 
a “loopback for more.” P4 commented that it is “confusing to 
go from Symptoms to other screens if I want to skip 
something” and wondered if it is better “to go to the Home 
page from Symptoms or to go through all unwanted pages.” 
They did not understand that Diary page offered random-
access. The same participant complained that “when I went 
to Activity, Back (button) is taking me to the main (Diary) 
menu instead to Energy,” which happened because the 
participant directly selected Activity from the Diary page. P5 
thought that by tapping on the Next button on the News 
page, they were “going to the next page.” This participant 
was not sure if they selected Mood “it would take me 
through everything,” asked why Symptoms and Difficulties 
are not at the same level because these “are the same,” and 
thought that “it should be clear there is no scrolling because 
of Back and Next buttons.” P6 thought that we should “add 
another meal page after you go through one.” P9 was 
confused that there is no “choice of eggs on the same page 
(with bread),” when both bread and eggs were selected. P10 
commented when opened Diary Instructions page:  
“I see a screen with a lot of text on it. When I first click 
on Diary, I would expect an input box. I see it’s a prompt, 
but it doesn’t look like a prompt.” 
The same participants thought that the comment section 
on the Symptoms page was not clear: 
“I wouldn’t think to put that information in here. I would 
enter numbness related to arm in one log, and for legs in 
another. Not both in one.” 
P10 also thought that “Email Reports would email 
reports by pressing (it).” The same participants reported a 
lack of confirmation of activity after entering the data on the 
Symptoms page (n=1). 
b) Positive Feedback 
Participants had some positive feedback throughout their 
usage of the app. P3, P4, and P10 loved the icons, which 
made sense to them and looked “expressive.” P3 liked the 
sound feedback with the slider and with a tap on the buttons. 
Settings had a “pretty good mix there.” P4, P6, and P7 liked 
“the color scheme a lot” (P6). P4 liked the font size. P4 and 
P8 appreciated the ability to deselect information which 
would be shared by using the switches on the Personal 
Information page, and P5 liked that on the switches have 
green color when selected because “green means go, so I 
guess green means sharing,” and that there was a 
confirmation message (i.e., prompt) “especially when I was 
sharing the information.”. P4 commented that the “buttons 
are refreshingly large,” how “it is nice that it (linear 
interface) is making me log in everything this way,” and that 
the app was “nice and easy to use.” Both P5 and P6 
appreciated that the user could choose from many items and 
make multiple selections on View Reports and Email 
Reports pages. P6 and P10 liked the design of the Sleep 
page, and P10 commented: 
“I like the Sleep screen. It saved me a click. Once I am 
done, the screen itself looks like a confirmation. This screen 
is more confirmative to me than a Symptoms screen.” 
P10 thought that the Diet pages were designed consistent 
with the linear interface and that “if I am eating two different 
things I would not expect that Next would take me to both 
selections (on one page). It is pretty linear, the app, so I 
wouldn’t expect that.” The same participants thought that 
“Energy screen is really good and clear,” and that” the slide 
bar is really good because the slider is big.” P10 added that:  
“Back and Home (buttons) both take me to the Home 
page, which is good. Home is a reference point. I would 
press Home button to go to the Home page.” 
P6 and P8 liked that there was a prompt before emailing 
the reports asking if the user wanted to email selected reports 
to selected contacts. P8 thought that “Reports is a great 
feature,” because the user “can decide what I am going to let 
them know. I am not going to let them know about my diet 
because I had a lot of bacon.” P6, P7, P8, and P10 thought 
that MS Friends is a nice and “straightforward” (P10) 
feature, on which P6 commented: 
“I really like the idea that they can connect with people 
with MS.” 
P6 liked having the RPM via Bluetooth in Vitals. Games 
were “clear and easy to find” to P6 and “very simple” to P10. 
P8 thought that “this is going to be very cool. I like the 
News.” 
P6 commented on the overall design of the app: 
“I like it. I like the nice simple design with large icons. It 
is easy to read. It has very nice feeling about so that I want 
to use it. It is nice. It looks like it can be useful.” 
P7 thought of MS Assistant as a consistent app with a 
great display: 

164
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
“From UD perspective, it is really well done.” 
P8 thought that MS Assistant “is very well designed,” it 
offers flexibility and a choice, and further commented: 
“I think this is fabulous. Enormous utility. It is incredibly 
thought out. I love this.” 
P9 liked Home button and thought that the app was “very 
consistent” and “for someone with learning cognitive 
disability, it is accessible,” and added: 
“This is better than most apps that I have experienced. I 
am impressed.” 
C. Design Implications 
As expected, audio transcripts revealed some additional 
usability problems reported by the participants and the 
existing problems were reported by a larger number of 
participants verbally, except in the case of the issues with the 
color contrast.  
Overall, the main usability problems were labeling of the 
buttons, use of Next and Back buttons for the linear 
navigation, design of a number of UI elements, lack of page 
scrolling with the use of a keyboard, layout of a number of 
the buttons, certain feature requests, miscategorization of a 
number of labels, and navigation related to the design of the 
buttons and pages. For example, problems with the labels for 
“Education,” “Emergency,” “Input,” and “Output” buttons 
were reported by a majority of the participants (Appendix 
D). Labeling of the “Speech” button was reported by 40% of 
the participants and labeling of the “Energized” button on the 
Mood page was reported by 20% of the participants. 
Additionally, participants commented unfavorably on the use 
of Next and Back buttons for the linear navigation. However, 
they understood that the linear navigation using these two 
buttons might be more usable for the aging population of 
users. Moreover, they acknowledged that the smart interface 
and an option to switch from novice to expert user skips this 
way of the navigation for the more tech-savvy users. Design 
of certain UI elements was reported as well. For example, 
Profile and Settings did not look like buttons and the slider 
needed to be redesigned to half of the participants. Thirty 
percent of participants reported that Header looked like a 
button and that certain icons needed to be redesigned. 
Additionally, half of the participants reported that the page 
scrolling should be present while using the keyboard. Sixty 
percent of participants reported that the layout of the buttons 
needed to be changed (e.g., locations of Email Reports and 
View Reports buttons should be switched). Additionally, 
40% of them thought that the spacing between the top 
buttons (e.g., Manual input button in Vitals, Week, Month, 
Year buttons in Reports) and the buttons below should be 
increased. Total of 30% of participants thought that after 
missing to fill out all the fields on one page, the prompt that 
follows should give them two options. First, it should let 
them go back to the previous page to fill out the missing 
content. Alternatively, it should allow them to go to the 
following page and leave certain fields empty. 20% of the 
participants stated that the font size of the MS News articles 
was small. In addition, 20% of the participants reported on 
the UDMIG v.2.1 questionnaire only that it was not clear 
that they can navigate through the whole interface in a linear 
fashion using the Next and Back buttons.  
There were a number of problems that were found on the 
audio transcripts, which were not reported on the 
questionnaire. For example, 60% of participants thought that 
the app would benefit from the additional features (e.g., a 
place to specify the body area in Difficulties, the user’s 
current weight with the text “This is what your weight is 
right now” in the weight goals, a louder sound feedback with 
the use of the buttons). Miscategorization of certain labels 
was a problem to half of the participants. Sixty percent of the 
participants reported problems with navigation due to the 
lack of direction, page design, and multiple selections. 
Additionally, 20% of the participants reported a lack of 
consistency on a page layout due to two pages with multiple 
selections within Reports. 
Moreover, there were a number of problems that were 
reported by only one participant. For example, labeling of 
“News,” “Diary,” and “Do not show this again” was not 
clear to 1 participant per label. These problems were not 
addressed in the app redesign section, except for the “Do not 
show this again” button, which was renamed into “Hide this 
page.” Design of UI elements category had the additional 
problems with the design of an input field for the MS type in 
Personal Information within the Profile (n=1). Problem with 
the keyboard spell check was not present in the audio 
transcripts, and one participant reported it on a questionnaire. 
One participant reported that the interface requires too many 
clicks. Although the app provides an on-screen verification 
within the input field, the lack of it was reported by 1 
participant. Additionally, lack of confirmation of activity 
was reported once. 
V. 
REFINEMENT OF MS ASSISTANT 
All the design features and related characteristics that 
needed to be redesigned based on the results of both the 
UDMIG v.2.1 design criteria questionnaire and audio 
transcripts were summarized, as previously reported [1]. The 
rationale for the design response was to make a design 
change if in agreement with UDMIG v.2.1, if at least two 
participants reported the problem, and if the suggestions 
were not already present in the prototype of MS Assistant. 
Dark grey background on the instruction pages was 
changed into white to provide more contrast against the 
black and green (i.e., confirmation) text (Figure 3). 
“Education” was renamed into “Resources”, “Emergency” 
into “Emergency Contacts” (Figure 4), “Energized” (in 
Mood) into “Excited”, “Input” into “Speech Input”, “Touch” 
into “Touch Input”, “Output” into “Display and Sound”, and 
“Speech” was replaced with “Voice”. 
Due to the lack of space on the top navigation bar, the 
name of the app, MS Assistant, was taken out of the Home 
page and the icons for Profile and Settings were added 
(Figure 4). The color of the icons for the current state (e.g., 
Diary, Reports) was changed from black into the color of 
that function (e.g., Diary icon in green, Reports icon in blue). 
In this way, the icon and the header look like the part of the 
page background and not like the buttons (Figure 3). 
 

165
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3.  Before (left) and after (right) Diary Instruction page 
Figure 4.  Before (left) and after (right) Home page 
TABLE II.  
DESIGN FEATURES AND CHARACTERISTICS RELATED TO THE IDENTIFIED USABILITY PROBLEMS
Themes 
Usability Problems 
Design Feature and Related 
Characteristic 
Ability 
Required to 
Perform the 
Task 
Number and 
Frequency of 
Participants, N, F 
(%)  
Navigation 
Not clear whether a required action was taken due 
to having to press Next after a single choice is 
made 
Next and Back buttons, Navigation 
Cognitive 
N=7 
F=70% 
Lack of understanding that there are two ways of 
navigation 
Two ways of navigation, Navigation 
N=2 
F=20% 
Labeling 
Not clear labeling of buttons 
Buttons, Labeling 
 
Education 
N=4 
F=40% 
Emergency 
N=2 
F=20% 
Energized 
N=1 
F=10% 
Input, Output 
N=2 
F=22.22% 
Speech 
N=1 
F=10% 
Design of UI 
elements 
Profile and Settings buttons not prominent and 
visible 
UI elements, Design 
Profile and 
Settings 
Visual 
N=3 
F=30% 
Header looks like a button 
Header 
N=3 
F=30% 
Slider hard to use by the target population, the 
font and location of the numbers 
Slider 
Physical/ 
Visual 
N=2 
F=20% 
Buttons 
Lack of vibration 
Buttons, Haptic feedback 
Physical 
N=3 
F=30% 
Expected double-tap 
Buttons, Single tap 
N=1 
F=11.11% 
Keyboard 
Lack of page scrolling with use of a keyboard 
Keyboard, Page scrolling 
N=2 
F=20% 
Lack of spell check with the use of a keyboard 
Keyboard, spell check 
N=1 
F=10% 
Page layout 
 
Small spacing between the buttons 
Button spacing, Layout 
Visual 
N=2 
F=20% 
Layout, form, and location of View/Email Report 
buttons 
View and Email Report buttons, Layout 
N=1 
F=10% 
Contrast 
Low contrast against the background (instruction 
page) 
Background, Contrast 
N=3 
F=30% 
Prompt 
Lack of specificity and lack of flexibility 
(navigation) 
Prompt, Content 
Cognitive 
N=2 
F=20% 
Font size 
Small font size 
Text, Font size 
Visual 
N=1 
F=11.11% 
 
 

166
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III.  
USABILITY PROBLEMS (I.E., THEMES AND PROBLEM EXPLANATIONS) WITH RELATED DESIGN FEATURES AND CHARACTERISTICS 
Themes 
Usability Problems 
Design Feature and Related 
Characteristic 
Ability 
Required to 
Perform the 
Task 
Number of 
Instances 
Problem was 
reported, n 
Number of 
Participants, N 
Navigation 
Not clear whether a required action was 
taken due to having to press Next after a 
single choice is made; Specialized use 
Next and Back buttons, 
Navigation 
Cognitive 
12 
N=7 
Labeling 
Not clear labeling of buttons 
Buttons, 
Labeling 
Education 
 
7 
N=7 
Emergency 
 
7 
N=7 
Energized 
 
2 
N=2 
Input, Output 
 
9 
N=7 
Speech 
 
4 
N=4 
News 
 
1 
N=1 
Diary 
 
1 
N=1 
Do not show this 
again 
1 
N=1 
Design of UI 
elements 
Profile and Settings buttons not prominent 
and visible; 
UI 
elements, 
design 
(form and 
color) 
Profile, Settings 
Visual 
5 
N=5 
The header looks like a button; 
Header 
 
4 
N=3 
Slider hard to use by the target population, 
the font and location of the numbers; 
Slider 
Physical/ 
Visual 
7 
N=5 
Not adequate icons; 
Icons 
 
Cognitive 
5 
N=3 
Lack of MS types options 
MS type 
 
1 
N=1 
Page layout 
 
Layout, form, and location of the buttons 
(including View/Email Report buttons); 
Page layout; Missing information about 
the selection and navigation; not dynamic 
enough; smart app feature 
Buttons, Page Layout 
13 
N=6 
Too small button spacing 
Button spacing, Layout 
 
Visual 
4 
N=4 
Keyboard 
Lack of page scrolling with use of a 
keyboard 
Keyboard, Page scrolling 
Physical 
6 
N=5 
Prompt 
Lack of flexibility (navigation) 
Prompt, Content 
 
Cognitive 
4 
N=3 
Font size 
Small font size 
Text, font size 
 
Visual 
2 
N=2 
Contrast 
Low contrast against the background 
Background, Contrast 
 
3 
N=2 
Single tap 
Too many clicks required (physical effort) 
Buttons, Single tap 
 
Physical 
1 
N=1 
Feature 
request 
Missing features 
Feature, Feature request 
Cognitive 
11 
N=6 
Navigation 
Lack of direction; Page design; Multiple 
selections 
Buttons and pages, Navigation 
12 
N=6 
Design 
Wrong location and labeling of certain 
features 
Labels, Miscategorization 
10 
N=5 
Lack of 
consistency 
Lack of consistency in page layout 
Page layout, Lack of 
consistency 
2 
N=2 
Keyboard 
Lack of the on-screen verification with 
keyboard 
Keyboard, On-screen 
verification 
1 
N=1 
Lack of 
confirmation 
Lack of confirmation that data was entered 
Lack of confirmation of 
activity, Navigation 
1 
N=1 
 
 
 
 

167
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Numbers on the slider were placed on the top of it. 
Speech icon was replaced with Output icon, and Input icon 
with Speech icon. Output icon and Seeing icon (in 
Difficulties) were redesigned. Even though only one 
participant reported that there was no spell check with the 
use of a keyboard, this general feature was implemented 
because it is present in a majority of the apps. Page scrolling 
was added with the use of a keyboard. A prompt was 
redesigned to inform about the missing data in a way that 
allows users to go to the following page without having to 
fill out all information (i.e., “Do you want to fill out the 
missing information?” with Yes that takes them back to the 
previous page, and No that takes them to the following 
page). Text about the navigation (i.e., linear navigation using 
Next and Back buttons) was added to the first instruction 
page. The font size of the MS News articles was increased. 
The layout of the buttons was changed (e.g., View Report 
button was moved above the Email Report button, and the 
names of the VR games were shortened). The other layout 
changes were not made due to the inconsistencies with the 
page layout. A spacing between the top buttons and large 
buttons bellow (e.g., Manual entry, and Week, Month, Year 
buttons) was increased. There were a number of feature 
requests. For example, additional information about MS 
Friends is added on the calling page (e.g., friend’s interests, 
MS type, and other information the person wants to share). 
No changes were made to the other feature requests due to 
the small number of participants reporting the problem (N=1 
per problem). 
Seven participants were reporting a problem with the 
navigation using Next and Back buttons. However, no 
change was made due to the design criteria IC2d. (i.e., Have 
more than one way to go to different pages while keeping the 
consistency). Next and Back buttons are typical of linear 
navigation and will be used in the novice user mode only. 
Additionally, 3 participants did not see that this prototype 
included alternative voices within the Settings and a problem 
with it. Similarly, 3 participants reported problems with the 
lack of the tactile feedback, which was not incorporated 
because iPhone 6 does not have the Taptic Engine that 
provides the vibration while tapping the buttons that was 
included in later versions. The total number of participants 
reporting the problems with the miscategorization of the 
labels was 5. However, no changes were made due to the 
small number of participants reporting the individual 
problem (N=1 per problem). No change was made to the 
second page of the Reports due to the lack of page space 
(N=2). Even though was there was a total of 6 participants 
who reported a problem with the navigation due to the 
design of the buttons and pages, no changes were made due 
to the small number of participants reporting the specific 
problem (N=1 per problem). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This research paper provides a detailed evaluation of the 
usability of MS Assistant by expert reviewers, which was 
previously reported [1]. The results of the expert review 
confirm the effectiveness of the UDMIG v.2.1 within the 
application to MS Assistant. Overall, this implementation of 
the guidelines to the design of the mobile app scored well. 
Most of the participants favorably agreed that the guidelines 
were effective. Ninety percent of the mean values of the 
participants’ ratings were equal to 4 or higher. In addition, 
there was a small number of recommendations related to the 
minor usability problems in MS Assistant. Design changes 
addressed the usability-related suggestions made by the 
expert reviewers. One of the drawbacks of the study was its 
small sample size. However, all the experts had extensive 
and wide expertise applicable to the design of mHealth apps 
for people aging with disabilities. Another drawback of the 
study was that none of the experts was “very familiar” with 
the design of user interfaces for the target population. 
However, the majority of them were “somewhat familiar” 
with it. 
Future work will include usability testing of the mHealth 
app with the individuals aging with MS to understand the 
usability of MS Assistant to determine the effectiveness of 
UDMIG v.2.1 in producing a universally usable product. 
This study will help with the analysis of the user-specific 
preferences for the specific design features and the resulting 
design implications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by a grant from the 
National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and 
Rehabilitation 
Research 
(NIDILRR 
grant 
number 
90RE5016-01-00) under the auspices of The Rehabilitation 
Engineering Research Center on Technologies to Support 
Successful Aging with Disability (RERC TechSAge). 
NIDILRR is a Center within the Administration for 
Community Living (ACL), Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS). 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ruzic, H. P. Mahajan, and J. A. Sanford, "Universally 
Designed mHealth App for Individuals Aging with Multiple 
Sclerosis," The Third International Conference on Universal 
Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart 
Environments (SMART ACCESSIBILITY 2018), Mar. 2018. 
[2] H. Moses, M. Picone, and V. Smith, Clinician's primer on 
multiple sclerosis: An in-depth overview. CMC, 2008. 
[3] R. Fraser et al., "Self-management for People with Multiple 
Sclerosis: Report from The First International Consensus 
Conference, November 15, 2010," International Journal of 
MS Care, vol. 15, pp. 99-106, 2013. 
[4] E. E. Gulick, "Symptom and activities of daily living 
trajectory in multiple sclerosis: a 10-year study," Nursing 
Research, vol. 47, pp. 137-14, 1998. 
[5] W. E. Fleming and C. P. Pollak, "Sleep disorders in multiple 
sclerosis," Seminars in Neurology, pp. 64-68, 2005. 
[6] M. Finlayson, "Health and social profile of older adults with 
MS: Findings from three studies," International Journal of MS 
Care, vol. 4, pp. 139-151, 2002. 
[7] T. DiLorenzo, "Aging with Multiple Sclerosis," Clinical 
Bulletin, Information for Health Professionals, pp. 1-9, 2011. 
[8] A. D. Rae-Grant et al., "Self-management in neurological 
disorders: systematic review of the literature and potential 
interventions in multiple sclerosis care," Journal of 
Rehabilitaiton Research and Development, vol. 48, pp. 1087, 
2011.  

168
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[9] M. Bishop and M. Frain, "Development and initial analysis of 
multiple sclerosis self-management scale," International 
journal of MS care, vol. 9, pp. 35-42, 2007. 
[10] C. H. Bombardier, M. Cunniffe, R. Wadhwani, L. E. Gibbons, 
K. D. Blake, and G. H. Kraft, "The efficacy of telephone 
counseling for health promotion in people with multiple 
sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial," Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 89, pp. 1849-1856, 2008. 
[11] E. S. Knaster, K. M. Yorkston, K. Johnson, K. A. McMullen, 
and D. M. Ehde, "Perspectives on self-management in 
multiple sclerosis: a focus group study," International journal 
of MS care, vol. 13, pp. 146-152, 2011. 
[12] A. K. Stuifbergen, H. Becker, S. Blozis, G. Timmerman, and 
V. Kullberg, "A randomized clinical trial of a wellness 
intervention for women with multiple sclerosis," Archives of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 84, pp. 467-476, 
2003. 
[13] P.  Rompani and T. Dua, Atlas: Miltiple sclerosis resources in 
the world 2008.  WHO Press, World Health Organization, 
2008. 
[14] M. Finlayson, K. Preissner, C. Cho, and M. Plow,  
"Randomized trial of a teleconference-delivered fatigue 
management program for people with multiple sclerosis," 
Multiple Sclerosis Journal, vol. 17, pp. 1130-1140, 2011.  
[15] D. C. Mohr et al., "Telephone-administered psychotherapy for 
depression. Archives of General Psychiatry," vol. 62, pp. 
1007-1014, 2005.  
[16] D. C. Mohr et al., "Telephone-administered cognitive–
behavioral therapy for the treatment of depressive symptoms 
in multiple sclerosis," Journal of consulting and clinical 
psychology, vol. 68, pp. 356, 2000.  
[17] M. Ploughman et al., "Factors influencing healthy aging with 
multiple sclerosis: a qualitative study," Disability and 
rehabilitation, vol. 34, pp. 26-33, 2012.  
[18] D. M. Zulman et al., "How can eHealth technology address 
challenges related to multimorbidity? Perspectives from 
patients with multiple chronic conditions," Journal of General 
Internal Medicine, vol. 30, pp. 1063-1070, 2015. 
[19] R. Haase, T. Schultheiss, R. Kempcke, K. Thomas, and T. 
Ziemssen, "Use and acceptance of electronic communication 
by 
patients 
with 
multiple 
sclerosis: 
a 
multicenter 
questionnaire study," Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
vol. 14, pp. e135, 2012. 
[20] K. Van Kessel, D. R. Babbage, N. Reay, W. M. Miner-
Williams, and P. Kersten. "Mobile technology use by people 
experiencing 
multiple 
sclerosis 
fatigue: 
Survey 
methodology," JMIR mHealth and uHealth vol. 5, e6, 2017. 
[21] M. R. Ann, A. R. Salter, T. Tyry, R. J. Fox, and G. R. Cutter. 
"Preferred sources of health information in persons with 
multiple 
sclerosis: 
degree 
of 
trust 
and 
information 
sought," Journal of Medical Internet Research vol. 15, e67, 
2013. 
[22] My MS Manager. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. 
Avalable: https://mymsaa.org/msaa-community/mobile/ 
[23] MS self™, the Multiple Sclerosis Mobile App. Access date: 
10/03/2018. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
http://www.moveoverms.org/multiple-sclerosis-app-ms-self/ 
[24] MySidekick for MS. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. 
Avalable:https://www.abovems.com/en_us/home/resources/m
s-tools-services/mysidekick-app.html 
[25] My MS Conversations™. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. 
Avalable:https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.s
yandus.ms_patiented_01&hl=en 
[26] MS Journal. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ms-
journal/id523663325?mt=8 
[27] My Multiple Sclerosis Diary. Access date: 10/03/2018. 
[Online]. 
Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.appxient.m
ymsdiary&hl=en 
[28] SymTrack. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
http://www.symtrac.com/ 
[29] MS Buddy. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.healthline.
msbuddy 
[30] MS Attack. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cloudnined
evelopmentllc.MSAttack&hl=en 
[31] iHealth. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable:  
https://ihealthlabs.com/ 
[32] Headpsace: Meditation. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. 
Avalable: https://www.headspace.com/headspace-meditation-
app 
[33] Mango. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
https://www.mangohealth.com/ 
[34] Syandus. Access date: 10/03/2018. [Online]. Avalable: 
https://www.syandus.com/ 
[35] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Needs Assessment - mHealth 
Applications for People Aging with Multiple Sclerosis," 
Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research, pp. 1-28, 2017. 
[36] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Universal design mobile 
interface guidelines (UDMIG) for an aging population," in 
Mobile e-Health, pp. 17-37, 2017. 
[37] L. Ruzic and J. A. Sanford, "Usability of mobile consumer 
applications for individuals aging with Multiple Sclerosis," 
Proc. 9th International Conference on Universal Access in 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCII2017), Springer, Jan. 
2017, pp. 258-276. 
[38] L. Ruzic, C. N. Harrington, and J. A. Sanford, "Design and 
evaluation of mobile interfaces for an aging population," The 
Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions (ACHI2017), Mar. 2017, pp. 305-309, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-538-8 
[39] L. Ruzic, C. N. Harrington, and J. A. Sanford, "Universal 
Design Mobile Interface Guidelines for mobile health and 
wellness apps for an aging population including people aging 
with disabilities," International Journal on Advances in 
Software, vol. 10, pp. 372-384, 2017. 
 

