Elder Care Architecture – a physical and social approach
Isabel Marcelino 1, 4, João Barroso 2, José Bulas Cruz 3 and António Pereira 1, 4
1 INOV INESC INOVAÇÃO – Instituto de Novas Tecnologias
ESTG Leiria
Leiria, Portugal
2 GECAD – Grupo de Investigação em Engenharia do Conhecimento e Apoio à Decisão
Porto, Portugal
3 CITAB – Centre for the Research and Technology of Agro-Environment and Biological Sciences
University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro
Vila Real, Portugal
4 Research Center for Informatics and Communications
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria
Leiria, Portugal
isabel.marcelino@gmail.com, jbarroso@utad.pt, jcruz@utad.pt, antonio.pereira@ipleiria.pt
Abstract— As we observe society in our days, we can see that
people
live longer;
this
means
that
we have an
older
population, more likely to have health issues. The special needs
presented by the elderly are becoming a major concern for all
of us, along with the lack of time demonstrated by society as a
whole and, as a consequence, the lack of time is seen when
families are not able to take care of their own elders. Many
solutions are being presented in order to solve this problem.
Some of them are taking advantage of the new technological
developments in the body sensor networks area. In this paper
we propose the architecture of a system called Elder Care. The
Elder Care solution has two primary goals: monitoring vital
signs, sending alerts to family and to specialized help and
providing a social network in order to help end the elderly’s
social isolation.
Keywords - health monitoring; wireless sensors networks;
body area network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is a fact that global life expectancy is rising; therefore,
the number of older people is increasing, as shown in
TABLE I.
and TABLE II. . Because women are working
outside the home more and are less time at home, they are no
longer able to give support to old family members. Another
fact is the scalability of new technologies [2] [3] [4]
TABLE I.
COMPARISON OF POPULATION IN 2005 AND 2050 (%) [5]
Region
Population in 2005
Population in 2050
0-14
15-
59
60-
79
80+
0-14
15-
59
60-
79
80+
Global
28.3
61.4
10.3
1.3
19.8
58.3
21.8
4.4
Africa
41.4
53.4
5.2
0.4
28.0
61.7
10.4
1.1
North
America
20.5
62.7
16.7
3.5
17.1
55.6
27.3
7.8
South
America
29.8
61.2
9.0
1.2
18.0
57.8
24.3
5.2
Asia
28.0
62.7
9.2
1.0
18.0
58.3
23.7
4.5
Europe
15.9
63.5
20.6
3.5
14.6
50.9
34.5
9.6
Oceania
24.9
61.0
14.1
2.6
18.4
56.9
24.8
6.8
TABLE II.
POPULATION/DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS IN PORTUGAL [6]
1970
1980
1990
2000
2004
Population ages 0-14
(% of total)
28.8
25.9
20.4
16.2
15.9
Population ages 15-64
(% of total)
62.0
63.6
66.2
67.6
67.2
Population ages 65 and
above (% of total)
9.20
10.5
13.4
16.1
16.9
Facing this new scenario, there are many solutions that
aim to monitor the elderly in order to provide a higher
quality of life in their homes and to decrease health costs.
Wireless communications made
remote monitoring of
people possible, allowing us to have 24 hours of surveillance
with low costs and to obtain a great amount of accurate data
about a patient, such as heart-rate, blood pressure, blood
oxygenation, carbon dioxide partial pressure or fall detection
[3] [4] [7]. This patient’s historical record can be a very
useful factor in medical decisions, leading to a decrease of
errors made by lack of information. It also has a major
importance in detecting sicknesses early so that measures can
be taken to prevent illnesses from getting worse.
Older people are a target population for the use of these
solutions due to their fragile health. They also show a strong
determination to live at home as long as possible and have
their own independence. Despite of the need for living an
independent life, they also demonstrate great fear of feeling
unsafe and alone [8] [9].
A solution that involves uniting caring for elderly, with
information
and
communication
technologies,
was
considered because there is an increase in the use of
technology by the elderly. Figure 1. illustrates this trend.
53
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
Computer use by elder in home care facilities (in %) [10]
To overcome these questions, we propose an architecture
to monitor vital signs and give the proper response in
abnormality cases, and also create a social infrastructure to
bind older people and make them more valuable to society
[1].
This article intends to give an overview of the Elder Care
solution, by supplying a global synopsis of related existing
solutions and projects (approached in Section 2) and giving a
contextualization of the main architecture of Elder Care
(shown in Section 3) as well as explaining the different
modules in which Elder Care is divided. Section 4 shows a
briefing of the interviews made in order to accomplish the
requirement analyses. Section 5 presents some conclusions
and future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many solutions, both academic and commercial, are
presented to provide a better life for older people and to be
able to reduce health costs. For instance, the solution Alarm-
net developed by the University of Virginia is capable of real
time and long-term monitoring using wearable sensors,
continuously records the information to assist diagnosis and
has medication reminders [11].
There are some solutions that use Bluetooth technology
like Nonin [12], which developed a bracelet that reads SpO2
and blood pressure. Others use motes, such as the Code Blue
project from Harvard University [13] [14] [15]. There are
also companies that are developing t-shirts with wireless
sensors, for example Sensatex [16] and Vivometrics Error!
Reference source not found.. In [18] a solution is presented
where the routine life of older people can be monitored and
alerts occur whenever there are abnormal behaviors.
The importance of solutions to deal with older people is
so extreme that there are numerous projects in development
referred in [19] and [20]: OLDES (Older People's e-services
at home), CAALYX (Complete Ambient Assisting Living
EXperiment),
K4CARE
(Knowledge-based
HomeCare
eServices for an ageing Europe), ALADIN
(Ambient
Lighting Assistance for an Ageing Population), ENABLE (A
wearable system supporting services to enable elderly people
to
live well, independently and
at ease), SHARE-IT
(Supported human autonomy for recovery and enhancement
of
cognitive
and
motor
abilities
using
information
technologies), EASY LINE+ (Low cost advanced white
goods for a longer independent life of elderly people),
PERSONA
(Perceptive
spaces
promoting
independent
aging), SOPRANO (Service oriented programmable smart
environments
for
older
Europeans),
WAI-AGE
(Web
accessibility initiative: ageing education and harmonization),
ESBIRRO (Bio mimetic actuation, sensing and control
technology for limit cycle bipedal walkers), COGKNOW
(Helping people with mild dementia navigate their day),
ESANGATHAN (Collaborative working environment for
ageing workforce).
Most of the found solutions aren’t in production and are
still in an embryonic state. Some of them are also not
focused for a specific population. As some deficiencies are
found we can conclude that:

they don’t interact with national health systems,
which implies that all the information obtained
through monitoring is still not accessed directly by
the patient’s doctors and, therefore, the potential of
providing detailed information to allow doctors to
make more accurate diagnosis and prevent illnesses
is underestimated;

many solutions are generalist, and do not include a
target population and their special needs. For
example, in the elderly’s case, interfaces must be
simplified and all the tasks have to be intuitive
without the necessity of huge memorizing process.

numerous solutions are concerned with the physical
side but neglect the psychological side;

most solutions do not provide a global response,
allowing the senior population to have only one
centralized and simplified solution. The fact of
having to interact with different products and
solutions, in order to have physical monitoring and
social support, increases task complexity, causing
the elderly to abandon the use of those solutions;

although the elderly are aware of the fact that their
privacy is somehow invaded by a continuous survey
and give consent to the use of the obtained
information for medical purposes and family alerts,
none of the solutions have a pausing ordered by
users, for a specified period of time.
The Elder Care solution, besides monitoring physical
issues, is also mainly concerned in giving a proper solution
to the psychological and social aspects. Elder Care stands out
from all other architectures by expanding its purpose to a
social level, focusing not on the physical well-being of
elderly people, but also by giving an emphasis to the social
issues while offering solutions the deficiencies presented
above.
III.
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In
order
to
achieve
the
presented
architecture,
a
qualitative interpretative research method based on semi-
structured interviews was used.
In
interpretative
research,
learning
comes
from
interaction
with
the
phenomenon.
i.e.,
through
the
knowledge that the researcher already has, in interaction with
the new aspects of the phenomenon, new knowledge is
obtained on the reality that is being explored [21] [22] [23].
54
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In semi-structured interviews, the interviewer follows
some guidelines and questions to conduct the interview but
gives some flexibility to the interviewee [21].
The process, reflected on Figure 2. , began by making a
requirement analysis to allow an architecture sketch. After
this step, interviews were conducted in order to validate the
identified requirements and add new ones, according to the
interviewee’s points of view.
Figure 2.
Research guideline
All of the requirements initial and added by the
interviews led to the proposed architecture.
Some of the most important requirements are the
following:

each user will have a set of wireless body sensor
that
will
allow
continuous
vital
parameter
monitoring;

the parameter monitoring should not interfere with
user’s daily routines;

the system will be responsible in sending alerts to
family members and emergency services whenever
an abnormality is detected (abnormal parameter
values or sudden routine changes);

the elderly will be able to order pause surveillance
during a specific period of time;

multimedia devices will be installed at the elder’s
residence in order to provide interaction with a
virtual leisure room;

the multimedia device will also be responsible to
inform the elderly to take his medication;

the virtual leisure room will be divided in areas that
will
allow
communication,
knowledge
record,
hobbies, education and culture and service requests.
To respond to all the requirements, including the ones
specified above, the proposed architecture is divided in 3
primary modules: local monitoring, control center and virtual
leisure room (visible in Figure 3. ).
Figure 3.
Elder Care block diagram (level 0)
The local monitoring will be installed at the patient’s
home, obtaining vital signs and sending them to the control
center that will be responsible for setting in motion the
proper alerts and specialized help in motion as a response to
abnormal situations.
The local monitoring will also have a media center in
order to allow users to communicate with other users that
acquire the Elder Care solution, through the virtual leisure
room. This virtual leisure room, as the name indicates, will
represent a virtual room where users can meet and interact,
creating a social network.
Figure 4. represents how information will be exchange
between the different modules.
Local Monitoring will send medical data acquired
through wireless sensors, to the control center. This data will
be encrypted and sent over Ethernet in XML format.
The local monitoring center will also interact with the
virtual leisure room. Inputs will be provided from a web
cam, microphone and touch screen device, at the elder’s
residence, and sent over Ethernet to the virtual leisure room.
The control center will receive all local monitoring center
information and manage the alerts, sending SMS alerts to the
elderly’s family, as well as activating local help support.
As regarding user’s information, the control center will
also let certified health units access information, with
previous authorization from the elderly.
Certified health units and the elderly’s family can also
upload relevant information to the control center such as
clinical analysis, medical exams, allergies and blood type.
Figure 4.
Elder Care information exchange
55
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The subsections bellow explain, in a more detailed
perspective, how each one of these three modules works.
A.
Local Monitoring
The basic concept of Body Area Network (BAN) is the
idea of having a set of compact mobile units, allowing the
transfer of patient’s vital parameters to the control center or
responsible medical staff [24].
This system is based on several sensor nodes, each with
its own power supply, processing unit, memory unit, radio,
one or more sensors and analog to digital conversion module
[25] [26] [27]. Each node is able to communicate with other
nodes or a control center through wireless technology. In
turn, the control center establishes communication sending
all information by Ethernet or cellular network [28]. The
basic concept of BAN is used in Local monitoring module.
Local monitoring will be installed in older people’s
home. It will acquire vital signs from body wireless sensor,
in
a
non-invasive
method,
and
send
the
abnormal
information and samples of normal information to the
control center through a communication network. The vital
signs to monitor are, for example: blood pressure, heart rate,
respiratory rate, temperature and fall detection. This choice
was made after some interviews with doctors and nurses that
indicated these parameters as the most important to survey in
elder people.
As it can be seen in Figure 5. , the elderly will have body
wireless sensors communicating with the gateway node. If
the elderly are in their own residence, the information will be
sent through cable network. When the elderly are outside
their residences, the information will be sent through their
cell phone. The information will be treated in the control
center module.
Figure 5.
Communication in monitoring vital parameters
Some routines, like the time spent at home and outside by
the elderly, will also be monitored. This appraisal is going to
be helpful in order to detect unusual behavior. For example,
if a person has the habit of being in the garden for 30
minutes every day between 2 and 3 p.m., and the local
monitoring module detects that it is 4 p.m. and s/he has not
entered home, it will send a message alert to the control
center module, that is responsible to manage all the incoming
alerts from the different local monitoring modules. As
regarding privacy invasion, the possibility for users to pause
the routine monitoring will be given.
Local monitoring will also be detecting movement, gas,
flood and fire and deploy a trigger to the control center
whenever a problem occurs.
Besides, it will have reminders for taking medication,
people’s birthdays, and other configurable events.
Moreover, the local monitoring module will have a media
center composed by a touch screen device, webcam, sound
columns and microphone that will allow the user to interact
with the virtual leisure room module, which will be
approached bellow in this article. The program installed in
the device with the touch screen will have a simple interface
and few options, in order to guarantee accessibility and easy
memorization by older people.
Due to the sensitive nature of the information, this will be
encrypted
when sent to the Control Center. All the
information in the Control Center will be accessible only by
the elderly and by people whose access was given consent by
the elder, for instance their family and doctors that are
treating them.
A representation of local monitoring module can be seen
in Figure 6.
Figure 6.
Elder Care local monitoring module
B.
Control Center
The control center, represented in Figure 7. , will receive
the information from all local monitoring.
In addition to the fact of being an information repository,
the control center manages all the alerts. This means that, it
is possible to compare current data with the patient records
and check what parameters are abnormal. It can, then, inform
the family as well as activate proper emergency responses.
This allows having a personalized response for each case
because, besides the incoming alert, the control center has all
the medical records and previous alerts of each patient.
56
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7.
Elder Care control center module
In a more and more frantic life style, sometimes people
have no time to take care of their family’s elders. With this
in mind, alerts will be sent to the elder’s family, from control
center to their mobile phones. This implies that all families
that have adopted the Elder Care solution may rest easy with
the assurance that their elders are being monitored and,
whenever some irregularity happens they are alerted.
In addition, authenticated family members can access a
web site, through personal computer or mobile phone, to
consult all the history of the user.
By having an extremely rich information database, the
control center may provide data to the National Health
System in order to create georeference statistics while
providing a complete historical record of the patients with
local monitoring module. This may help during medical
diagnosis by supplying more complete and accurate data.
The communications with the National Health System is
going to be developed by using a standard protocol such as
HL7, DICOM, HIPAA, CEN/TC 251 (WGIII) - Security,
Safety and Quality, ISO TC 215 (WG 4) - Security, IEEE
P1157 Medical Data Interchange (MEDIX), IEEE P1073
Medical Information Bus (MIB) [29] [30], according to the
country where the solution will be implemented. The future
tendencies are to have common protocols exchanging
medical information in order to guarantee the integrity of all
systems.
By having a great amount of vital information, the control
center will have huge measures to back up information and
to provide a no fault tolerant service.
C.
Virtual Leisure Room
As people are getting older, they have a propensity to
isolate
themselves
at
home,
mostly
due
to
physical
movement difficulties. As a consequence, they start to feel
sad and to be a burden to society by not being able to
contribute in some way.
The virtual leisure room promotes a social relationship
between the elderly with the Elder Care solution, in order to
prevent social seclusion (Figure 8. ). The virtual leisure room
is going to be conceived to cover most of the elderly,
including illiterate people and with some motor disabilities,
but cannot be applied to those who suffer from degenerative
mental illnesses, such as Alzheimer.
The virtual leisure room will be divided in areas such as:
communication, knowledge recording, hobbies, education,
culture and service requests.
Figure 8.
Elder Care virtual leisure room module
Communication will appear in order to allow Elder Care
users to interact with each other and with their family and
friends by wrapping applications that are already in use, such
as Google talk, messenger, blogs and other social web
applications.
Another particularity of the virtual leisure room is going
to be the possibility for users to post their life experiences,
exchange recipes and describe some traditional professions
and handcrafts. This will allow for the saving of much
knowledge that will be lost if not passed to the generations.
The elderly have endless knowledge that is many times lost.
57
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The area for hobbies will provide a way for older people
to play some games, listen to some music or watch
interactive television.
The virtual leisure room will provide some cultural
activities like virtual visits to monuments and, in some
occasions, it will also have a tour guide that will inform the
visitors by giving historical explanations and responding to
questions. This means that the user can visit the monument
any time of the day, and interact with other users that are
already in that monument, but also has the possibility, in
certain stipulated hours to visit the monument with a
professional tour guide.
Furthermore, the virtual leisure room will be a platform
for e-learning classes, as many older people are returning to
schools to obtain knowledge in new subjects.
The virtual leisure room will also offer the opportunity to
the users to expose their doubts to doctors, nurses and
medical staff. This is a benefit because older people feel,
many times, embarrassed to ask some questions to their own
doctors in a face to face situation. This feature will allow
users to pose some questions without having to meet the
doctor in person.
Other services like on-line shopping or household repairs
(like plumbing) will also be available in the virtual leisure
room.
In summary, the virtual leisure room will provide an
open door for those who feel forlorn, by returning some
hope, pride and dignity to people who are sometimes
forgotten.
The intention of building the virtual leisure room is to
centralize most of the social aspects that are important to the
elderly. It is also a way to provide these features to users
with health problems.
IV.
INTERVIEWS
Six interviews were made to agents that are familiarized
with the problem: a hospital director, a social security and
elder home care director, a doctor, an older person and two
nurses.
As mentioned in the research method, the purpose of
these interviews was to validate the identified requirements
and add new ones in order to obtain a more robust and
complete architecture.
The
Leximancer
software
webpage
indicates
that
“through a rigorous scientific process, Leximancer drills into
textual data: documents, e-mails, call center transcripts,
blogs, Web sites, etc., and extracts the main concepts, themes
and causal relationships to provide the information needed to
make critical decisions” [31].
Leximancer was therefore, applied to the interviews
made, in order to provide a schematic relationship between
concepts and terms spoken during the interview. This allows
for a notion of what terms are more important to these
interviewed.
A.
Hospital Director
The
interviewed
hospital
director
belongs
to
an
Integrated Care Coordination Unit.
He mentioned that the elderly don’t like to leave their
homes nor have a stranger in their own home watching after
them; especially in the beginning where no bound has been
made.
Even though they are receiving home assistance, there
are still periods, mainly at night, where the elderly are alone.
The apprehension shown by the hospital director in this
matter is not just about lack of monitoring, but also, the
loneliness experienced by the elderly. Besides the night
period, there is also a main preoccupation with geographic
isolation that affects many elderly in our country, making
continuous support more difficult.
The hospital director pointed to the urgent need to have
something to prevent the elderly social isolation.
Through Leximancer software, it was seen that the most
often spoken word during the interview was “Elder”, as
shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9.
Hospital director interview concept map
As
a
response
to
these
concerns,
the
presented
architecture has continuous monitoring of vital signs and a
virtual leisure room.
B.
Social security and elder home care director
The interviewed social security and elderly home care
director interviewed works in private home care where 70
older people live.
She usually takes the elderly to a city council program
that consists in weekly visits to an internet space. With this
continuous contact with the elderly and their interaction with
technology, the social security and elderly home care
director was able to observe and indicate their biggest
difficulties: to work with the keyboard and mouse. But the
barrier is overcome by the huge curiosity and interest of
being able to search any subject on the web.
58
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The Leximancer concept map, visible in Figure 10. ,
shows that the most used terms where “Person”, “Home” and
“Internet”.
Figure 10. Social security and elderly home care director interview concept
map
In order to overcome this hindrance, the proceedings
involved in the proposed architecture must be simple and
repetitive, attending to the elderly feeble skills and trouble to
memorize.
C.
Doctor
The interviewed doctor has been a doctor in a public
health unit for more than 20 years.
He mentioned, as one of his major concerns, the fact that
several of his elder patients that live alone, had already a
stroke or had fallen and lay on the floor for innumerous
hours before neighbors or family missed them. After these
episodes, family members, usually daughters and sons
become very worried and start making frequent phone calls
to their parents in order to check on them. This procedure
affects family in their daily tasks.
The Leximancer concept map, represented in Figure 11. ,
shows that the most used terms where “Elder”, “Talk”,
“Home” and “Fall”.
Figure 11. Doctor interview concept map
To solve the problems mentioned above, the proposed
solution monitors the elderly leading to increased safety
feelings of their own and their family members.
D.
Elder
The interviewed elder is a 74 year old female widow who
lives by herself at home. She retired 3 years ago and used to
be a university language teacher.
At
the
beginning
of her professional
activity,
all
processes where made in paper. With the emerging of
technologies, many processes started to be developed using
computers. She indicated that her biggest fear is to damage
the software or hardware and be without the equipment
during its repair. She gets anxious whenever the computer
responds differently than she is expecting. She referred the
use of automatisms, routines and mnemonics in order to do
her work properly.
When asked if she sees any problem in doctors accessing
her medical record resulting from a continuous monitoring,
she doesn’t consider it an issue. As a matter of fact, she
thinks that it is very beneficial that doctors can access all her
information in order to me more accurate in their decisions.
In her opinion, it is important that the medical staff can
access the information so as to be able to have a truthful
medical diagnosis. It is also important to be continuously
monitored in order to have a real time response if an
abnormality occurs.
The Leximancer concept map, presented in Figure 12. ,
shows that the most used terms where “People”, “Time”,
“Security”, “Computer”, “Messages”, “Cell phone” and
“Phone”.
Figure 12. Elder interview concept map
As a result of this interview, the significance of a simple
interface in Elder Care can be observed. We can also
conclude that it is very important to have training courses to
involve Elder Care in their daily routines.
59
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

E.
Nurse 1
The interviewed nurse has been practicing for the last 14
years.
In her opinion, resulting from her experience, the elderly
are not likely to use technology. After some years watching
older people struggling over cell phones, there are still some
of her patients who complain about their inability to use
them. Many of her patients can’t even read, so they have to
memorize proceedings to be able to call 2 or 3 people and to
ask for help if they need other functionalities from the cell
phone.
Nevertheless, she thinks that having one accessory
monitoring vital signs is an advantage, as well as having
some device that allows the elderly to communicate is an
advantage because, she thinks that isolation is one of the
critical problems that should be solved.
The Leximancer concept map shows that the most used
term where “Elder”, “Nurse”, “Phone”, “Family” and “Hard”
(Figure 13. ).
Figure 13. Nurse 1 concept map
To struggle with the problem of interaction between the
elderly and technology, Elder Care is designed to have a
simple touch screen device with configurable options to
show only images or text and images associated with sound.
The application on multimedia device will also have few
options for easy memorization.
F.
Nurse 2
The interviewed psychiatric nurse worked with the
elderly in a hospital emergency room and, during 3 years, in
an elder care home. At the present date he is a university
teacher.
His greatest concern is the isolation experienced by many
older people. He observed that their social isolation is not a
small
town
phenomenon
where
people
are
often
geographically isolated, but also in big cities where they do
not feel safe on the streets and start to spend more time at
home.
He thinks that monitoring the elderly while providing
them with security is a very important subject because it
increases their welfare. As a nurse, he enumerated the
following items as the most important to watch over in an
older population: blood pressure, heart rate, temperature,
respiratory rate and blood glucose. He also referred that it
was crucial to have GPS coordinates of the elderly to precise
their location whenever there was a problem outside their
residence. These problems occur frequently when they work
alone in agricultural grounds frequently using tractors or
other agricultural tools.
Adding an idea to the virtual leisure room, he mentioned
that, a measure to increase welfare could be to provide an
option for the elderly to require services such as small house
repairs, on-line shopping and other types of services that
could improve the lifestyle quality because the elderly are a
population with many needs and without a global and easy
access solution.
The Leximancer concept map shows that the most used
terms where “Elder”, “Health”, “Monitoring”, “Person”,
“Hospital”, “Technologies” and “Social” (Figure 14. ).
Figure 14. Nurse 2 concept map
As a response for solitude, Elder Care has a virtual
leisure room. The idea of having service request was
embedded in the virtual leisure room.
G.
Review
As the interviews were being conducted, a sketch of the
architecture was being done. At the end of each interview,
this sketch was shown so that more targeted reviews were
made.
All interviewed expressed, as the first and main concern,
the
loneliness
experienced
by
the
elderly
population,
overruled by the existence of the virtual leisure room.
Another feature behind the whole system, and identified
as a very important added value, was the sense of security
that Elder Care provides due to alert management.
60
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Some interviews also revealed requirements that were not
previously
planned
and
the
reformulation
of
existing
requirements, such as:

the inclusion of a blog with social events occurring
around the user’s residence;

a device worn by the elderly that obtains GPS
coordinates;

the most relevant parameters to be measured are
blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, respiratory
rate and glycemia;

the monitoring users’ position must consider that,
when at sleep, the elderly are in an horizontal
position, but not due to a fall. The sleeping periods
must not be a fall alert.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
To be able to give older people quality of life as long as
possible is an emerging problem, which many people are
noticing and are trying to develop a proper solution with
technological features.
Elder Care is an attempt to give a response to the fact that
we have more and more older people and have a lifestyle that
prevents us to take care of the elders in our families. This is
due to the fact that in most families, active members are
workers or students and cannot be at home. Many elders are
reluctant to go to care home or accept caregivers’ help since
they feel that they are losing their independence. Even when
the caregivers are their own sons and daughters, they feel
reluctant to accept help [6].
With Elder Care solution we will be able to maintain the
elderly in their homes, survey their health and make them
useful through interaction in the virtual leisure room.
We followed a qualitative research with semi structured
interviews in order to obtain the necessary requirements to
the proposed architecture.
At this point we have a high level architecture. In the
future we will advance with prototype implementation of the
proposed architecture, testing it in a real scenario, with
elderly who are mostly underprivileged and live in remote
areas. This choice of a critical target is going to allow us to
get a reliable and robust solution.
It is also our intention to integrate our solution with the
elder care in specialized nursing homes, by giving a global
coverage to all entities that deal with elderly people.
VI.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Marcelino, J. Barroso, J. Bulas Cruz, A. Pereira, “Elder
Care Architecture”, Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Systems and Networks Communications,
IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
[2]
U. Varchney, “Pervasive healthcare and wireless health
monitoring”, Springer Science, 2007.
[3]
A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and E. Jovanov, “Wireless sensor
networks for personal health monitoring: Issues and an
implementation”, Elsevier, 2006.
[4]
J. Stankovic , et al., “Wireless sensor networks for in-home
healthcare: potential and challenges”, HCMDSS, 2005.
[5]
United Nations – Department of Economics and Social
Affairs, Population Division, “World Population prospects –
The 2006 revision”, Highlights, 2007.
[6]
P. Barros and J. Simões, “Portugal health system review”,
Sara Allin and Elias Mossialos, European Observatory on
Health Systems and Policies, 2007.
[7]
E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P. Groen, “A
wireless body area network of intelligent motion sensors for
computer assisted physical rehabilitation”, BioMed, 2005.
[8]
E. Dishman, “Inventing wellness systems for aging in place”,
IEEE, 2004.
[9]
D. Wilson, S. Consolvo, K. Fishkin, and M. Philipose, “In-
home assessment of the activities of daily living of the
elderly”, Extended Abstracts of CHI 2005: Workshops - HCI
Challenges in Health Assessment, pp 2130, Portland, 2005.
[10] Bareme
Internet,
http://www.marktest.com/wap/a/n/id~1186.aspx,
22.06.2010.
[11] AlarmNet, http://www.cs.virginia.edu/wsn/medical/,
22.06.2010.
[12] Nonin, http://www.nonin.com/, 22.06.2010.
[13] CodeBlue, http://fiji.eecs.harvard.edu/CodeBlue, 22.06.2010.
[14] V. Shnayder, B. Chen, K. Lorincz, T. Fulford-Jones, and M.
Welsh, “Sensor networks for medical care”, Technical Report
TR-08-05, Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, 2005.
[15] D. Malan, T. Fulford-Jones, M. Welsh, and S. Moulton,
“CodeBlue: an ad hoc sensor network infrastructure for
emergency medical care”, Workshop on Applications of
Mobile Embedded Systems, Boston, 2004.
[16] Sensatex, http://www.sensatex.com/, 22.06.2010.
[17] K. Heilman and S. Porges, "Accuracy of the LifeShirt®
(Vivometrics) in the detection of cardiac rhythms", Elsevier,
2007.
[18] G.
Gupta,
S.
Mukhopadhyay,
M.
Sutherland,
and
S.
Demidenko,
“Wireless
sensor
for
selective
activity
monitoring in a home for the elderly”, IEEE, 2007.
[19] Community Research & Development Information Service,
http://cordis.europa.eu/, 22.06.2010.
[20] M. Boulos, et al., “CAALYX: a new generation of location-
based services in healthcare”, BioMed, 2007
[21] M. Myers, “Qualitative research in information systems”,
MISQ Discovery, 1997.
[22] R. Pratt, C. Smatt, C. Furner, and B. Keane, “A review of
epistemology and subject areas in MIS research”, Southern
Association of Information Systems Conference, 2008.
[23] R. Rijo, R. Gonçalves, and J. Varajão, “Factores chave dos
projectos de sistemas de informação de contact centers:
research design”, Edições UFP - Novas Perspectivas em
Sistemas e Tecnologias de Informação, 2008.
[24] Fraunhofer Institute,
http://www.ban.fraunhofer.de/index_e.html, 22.06.2010.
[25] P. Coronel, W. Schott, K. Schwieger, E. Zimmermann, T.
Zasowski, and P. Chevillat, “Briefing on wireless body area
and sensor networks”, 8th Wireless World Research Forum,
2004.
[26] M. Kruger and C. Grosse, “Structural health monitoring with
wireless sensor networks”, Ottor-Graf-Journal, Vol.15, 2004.
[27] L. Ruiz, et al., “Arquitecturas para redes de sensores sem fio”,
22° Simpósio Brasileiro de Redes de Computadores -
Gramado, Brasil, 2004.
61
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[28] B. Gyselinckx, J. Penders, and R. Vullers, “Potential and
challenges of body area networks for cardiac monitoring”,
Elsevier, 2007.
[29] S. Araújo, J. Faria, and J. Cruz, “Propostas de melhoria da
segurança dos sistemas de informação clínica em Portugal”,
Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, 2007.
[30] C. Martins and A. Azevedo, “Informação empresarial”, Tese
de Mestrado em Gestão de Informação, Faculdade de
Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, 2001.
[31] Leximancer, https://www.leximancer.com/products/,
22.06.2010.
62
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

