125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Move Better with tripzoom 
 
Jing Bie1, Marcel Bijlsma2, Gregor Broll3, Hu Cao3, Anders Hjalmarsson4, Frances Hodgson5, Paul Holleis3, 
Ynze van Houten2, Koen Jacobs6, Johan Koolwaaij2, Diana Kusumastuti1, and Marko Luther3 
 
1 University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, {J.Bie, D.Kusumastuti}@utwente.nl 
2 Novay, Enschede, The Netherlands, {marcel.bijlsma, ynze.vanhouten, johan.koolwaaij}@novay.nl 
3 DOCOMO Euro-Labs, Munich, Germany, {broll, h.cao, holleis, luther}@docomolab-euro.com 
4 Victoria Institute, Gothenburg, Sweden, anders@viktoria.se 
5 Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds, F.C.Hodgson@its.leeds.ac.uk 
6 Locatienet, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, koen.jacobs@locatienet.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The increase of urban traffic confronts individuals 
and transport authorities with new challenges regarding traffic 
management, personal mobility, sustainability, or economic 
efficiency. Existing resources cannot be arbitrarily extended 
without negative effects on pollution, costs, or quality of living 
and have to be used more efficiently. The SUNSET 
(Sustainable Social Network Services for Transport) project 
aims to improve this situation on a city-wide level by 
motivating users on a personal level to change their mobility 
behavior. To make personal mobility more sustainable, 
flexible, and rewarding for users, SUNSET combines mobility 
data and patterns from mobile sensing, a dynamic incentive 
system, and feedback from social networks. This paper 
describes how the tripzoom application implements this 
conceptual approach, discusses critical issues and outlines the 
forthcoming living lab evaluation in several European cities. 
Keywords–sustainable traffic; mobile mobility; mobile 
sensing; incentives; social networks; living labs 
I. 
MOBILE MOBILITY 
Urban environments provide many different challenges 
for transport and traffic authorities regarding sustainability 
(e.g., CO2, air pollution), accessibility (e.g., congestion) or 
economic efficiency [1][2]. Existing traffic networks often 
operate at their limits and need to be extended or improved 
to meet the increasing mobility needs of an increasing 
number of people. Urban mobility management has to use 
existing resources more efficiently to improve personal 
mobility and to reduce congestion, accidents, and pollution at 
the same time. It also has to cope with conflicting interests. 
Road authorities want to optimize traffic to enhance 
accessibility and sustainability, while individual people want 
to move comfortably and save time and money. 
Some approaches try to solve the challenges of urban 
traffic by extending the capacities of existing infrastructures 
and transport modalities. Other, more human-centered 
approaches target individual travelers and encourage them to 
change their travel behavior instead. They address personal 
goals like healthy living, flexibility, or sustainability, 
motivate travelers on a personal level to improve these goals 
and thus achieve system goals like reduced congestion, 
reduced air pollution or improved safety. Examples for novel 
mobility concepts that appeal to individual travelers and 
urban transport authorities alike are services for ride sharing 
(e.g., Avego [3]) car sharing (e.g., Whipcar [4], ZipCar [5] or 
GreenWheels [6]) or bike rental (e.g., DB Call-a-Bike [7], 
Velib [8] or Yokohama Bay Bike [9]) that show up in a 
growing number of cities all over the world. 
Other solutions take advantage of mobile devices and 
applications to make travelling, transport and commuting 
smarter, more flexible and more beneficial for individual 
users. Mobile devices allow users to easily retrieve and 
communicate traffic-related information. They feature 
technologies like GPS or accelerometers to provide location 
data, suggest routes or detect user mobility. Mobile devices 
can also be highly personalized, context-aware [10] and 
persuasive [11]. They can influence the travel behavior of 
their owners by stimulating them in a personalized way and 
by providing incentives that match their motivations and 
preferences in the right place and at the right time. 
The European FP7 project “Sustainable Social Network 
Services for Transport” (SUNSET) [12] is developing the 
tripzoom application [13] to investigate mobile mobility – 
solutions for personal mobility based on mobile devices and 
applications. With the tripzoom app (Fig. 1), SUNSET 
combines three means to improve personal mobility:  
 
Personal Mobility Monitoring: SUNSET uses mobile 
devices and their sensing capabilities to create 
individual mobility profiles with details about mobility 
patterns and transport modalities. These profiles allow 
users to zoom in on individual trips, frequent travels and 
special places and to re-visit them in detail.  
 
Incentives: tripzoom builds on this mobility data to 
provide users with incentives that match their interests 
to motivate the use of alternative means of transport and 
to encourage more sustainable travel behavior.  
 
Social Networking: Users can share mobility data and 
incentives with the tripzoom-community and existing 
social networks to encourage further improvements of 
their mobility behavior. For example, the mobile 
tripzoom 
app 
visualizes 
individual 
performances 
regarding costs or CO2 footprint and shows users how 
well they perform compared to the community (Fig. 1). 

126
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1. Mobile tripzoom app  
 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: After an 
overview of related work in Section II, Section III gives a 
general overview of the SUNSET approach and how it 
combines mobility monitoring, incentives and social 
networking to meet the challenges of modern traffic. Section 
IV describes the tripzoom application from a user’s 
perspective, while Sections V and VI focus on technical 
details regarding system architecture and mobility sensing. 
Section VII concludes the paper with a discussion of our 
approach and an outlook to its evaluation in living labs in the 
cities of Enschede, Gothenburg and Leeds. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Our work on SUNSET and tripzoom is influenced by 
research on personal mobility, incentive mechanisms and 
living lab evaluations.  
A. Personal Mobility 
Most applications for personal mobility are related to 
information provisioning (e.g., Google Maps [14]) and 
mobility monitoring (e.g., [15][16][17][18]). Information can 
be provided to users via their mobile devices so that they can 
make better decisions regarding their trips. Such information 
involves trip planning, route guidance, and real-time traffic 
information (e.g., congestion, accidents).  
Trip planning involves consulting maps, timetables, or 
online trip planners at home or relying on signs and fellow 
travelers on the road. As pointed out by Pitt et al. [19] the 
introduction of smartphones allows creating portable systems 
and multipurpose information appliances [20] that enable 
users to make sustainable decisions. With regard to personal 
mobility, smartphones make traffic related information, 
maps or timetables portable so that advanced tasks such as 
route planning can be done on the go. Mobile internet 
connections provide users with access to online trip planners 
and up-to-date traffic information, or allow them to arrange 
ride sharing [21] anywhere and at any time. 
 A common problem with most online trip planners is 
that they only accommodate single transport modalities. This 
makes the planner less useful for multi-modal trips, where 
the traveler has to consult several planners. Examples for 
multi-modal trip planners include the DB Navigator [22] or 
ReseRobot [23], that support multi-modal trip planning with 
plane, train, bus, metro, ferry, tram and walking. However, 
driving by car or bicycle is not accommodated, excluding 
P+R as an option.   
In-car navigation devices are becoming a standard feature 
of most new car models. The on-board unit typically uses 
GPS to acquire position data and then locates the car using 
the unit’s map database. Although stand-alone units are 
common, they are not popular for use in non-car modes, as 
carrying the device along can be a burden for the traveler. 
Route guidance systems for mobile phones, such as Google 
Maps [14], can minimize the carriage burden. The map 
database is normally stored on the server and accessed via 
the mobile phone’s internet connection. Therefore, the 
guidance is always based on the latest database, significantly 
reducing inconveniences caused by outdated information.  
Mobility monitoring is realized by sensing movement 
data and matching it with the traffic infrastructure. The 
sensing component tracks the position of users via GPS and 
cellular information, while the matching component fits 
these movement data into the context of the map database 
and establishes the trip-level characteristics, including origin, 
destination, timing or routing. Pattern recognition techniques 
are then utilized to identify the mode of travel and the role of 
users (e.g., driver, passenger), and to recognize places of 
interest over time by learning from the user’s past behavior. 
Examples 
for personal mobility 
monitoring 
include 
TravelWatcher [24] and IYOUIT [25], which also supports 
the sharing of personal experiences on the go. 
Personalization is often overlooked in existing mobile 
mobility systems. Although certain personal settings are 
allowed for filtering information, the majority of information 
is provided in the same way to all users. Guidance and 
advices are constructed as if they apply universally, 
disregarding the travelers’ individual needs and preferences. 
The digital innovation contest TravelHack 2011 [26] tried to 
solve this problem by building prototypes for digital mobility 
services that present travel-related information according to 
personal user settings [27]. This indicates the potential for 
future mobility systems that allow users to adjust systems to 
their needs and preferences. The personalized approach in 
SUNSET is another attempt to bridge this gap in mobile 
mobility services.  
B. Incentives  
Over the past decade, there has been a growing interest in 
using incentives in transport both in commercial applications 
and government implementations to achieve sustainable 
policy aims. A number of EU-countries have implemented a 
range of different initiatives, like travel planning, public 
transport marketing, travel awareness campaigns or mobility 
management. Initiatives that share a common desire to 
change travel behavior through persuasion are collected 
under the term “soft measures”, while “hard measures” 
involve enforcement and legislation. 
The design of incentives in transport policies has a 
history of being more ambitious than the technology will 

127
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
allow. For a long time there has been a vision and a desire to 
be able to offer personalized, multi-modal travel planning 
support as an incentive, but the technology has not been 
available to make it happen. Policy initiatives like Smarter 
Choices in the UK [28] have tried to make travelling less 
costly and more beneficial, sustainable or healthier for 
individuals using personalized travel planning or mobility 
management. However, these initiatives have often been 
relatively time-consuming and costly for local authorities 
and municipalities to implement. 
Another, very simple and persuasive measure for 
motivating particular travel behavior are “monetized” 
inducements like discounted tickets for using public 
transport at certain times, price reductions for bulk or annual 
purchases of tickets, or discounted rates for entrance to 
tourist and visitor attractions for those who arrive by train or 
bus. The Spitsmijden initiative [29] in the Netherlands 
experimented with offering cash incentives to drivers who 
changed their car travel patterns and avoided travelling on a 
congested section of highway during the peak times. While 
this approach was effective and resulted in a change in 
congestion, it was also criticized for potentially introducing 
inequity into transport policy implementations [30].  
Theory and practical evidence indicate that peer pressure 
can be a very influential incentive for changing travel 
behavior [31]. Many policy makers and commercial interests 
are experimenting with social networks like Facebook, 
Twitter or Foursquare, to encourage and support sustainable 
behavior. Examples include car sharing (e.g., [4][5][6]) or 
bike rental (e.g., [7][8][9]). Social interactions like sharing, 
collaboration or competition can be amplified by social 
networks. Tapping into these social interactions, applications 
can provide new forms of engagement and stronger 
incentives. 
Within the SUNSET project, a number of key approaches 
to incentive design have been explored [32]. We have found 
out that social network based sharing of incentives is 
attractive to some demographic groups but not all, that point-
based incentives have to be exchangeable to generate loyalty, 
and that feedback is a mechanism that can be mainstreamed 
into everyday travel behavior. tripzoom offers the possibility 
of bringing together a number of novel and inventive 
concepts in incentive design through the use of dynamic, 
personalized, mobile social media to develop sustainable 
travel behavior.  
C. Living Lab Evaluation  
tripzoom will be evaluated in the real-life context of living 
labs [33] in Enschede, Gothenburg and Leeds. Eriksson et al. 
[34] define living labs as a research and development 
methodology whereby application enhancements, services, 
or products are created and validated in collaborative, multi-
contextual empirical real-world settings. All stakeholders in 
a product, service or application participate directly in the 
development process. For SUNSET, this includes end-users 
and municipalities. Living lab experimentation strives for the 
same level of observation as is common in, for example, a 
usability lab, but in an organic, multi-contextual space. This 
means that customers participating in a living lab are 
observed across many aspects of their lives, such as their 
roles as citizens, workers, at home or travelling. As such, 
living lab studies provide user feedback of high ecological 
validity. In SUNSET, the living labs will also collect high-
value and real-life mobility data about their mobility 
behavior and patterns. 
III. 
THE SUNSET APPROACH 
The European FP7 research project SUNSET [12] takes a 
new approach to urban mobility management and personal 
mobility. For that purpose, its consortium contains partners 
from the complete value chain: providers of location-based 
services, mobile operators, local authorities, green mobility 
providers and research centers. The focus of SUNSET lies 
on urban mobility with a fine-grained maze of roads (as 
opposed to long-distance highways) and on commuters with 
good knowledge of their environment, but with limited 
overview of dynamic situations and routine behavior. 
The SUNSET approach builds on mobile devices, 
personal mobility monitoring, a dynamic incentive system 
and information sharing over social networks to optimize 
mobility for individual users and to encourage the adoption 
of more flexible, sustainable and rewarding ways of 
traveling. This approach includes research on the recognition 
of individual mobility-patterns and transport modalities, the 
effects of different incentives to encourage users to change 
their travel behavior as well as mechanisms for building 
social communities and sharing travel-related information. 
The SUNSET approach envisions an eco-system, in 
which individual travelers, communities, city authorities and 
3rd party service providers interact with each other to 
optimize personal mobility (Fig. 2). Individual travelers 
provide the SUNSET eco-system with information about 
their preferences as well as mobility data about travels, 
transport modalities or places. In return, travelers can take 
advantage of personalized recommendations and services to 
optimize their personal mobility, share travel related 
information on social networks and receive incentives for 
improved travel behavior.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Stakeholders in the SUNSET eco-system 

128
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
City authorities receive detailed, personal mobility data 
from travelers that are relevant for the assessment of current 
infrastructure use and future mobility needs. To optimize this 
data, cities can offer incentives to travelers. The information 
is targeted at individual travel behavior, and thus allows road 
authorities to fine-tune their transport policies and individual 
travelers to meet their personal objectives.  
Third party service providers can tap into the wealth of 
mobility data to create novel services and offerings for 
travelers. They can also integrate with other parties and 
stakeholders through common incentive structures.  
Communities, like participants of a car sharing system or 
employees of a company, can receive special group 
incentives and improve their networking. 
A. Mobility Monitoring 
To optimize personal mobility, individuals or groups 
need to be identified that are relevant for the optimization 
targets under consideration. Therefore, personal mobility 
sensing that uses mobile phones to track how travelers move, 
plays a fundamental role in the SUNSET system to gain 
profound insights into mobility behavior. One example is the 
detection of travel modalities, which combines orientation 
sensors, location data, and road network information to 
estimate the mode of transport in a reliable way. Other than 
systems that build on infrastructure data alone, e.g., on road 
sensors like NDW [35] in the Netherlands, SUNSET is able 
to target individual travelers to initiate a change in behavior 
in accordance with a global optimization of travel behavior 
across a whole city. For that purpose, the mobility behavior 
of the entire community or specific groups can be analyzed 
by aggregating mobility data across the respective users. 
B. Incentives  
One approach SUNSET employs to trigger behavior 
change is to provide incentives for specific target groups in 
specific mobility situations. Incentives may stem from all 
parties of the SUNSET ecosystem and may contain 
information about the current and future status of the 
transport infrastructure or about travel alternatives. To find 
the most effective types of incentives, we conducted an 
analysis of individual travel behavior [36]. This research 
implies that influential incentives should be based on the 
following aspects. 
 
Time: Travelers can save time, use it more efficiently, 
control it or plan trips in a better way. 
 
Money: Travelers can save money, for example with 
coupons or discounts on transportation tickets. 
 
Information: Travelers can receive useful (real-time, 
personalized) travel-related information about progress, 
accidents, alternative routes, etc. 
 
(Social) Recognition: Travelers can show (off) how 
green and healthy they are and give or receive feedback 
from other members of the community. 
 
In SUNSET, incentives appear as challenges defined by a 
set of rules that users have to fulfill to earn a reward (e.g., 
take the bike 3 times a week instead of the car to get a 
discount on bike maintenance financed by a bicycle store). 
SUNSET promotes an abstract point scheme to implement 
rewards and to facilitate the integration of 3rd party incentive 
offers. This includes the possibility to exchange point for 
other types of rewards, for example monetary discounts. 
Furthermore, points also enable users to track their progress 
and to compare it with friends and colleagues.  
To evaluate the effects of different (combinations of) 
incentives, SUNSET foresees dynamic and controllable 
incentive management. It allows for generating and placing 
incentives in real-time during the entire runtime of the 
system. This means that weak impact or unintended side 
effects of incentive offers can be detected early and incentive 
operators, such as city representatives, can alter incentives 
and the corresponding awards accordingly. For example, city 
operators can quickly set up incentives to prevent traffic 
jams after a large concert by motivating visitors to use public 
transport. In case of temporary overloading, operators can 
quickly react and issue another incentive to motivate people 
to stay in the area longer (by offering a free coffee nearby). 
C. Social Networking 
SUNSET also uses existing social networks, like 
Facebook, Foursquare, or Twitter, to motivate users to 
change 
their 
travel 
behavior. 
Their 
social 
sharing 
infrastructure is ready for users to share and advertise their 
rewards, achievements, and progress with their friends and 
other people and get feedback from them. Social networks 
can also support competition as a gamification feature [37] 
and create a more playful experience. They can be powerful 
tools for inducing behavior change as users can compete 
with 
each other by 
sharing and 
comparing 
their 
achievements. Social networks can also trigger conformance 
to group behavior, especially within a community of people 
with similar goals and interests. 
IV. 
TRIPZOOM 
The tripzoom system is a concrete implementation of the 
general SUNSET approach and consists of three parts: a 
mobile application (app) that encourages users to improve 
their mobility behavior, a Web portal that introduces 
tripzoom to novel users, and a city dashboard that allows 
providers to manage tripzoom and its different features. 
A. Mobile App 
The tripzoom app for iPhones and Android devices is the 
center of the tripzoom system and makes its main features 
available to users. To provide these features, the app uses the 
sensing capabilities of modern mobile devices (e.g., GPS, 
accelerometer) to detect, measure and track the movements 
of their users. This raw sensor data is filtered, refined, and 
finally turned into useful mobility data about places, trips, or 
transport modalities. This data can later be used to derive the 
travel behavior of users and give recommendations for how 
to improve it. The app also visualizes mobility data in 
different ways and allows users to interact with them. The 
different features for visualization and interaction are 
represented by the tabs “Community”, “Friends” and “Me” 
in the user interface of the app (Figs. 1 and 3). 

129
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Community: This tab gives an overview of how well 
the user of the app performs compared to the whole 
tripzoom community (Fig. 1, right). Four different 
visualizations illustrate this performance regarding 
saved money and CO2, health and collected points 
(Fig. 4). If a user performs better than the community 
average, the respective illustration is more positive, if he 
performs worse, it is more negative. 
 
Friends: This tab shows the list of friends in the 
tripzoom community. The list can be managed on both 
the mobile app and in the Web portal. Every list entry 
provides additional information about a specific friend, 
for example about his last trip or trip statistics.  
 
Me: This tab contains all information that is related to 
the user of the tripzoom app (Fig. 1, left). It provides 
detailed information about his mobility profile, 
including visited places, individual and frequent trips 
(“trails”) or statistics on travel modalities (Fig. 3). It also 
manages challenges that a user tries to achieve and gives 
an overview of rewards he has earned. 
 
Settings: This tab contains different options for the 
management of the tripzoom app, including settings for 
privacy, profile information, or sharing data. 
 
B. Web Portal 
The tripzoom Web portal is the main entry point into the 
tripzoom experience for new users and consists of two main 
parts: The landing page advertises tripzoom to interested 
users, explains its features, provides background information 
and links to the App Store and Google Play from where users 
can download the tripzoom app for iPhones and Android 
devices. The landing page is also a first step into the 
tripzoom community as it provides links to tripzoom pages 
on social networks (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Google+ and 
Foursquare) and shows updates from Facebook and Twitter 
feeds. In addition, a community feature provides anonymous 
and aggregated real-time statistics about the performance of 
users in the three living lab cities regarding the number of 
trips or the amount of CO2 that is saved through improved 
personal mobility. 
On the landing page, users can log in to their accounts or 
create new ones. The portal provides all functionalities to let 
users maintain their accounts, edit their profiles, or manage 
settings. As the portal puts a focus on social features, users 
can create blogs, send messages, invite friends and manage 
their relationships with them, e.g., by categorizing them as 
“family members”, “close friends” or “colleagues” (Fig. 5). 
An activity stream gives a dynamic overview of interesting 
actions that users carry out in the portal, such as creating new 
blog posts or accepting friend requests. 
 
 
Figure 4. Visualizations of user performance 
 
C. City Dashboard  
Next to the Web portal and the mobile app, tripzoom 
offers a service called city dashboard that allows city 
authorities to monitor and manage the incentives and reward 
system. They can add new incentives and specify for which 
 
 
Figure 3. Visualizing mobility data in the tripzoom app 

130
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
target group and in which situations these will be triggered. 
Furthermore, they can get an overview of the current and 
past mobility situation in the city to design suitable and 
effective incentives. The city dashboard offers a live view on 
various aggregated statistics and anonymized data of the 
users within a city with which operators can check and 
evaluate the current state and impact of incentive measures. 
This approach can be used to influence overall mobility 
behavior (e.g., fewer cars in the city) or to target specific 
goals, e.g., optimize the use of alternative travel modalities 
before and after large events. 
 
 
Figure 5. Friend management in the tripzoom Web portal 
 
V. 
ARCHITECTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION 
tripzoom follows a client-server architecture offering a 
service infrastructure that provides a set of core mobility and 
social networking services guarded by a security layer. As 
described above, users interact with one of the smartphone 
clients for iPhone or Android or with a Web user interface. 
City controllers can make use of a city dashboard view, 
which provides access to city wide mobility information and 
incentive control. Finally, 3rd party services such as the 
social networking applications Facebook and Twitter expand 
the reach of tripzoom information and allow for personalized 
sharing of mobility information. 
In the following, we provide an overview of the general 
architecture with its main components and some detail about 
the central functionality, the collection and interpretation of 
the users’ movement data to build mobility profiles. The 
tripzoom server side consists of a set of core services 
providers, Web user interfaces, and programming interfaces 
to 3rd party services, data, and applications (Fig. 6). It 
delivers core services including incentives, mobility 
monitoring, and basic social networking services.  
 
Personal Mobility Store (PMS): Collects raw 
measurements from mobile clients and preprocesses 
them as input to algorithms for mobile pattern detection. 
 
Mobility Pattern Detector (MPD): Receives data from 
the PMS and employs sophisticated algorithms to detect 
patterns for individuals, groups, places, regions, routes, 
or vehicles such as bus lines or taxis. 
 
Relation, Identity, and Privacy Manager (RIP): 
Provides a homebuilt social network implementation 
and organizes the privacy policies of users based on 
their social relations or ad-hoc groupings computed by 
the MPD. 
 
Social Network Connector (SNC): Connects the 
internal social network (RIP) with existing social 
networks such as Facebook or Twitter to facilitate user 
registration, information sharing (e.g., a notification on 
the successful completion of an incentive), importing 
contacts, or showing visualizations from the MPD. 
 
Incentives Market Place (IMP): Provides a platform to 
offer rewards, recognition or real-time feedback as 
incentives to encourage travelers to improve their travel 
behavior with respect to the system’s and an individual’s 
objectives. The IMP matches available challenges with 
mobility patterns from the MPD, individual user profiles 
and preferences from the RIP, general transport 
information, and can publish performance and events 
using the SNC. 
 
Context Harvester (CH): Harvests all information 
required to populate the user’s buddy list from all 
server-side components, such as the RIP for the user 
profile, the PMS for the last location and trips, the MPD 
for mobility patterns and the IMP for rewards gained 
with incentives. 
 
Additionally, the tripzoom server provides a Web portal 
where mobile users can view their mobility profiles online. 
3rd party applications can request access to services provided 
by the core service provider components after obtaining the 
user’s consent. The distributed system is implemented 
building on Representational State Transfer (REST) and 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). This supports loose-
coupling 
between 
components, 
clear 
application 
programming interfaces, and independence of platform and 
programming language. The security layer uses OAuth, a 
simple mechanism to publish and interact with data that 
needs access control. OAuth is a de facto standard used by 
many systems such as Facebook or Twitter. The tripzoom 
social network features such as the Social Network 
Connector build on the open source social networking engine 
ELGG [38]. Using such a platform has the advantage that 
users are not required to use a specific network and it 
simplifies the integration with other functionalities that the 
portal and the mobile application offer. 
The mobile devices of tripzoom users serve as clients to 
provide mobility data and to present transport information 
and incentives to guide the mobile user’s travel behavior. 
Correspondingly, the mobile client comprises components 
for mobile sensing, graphical user interfaces and secure 
communication with the server (Fig. 6). The sensing 
component is responsible for gathering mobility sensing data 
from sensors, to preprocess the data thereby removing 
redundant and low quality items, and then to upload them to 
the tripzoom server. Some sensing data elements such as 
location and battery level can be obtained from onboard 

131
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mobile device sensors. Other data can be incorporated from 
external sensors, such as step counters or bike sensors. 
Currently, the tripzoom app supports a range of sensors 
based on the ANT+ protocol such as the Fitbit Tracker [39] 
or the Wahoo Cycling Speed/Cadence Sensor [40]. There are 
four sub-components in the mobile sensing pipeline. 
 
Data Collector: Gathers raw measurements from built-
in mobile device sensors as well as externally connected 
sensors. 
 
Sensing Preprocessing: Applies algorithms to reduce 
the noise and size of the gathered data, to recognize 
stationary and travelling situations, and computes initial 
trip modalities based on the gathered data and the type 
of the corresponding sensor source.   
 
Location Updater: Decides when to upload the sensing 
data to tripzoom servers and uploads them when 
appropriate.  
 
Sensing Manager: Activates, deactivates and adjusts 
the available sensors and sampling rates to optimize 
energy consumption as well as data quality.  
 
The social and UI components provide the user interface 
showing the users’ mobility profile (mobility profile 
visualization), live status of their friends (buddy status and 
social networking), and receive incentives for a healthier and 
more cooperative mobility behavior (incentive presenter). A 
security and communication component is responsible for 
authenticating mobile users to access their sensitive personal 
mobility data and to synchronize the mobility, incentive, and 
social network data between tripzoom mobile clients and the 
tripzoom server. Upload and download links to push data to 
and query data from the tripzoom server is implemented by a 
communication manager module.  
Another important component to keep the users up-to-
date and to be able to request their feedback on the spot is 
integrated in the mobile notifications component. This is 
used to published new incentives, to inform about earned 
rewards, and to send experience sampling questions.  As it is 
based on the respective mobile operating system’s 
notification mechanism, it can deliver messages even when 
the phone is in sleep mode. 
VI. 
MOBILITY SENSING AND MINING 
tripzoom uses various technologies in mobile phones (e.g., 
GPS,  Wi-Fi, accelerometer) to detect or deduce the 4 Ws of 
personal mobility: when do people move, where (via which 
route), with whom, and using which modality (e.g., bike, 
car). While personal mobility data allows detailed, individual 
tracking, only a small part of the population can be expected 
to participate. Still, the goal is to get a comprehensive 
mobility profile per traveler (Fig. 3) covering a 24/7 period. 
The use of mobile phone sensors and battery power has to be 
carefully balanced with the measurement accuracy to be 
achieved. In the following, we provide more details about 
how tripzoom senses, gathers, and analyses data from mobile 
phone sensors keeping the additional energy consumption to 
a minimum. Fig. 7 gives an overview of the three main 
processing stages for mobility sensing and mining: 
 
Mobile Sensing: Location data are the key to construct 
a person’s mobility profile. Various data sources from a 
smartphone’s sensors need to be gathered, outliers must 
be removed, and data transmission optimized. 
 
Trip Reconstruction: This continuous but often noisy 
location data has to be categorized as a series of static 
periods and trips with potentially different travel 
modalities. To get the actual route of the trip, the 
location trace is mapped onto the road or rail network. 
 
Pattern Mining: Location points and traces are 
examined to identify frequently visited places and 
regular trails, such as commuting routes. This 
information is crucial for isolating trips that will have 
the largest impact on the user’s mobility behavior when 
changed. 
A. Mobile Sensing 
Information from mobile device sensors (e.g., GPS, Wi-
Fi, and GSM measurements) is combined into one location 
model that can deal with the varying accuracy of location 
measurements. These location signals contain a lot of noise 
and outliers. Especially, the accuracy of GSM data is usually 
low and the reported locations may be hundreds of meters 
away from the actual locations of the phone. 
 
 
Figure 6. Architecture of the tripzoom system 

132
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 7. Mobility sensing overview 
 
We designed a location update approach that combines 
location updates to the tripzoom server with noise removal 
and data reduction. For a smartphone with GPS, Wi-Fi, and 
GSM location sensors (in case of Wi-Fi and GSM, locations 
are computed by a central service provider like Google or 
Skyhook [41] based on the sensing data provided by the 
smartphone), tripzoom registers a location change listener to 
continuously receive location data. 
As shown in Fig. 8, our approach considers four 
scenarios for a location update. If, as shown in Fig. 8a, the 
new location q is far away from the old location p and the 
following location r, but the time difference is little (i.e. the 
calculated speed from p to r through q is high), the update q 
is considered an outlier. Subject to further empirical studies, 
we use 50m/s as the threshold of bad data selection. Fig. 8b 
depicts a common scenario that the new location q’s error 
range is much worse than that of p. A common example is 
that p is given by Wi-Fi or GPS, while q is a GSM location. 
Since the error ranges of p and q overlap, q will be discarded 
as a low accuracy and unnecessary location update. The 
missed location will be compensated by the map matching 
approach detailed in the next section. If the new location q is 
more accurate (as is depicted in Fig. 8c) or q’s error range 
does not overlap with the previous location p (as in Fig. 8d), 
the new location q is accepted as a good location update and 
sent to the tripzoom server for further processing. 
To keep the amount of data to be processed and 
transferred small (thus reducing energy consumption, storage 
space, and transfer times), location updates within a certain 
threshold distance are also discarded as these add little 
information for the subsequent route reconstruction.  
To implement the trip detection in a battery-efficient 
way, the tripzoom app listens to ‘significant’ location 
changes using Wi-Fi (preferred) or GSM location updates 
and only enables the battery-hungry GPS if it has reasons to 
assume that the user has left the (static) location. Attempts to 
acquire a GPS fix are kept short. If there is no fix within that 
time, the GPS is turned off and will be re-enabled only after 
some time. By varying those time intervals, a trade-off is 
made between consuming battery power and attempting to 
record the trip as detailed as possible. Our initial tests within 
a limited user community have shown that battery life can be 
brought to 20 hours on average, with quite some variations 
related to differences in coverage (GSM, GPS, etc.) and 
mobile phone use. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Location update 
 
B. Trip Reconstruction  
The task of trip reconstruction is to estimate the route 
traveled, deduce the places of origin, destination and 
intermediate stops, as well as to infer the transport modalities 
used per trip segment, based on the recorded data. Therefore, 
on the back-end, the goal is to further enhance the data, to 
apply smoothing and outlier detection to the location data, 
and to improve trip timings. To gather information on overall 
modality use and reward calculation, trips need to be stitched 
and split such that each segment covers a single modality 
only. To facilitate modality detection, each route segment is 
mapped onto the underlying infrastructure network. Our 
algorithms estimate the modalities of each trip based on the 
location measurements as well as derived parameters such as 

133
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
speed pattern, infrastructure usage, and origin and 
destination of the trip. Trip modality recognition applies 
rules to all gathered information and calculates modality 
likelihoods. For example, a trip going from one airport to 
another with an average speed above 150km/h will likely 
have been made by plane. Users travelling on roads closed 
for car traffic are likely to walk or cycle depending on their 
speed pattern, etc. Still, it is important to allow users to 
manually adapt the recognized modality, in case of any error. 
The current system has an accuracy of about 70%, which 
already saves considerable effort compared to manually 
labeling all trips and is similar to other state-of-the-art 
approaches [42]. Its algorithm works better on “walking”, 
“cycling”, “car”, “plane”, and “train” than on other 
modalities including “bus” and “tram” as these share various 
properties with similar modalities such as “car” or “train”. 
An improved approach for recognizing these modalities has 
been designed, which takes into account bus and tram stops 
as well as train stations. Trips passing along these places 
with significant differences between both trip segments, e.g., 
in speed, will be automatically split at that location, thereby 
improving the modality detection. 
Both trip reconstruction and modality detection strongly 
rely on map matching. Map matching is the process where 
the geographic trace in terms of latitude, longitude, and 
accuracy of the location measurements of a trip is mapped 
onto the infrastructure network in terms of streets, paths, 
rails, ferry, and air connections. We have made our own 
implementation based on existing open-source components 
[43], and each trip submitted to the PMS is map matched, 
resulting in a reliable estimate of which infrastructure was 
actually used to make this trip. This infrastructure usage is 
then input for the modality detection in the sense that a 
higher percentage of bus lane usage will favor the “bus” 
modality, and higher percentage of paths only suited for 
walking and cycling will decrease the likelihoods for all 
four-wheeled modalities. Discontinuities in infrastructure 
usage, like transitions between road and rails, or between 
rails and air, are proper triggers for the trip splitting 
algorithm. And the higher the quality of the information on 
the lowest trip level is, the higher will be the quality of every 
piece of (pattern, profile or community) information derived 
from all trips made in SUNSET’s living labs. 
C. Pattern mining 
To challenge travelers into new – and more optimal – 
behavior, it is very important for the tripzoom system to 
know what someone’s current mobility behavior is. Based on 
this knowledge, tripzoom can notice deviations from the 
normal routine, which might be the traveler’s response to an 
attractive incentive. This way, the effectiveness of 
tripzoom’s incentives can be measured. Personal places, 
regular trips, called trails in the following, and modality 
statistics are key components of personal mobility profiles.  
Personal places are geographical places that a traveler 
either visits frequently or for a longer period of time. These 
personal places will be automatically linked to nearby public 
places, and the traveler can also adapt naming and 
typification of these places manually. These places are then 
used to assign origin and destination to the personal trips, 
thereby adding semantics to these trips, as it will not only be 
classified as a trip from street “A” to street “B”, but as a trip, 
e.g., from “home” to “work” with the objective to “go to 
work”, or to a “shopping mall” with the objective to “go 
shopping”. Personal places are automatically detected by 
analyzing the static periods of a traveler between two trips. 
Smart smoothing is applied, and the spikes in the 2D 
geographical duration-of-stay-histogram are then recognized 
as personal places in terms of (latitude, longitude, radius). 
These are used to either update information on the previously 
detected places, or to add newly detected places. Per place, 
numerous statistics are computed and persisted, including 
absolute and relative duration of stay, and their distributions 
over the hours of the day and the days of the week (Fig. 9).  
 
 
 
Figure 9. Personal place statistics 
 
Once tripzoom has knowledge about the personal places 
of a user, it can also start deducing trails. This is done by 
clustering all detected trips with the same origin, destination, 
route, and modality. The clustering is not done on the 
geographical level, but on the level of Open Street Map [44] 
infra segments, cancelling out short detours and potentially 
missing detailed information in the beginning of the trip. All 
trails with the same origin and destination provide a good 
overview over all routes and modalities a traveler uses to get 
from that origin to that destination, and when and how often 
exactly. Furthermore, all newly detected trips are – if 
possible – assigned to one of the existing trails consumption 
if a traveler is on his way to office with a known modality 
and route for the nth time.  
The personal modality statistics provide an overview of 
how much time, distance, costs, and emissions a traveler 
spends per modality over different periods of time. This is 
done by analyzing all trips in that period of time and 
computing the total amounts per modality and other 
conditions such as whether it is rush hour or not, whether it 
is raining or not, etc. A perfect capture of a traveler’s normal 
mobility behavior can be used to add someone to the target 
group for specific incentives. With the modality statistic at 
hand, the appropriate triggers can be provided automatically 
by the tripzoom system. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The tripzoom app supports a personalized mobility 
monitoring and dynamic incentive system within a social 
network context. The major contribution of tripzoom lies in 
the combination of the following aspects:  

134
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
tripzoom implements a mobility sensing and profiling 
service that is accurate and battery friendly. This allows 
users to monitor their individual mobility behavior 24/7. 
 
tripzoom supports the operation of innovative incentive 
programs that will encourage sustainable mobility. The 
sustainability goals can be achieved through the 
adaptations in traveller behaviour regarding destination, 
timing, mode, and route choices.  
 
tripzoom provides a social networking environment that 
is attractive to the e-generation. It can be utilized to 
promote identity recognition and synergy of travellers 
on sustainable travel behaviour.  
 
The tripzoom system has the potential to meet mobility 
challenges our society is facing nowadays, with an ever 
increasing emphasis on efficiency and sustainability. The on-
going living lab experiments will not only validate the 
operational maturity of the app, but also shed light on the 
impact of tripzoom on the policy goals commonly used in 
Europe and beyond, such as congestion and emission. The 
living lab experiments [45] take place in three European 
cities, where tripzoom is put to the test in the real world: 
Enschede, the Netherlands; Gothenburg, Sweden; and Leeds, 
U.K. Participants are recruited from these cities to be active 
users of tripzoom. Mobility experts at the municipal 
governments act as living lab coordinators and determine the 
issuance of incentives among the user groups.  
The primary objective of the living labs is to evaluate the 
effectiveness of tripzoom and its incentive system and how 
much it can influence the mobility behavior of its users. The 
evaluation is based on monitoring individual changes by 
particular population subgroups in particular contexts. The 
potential impact of these changes at system level can then be 
estimated. These results will provide valuable input for the 
improvement of existing incentives and the identification of 
new ones. Besides the evaluation of incentives, the living 
labs will provide user feedback of high ecological validity 
for the operational success of tripzoom and assess the impact 
of tripzoom on local traffic policies. In the end, the living 
labs will establish a continuously growing and developing 
initiative in the cities involved, where a community of 
citizens, companies and municipalities is formed for 
realizing their objectives.   
Various issues have arisen during the development of 
tripzoom. On-going research within the SUNSET consortium 
strives for the further enhancements of the following issues.  
 
Robust Mobility Detection vs. Battery Efficiency: 
Trip sensing requires the detection of movements and 
the subsequent matching into mobility patterns. Firstly, 
the app may fail to detect the mobile phone’s movement. 
Secondly, given that some movements are registered, 
the app may not fully recognize the trip’s origin, 
destination, timing, and mode, or recognize them in the 
wrong way. There is a trade-off between detection 
accuracy and battery consumption. Our research will 
strive for a highly accurate detection system that 
consumes as little battery power as possible.  
 
Effectiveness of Incentives: Incentives provide stimuli 
to individual travelers for changing their behavior. 
Behavioural adaptation is dependent on the types and 
operational characteristics of these incentives. This 
relationship can be used to derive the most effective 
incentives, which are expected to vary depending on the 
traffic situation and the group of travellers. 
 
User Friendliness: Usability of an app strongly affects 
its attractiveness to new users as well as the retention of 
existing users. A user friendly app needs to be effective, 
efficient and satisfactory in its specified context of use. 
For tripzoom, user interface design, user documentation, 
and error prevention will be further enhanced to improve 
the user experience.  
 
Attractiveness: Participating in a living lab should be 
attractive to the average commuter and citizen. It will be 
interesting to know the share of people who want to 
contribute to a 24/7 living lab for the common good, 
especially in comparison to the share that is required to 
draw valid conclusions on city mobility as a whole. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
P. Holleis, M. Luther, G. Broll, H. Cao, J. Koolwaaij, A. 
Peddemors, P. Ebben, M. Wibbels, K. Jacobs, and S. 
Raaphorst, “tripzoom: A System to Motivate Sustainable 
Urban Mobility,” Proc. International Conference on Smart 
Systems, 
Devices 
and 
Technologies 
(SMART 
‘12), 
ThinkMind, May 2012. 
2. 
M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak, and 
R. Morris, “Smarter cities and their innovation challenges,” 
Computer, vol.44, no.6, pp.32-39, June 2011. 
3. 
Avego website. www.avego.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
4. 
WhipCar website. www.whipcar.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
5. 
Zipcar website. www.zipcar.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
6. 
Greenwheels website. www.greenwheels.com. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
7. 
Call a Bike website. www.callabike-interaktiv.de. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
8. 
Velib website. en.velib.paris.fr. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
9. 
Yokohama Bay Bike. http://docomo-cycle.jp/yokohama/top. 
Accessed: 20.12.2012 
10. G. D. Abowd, A. K. Dey, P. J. Brown, N. Davies, M. Smith, 
and P. Steggles, “Towards a Better Understanding of Context 
and Context-Awareness,” Proc. of International Symposium 
on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing (HUC '99), 
Springer-Verlag, Sep. 1999, pp. 304–307.  
11. B. J. Fogg and D. Eckles (eds.), “Mobile Persuasion: 20 
Perspectives of the Future of Behavior Change,” Stanford 
Captology Media. 
12. SUNSET project website. www.sunset-project.eu. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
13. tripzoom website. www.tripzoom.eu. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
14. Google Maps. maps.google.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
15. J. Ryder, B. Longstaff, S. Reddy, and D. Estrin, “Ambulation: 
A tool for monitoring mobility patterns over time using 
mobile phones,” Proc. of the 12th IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Computational Science and Engineering (CSE '09), IEEE 
Computer Society, 2009, pp. 927–931.  
16. S. Wang, C. Chen, and J. Ma, „Accelerometer based 
transportation mode recognition on mobile phones,” Proc. of 
the 2010 Asia-Pacific Conference on Wearable Computing 

135
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Systems (APWCS’10), IEEE Computer Society Washington, 
DC, USA, 2010, pp. 44–46.  
17. P. Siirtola and J. Röning, “User-independent human activity 
recognition using a mobile phone: Offline recognition vs. 
real-time on device recognition,” Advances in Intelligent and 
Soft Computing, volume 151, pages 617-627. 
18. J. J. Guiry, P. Van De Ven, and J. Nelson, “Orientation 
independent human mobility monitoring with an android 
smartphone,” Proc. of the IASTED International Conference 
on Assistive Technologies (AT’12), ACTA Press, 2012, pp. 
800–808.  
19. L. F. Pitt, M. Parent, I. Junglas, A. Chan, and S. Spyropoulou, 
„Integrating the smartphone into a sound environmental 
information systems strategy: Principles, practices and a 
research agenda,” Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
volume 20, 2011, pp. 27–37. 
20. S-J. Hong and K. Y. Tam. “Understanding the Adoption of 
Multipurpose Information Appliances: The Case of Mobile 
Data Services,” Information Systems Research, volume 17, 
number 2, 2006, pp. 162–179. 
21. N. D. Chan and S. A. Shaheen, “Ridesharing in North 
America: Past, Present, and Future,” The Transportation 
Research Board Annual Meeting 2011. Transport Reviews, 
volume 32, number 32, 2012, pp. 93–112. 
22. DB Navigator website. www.bahn.de/iphone. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
23. Reserobot website. www.reseplanerare.resrobot.se. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
24. W. B. Teeuw, J. Koolwaaij, and A. Peddemors, “User 
behaviour captured by mobile phones,” Proc. of the 
Workshop on Interactive Human Behavior Analysis in Open 
or Public Spaces (INTERHUB’11), Springer Berlin, 2012, 
pp.81-90. 
25. S. Böhm, J. Koolwaaij, M. Luther, B. Souville, M. Wagner, 
and M. Wibbels, “Introducing IYOUIT,” In Proc. of the Int. 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC’08), Springer, 2008, pp. 
804-817.  
26. TravelHack 
website. 
www.travelhack.se. 
Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
27. A. Hjalmarsson and D. Rudmark, “Designing Digital 
Innovation Contests,” In K. Peffers, M. Rothenberger, B. 
Kuechler (Eds.) Proc. of the 7th Int. Conf. on Design Science 
Research in Information Systems: advances in theory and 
practice (DESRIST’12). LNCS volume 7286, pages 9–27. 
Springer Berlin, 2012.  
28. Smarter Choices – Department for Transport website. 
www.dft.gov.uk/topics/sustainable/smarter-choices. 
Accessed: 20.12.2012 
29. Spitsmijden 
website. 
www.spitsmijden.nl. 
Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
30. M. C. J. Bliemer and D. H. van Amelsfort, “Rewarding 
instead of charging road users: a model case study 
investigating effects on traffic conditions,” European 
Transport, number 44, 2010, pp. 23–40. 
31. A. Binsted and R. Hutchins, “The role of social networking 
sites in changing travel behaviours,” TRL Published Project 
Report, number PPP599, TRL, 2012. 
32. D. Kusumastuti (editor), “Impact of Incentives,” EU Project 
SUNSET, Deliverable D3.3. 2012. 
33. EC-ISM European Commission – Information Society and 
Media. Living Labs for User-driven Open Innovation – An 
Overview of the Living Labs Methodology, Activities and 
Achievements. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications 
of the European Communities, 2009. http://ec.europa.eu/ 
informationsociety/activities/livinglabs/docs/brochure_jan09_
en.pdf. Accessed: 20.12.2012. 
34. M. Eriksson, V.-P. Niitamo, and S. Kulkki, „State-of-the-art 
in utilizing Living Labs approach to user-centric ICT 
innovation - a European approach,” www.vinnova.se/upload/ 
dokument/Verksamhet/TITA/StateoftheartLivingLabs 
Eriksson2005.pdf. Accessed 20.12.2012. 
35. Nationale 
Databank 
Wegverkeersgegevens 
website. 
www.ndw.nu/en. 20.12.2012 
36. A. Ma 
(editor), 
“Feasible 
and 
Potentially 
Successful 
Incentives,” EU Project SUNSET, Deliverable D3.4, 2012.  
37. G. Zichermann, “Gamification by Design,” O'Reilly, 2011. 
38. Elgg – Open Source Social Networking Engine website. 
http://elgg.org. 20.12.2012 
39. Fitbit website. www.fitbit.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012. 
40. Wahoo Fitness website, Wahoo Cycling Speed/Cadence 
Sensor. www.wahoofitness.com. Accessed: 20.12.2012 
41. Skyhook website. www.skyhookwireless.com. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
42. V. Manzoni, 
D. Maniloff, 
K. Kloeckl, 
and 
C. Ratti, 
“Transportation mode identification and real-time CO2 
emission estimation using smartphones,” Technical report, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 2010. 
43. Y. Lou, Ch. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Xie, W. Wang, and Y. 
Huang, 
„Map-matching 
for 
low-sampling-rate 
GPS 
trajectories,” Proc. of 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. on 
Advances in Geographic Information Systems (GIS’09), 
ACM New York, USA, 2009, pp. 352–361. 
44. OpenStreetMap website. www.openstreetmap.org. Accessed: 
20.12.2012 
45. M. Meeuwissen (editor), “Living Lab Plan,” EU Project 
SUNSET, Deliverable D7.1, 2012. 
46. K. Lin, A. Kansal, D. Lymberopoulos, and F. Zhao, “Energy-
accuracy trade-off for continuous mobile device location,” In 
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Mobile Systems, Applications and 
Services (MobiSys’10), ACM, 2010, pp. 285–298. 
 

