Quantitative Approaches for Detecting Early Childhood Developmental Disorders 
using Wireless Sensors and Mobility Data 
Rama Krishna Thelagathoti and Hesham H. Ali 
College of Information Science and Technology 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68182, USA 
e-mail: rthelagathoti@unomaha.edu and  hali@unomaha.edu 
 
 
Abstract— As estimated by the World Health Organization 
(WHO), 5% of the world’s children population are diagnosed 
with an early developmental disability such as autism and 
cerebral palsy. State-of-the-art clinical diagnostic procedures 
are predominantly dependent on observational assessment by a 
trained physician. Physicians assess the severity of the 
disability by observing the child as well as by considering the 
feedback from the parents. However, as the final decision is 
completely dependent on the observer the procedure becomes 
subjective and does not provide an accurate decision. 
Moreover, such approaches are time-intensive and require 
enormous human effort. Hence, it is essential to explore the 
alternative opportunities that provide an accurate assessment.  
Recent studies show that abnormal motor skills are often the 
initial signs of later developmental disorders. This paves the 
way for exploring alternative opportunities to identify the 
disease in the early stages of childhood.  Although different 
methods for collecting neonate motor data have been explored 
in the past, improvements in sensing technologies facilitate 
convenient as well as unobtrusive methods to collect the 
mobility data even from the infants and be able to detect the 
abnormality in the motor movements. Since wearable devices 
are tiny and easy to use in collecting motor data from neonates, 
it is feasible to distinguish abnormal motor development from 
normal motor development. Thus, mobility data collection 
from an infant using a wearable sensor is beneficial in the early 
diagnosis of developmental disabilities like cerebral palsy. Our 
main contribution to this study is to present the analysis of 
various wearable sensor-based motor assessment methods in 
predicting childhood disorders.  This article first presents some 
of the existing clinical diagnostic procedures and then 
elaborates on mobility-based quantitative assessment methods. 
Furthermore, this document presents various crucial mobility 
parameters associated with identifying childhood disorders. 
Keywords- mobility; childhood developmental disorder; wearable 
sensor. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
     In recent years, the prevalence of developmental disorders 
among children is rising at an alarming rate. Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Cerebral Palsy (CP), and 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are the 
most common disorders that infants are affected in the USA 
[1]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 
around 5% of the world's children population aged under 14 
years are afflicted with a moderate to severe disability [2]. 
Early childhood developmental disorder is one of the 
primary causes of children being referred to primary 
healthcare clinics [3]. Chronic or perpetual delays in one or 
more motor functions of the child can be treated as a 
development disorder [4]. The onset of the disability may 
occur regardless of racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups. 
The manifestation of motor disability is caused by atypical 
brain development. Yet, specific reasons for atypical brain 
development are not known [5]. Research shows that preterm 
birth and pregnancy complications that occur in the perinatal 
period may affect the brain. Consequently, babies born in 
this category are at risk for neurodevelopmental impairments 
[6]. Additionally, low birth weight and infections during 
pregnancy are a high risk for several developmental 
disabilities. According to the study conducted by National 
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) in the United States, the 
growth of childhood disorders has increased to 17% between 
the years 2009 and 2017. Also, one out of six children 
between the age groups 3 and 17 years have one or more 
disabilities [7]. Furthermore, ADHD, ASD, and CP are the 
common disorders found among children and boys were 
more likely to be in the vulnerable group than girls [4]. 
 
Although there is no standard laboratory test for 
identifying developmental disability in high-risk neonates, 
several researchers have proposed diagnostic guidelines for 
each disorder individually. For instance, Case-Smith 
introduced Posture and Fine Motor Assessment of Infants 
(PFMAI) for identifying developmental delays by observing 
neonate’s motor movements [8]. Similarly, Prechtl’s 
assessment for detecting CP and The Alberta Infant Motor 
Scale (AIMS) for assessing gross motor development are 
some of the observation-based diagnostic methods [9][10].  
Nevertheless, most of these procedures offer subjective 
evaluation and are solely judged by a trained practitioner. 
Furthermore, children need to be taken to specially designed 
laboratories multiple times. Therefore, it is crucial to 
implement an objective technique that can accurately 
identify the developmental disability.  
 
The evolution of fine and gross motor skills in children 
with atypical neurodevelopment is more cramped than in 
children with typical neurodevelopment. As a result, affected 
children do not acquire smooth limb movements but rather 
rigid and nonsynchronous [11]. Often, delays in acquiring 
sufficient motor movements are the early signs of later 
42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

developmental impairment. Hence, an infant’s motor 
assessment can be a potential parameter for the early 
diagnosis of the disability. Moreover, significant research is 
going on towards the assessment of an infant’s motor 
function as a method to detect developmental disorders, such 
as CP, and ASD [4][7][11]. The sooner the disorder is 
diagnosed the better the possibility for effective intervention 
therapy. 
The main motivation of this study is to describe some of 
the existing clinical procedures to determine the onset of the 
disability. Then elaborate on wearable sensor-based 
diagnostic methods in identifying the various developmental 
disorders by utilizing the motor movements of infants. In this 
document mobility and motor, movements are used 
interchangeably. The remaining sections of the document are 
structured as follows. In Section II, the study methodology is 
discussed. Section III explains various qualitative assessment 
methods. different types of wearable devices used for 
mobility data collection are elaborated in section IV. In 
section V, the mobility-based quantitative diagnostic 
approaches are presented. Important mobility parameters that 
have been explored by the scientific community are 
highlighted in section VI. Under Section VII, various aspects 
of mobility-based assessment methods are elaborated. 
Finally, Section VIII concludes with a summary of this work. 
 
II. 
METHOD 
In the past decade, there has been a substantial rise in the 
quantitative assessment of motor dysfunction by attaching 
tiny sensors to neonates’ upper and lower limbs. Abnormal 
movements are characterized by repetitive, stereotyped 
movements, rigid movements due to lack of smoothness, and 
unusual gait patterns [6]. These atypical patterns are 
distinguishable by processing the mobility data collected 
from the sensors attached to a child’s limb. Researchers have 
also concluded that abnormal movements are strongly 
correlated to their abnormal brain development [12]. The 
goal of motor assessment is to quantify the degree and range 
of motor disability and predict whether the child falls under 
the stage of Typical Development (TD) or At Risk (AR).  
The primary purpose of this document is to review the 
various mobility assessment methods that were employed for 
diagnosing early childhood developmental disorders. At first 
subjective methods are discussed then wearable sensor-based 
assessment methods are elaborated. For this study, literature 
has been chosen, which includes different aspects of early 
childhood disorders. The literature study criteria are 
explained in detail in Fig. 1.  
III. 
BACKGROUND 
 
This section illustrates various subjective methods that 
detect developmental disability in early childhood. These 
methods can be broadly categorized into two types: 
milestone-based 
assessment 
methods 
and 
observer-
dependent methods. To discuss further three generalized 
developmental stages are defined. 
 
Figure 1:  Study procedure 
 
At-Risk (AR): Neonates born preterm and with pregnancy 
complications are considered At Risk (AR) of developing 
aberrant motor function and eventually likely to be 
diagnosed with developmental disorders including CP [4]. 
 
Typically developing (TD): Infants with normal limb 
movements are classified as Typical Developing (TD) [4]. 
 
Neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD): Children who are 
already diagnosed with any developmental disorders like 
CP, ASD, and ADHD are categorized as infants with NDD 
[13]. 
A. Milestone-based assessment Methods 
Milestone for a child is considered as what most babies 
do by that age. Milestone-based assessment is the simplest 
method that facilitates in early detection of the disability. 
The development in the early infantile years is crucial for 
the lifelong growth of every child. Therefore, the first 36 
months are very important to check and recognize if there is 
any lag in acquiring any development [14]. Typical growing 
children develop in five major categories: (1) cognitive, (2) 
social and emotional, (3) speech and language, (4) fine 
motor skills, and (5) gross motor skills. Delay in acquiring 
one or more of such skills can be considered a 
developmental disorder.    
According to the CDC [4], TD child reaches certain 
developmental milestones as they grow. For instance, in 
most, the 6 months old babies begin to roll over and 
recognize their parent's faces. Likewise, a 12-month-old 
toddler should be able to sit without any help and exhibit 
variable limb movements. However, AR infants lag in 
acquiring one or more such skills. Trained physicians and 
practitioners recommend using developmental surveillance 
and screening process as an early intervention to identify the 
disabilities [14].  It is a longitudinal and continuous process 
where infants’ growth is carefully observed. Often, 
clinicians assess the type and severity of the disability by 
integrating the feedback questionnaire from parents as well 
as the child. Though it is the initial diagnostic method used 
by the practitioners, it is time-intensive and requires 
continuous monitoring of the child for several days. 
43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Moreover, the probability of missing certain guidelines is 
very high. Hence, clinicians are interested in developing 
standardized clinical guidelines that can identify the 
disorder as well as quantify the severity of the disorder.     
B. Observation-dependent Methods 
    Traditional assessment is heavily dependent on visual 
observation by a trained physician. Sometimes physicians 
prepare a questionnaire and assess the level of abnormality 
by integrating the feedback from the parents and/or the 
child. In such a scenario, parents might be unaware of 
specific symptoms that the child is suffering, and the child 
may not be able to give precise feedback as adults. Hence, 
the decision-making becomes more complex. Additionally, 
existing clinical methods, such as analysis of neuroimaging 
require a trained consultant physician. But reliability and 
accuracy are largely depending on the expertise of the 
consultant. Besides the inherent complexity in judging the 
presence of the disorder, estimating the severity of the 
illness is far more challenging. The inception of qualitative 
assessment of the infant’s nervous system is indeed a 
breakthrough in the diagnosis of developmental disorders. 
    The Alberta Infant Motor Scale (AIMS) [9] is one of the 
early observational scales to assess the neonate’s gross 
motor function. In this method, a rating will be calculated 
based on the infant’s performance in weight-bearing, 
posture, and antigravity movements. This method can be 
used only for babies under 18 months of age and the 
observer needs extensive training in the respective 
assessment. Prechtl et al. [10] proposed another observation-
based systematic methodology termed General Movement 
Assessment (GMA) for diagnosing CP. They have 
postulated that the quality of General Movements (GMs) is 
cramped and lacks smoothness over time due to impaired 
brain development. The absence of GMs may be observed 
in the video recording of an infant. This approach also does 
necessitate training by experts. In another experiment [15], 
Heineman et al. developed a video-based mobility 
evaluation technique, the Infant Motor Profile (IMP), that 
can differentiate between kids between TD and AR 
neurodevelopment. The downside of all these methods is 
that it involves an enormous human effort to examine the 
video recording for accurate prediction. Melbourne 
Assessment of Unilateral Upper Limb Function-2 (MA-2) is 
a standard reference tool to measure the quality of upper 
limb movements in kids with atypical brain growth aged 
between 2 to 15 years [16]. Moreover, scoring is estimated 
based on how a child performs 14 test activities including 
pickup and release of some objects. Likewise, there are 
numerous subjective motor assessment methods including 
the Bayley Scale of Infant and Toddler Development [17], 
Neuro Sensory Motor Development Assessment (NSMDA) 
[18], and Test of Infant Motor Performance (TIMP) [19]. 
     However, rating-dependent approaches have various 
shortcomings. 
(1) 
Assessment 
is 
entirely 
observer-
dependent. Consequently, there is a high probability that the 
observer is wrong in his estimation. (2) Evaluation is time-
intensive and consumes immense human effort. (3) The 
observer is required to be trained in advance with the 
necessary skills to make an optimal conclusion. After the 
training, it takes substantial time to acquire proficiency in 
the diagnosis. (4) Patients must visit the physicians and 
laboratories frequently. (5) Often, laboratories must have a 
specialized environment and equip with expensive tools. (6) 
Monitoring the rehabilitation of the affected infants is 
challenging because of the dependency on the observer. (7) 
Children’s attention span is very limited, and so they can 
easily get annoyed with cumbersome instructions. Hence, to 
overcome these limitations, it is essential to have an 
observer-independent approach.  
IV. 
MOBILITY AND DEVICES 
Characterizing the atypical motor movements including 
repetitive and stereotypical patterns is crucial in the early 
diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disease. A qualitative 
examination of neonate movements necessitates a special 
skill set and the outcome varies from observer to observer 
[20]. To fill the gap, sophisticated systems, such as stereo 
photogrammetric movement analysis, gaze-tracking devices, 
and 3D motion tracking with passive markers [21] were 
introduced. Yet, these methods require an expensive 
structured setup with many wires and sensors to monitor the 
baby's physical movements. Wearable technology made it 
possible to collect the movement data by attaching tiny 
sensors to the body parts of the infants without major 
disturbance. 
In recent times, Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), also 
known as inertial sensors have been increasingly explored 
by numerous researchers. Typical IMUs comprise of 
accelerometer and gyroscope and occasionally include a 
magnetometer. Nevertheless, many scholars have employed 
an accelerometer-based sensor to acquire infants' arm and 
leg movements [6][22][23]. Wearable instruments are 
suitable for monitoring the limb movements of infants 
because of their flexibility in sensor placement, adaptability, 
and power efficiency. Since the human subject is an infant, 
sensors are usually embedded in an appropriate peripheral, 
such as leg warmers [12], and wristwatches [24]. In some 
studies, skin-adhesive sensors have also been used [25].  
Although the device has a variety of sensing technology, the 
aim is to collect the movement data unobtrusively without 
creating considerable discomfort for the babies. Therefore, 
wearable sensors are efficient for the objective assessment 
of children's movements. Table 1 shows various wearable 
sensor devices employed in collecting mobility data from 
children. 
Nowadays, wearable devices are compact and come with 
internal storage as well as a provision to connect and upload 
the data to cloud storage on the go. Most of the devices are 
battery-operated, eliminating cumbersome wires and cables. 
When multiple sensors are included in the data collection 
process, then all the sensors must be actively synchronized  
44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

throughout the duration. It then allows data to be collected 
continuously from all sensors, even outside the laboratory 
environment, such as at home. Primarily, these devices are 
used to record upper and lower limbs that will help 
characterize the disorder. Although numerous instruments, 
such as gaze tracking devices, are available to collect 
mobility data, not all may be suitable for infants. 
Furthermore, setting up such a piece of equipment requires a 
well-structured 
and 
perfectly 
controlled 
laboratory 
environment. The wearable devices are an ideal replacement 
for infants that can facilitate accurate measurement of motor 
movements [21]. In addition to this, wearable devices are 
wireless and create a friendly ecosystem for little kids. 
Wearable devices come at affordable prices that make it 
easy to attach multiple sensors simultaneously to record all 
the baby's movements. Fig. 2 presents the convenient body 
locations where sensors can attach. And different impaired 
movements are shown that are characterized as aberrant 
motor movements exhibited by the disordered children.  
V. 
MOBILITY-BASED ASSESSMENT METHODS 
Measuring abnormality from the child’s movements is an 
important clinical task as it reduces the significant human 
effort in identifying the impaired motor skills. Further, it 
helps physicians to come to an objective conclusion. With 
the latest advancements in wearable devices, it has become 
easy to attach them to infants and collect the data 
continuously. Various quantitative motor assessment studies 
are summarized in Table 2. This study includes the research 
that has employed wearable sensors and finds the 
quantitative 
measurement 
of 
the 
children's 
motor 
movements.  
A few scholars had endeavored and developed 
unobtrusive and non-invasive wearable instruments suitable 
for infants and toddlers. As early as 2008, Campolo et al. 
[21] prototyped a wearable sensing system for monitoring 
the upper and lower limb spontaneous movements of 
premature babies. Their sensing instrument can be used in 
infants as young as 2 weeks. They have hypothesized that 
abnormal movements are the early signs of later 
developmental disorders, such as ASD. Redd et al. [25] 
carried a pilot project on a single healthy born infant to 
assess the General Movements (GMs) and Fidgety 
Movements (FMs) [10]. They have built a wearable 
monitoring system with an array of sensors to acquire the 
infant movements for both the short and long-term. Their 
results show that the absence of variability in GMs and FMs 
might be the early sign for the manifestation of 
neurodevelopmental disorders, such as CP. Nonetheless, they 
have experimented with only one healthy infant.  
Reference 
Sensor name 
Components 
Make 
Sensor placement Type of data 
Type of 
movement 
[6] 
Cloth band 
sensors 
Accelerometer 
Custom 
designed 
Wrist, ankles, 
and forehead 
Raw sensor data 
Limb and head 
movements 
[12,26,28, 
27, 31] 
APDM Opal 
sensor 
3D-accelerometer, 3D-
gyroscope, and 3D-
magnetometer 
APDM 
Left and right 
ankle 
Raw sensor data 
from all directions 
Leg 
movements 
[21] 
WAMS 
Inertial-magnetic MAG3 
sensor, Analog-to-Digital 
Converter 
Custom 
designed 
Wrist and ankle 
Raw channels 
converted by ADC 
Wrist and 
ankle 
movements 
[23] 
ETH orientation 
sensor 
Accelerometer and 
Gyroscope 
Custom 
designed 
Predefined body 
movements 
Raw sensor data 
Limb and head 
movements 
[24] 
Bracelet sensors 
Accelerometer 
Custom 
designed 
Both wrists 
Raw sensor data 
Right and left 
wrist 
movements 
[25] 
MetamotionC 
sensing board 
Accelerometer, Gyroscope, 
and Magnetometer. 
Mbientlab 
Wrist, ankles, 
and forehead 
Raw sensor data 
Limb and head 
movements 
[29] 
Actiwatch 
Modified Accelerometer 
Mini Mitter 
Right ankle 
Activity count 
Right leg 
movements 
[30] 
Axes of the 
accelerometer 
Accelerometer 
Freescale 
semiconductor 
Hands and 
ankles 
Raw sensor data 
Both hands and 
leg movements 
TABLE 1: Various wearable sensors employed in collecting the mobility data 
45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

   
Reference Purpose  
Sensor  
Sensor 
placement 
Wear time 
(in hours) Setting  Disorder  Movement type Subjects  Age (in 
months) 
[6] 
Predict impaired 
motor activity 
Accelerometer  Head, ankles, 
and wrist 
1 
Clinical  CP 
Spontaneous 
head, leg and 
arm movements 
10 AR 
<3 
[12] 
Classify TD and 
AR 
IMU 
Ankles  
8-13 
Natural   NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
19 AR 
1-15 
[21] 
Early diagnosis  
IMU 
Wrist and 
ankles 
NA 
Clinical   ASD 
Spontaneous leg 
and arm 
movements 
NA 
NA 
[22] 
Measure 
variability of 
movements 
IMU 
Ankles 
8-13  
Natural  NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
11 TD 
20 AR 
6-9 
[23] 
Predict motor 
disorder 
Accelerometer 
and gyroscope  
Trunk, upper 
and lower 
limbs  
4 
clinical CP, 
stroke  
Predefined body 
movements 
4 AR 
9-12 years 
[24] 
Clinical vs motor 
assessment 
Accelerometer 
wrist 
75 
Natural  CP 
Spontaneous 
upper arm 
movements 
26 TD 
26 AR 
1-17 years 
 
[25] 
Diagnosis CP 
IMU 
Forehead, 
ankles, and 
wrist 
1 min 
Clinical CP 
Spontaneous 
head, leg, and 
arm movements 
1 TD 
3-5 
[26] 
Classify TD and 
AR 
IMU 
Ankles 
8-13 
Natural NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
19 AR 
1-16 
[27] 
Quantify leg 
movements 
Inertial sensor 
Ankles  
8-13  
Natural  NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
1-12 
[28] 
Diagnose ASD 
IMU 
Ankles  
8-12 
Natural  ASD 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
5 
3-12 
[29] 
Assess leg 
movements 
accelerometer  
Right ankle  
48 hrs. x 4 
times 
Natural DS 
Spontaneous 
right leg 
movements 
8 TD 
8 AR 
3-6 
[30] 
Diagnose CP 
Accelerometer  Ankles and 
wrist 
20 min 
Clinical  CP 
Spontaneous leg 
and arm 
movements 
19 TD 
4 AR 
<10 
[31] 
Number of days 
required for 
assessment 
IMU 
Ankles 
5 days 
Natural  NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
16 AR 
2-14 
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF MOBILITY-BASED ASSESSMENT METHODS 
Figure 2: Wearable sensors based quantitative diagnosis 
46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 Typically developing (TD) neonates demonstrate rich leg 
movements by embedding tiny sensors inside custom-
designed leg warmers. Moreover, the researchers aimed to 
classify the group of infants into TD or AR from the day-
long (8-13 hours) leg movements data. They also analyzed 
sensor data recorded from AR infants and were able to 
distinguish between AR babies with poor and good 
development. In [26], Goodfellow et al. developed binary 
classification algorithms to predict whether the child is TD 
or AR.  In this approach, a group of 22 infants aged between 
0 to 12 months was divided into two groups 0-6 months and 
6-12 months. Then, the researchers extracted two sets of 
features for each group and found a significant difference 
between TD and AR mobility data of 0-6 months than from 
6-12 months. Their findings prove the importance of early 
childhood diagnosis. Often, it is critical to categorize 
between TD and AR during early infancy. Abrishami et al. 
[26] quantified infants' spontaneous groups as 0-6 months 
and 6-12 months. Then, extracted two sets of features for 
each group and found a significant difference between TD 
and AR mobility data of 0-6 months than from 6-12 months. 
Their findings prove the prominence of early childhood 
diagnosis. 
Similarly, numerical estimation of abnormal mobility has 
also been studied in the past as it helps in distinguishing both 
healthy and impaired infants. One of the early experiments 
[6], utilized a simple accelerometer sensor and was able to 
collect the data from the premature neonates recruited from 
the NICU, who are potentially at risk of CP.  Then, by 
extracting features and applying the machine learning 
technique including Decision Trees. The researchers were 
able to recognize the abnormal movements namely 
Cramped-Synchronized General Movements (CSGMs) [10]. 
According to Prechtl’s assessment for CP [27], the presence 
of CSGM is an early marker for lateral developmental 
disorders. Wilson et al. [28], formulated Motion Complexity 
(MC) by measuring the variability from the infant’s leg 
movement data.  They conjectured that infant with lower MC 
is at risk (AR) of disabilities, such as ASD. Moreover, AR 
subjects compose lower motion complexity compared to TD 
subjects because their actions are repetitive and stereotyped.  
Smith et al. [22] proposed Sample Entropy (SampEn) as a 
function to measure the variation and repetition in kids' leg 
movements. Additionally, SampEn is lower for infants with 
developmental delays than normal infants. A different 
experiment carried out by Hoyt et al. [24], assessed only 
upper limb movements and recommended two metrics: The 
Use Ratio (UR) to measure the quality of using both arms 
and the Mono Arm Use Index (MAUI) for quantifying 
intensity and frequency of each arm. Their results signify 
that UR and MAUI are lower for typically developing 
children and higher for children with developmental delays. 
Furthermore, many scientists are interested in studies 
specific to a particular disorder like CP and Down Syndrome 
(DS). McKay et al. [29] conducted a mobility assessment of 
a group of infants with DS and without DS. Using an activity 
monitor attached to the baby’s right ankle measured leg 
activity and sleep patterns at 3,4,5, and 6 months. Their 
statistical analysis observed a significant group difference 
between the infants with DS and without DS with respect to 
their motor components. Strohrmann et al. [23] acquired 
mobility data from four children (2 diagnosed with CP and 2 
with stroke) undergoing rehabilitation. In this work, they 
were invited to perform a set of predefined motor tasks and 
the progress in rehabilitation therapy was measured using 
extracted features including smoothness in the upper and 
lower limb movements, and coordination between both arms. 
Another study [30], proposed an objective assessment 
methodology to diagnose CP from the spontaneous leg and 
arm movements of newborn babies. Their method is built on 
a decision tree classifier algorithm and achieved ~90% 
accuracy. Further, they have posited that their methodology 
can be easily adapted by the clinical practitioners and helps 
to monitor the progress of rehabilitation.   
     A different experiment performed by Deng et al. [31] 
assessed the motor behavior of neonates to determine the 
minimum number of days required to characterize the ideal 
daily leg movement patterns of children who are at risk of 
developmental disorders. They hypothesized that two days of 
leg movement data is sufficient to accurately predict 
developmental disorders among the infants at risk.   Smith et 
al. [27] developed an algorithm to measure the full day of leg 
activity and attempted to identify the relationship between 
the number of leg movements and the onset of walking. 
However, their test produced surprisingly unexplainable 
results as infants with a smaller number of leg movements 
began walking early than the babies with a greater number of 
leg movements. 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
     This section presents the various aspects of mobility-
based assessment approaches and discusses their strengths 
and weaknesses.   
A. Mobility Parameters 
Analysis of mobility data is central to the identification of 
abnormal motor movements, which are characterized as 
developmental 
disorders. 
Identification 
of 
abnormal 
movements begins with the collection of mobility data using 
wearable sensor devices. The raw sensor data generated by 
these devices are preprocessed to eliminate noise and 
unwanted information. Furthermore, the sensor data will be 
cleaned and transformed, which will be consumed by the 
feature extraction phase. Features are selected in a way that 
represents motor movements that allow quantifying the 
intensity of abnormality. Table 3 lists the various mobility 
parameters chosen by the researcher in identifying the 
abnormal movements.  
From Table 3, although the objective of each study is to 
quantify the limb, wrist, ankle, and head movements to 
identify the abnormal movements, all the researchers have 
not used the same set of features. For instance, studies [12] 
and [28] have employed accelerometer-based sensors and 
extracted the duration of each ankle movement, peak, and 
average acceleration of a movement. On the other hand, a 
researcher in a study [6] has measured the maximum and 
47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

minimum acceleration of body movements. However, most 
of the researchers utilized mobility data from the wrist and 
ankles. The duration of the movement is another common 
parameter 
utilized 
by 
most 
of 
the 
studies 
[7][12][28][30][31]. The motivation behind using duration 
as a feature is to quantify the difference between healthy 
and 
abnormal 
motor 
development. 
Children 
with 
developmental 
disorders 
perform 
lower-duration 
movements while healthy kids perform longer-duration 
movements. Unlike in other experiments, [23] did not 
extract the mobility features directly from the raw sensor 
data. Rather, subjects were asked to perform a set of 
predefined tasks, and then features are computed from the 
data 
recorded 
from 
those 
predefined 
actions 
and 
movements.  
B. Challenges in Data Collection 
Infant’s motor assessment using wearable sensors has 
been increasing over the last decade because of their 
miniature size and wearability. Also, sensors can be attached 
to any part of the body and have the ability to function in 
both a laboratory setting and a home environment. 
Nonetheless, unlike adults collecting data from kids is not as 
easy for several reasons. (1) Preparing an infant for data 
collection is challenging because they are fragile and require 
utmost care. If it is a lab environment, then room temperature 
must be adjusted to the comfort of the child [30]. 
Additionally, the parent must ensure essential daily routines, 
such as breastfeeding and diapering. So, the child is ready 
and performs desired spontaneous movements. (2) Children's 
behavior is unpredictable, so sensors can fall off or become 
loose, which can eventually add noise to the data stream. For 
this reason, in a clinical setting or home environment, either 
a parent or a caregiver must always be present to take care of 
the sensor positing during the data collection period [31][32]. 
(3) size and placement of the sensor are important to reduce 
the irritation to the child.  The ongoing research shows that 
the average weight of each sensor ranges between 10 grams 
to 30 grams [12][24][25]. However, the sensor's positioning 
has limited choices as it needs to be placed on the arms and 
legs to measure the limb movements.  
C. Wear Time 
Although there is no evidence for precise sensor wear 
time required for accurate data analysis, numerous studies 
collect the data for more than one hour for an objective 
conclusion.  As wearable technology is advancing, it is now 
possible that sensors can be placed in diversified products 
like leg warmers [12], which are comfortable for the infant.  
Hence, some scholars have embedded sensors in the form of 
socks, and wristwatches and were able to collect the data for 
2 to 5 days. Nonetheless, according to the study conducted 
by Deng et al. [31], two days of sensor data of infants is 
sufficient to differentiate between typical and atypical 
movements pattern. Yet, further investigations are necessary 
to minimize the wear time.  
Reference 
Mobility parameters 
Purpose of 
assessment 
Type of movements 
 
[6] 
Maximum and minimum of the upper and lower body, 
maximum of all limbs, Pearson correlation between left 
and right leg 
Predict abnormal 
motor function 
wrist, ankles, and head 
movements 
 
[7,30] 
Skewness, cross-correlation, Area out of standard 
deviation of moving average and area differing from 
moving average, periodicity, the Detection rate 
Diagnose CP 
Ankle and wrist movements 
 
[12, 28] 
Duration of a movement, peak acceleration, and average 
acceleration during a movement. 
Diagnose ASD, 
Classify TD & AR 
Left and right ankle movements 
 
[23] 
Task completion time, Mean value of movement intensity, 
movement intensity variation, dominant frequency, 
smoothness of movements, average rotation energy, range 
of angular velocity, synchrony of arm movements 
Predict motor 
disability 
Movement data from predefined 
tasks 
 
[25] 
Fidgety movements (FMs) and general movements (GMs) Diagnose CP 
wrist, ankles, and head 
movements 
 
[26] 
movement count, movement duration, average 
acceleration, and peak acceleration 
Classify TD & AR 
Left and right ankle movements 
 
[27] 
Acceleration and angular velocity 
Quantify leg 
movements 
Left and right ankle movements 
 
[31] 
Average leg movement rate, movement duration, average 
acceleration, peak acceleration 
Minimum number of 
days required for 
diagnosis 
Left and right ankle movements 
 
Table 3: Summary of mobility parameters 
48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Accuracy and Validation 
Accuracy validation of an infant’s motor assessment 
method is crucial for decision-making in clinical research. 
Irrespective of the methodology used for the assessment, it is 
essential to compare the results with ground truth to measure 
the accuracy of the model. Researchers are primarily 
depending on two types of accuracy validation approaches in 
the context of an infant’s motor assessment. Each method 
differs by ground truth. (1) In this approach, the sensor data 
collection procedure is video recorded such that normal and 
abnormal movements are annotated by experts. This 
annotated data is used as ground truth to validate the 
accuracy [12][22][23][24][27]. Undoubtedly, it is one of the 
popular and fastest methods used in many studies.  (2) 
Alternatively, some investigators follow up on the infant’s 
health status after a few months to validate their inference of 
those who were classified as high risk. In a study [20], the 
authors assessed children's movement complexity patterns at 
3,6, 9, and 12 months of age, however, follow-up was done 
at 18 and 36 months of age to validate their results. 
E. Noise Elimination 
Unfortunately, infant movement data recorded from the 
sensors is mostly accompanied by noise [27]. Especially, in 
the context of infants, the amount of noise induced might be 
higher than normal. Because the daily routine of every child 
frequently changes between sleep, waking, and active states. 
Besides, a child might experience discomfort for unknown 
reasons. Then, either parent or caregiver must pacify the 
child to resume the data recording. Thus, the presence of 
noise is inevitable in children's movement data. Due to the 
effects of noise, movement assessment derived from the 
noisy sensor data is biased and inaccurate.  To remove noise 
from the movement data, investigators have employed 
different techniques. To eliminate outliers, preprocessing and 
normalization of the data are some of the popular approaches 
[15][23][27]. In this approach, raw data is normalized and 
standardized to align within either first or third quantiles. 
Alternatively, parents or caregivers to write down the 
activity log of any major change in movement [12][22]. For 
instance, the activity log records the sleep, wake, and play 
times of the child. This method helps to extract the data, that 
is relevant and useful based on the activity log.  
F. Quantifiable Parameters 
Quantitative measurement has been used by several 
researchers for the automatic assessment of impaired motor 
function. In contrast, some researchers have developed a 
quantifiable metric that can measure the level of motor 
impairment. Their main objective is to quantify the 
variability and repeatability of arm and leg movements as a 
unit that can be used to measure the degree of neuromotor 
control. An objective metric called Motion Complexity (MC) 
[28] was proposed for full-day mobility data acquired from 
the sensors attached to both legs. MC is computed from the 
duration of movement, peak acceleration, and average 
acceleration during a movement. MC is essentially a measure 
of the variability of the recorded leg movements. Their 
experimental results demonstrate that two kids from the 
sample of five subjects have lower MC scores than the other 
three kids and that they later developed ASD. Sample 
Entropy 
(SampEn) 
is 
another 
quantitative 
measure 
introduced in [22]. The researchers postulated that AR 
infants' SampEn values are significantly lesser than TD 
infants. Hence, SampEn may be a potential early marker to 
detect abnormal growth of neuromotor control.  Hoyt et al. 
[24] computed two metrics from the sensor data of upper 
limb movements: Use Ratio (UR) and mono arm use index 
(MAUI). These two components measure the asymmetry 
between the two arms. They postulated that infants with 
neurodevelopmental deficits might not use both arms like 
normal children. Their study results corroborated their 
theory. 
G. Spontaneous Movements vs Therapeutic Movements 
While spontaneous movements are either leg or arm 
movements recorded during an infant’s active playtime, 
therapeutic (pre-defined) movements are designed by 
researchers in collaboration with clinical expert physicians 
[23]. Pre-defined movements are straightforward to process 
because they are logged in a well-controlled lab environment 
and accurate movement is well known in advance. Whereas 
spontaneous movements require additional processing to 
extract useful features as well as suppress unnecessary noisy 
data 
[27][30]. 
Although 
the 
pre-defined 
movement 
processing technique is simple to use, scholars are mostly 
interested in spontaneous physical movements. Because the 
treatment of spontaneous arm and leg movements is more 
practical and accurate.  
H. Upper vs Lower limb movements 
For a typical human being, the upper limbs are most 
important for performing daily routine activities such as self-
care and work.  Conversely, it is always not true for infants 
because most of their daily routine is taken care of by their 
parents or caregivers.  Thus, which limb movements are 
feasible for quantifying abnormal movements is a debatable 
question. In fact, unraveling the answer to this question also 
depends on another question, i.e., which limb movements are 
convenient to collect the mobility data to identify the 
disability. Table 2 clearly shows that most of the studies used 
sensors for either the upper limb or lower limb. However, the 
majority of the researchers were interested in recording the 
mobility 
data 
only 
from 
lower 
limbs 
[12][22][26][27][28][29][31]. Although they did not mention 
the specific reason for their decision to use only lower limbs, 
it might be more convenient than attaching the sensors to the 
upper limbs.   
I. 
Variations in motor movement skills 
Motor behavior of a growing child generally includes 
actions of every part of the body from head to toe. Although 
the development of fine motor skills is critical, they are 
usually established during the first 2 years of a child. At 
each developmental milestone [33], a child reaches a 
particular stage. For instance, most babies can sit at the age 
of 6-8 months without any support. The absence of such 
crucial milestones eventually turns into a developmental 
49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

disorder. Impairment in the growth of motor skills hampers 
various aspects of daily life including eating and self-care. 
Abnormality in motor abilities reflects the onset of a 
developmental disorder such as Autism. Variation in motor 
movements is the early sign of identifying developmental 
disability [21]. As described in Background section III, a 
child can be categorized into one of the three stages: 
Typically 
Developing 
(TD), 
At-Risk 
(AR), 
and 
Neurodevelopmental Disorder (NDD). A TD infant is 
considered to be healthy and therefore demonstrates a full 
repertoire of movement skills. Their movements are variable 
and complex in nature. They perform a wide range of 
movements from head to toe. On the other hand, an AR kid 
is on the fence about moving towards the disability stage. 
Though they may not exhibit complete abnormality in their 
movements, by careful observation and assessment certain 
impaired movements can be noticeable. There may be 
rigidness and inactiveness in limb movements. Their hand 
and leg motion might be cramped. In such a scenario, it is 
critical to diagnose the disorder as early as possible in order 
to facilitate early therapeutic intervention. A child who has 
already been diagnosed with a specific disorder is treated as 
NDD. The movements of NDD children are less complex 
and monotonous. Their actions contain repetitive and 
stereotypical movements. Compared to TD and AR, NDD 
child’s movement acceleration is very low. In summary, 
variations in motor skills are the best predictors to identify 
the developmental disorder during early infancy. 
VII. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
 
After careful deliberations based on recent literature, some 
of the most promising future directions are outlined below. 
• 
Reduced complexity and increased computational 
power: The wearability and affordability of sensing 
instruments eliminate the complexity of using expensive 
equipment such as video camera systems to record the 
mobility data. However, it is still required to minimize 
the complexity involved in handling wearable devices, 
especially for newborn babies and toddlers. Future 
devices should be so tiny as not to create any discomfort 
for the babies. For example, if a monitoring device is 
designed as a thin patch that can be attached to a child's 
clothing or socks, it would be even more comfortable 
than existing sensor devices. Hence, it is essential to 
consider the design of sensor devices for babies and 
toddlers while increasing their computational power.  
• 
Long-term Data collection: Most of the studies 
conducted by the researchers have focused on the 
assessment of the data recorded over a short duration. 
The majority of the studies collected mobility data for 8 
to 13 hours (Table 2) and occasionally some researchers 
have monitored the data for 2 to 7 days. Nevertheless, a 
few hours of mobility data are not sufficient for accurate 
decision-making. Moreover, the likelihood of results 
being biased towards a particular day would be higher in 
the case of short-duration data collection. For example, a 
child may be more active some days than others. 
therefore, to reduce such a bias, it is essential to include 
data over an extended duration. In addition to this, 
treatment progress monitoring is another crucial factor 
in intervention therapy. Therapy may continue for days 
and sometimes even for months. Thus, it is important to 
design sensing equipment in such a way that it can 
collect mobility data for an extended period without 
human intervention.  
• 
Extended battery life: All wearable sensors indeed 
operate on minimal battery life. But, in the event of 
long-term data collection, it is not optimal to remove the 
device frequently to recharge it. This frequent change 
would add unnecessary noise to the data and often 
disturbs the child. Therefore, sensors designed for 
infants should be able to withstand a long duration 
without charging.  
• 
Sophisticated techniques to eliminate the noise: The 
mobility data collected from infants consists of a huge 
amount of noise due to the infant’s daily routine. 
Soothing a crying child, feeding, and diapering are some 
of the common and repetitive tasks performed by either 
patients or caregivers. Since these tasks appear more 
frequently in the collected dataset, they generate 
enormous noise. State-of-the-art noise processing 
methodologies are human-driven, and they must be 
carefully removed by programmers. The presence of 
noise in the dataset may produce either biased or 
incorrect results. Hence, there is an immediate need for 
sophisticated automated methods to detect and suppress 
noise in mobility data collected from children. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
     Developmental disorders such as autism, hinder a child's 
typical behavior. As a result, they do not grow up like a 
normal child. Thus, it is crucial to diagnose and start 
treatment as early as possible in early childhood. However, 
the most frequently used clinical methods are subjective and 
based on the judgment of an observer. Furthermore, infants 
are required to visit the laboratories frequently. Therefore, 
observer dependency makes the decision ineffective in the 
early detection of the disorder. Quantitative measurement of 
disability using smart wearable devices accelerates the 
diagnosing process. Wearable devices are sophisticated for 
monitoring the mobility data of infants. Quantitative 
methods using 
wearable sensors facilitate objective 
measurement of the disability. Wearable instruments are 
tiny, affordable, and suitable for kids to record mobility data 
unobtrusively. Quantitative diagnosis can be performed by 
collecting mobility data from children. This paper highlights 
the importance of mobility-based quantitative prognosis and 
presented the various diagnostic approaches that are explored 
by the scientific community as a method of identifying the 
disorder by employing sensor devices. In addition, it explains 
various mobility parameters that have been explored by the 
researchers while developing the techniques to identify the 
developmental 
disorder. 
Finally, 
promising 
research 
directions on which future research should focus were also 
presented.  
50
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] R.K. Thelagathoti and H.H. Ali, “On Exploring the Use of 
Mobility Parameters in the Analysis of Early Childhood 
Developmental Disorders”, 15th International Conference on 
Sensor Technologies and Applications, pp. 15–21, 2021. 
[2] World Health Organization. “The Global Burden of Disease: 
2004 Update. Geneva: World Health Organization Press”, 
2008, [Online; retrieved: May 2022]. Available from: 
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/GBD_r
eport_2004update_part3.pdf.  
[3] K. A. I. Evensen, S. Sellæg, A.-C. Stræte, A. E. Hansen, and 
I. Meisingset, “Profile of children referred to primary health 
care physiotherapy: a longitudinal observational study in 
norway,” BMC Health Services Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 
1–10, 2021 
[4] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Developmental 
disabilities,” 2022, [Online; retrieved: May 2022]. Available 
from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/developmentaldisabilities/index.
html 
[5] B. Zablotsky et al., “Prevalence and trends of developmental 
disabilities among children in the united states: 2009–2017,” 
Pediatrics, vol. 144, no. 4, 2019. 
[6] D. Gravem et al., “Assessment of infant movement with a 
compact wireless accelerometer system,” Journal of Medical 
Devices, vol. 6, no. 2, 2012. 
[7] L.Meinecke et al., “Movement analysis in the early detection 
of newborns at risk for developing spasticity due to infantile 
cerebral palsy,” Human movement science, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 
125–144, 2006. 
[8] J. Case-Smith, “A validity study of the posture and fine motor 
assessment of infants”. The American journal of occupational 
therapy: official publication of the American Occupational 
Therapy Association, 46(7), 597–605, 1992. 
[9] M. C. Piper, L. E. Pinnell, J. Darrah, T. Maguire, and P. J. 
Byrne, “Construction and validation of the alberta infant 
motor scale (aims).” Canadian journal of public health= 
Revue canadienne de sante publique, vol. 83, pp. S46–50, 
1992. 
[10] C. Einspieler and H. F. Prechtl, “Prechtl’s assessment of 
general movements: a diagnostic tool for the functional 
assessment of the young nervous system,” Mental retardation 
and developmental disabilities research reviews, vol. 11, no. 
1, pp. 61–67, 2005. 
[11] F.Ferrari et al., “Cramped synchronized general movements in 
preterm infants as an early marker for cerebral palsy,” 
Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine, vol. 156, no. 5, 
pp. 460– 467, 2002. 
[12] M. S. Abrishami et al., “Identification of developmental delay 
in infants using wearable sensors: Full-day leg movement 
statistical feature analysis,” IEEE journal of translational 
engineering in health and medicine, vol. 7, pp. 1–7, 2019. 
[13] I. Braito et al.,“Assessment of upper limb use in children with 
typical development and neurodevelopmental disorders by 
inertial 
sensors: 
a 
systematic 
review,” 
Journal 
of 
neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 
2018. 
[14] J. K. Poon, A. C. Larosa, G. S. Pai, “Developmental delay: 
timely identification and assessment”, Indian pediatrics, 
47(5), 415-422, 2010. 
[15] K. R. Heineman, A. F. Bos, and M. Hadders-Algra, “The 
infant motor profile: a standardized and qualitative method to 
assess motor behaviour in infancy,” Developmental Medicine 
& Child Neurology, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 275–282, 2008. 
[16] M. Randall, C. Imms, and L. Carey, “Establishing validity of 
a modified melbourne assessment for children ages 2 to 4 
years,” American Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol. 62, 
no. 4, pp. 373–383, 2008. 
[17] N. Bayley, G. Reuner. “Bayley scales of infant development”, 
(pp. 1-178). New York: Psychological Corporation, 1969 
[18] Y. R. Burns, R.M. Ensbey, and M.A. Norrie, “The Neuro-
sensory motor developmental assessment part 1: development 
and administration of the test”, Australian Journal of 
Physiotherapy, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 141-149, 1989. 
[19] S.K. Campbell, T.H. Kolobe, E.T. Osten, M. Lenke, and G.L. 
Girolami, “Construct validity of the test of infant motor 
performance”, Physical Therapy, vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 585-596, 
1995. 
[20] H. Chen, M. Xue, Z. Mei, S. Bambang Oetomo, and W. Chen, 
“A review of wearable sensor systems for monitoring body 
movements of neonates,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 12, p. 2134, 
2016. 
[21] D. Campolo et al., “A novel technological approach towards 
the early diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders,” 30th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE, pp. 4875–4878, 2008. 
[22] B. A. Smith, D. L. Vanderbilt, B. Applequist, and A. 
Kyvelidou,“Sample 
entropy 
identifies 
differences 
in 
spontaneous leg movement behavior between infants with 
typical development and infants at risk of developmental 
delay,” Technologies, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 55, 2017. 
[23] C. Strohrmann et al., “Monitoring motor capacity changes of 
children during rehabilitation using body-worn sensors,” 
Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 10, no. 1, 
pp. 1–16, 2013. 
[24] C. R. Hoyt et al.,“Using accelerometry for measurement of 
motor behavior in children: Relationship of real-world 
movement 
to 
standardized 
evaluation,” 
Research 
in 
developmental disabilities, vol. 96, p. 103546, 2020. 
[25] C. B. Redd, L. A. Barber, R. N. Boyd, M. Varnfield, and M. 
K.Karunanithi, “Development of a wearable sensor network 
for quantification of infant general movements for the 
diagnosis of cerebral palsy,” 41st Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society (EMBC). IEEE, pp. 7134–7139, 2019 
[26] D. Goodfellow et al., “Predicting infant motor development 
status using day long movement data from wearable sensors,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02617, 2018. 
[27] B. A. Smith, I. A. Trujillo-Priego, C. J. Lane, J. M. Finley, 
and F. B. Horak, “Daily quantity of infant leg movement: 
wearable sensor algorithm and relationship to walking onset,” 
Sensors, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 19 006–19 020, 2015. 
[28] R. B. Wilson, S. Vangala, D. Elashoff, T. Safari, and B. A. 
Smith, “Using wearable sensor technology to measure motion 
complexity in infants at high familial risk for autism spectrum 
disorder,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 616, 2021. 
[29] S. M. McKay and R. M. Angulo-Barroso, “Longitudinal 
assessment of leg motor activity and sleep patterns in infants 
with and without down syndrome,” Infant Behavior and 
Development, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 153–168, 2006. 
[30] F. Heinze et al., “Movement analysis by accelerometry of 
newborns and infants for the early detection of movement 
disorders due to infantile cerebral palsy,” Medical & 
51
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

biological engineering & computing, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 765–
772, 2010. 
[31] W. Deng, I. A. Trujillo-Priego, and B. A. Smith, “How many 
days are necessary to represent an infant’s typical daily leg 
movement behavior using wearable sensors?” Physical 
therapy, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 730–738, 2019. 
[32] N. Jalloul, “Wearable sensors for the monitoring of movement 
disorders,” Biomedical journal, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 249–253, 
2018 
[33] B.R. Carruth, P.J. Ziegler, A. Gordon, and K. Hendricks, 
“Developmental milestones and self-feeding behaviors in 
infants and toddlers”, Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association, vol. 104, pp. 51-56. 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

