Individualized Self-Care for Early-Stage Dementia:                                            
A Framework for Activity Attainment and Replacement 
 
Jonathan Turner, Ciarán Nugent, Damon Berry, 
Dympna O’Sullivan 
Department of Computer Science 
Technological University Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
email: jonathan.turner@tudublin.ie, 
ciaran.nugent@tudublin.ie, damon.berry@tudublin.ie, 
dympna.osullivan@tudublin.ie 
Michael Wilson, Ann Marron, Julie Doyle 
NetwellCASALA 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Ireland 
email: michael.wilson@dkit.ie, ann.marron@hse.ie, 
julie.doyle@dkit.ie,
 
 
Abstract— For people with early or moderate dementia, there 
are benefits to them continuing to live in their own homes for 
as long as possible, both in improved quality of life and 
associated measures such as increased social contact, increased 
physical activity, lower use of medication, and reduced costs 
and burden of care. Tools to help extend the period of 
independent living, and to maintain quality of life in this 
period, are lacking. Systems exist to monitor individuals for 
problems, e.g. falls or wandering from the home, but there is 
scope for development of computerised support to help 
maintain activity in independent living. We aim to monitor 
achievement of activities, by app and by sensors, and provide 
recommendations on how to best maintain activities. We 
describe a goal model to monitor achievement and to suggest 
replacement activities and goals when an activity goal can no 
longer be achieved.  
Keywords- dementia; goal modelling; self-care; independent 
living. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
We report on our work on assisting Persons Living With 
Dementia (PLWDs) in living independently for as long as 
possible and with as much Quality of Life (QoL) as possible, 
work previously discussed in [1]. Dementia is a set of 
symptoms that may include deterioration in memory and the 
ability to focus attention; unpredictable behaviour; and 
decline in the ability to perform routine activities of 
everyday living. It can be caused by a number of conditions, 
with Alzheimer’s disease being the most common cause of 
dementia in older people, contributing to 60-70% of cases 
[2]; other common causes of dementia are vascular dementia, 
Lewy Body dementia and fronto-temporal dementia [3]. 
Dementia symptoms are progressive and the disorder is 
incurable; Persons Living With Dementia (PLWDs) require 
increasing care as their underlying disease progresses. 
Different types of dementia progress in different ways and at 
different rates but overall the disease is one of irreversible 
decline. There is evidence to suggest activity-based therapies 
can slow this decline, for example physical exercise [4]. 
Currently, it is estimated that about 50 million people 
worldwide suffer from a form of dementia, with this number 
projected to rise to more than 131 million by 2050, reflecting 
aging populations around the world [5]. As well as the 
human cost of the disease, such as demands on family 
members acting as informal carers [6], there is a societal 
financial burden, estimated to be over $1 trillion a year 
worldwide, with 80-85% of these costs due to paid social 
care services and unpaid informal family care [7]. For people 
with early or moderate dementia, there are benefits to them 
exercising their personal preference of continuing to live in 
their own homes for as long as possible, both in improved 
QoL and associated measures such as increased social 
contact, increased physical activity and lower use of 
medication, and reduced costs of care [8]. Lower physical 
function is associated with increased risk of admission to 
long-term care, and so it is beneficial to maintain physical 
function for as long as possible [8]. It should be noted that 
only a minority of PLWDs living in their own home will 
move into a care home [9].  
The Smart Dementia Care project [10] aims to develop a 
computerised toolkit to assist people with early-stage 
dementia to live independently in their own homes. This 
toolkit will support a PLWD and their informal family 
carer(s) in developing a personalised activity plan and will 
encourage each PLWD's compliance with their activity plan. 
The activity plan will incorporate goal targets derived from 
formal care plans, existing models of daily activities, and 
activities defined by the individual PLWDs and their carers 
as being activities that the PLWD finds rewarding and 
wishes to continue. The project is following a co-design 
methodology, where the research team includes PLWDs as 
experts in their condition and their lived experience of it. 
Achievement of goals by a PLWD will be measured by a 
combination of self- (or informal carer-) reporting via an 
app, and automatic data collection from body-worn or static 
sensors utilizing a variety of technologies, for example 
proximity sensors, humidity sensors, location sensors or 
motion sensors. The app and sensor data capture are under 
development in parallel with the work described in this 
paper. In this paper, we focus on the development of a 
computational goal framework to enable the specification of 
goals by PLWDs and the capture and quantification of their 
goal achievement data. 
22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 Persons with dementia should be at the centre of 
decision-making about their care and the regular activities 
that form part of their care [11] including basic activities 
(e.g., feeding themselves, dressing themselves), advanced 
activities (e.g., managing finances, using transportation), and 
activities meaningful to the individual PLWD (e.g., social 
and recreational pastimes). However, there is limited 
involvement of people living with dementia in the design of 
technology to support their care and their ability to live 
independently by helping them maintain the performance of 
activities required for the continuation of independent living.  
According to a report investigating older people’s 
preferences for care in Ireland, the majority of people with 
dementia would prefer to remain at home and in their 
community for as long as possible, utilising home-care 
support as an alternative to long-term residential care where 
possible and where feasible [12]. This is reflected in a report 
for the UK Alzheimer’s Society [13] which states that 85% 
of people in the UK would prefer to remain living in their 
own homes following a dementia diagnosis [14; 13].  A 
central goal therefore is to enable people to remain in their 
homes for as long as possible while also providing care that 
is safe, timely, efficient, and as close to home as possible. As 
well as this, emphasis is placed on maximising the 
integration of natural supports such as family, friends, and 
social interaction.  
The scope for assistive technology to play a role has been 
recognised as having the potential to improve QoL for both 
the person living with dementia and their informal carer(s), 
reduce carer stress, and foster and maintain a sense of 
independence and autonomy for the PLWD and those 
involved in providing care and support [15]. However, while 
there has been an increase in the development of 
technologies to support PLWDs, there remain gaps in 
healthcare technologies for self-management which provide 
support to PLWDs and their informal carers in their homes.  
We describe the early development of a goal framework 
to enable personalisation of goals and tracking of goal 
achievement for persons with an early-stage dementing 
illness, with the aim of promoting independent living at 
home. Goals are developed from existing measures of human 
ability and disability, from activities defined in formal 
personal care plans, and activities that individuals desire to 
maintain as pleasurable or otherwise meaningful and so 
which enhance QoL. We present an initial outline of our 
framework, that includes the capture of information 
pertaining to each goal in each individual’s personalised goal 
schedule, comparison of achievement with their personal 
target for included activities, and suggested actions to take in 
the case of under-achievement, whether that be persistent or 
short-term under-achievement.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the process of selection of activities to be 
monitored. Section III describes the chosen activities  and the 
selection of replacement activities. Section IV discusses 
possible burdens on PLWDs of this  work. Section V gives 
conclusions, description of further developments of this 
work and an acknowledgement. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Activities and goals 
 
Goal-oriented Cognitive Rehabilitation (CR) is a form of 
therapy which aims to address and manage functional 
disability and maximise social participation and engagement 
using a person-centred, goal-oriented and problem-solving 
approach [16]. It uses evidence-based rehabilitative methods 
and involves PLWDs and their carers or family members 
working together with a therapist to identify meaningful and 
personally relevant goals related to everyday activities [17]. 
Strategies are collaboratively devised and implemented; 
evaluation in terms of progress towards goal attainment is 
based 
on 
both 
participant 
and 
informant-reported 
information [16; 18]. A multi-centre randomized controlled 
trial by Clare et al. [16] demonstrated that PLWDs were able 
to identify goals they felt were important and were motivated 
to address and attempt to attain and retain. In addition, 
results from their trial suggest that an individualised and 
goal-oriented 
implementation 
of 
CR 
can 
lead 
to 
improvements in everyday functioning, and it can be an 
effective intervention for people with early-stage dementia. 
One of the fundamental strengths identified from Clare et 
al.’s work was the possibility of transfer and generalisation, 
with the goals that were identified and being worked towards 
being relevant and applicable to improved functioning in 
real-world situations. Moreover, the suggestion was made by 
Clare et al. that, once delivered in a cost-effective manner, 
CR could be integrated into care pathways with a view to 
developing strategies for living with dementia in the 
community [16]. The Goal Attainment Scale (GAS) [33] has 
been used to measure achievement of goals in dementia. 
GAS itself is not specific for dementia and the particular 
goals used in any analysis for PLWDs are selected in 
cooperation 
with 
the 
PWLD. 
Table 
1 
shows 
an 
implementation of a GAS for the work described here, 
adapted from Turner-Stokes [20]. 
Phinney et al. [21] identified four categories of goal, 
based on interviews with and observations of PLWDs: (1) 
leisure and recreation; (2) household chores; (3) social 
involvements; (4) work-related goals. Interview participants 
stressed the importance of being able to continue engaging in 
these activities and the willingness to employ new strategies 
to do so should this be required as the disease progresses. 
Related to this is the importance of identifying those 
activities that were valued and enjoyed before the onset of 
dementia since these are likely to be considered intrinsically 
meaningful in terms of everyday life and past experience 
[21]. 
We wish to encourage PLWDs to achieve goals in 
activities that will help maintain their ability to live 
independently in their own homes for as long as possible and 
which will give them the greatest QoL as possible.  
In particular, we wish to encourage PLWDs to perform 
activities that fall into one of three groups:  
23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE 1. GOAL TARGETS AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
 
Activity 
source: 
(I)ADL/ 
MWDS 
Care 
plan 
PLWD/ 
Carer 
Specific 
activity: 
Preparing a 
meal 
Walking 
outside 
Visiting a 
friend 
Optionality: 
Core 
Core 
Optional 
Frequency 
goal: 
Once a day 
Once a 
day 
Once a week 
Duration 
goal: 
20 minutes 
60 
minutes 
120 minutes 
Duration 
data source: 
Sensors/ 
Self-report 
Sensor 
Self-report 
Achievement 
goal: 
Successful 
preparation 
Walk 2.5 
km 
Visit friend 
Average 
frequency: 
5/week 
6/week 
0.8/week 
Average 
duration: 
24 minutes 
55 
minutes 
140 minutes 
 
 
(i) Basic Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) and 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs). These 
activities are the most basic activities that together allow 
individuals some degree of independence. ADLs are the 
ability to bathe oneself, select clothes and dress oneself in 
the correct sequence, toileting, transfer, continence, and 
feeding, activities defined by Katz et al. in 1963 [22] and 
now well-established. IADLs are the more sophisticated 
instrumental activities of making a telephone call, shopping, 
meal preparation, using transportation, doing laundry, and 
financial management, activities defined by Lawton and 
Brody in 1969 [23] as being those that enable independent 
living and are similarly now well-established. Each of these 
scales measure the ability of individuals to perform basic 
activities of daily living and activities required for 
independent living. These scales were created to allow 
scoring of the degree of self-maintenance functions that 
individuals are able to perform for themselves, with the Katz 
scale measuring more basic functions than the Lawton-Brody 
scale. It is important for these activities to be maintained for 
as long as possible both for those with dementia and those 
without dementia, but for those with some forms of dementia 
(including Alzheimer’s, the most common form), once the 
ability to perform an activity is lost, it cannot be regained. 
Retaining the ability to perform ADLs will benefit PLWDs 
even after they can no longer live independently. In Ireland, 
where this work is being performed, the Modified 
Winchester Disability Scale (MWDS) [24] dominates 
assessment of risk in older adults. Additional to the ADL and 
IADL scales it includes measures of mental and social 
activity. It should be noted that none of these scales are 
specific for PLWDs.  
(ii) Activities defined in individuals’ formal care plans. 
Care plans are agreed between health and care professionals, 
the PLWD and their family carers. They are documents that 
record the care needs of a PLWD and their informal carers. 
Formal Care Plans contain a variety of information useful to 
the PLWD and their family carers, and are usually drawn up 
in cooperation with health professionals (see, for example, 
the discussion on care plans in Burt et al. [25]). They can 
include such useful and essential information as medication 
and prescriptions details, emergency telephone numbers, 
allergies, etc. They can also include a set of activities that are 
essential and/or enjoyable to the PLWD, such as personal 
hygiene; going for a walk; preparing lunch; gardening. The 
plan can include goals which may be related to performing 
specific activities. Examples of the possible content of a care 
plan can be found in [26]. These care plans are relatively 
static, often paper-based and reviewed only annually, not 
computerised or interactive, and so the degree of responsive 
personalisation for each PLWD is limited. Should such 
activities be present in a care plan they can be included in the 
toolkit. 
(iii) Meaningful activities (MAs): Meaningful activity 
can be described as any activity that results in emotional, 
creative and intellectual stimulation, while also providing 
increased levels of wellbeing and QoL over the course of an 
adult’s life [27]. Engagement in meaningful activity has been 
found to positively affect overall health and wellbeing in a 
number of ways, including increased positive emotions, 
improvements in ADL performance, improved overall QoL 
and well-being, positive relationships with carers, and 
reduced behavioural symptoms [28]. Activities comprise a 
broad range of tasks and endeavours, ranging from 
household chore to recreation and social involvement. In 
essence, they are activities that bring pleasure or satisfaction 
(i.e. they have meaning) to PLWDs.  
Example sets of such MAs exist, e.g. Mahoney and 
Barthel [29], but it is unlikely that any one PLWD will wish 
to enjoy all activities in any one defined set, and they may 
have wishes to enjoy activities that are not in any existing 
sets of pleasurable activities. In proposing and selecting the 
use of MAs as a therapeutic tool, we take inspiration from 
work from such organisations as the NHS [30]. The set of 
activities in this group will be tailored to each PLWD and are 
chosen because they bring pleasure to that person and/or 
have other benefits, such as the health benefits gained from, 
for example, an enjoyable walk, that can help maintain QoL. 
Each PLWD, or their carer, will be asked to describe 
activities such as socialising, hobbies or exercising that the 
PLWD enjoys and wishes to maintain. From this list of 
activities, a set of activity goals will be agreed with the 
PLWD and included in that individual's set of goals to be 
achieved. Additionally, a prepared set of activities, derived 
from our literature review and from co-design sessions 
attended by PLWD and their carers, will be presented to 
PLWDs and their carers as prompts to ensure that they have 
not omitted any activities that they do enjoy but may not 
recall unprompted in interview. Two scales that measure 
pleasurable events or emotions in dementia were found: Teri 
and Logsdon’s PES-AD [31], a set of activities and events 
created to measure the QoL of individuals with Alzheimer's 
Disease, and Smith et al.’s DEMQOL [32]. These scales 
focus on QoL rather than basic activity achievement. Smith 
et al. focused on recording changes in emotional states, 
whereas Teri & Logsdon focused on the accomplishment of 
24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

actual events. Our initial list is based on the PES-AD scale. 
Example PES-AD activities include: Having friends visit; 
doing jigsaw puzzles; gardening; going to church. Each MA 
has associated with it a number of attributes that are required 
to perform that activity, which may be ADLs, IADLs, 
exercise specific functions, or bring other benefits. 
B. Activity selection 
In order to realise our aims of extending the period spent 
in independent living for PLWDs as much as possible, the 
expectation to exercise ADLs and IADLs will be standard 
for all PLWDs, with the caveat that new activities should not 
be introduced for PLWDs who had not previously routinely 
performed that activity (shopping, or preparing meals, for 
example). Performance of ADLs and IADLs will be 
regularly monitored. Other activities – the MAs - will be 
personalised using the formal care plans and wishes of each 
individual PLWD. Monitoring changes in goal achievement 
over time allows for a greater degree of personalisation for 
each PLWD. We reviewed the literature relating to basic 
activities of daily living, including scales used in 
determining the abilities and disabilities of PLWD and any 
goals for these basic activities. Similarly for pleasurable 
activities we reviewed the literature relating to measuring the 
frequency and degree of such activities and of related 
emotions. 
MAs have associated with them a number of attributes. 
As well as the ADLs and IADLs that may be exercised 
during the achievement of a MA, there are also benefits from 
exercising cognitive functions, and the benefits of improved 
QoL. The American Psychiatric Association [33] defines the 
cognitive functions as Learning and memory; Language; 
Executive function; Complex attention; Perceptual-motor; 
Social cognition. Tuijt et al. [34] identified six domains of 
meaningful or enjoyable activities into which activities could 
be categorized: physical activity; looking after my 
household; enjoyable and leisure activities; hobbies and 
personal interests; staying mentally active; and social 
activities/community involvement. Should a PLWD no 
longer be able to perform a MA, they may lose the QoL 
benefit of performing the activity and may also lose the more 
basic benefits of performing the ADLs and the IADLs, and 
of exercising the cognitive functions that may have been 
exercised by that activity. In order to maintain the benefits of 
the lost activity, it is proposed to suggest to PLWDs possible 
replacement MAs. Replacement MAs will be selected and 
ordered using, in the first iteration, a simple machine 
learning method, ‘k nearest neighbours’ [35]. This method 
uses attributes of an entity to identify closely matching 
entities from a set (in this case, using the IADLs, cognitive 
functions and domains fulfilled by exercising the ‘lost’ MA 
to identify MAs in the master set that most closely match the 
attributes of the ‘lost’ MA). 
ADL, IADL and PES-AD activity sets were each drawn 
up several decades ago and some activities included could 
benefit from updating. For example ‘making a telephone 
call’ should now allow for communication using SMS, 
email, or social media, as well as voice calls, using landline 
telephones, mobile telephones, tablets or laptop computers. 
Other activities may need to take into account restrictions 
due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, e.g., 'going to 
church' may need to also allow for 'attending church services 
remotely'. Additional activities will be identified through co-
design workshops attended by PLWDs and their family 
carers. To achieve this, Lindsay et al. [36] suggest including 
carers in meetings to provide support during discussions 
where communication issue arise while also paying close 
attention to instances where the carer may speak on the care 
recipient’s behalf. It has also been pointed out that operating 
separate interviews and workshops for people living with 
dementia and for carers can allow participants to express 
themselves freely without either being spoken over (in the 
case of the person living with dementia) or feeling reluctant 
to discuss negative aspects of the caring process (in the case 
of carers) [37, 38]. At the same time, it is important to 
consider that carers and family members may eventually 
become the primary user and facilitator of these technologies 
due to declining abilities and the progression of the disease. 
Goals will be determined for each PLWD for each of the 
established ADLs and IADLs, and to measure each PLWD’s 
achievement in reaching these goals. Further, for each 
PLWD, we take individualised goals from their formal care 
plans and from their chosen MAs, again measuring their 
achievement of these goals. Measurement of these goals will 
be either by PLWD or their family carer entering information 
directly into the toolkit interface, or by automated data 
collection by sensors where this is feasible. 
For each activity included, for example ‘ability to shop 
for oneself’ or ‘going to church’, a decision needs to be made 
on the appropriate metric to determine achievement of each 
goal, and how to measure achievement of the goal . We aim 
to establish baseline target goal levels based on the PLWD’s 
existing performance in order to maintain performance of 
activities and improve wellbeing. 
Existing scales of daily activities and pleasurable 
activities can be utilised to create a set of goals for 
individuals with dementia. Performance of these goals by 
PLWDs can benefit their QoL and help them maintain their 
ability to live independently. Achievement of these goals can 
be directly reported by PLWDs or their family carers via a 
computerised toolkit’s interface, or can be determined by 
data collected by sensors. Information recorded for each 
activity will include quantifiable information such as start 
time, end time, duration, achievement, comparison with goal 
target, and a measure of pleasure or satisfaction. For 
example, a PLWD may have had a daily walk starting at 
10am and finishing at 10:45am, lasting 45 minutes, walking 
for 2.5 km and exceeding a target of 2 km. This activity 
exercises some cognitive functions (Executive function; 
Complex attention;  Perceptual-motor) and has QoL benefits 
from the ‘enjoyable and leisure activities’ domain. The 
measurable achievement score – in this case 45 minutes, 2 
km – can be tracked over time, providing information to the 
PLWD and their carers about which areas of their daily life 
may require attention, potentially in the form of advice in 
improving achievement. 
25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III. 
RESULTS 
Examples of some typical goals are shown in Table 2. 
Included in the table is information on each goal, illustrating 
how we intend to quantify the achievement of each goal. 
ADLs are not included in the set of explicitly monitored 
activities since they are measured on a binary achievement 
scale which will be achieved by all PLWDs in the early 
stages of dementia, and which do not in themselves allow 
PLWDs to maintain independent living. Where possible, it is 
intended to monitor the performance of ADLs by use of 
sensors to capture information regarding achievement of 
ADLs, for example the time taken to get dressed, to monitor 
any gradual decline in performance of achieved ADLs. 
Each example in Table 2 shows a different type of goal. 
‘Preparing a meal’, an IADL, is a basic activity we wish to 
encourage the PLWD to maintain as essential for continued 
independent living. ‘Walking’ is often included in care plans 
for the health benefits it brings. ‘Visiting a friend’ is a little 
different from the previous two activities, as it is included as 
being chosen by the PLWD as a pleasurable activity that 
helps maintain their QoL. Each activity has several 
dimensions that can be quantified: duration of activity, 
frequency of activity, activity achievement (e.g., distance 
walked, completeness of meal preparation). Measurement of 
these dimensions can be recorded by sensors, by asking the 
PLWD or their family carer to enter information on goal 
achievement into an app, or by a combination of the two. 
Using this approach allows for finer granularity of 
information to be captured contemporaneously rather than 
the usually retrospective information capture necessitated 
when information is gathered by visiting healthcare 
professionals. 
Activity information is collected daily from the app and 
from sensors, and added to the historical data. Information 
relating to that day’s activities is then analysed. In particular, 
that day’s activities performance is compared to the targets 
for each activity. For those activities where the target is met, 
 
TABLE 2. GOAL TARGETS AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
 
Activity 
source: 
(I)ADL/ 
MWDS 
Care 
plan 
PLWD/ 
Carer 
Specific 
activity: 
Preparing a 
meal 
Walking 
outside 
Visiting a 
friend 
Optionality: 
Core 
Core 
Optional 
Frequency 
goal: 
Once a day 
Once a 
day 
Once a week 
Duration 
goal: 
20 minutes 
60 
minutes 
120 minutes 
Duration 
data source: 
Sensors/ 
Self-report 
Sensor 
Self-report 
Achievement 
goal: 
Successful 
preparation 
Walk 2.5 
km 
Visit friend 
Average 
frequency: 
5/week 
6/week 
0.8/week 
Average 
duration: 
24 minutes 
55 
minutes 
140 minutes 
 
the target is met, an appropriate encouraging confirmatory 
message is sent to the PLWD. Background analysis of the 
performance of the activity over time is also performed to 
see if there is a measurable decline or improvement in 
activity performance, irrespective of whether the target has 
been achieved. For activities which are not achieved, the 
initial action is to send a message to the PLWD to either 
remind them to perform the activity or to encourage them to 
improve their performance. If it becomes apparent that a MA 
is no longer being achieved with any regularity, then a 
replacement MA (or set of replacement MAs) is chosen for 
recommendation 
to 
the 
PLWD. 
Determination 
of 
replacement MAs is based on the continuation of 
achievement of the attributes intrinsic to the achievement of 
the ‘lost’ MA. These attributes may be IADLs, skills and/or 
themes.  
    Table 3 shows an example of a MA that might be chosen 
by a PLWD as an activity that had meaning to them and that 
they enjoyed on a regular basis, and includes a small subset 
of other MAs for comparison. For the purposes of the 
examples, it has been assumed that the preferred MA, ‘coffee 
with friends’, involves travelling to a coffee shop, purchasing 
items in the shop, and socializing with friends. Thus the 
‘travelling’ IADL is being exercised, the ‘perceptual-motor’, 
‘complex attention’, ‘language’ and ‘social cognition’ skills 
are being exercised, and meaning is achieved in the 
‘enjoyable/leisure’ and ‘social/community’ domains. When 
this MA, ‘coffee with friends’, is no longer being achieved 
on a regular basis, the achievement of the particular IADLs, 
the exercising of particular cognitive functions and the 
pleasure gained from particular domains may be lost. The 
table includes indication of which IADLs, cognitive 
functions and domains are fulfilled when the MA is 
achieved. If this MA is no longer being achieved then 
alternative activities that exercise the IADLs, cognitive 
functions and domains should be adopted. Suggestions are 
made to the PLWD (or their informal carer) of possible 
alternative activities (or sets of activities) that can exercise 
the IADLs, cognitive functions and domains that are not 
exercised if an MA is no longer achieved. Potential 
replacement activities are selected from the existing set of 
MAs according to how well the potential replacement MA 
matches. 
    To select candidate MAs for suggestion to a PLWD as 
potential replacements for a lost MA, the full set of MAs is 
examined to find those MAs that most closely match the MA 
that is no longer being performed. Note that Table 3 shows 
only a small subset of the set of MAs maintained for this 
study, for illustrative purposes. The full set of MAs is based 
on the work of Teri and Logsdon [31] with additions from 
PLWDS in this study who suggest MAs that are meaningful 
to them. The closeness of matching of candidate replacement 
MAs to the lost MA is calculated using a simple k nearest 
neighbours 
method, 
chosen 
for 
its 
simplicity 
and 
explainability. For the knn distance between activities, the 
simplest calculation method is employed, that of the number  
 
 
26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE 3. SOME MEANINGFUL ACTIVITIES AND THE 
ATTRIBUTES THEY EXERCISE 
 
 
     
 
 
 
MA: 
Coffee with friends 
Being outside 
Video meeting with friends 
Gardenig outdoors 
Having friends visit for lunch 
Activity type 
Attribute 
 
 
 
 
 
IADL 
Telephone 
 
 
Y 
 
 
Shopping 
Y 
 
 
 
 
Food 
Y 
 
 
 
Y 
Laundry 
 
 
 
 
 
Transportation 
Y 
 
 
 
 
Finances 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognitive 
function 
Learning and memory 
 
 
 
Y 
 
Language 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Y 
Executive function 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Y 
Complex attention 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Y 
Perceptual-motor 
Y 
 
 
Y 
Y 
Cognition 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Domain 
Enjoyable/leisure 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Look after house 
 
 
 
 
 
Hobbies/interests 
 
 
 
Y 
 
Mentally active 
Y 
 
 
 
Y 
Social/community 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Y 
 
Distance (knn) 
- 
2 
5 
3 
8 
 
of attributes that match. This knn distance calculation is 
included in Table 3 as ‘Distance (knn)’. 
Results from this calculation allow the candidate MAs to 
be ordered by their closeness to the lost MA by using the 
Distance (knn) result: Having friends visit for lunch (8, 
closest match); video meeting with friends (5); gardening 
outdoors (3); being outside (2, most distant match).  
The most closely matching MAs are presented to the 
PLWD as candidate replacement activities. Once the PLWD 
selects a replacement MA, the attributes of this MA are 
compared with the original lost MA to determine if any 
attributes remain unfulfilled. Assuming that the PLWD 
selects the most closely matching candidate MA from the 
example set in Table 3, ‘Having friends visit for lunch’, does 
not necessarily fulfil the shopping IADL (although it may do 
and this can be established), the use of transportation, and 
may not qualify as an activity in the enjoyable/leisure 
domain. It should be ensured that these specific activities 
continue, either by the addition of a second new MA (in the 
set in Table 3 for example, ‘being outside’ can fulfil the 
‘enjoyable/leisure’ domain) or setting goals to exercise 
specific IADLs (in the example set in Table 3, use of 
transportation may need to be explicitly exercised). Figure 1 
shows the complete workflow to be implemented. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In order to record achievement of activities, data on 
achievement of activities must be captured. This can be done 
by using sensors, with little or no demand on the PLWD, or 
by active self-reporting of activity data by the PLWD or their 
informal carer. We believe that of the 12 ADL and IADL 
activities, seven can be monitored by use of sensors, e.g. the 
‘bathing’ ADL can be detected by use of capacitive humidity 
sensors and resistance temperature sensors in the bathroom 
and analysing the output from the sensors to detect use of the 
bathroom. We are developing techniques for performing this 
event detection, leaving five activities that will require self-
reporting (i.e. manual entry of data into the app) of 
achievement of activities by the PLWD (e.g. completion of a 
‘shopping’ activity). Table 4 summarises which ADLs and 
IADLs can be monitored by use of sensors and which require 
to be self-reported. The intention of the co-design 
methodology is that, by engaging with PLWDs at the app 
design stage, the app will be simple to use and be seen by the 
PLWD as a device of empowerment rather than a burden. By 
including activity reminders and goal targets it is intended 
that the app be a useful assistive tool, and our early feedback 
from carers is that this will be so. However, we await the 
outcome of the full co-design sessions and feedback on use 
of the developed app to confirm or otherwise that this is the 
case. 
In order to design useful and usable technologies that will 
be used by PLWDs to support and maintain independence, it 
is necessary to understand their point of view and lived 
experience, without focusing solely on impairments 
commonly associated with dementia [36]. It is also important 
to note that personal, social, and environmental factors as 
well as a PLWD’s specific disabilities result in needs, wishes 
and abilities which can vary significantly [39]. Involving end  
 
TABLE 4. MONITORING METHODS FOR ADLS AND IADLS 
 
Activity group 
Activity 
Monitoring method 
ADL 
Bathing 
Sensors 
Dressing 
Sensors 
Toileting 
Sensors 
Transferring 
Self-reporting 
Continence 
Self-reporting 
Feeding 
Sensors 
IADL 
Telephone 
Sensors 
Shopping 
Self-reporting 
Food 
Sensors 
Laundry 
Sensors 
Transportation 
Self-reporting 
Finances 
Self-reporting 
27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1. Workflow to capture activity data and suggest alternative activities 
28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

users considers the likely gulf between the day-to-day lives 
and life experiences of designers or researchers and PLWDs. 
Moreover, involving PLWDs in the design process can 
improve 
usefulness 
and 
acceptability 
of 
assistive 
technologies 
while 
also 
resulting 
in 
feelings 
of 
empowerment [40]. Being given a voice in this manner has 
led to designs that improve social interaction [41] and help to 
maintain independence through support for ADLs [42].  
Mobile technologies and applications that allow for 
customisation can adapt and respond to the needs of 
individual users, which is considered particularly important 
for the developing needs of PLWDs in terms of cognitive 
deterioration and gradual decline in abilities [43; 44]. Among 
the themes to emerge from work carried out by Lindsay et al. 
[36] was the importance of a design feeling personal to the 
individual PLWD (due to the degree to which individual 
circumstances vary), while also integrating into the person’s 
routine. Such factors were deemed crucial to determining 
whether a new device would be accepted. This can be 
achieved by taking an approach that focusses on a personally 
tailored design that considers an individual’s day-to-to 
experiences, and the way routine is used to cope with daily 
challenges. Adopting this design approach, developing a 
relationship between the designer and the participant, and 
creating individually tailored prototypes thereby allows for a 
scenario where participants can focus on individual problems 
and get a feel for what a design that works for them 
specifically may look and feel like [40].  
There is some literature on behaviour change, such as the 
work of Fogg et al. [45], Oinas-Kukkonon [46], Reimer et al.  
[47] and Webb et al. [48], which will inform our work on 
assisting PLWDs to continue to maintain good behaviours. 
In particular, Fogg et al.’s categorisation of new behaviours 
into ‘one-time’, ‘temporary’ or ‘permanent’. We take further 
inspiration from the transtheoretical model of health 
behavior change of Prochaska and Velicer [49], in particular 
because we are aiming at maintaining activities of PLWDs 
rather than changing them. 
The success of our system will be measured by recording 
the period of independent living of our participant PLWDs 
against current established times for independent living 
following diagnosis with a dementing illness, the rate of 
decline in performing activities, and the adherence to self-
reporting of activity performance.  Limitations on our work 
are the engagement of PLWDs and their carers, the 
technology challenges of tracking activities by sensors, and 
the 
appropriate 
selection 
of 
activities 
and 
activity 
achievements. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
A set of goals for PLWDs can be constructed from 
existing scales of performance and disability, including 
scales that are not specific for dementia, those that are 
specific, and from care plans. Additional goals can be 
included following discussion at co-design workshops and 
interviews with individual PLWDs. Goal targets can be 
determined from care plans, from existing achievement 
levels of PLWD and their activity achievement ambitions. In 
this work we are focusing on the using the standard ADLs 
[22] and  IADLs [23], activities recommended by clinicians 
derived from formal care plans, and MAs selected by the 
PLWDs.  The set of goals and goal targets can be used to 
construct a framework that will allow for computational 
models to determine goal achievement and suggestions to 
maintain or achieve goal targets. 
Goals and goal achievements are formally specified in 
conjunction with PLWDs. The set of IADLs is taken from 
Lawton-Brody [23], with achievement goals set in 
collaboration with PLWDs. Activities and goals from formal 
care plans are those specified for each individual PLWD. 
The MAs and goal targets are those specified by individual 
PLWDs. When performance of an MA has declined such 
that it is no longer being performed, replacement MAs are 
suggested using a simple knn approach that aims to ensure 
that the benefits of performing the lost MA are maintained, 
in particular the cognitive functions, the domains of pleasure 
or meaning, and the exercising of the IADLs.  
Future work will include developing methods of 
capturing goal achievement information with minimum 
burden to the PLWD, by using an app with a simple interface 
and/or capturing and processing data automatically from 
sensors; developing appropriate methods of prompting or 
encouraging PLWDs to achieve or repeat goals, and mapping 
relationships and dependencies between goals (for example, 
the ability to walk or drive a minimum distance, or the ability 
to use public transport, which may be necessary for the 
ability 
to perform independent 
shopping). 
A pilot 
implementation of the system in the homes of 6 PLWDs is 
planned, to include evaluation of activity achievement, and 
burden of activity tracking on the PLWDs and their carers. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This material is based on works supported by the Science 
Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 19/FFP/6917. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. 
Turner 
et 
al., 
“A 
Goal-Driven 
Framework 
for 
Individualised 
Self-Care 
for 
Early-Stage 
Dementia,” 
HEALTHINFO 2021: The Sixth International Conference on 
Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, 
Medical Support and Wellbeing. IARIA, Oct 2021, ISSN: 
2519-8491, ISBN: 978-1-61208-916-4.  
[2] World Health Organization. Dementia. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/dementia 
[3] Health Service Executive. Types of Dementia. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.understandtogether.ie/about-
dementia/what-is-dementia/types-of-dementia/ 
[4] G. Rakesh, S. T. Szabo, G. S. Alexopoulos, and A. S. Zannas, 
”Strategies for dementia prevention: latest evidence and 
implications,” Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Diseases, 
vol. 
8, 
pp. 
121-136, 
Aug. 
2017, 
doi:10.1177/2040622317712442. 
29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[5] M. Prince, A. Comas-Herrera, M. Knapp, M. Guerchet, and 
M. Karagiannidou. World Alzheimer report 2016: improving 
healthcare for people living with dementia: coverage, quality 
and costs now and in the future. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.alzint.org/u/WorldAlzheimerReport2016.pdf 
[6] M. Pinquart and S. Sörensen, “Differences between caregivers 
and noncaregivers in psychological health and physical 
health: a meta-analysis,” Psychology and Aging, vol. 18, pp. 
250-267, Jun. 2003, doi:10.1037/0882-7974.18.2.250. 
[7] M. Prince, A. Wimo, M. Guerchet, G-C. Ali, Y-T. Wu, and 
M. Prina. World Alzheimer Report 2015 - The Global Impact 
of Dementia: An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost and 
trends. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.alzint.org/u/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf 
[8] C. Olsen et al., “Differences in quality of life in home-
dwelling persons and nursing home residents with dementia - 
a cross-sectional study,” BMC Geriatrics, vol. 16, Jul. 2016, 
doi:10.1186/s12877-016-0312-4. 
[9] Department of Health. The Irish National Dementia Strategy.  
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/healthy-
ireland/publications/irish-dementia-strategy-1-.pdf 
[10] NetwellCASALA. Smart Dementia Care. [Online]. Available 
from:  https://www.netwellcasala.org/smart-dementia-care/ 
[11] D. Edvardsson, D. Fetherstonhaugh, and R. Nay. “Promoting 
a continuation of self and normality: person-centred care as 
described by people with dementia, their family members and 
aged care staff,” Journal of Clinical Nursing, vol. 19, pp. 
2611-2618, 
Sep. 
2010, 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2702.2009.03143.x. 
[12] S. Donnelly, M. O’Brien, E. Begley, and J. Brennan, “I’d 
prefer to stay at home but I don’t have a choice: Meeting 
Older People’s Preference for Care: Policy, but what about 
practice?” Dublin: University College Dublin. School of 
Social Policy, Social Work and Social Justice, Jun. 2016, doi: 
10.13140/RG.2.2.29520.61443 
[13] D. Carter. Fix Dementia Care: Homecare. [Online]. Available 
from:  
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/sites/default/files/migrate/dow
nloads/fix_dementia_care_homecare_report.pdf 
[14] S. Evans, S. Waller, J. Bray, and T. Atkinson, “Making homes 
more dementia-friendly through the use of aids and 
adaptations,” 
Healthcare, 
vol. 
7, 
Mar. 
2019, 
doi: 
10.3390/healthcare7010043. 
[15] Department of Health. The Irish national dementia strategy. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://health.old.gov.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/30115-National-Dementia-Strategy-
Eng.pdf 
[16] L. 
Clare 
et 
al., 
“Individual 
goal-oriented 
cognitive 
rehabilitation to improve everyday functioning for people 
with early-stage dementia: A multicentre randomised 
controlled trial (the GREAT trial),” International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 34, pp. 709-721, May 2019, 
doi:10.3310/hta23100. 
[17] L. Clare, “Rehabilitation for people living with dementia: a 
practical framework of positive support,” PLoS Medicine, 
vol. 14, Mar. 2017, doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1002245. 
[18] L. Clare et al., “Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation in 
early-stage dementia: study protocol for a multi-centre single-
blind randomised controlled trial (GREAT),” Trials, vol. 27, 
pp. 152-165, May 2013, doi:10.1186/1745-6215-14-152. 
[19] T. J. Kiresuk and R. E. Sherman, “Goal attainment scaling: A 
general method for evaluating comprehensive community 
mental health programs,” Community Mental Health Journal, 
vol. 4, pp. 443-53, Dec. 1968,  doi:10.1007/BF01530764. 
[20] L. Stokes-Turner. Goal Attainment Scaling (GAS) in 
Rehabilitation. A practical guide. [Online]. Available from 
https://www.kcl.ac.uk/cicelysaunders/attachments/Tools-
GAS-Practical-Guide.pdf 
[21] A. Phinney, H. Chaudhury, and D. L. O'Connor, “Doing as 
much as I can do: the meaning of activity for people with 
dementia,” Aging & Mental Health, vol. 11, pp. 384-93, Jul. 
2007, doi:10.1080/13607860601086470. 
[22] S. Katz, A. B. Ford, R. W. Moskowitz, B. A. Jackson, and M. 
W. Jaffe, “Studies of illness in the aged. The Index of ADL: a 
standardized measure of biological and psychosocial 
function,” JAMA, vol. 185, pp. 914-919, Sep. 1963, 
doi:10.1001/jama.1963.03060120024016. 
[23] M. P. Lawton and E. M. Brody, “Assessment of older people: 
Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living,” 
The Gerontologist, vol. 9, pp. 179-186, Sep. 1969, 
doi:10.1093/geront/9.3_Part_1.179. 
[24] I. P. Donald, "Development of a modified Winchester 
disability scale--the elderly at risk rating scale," Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, vol. 51, pp. 558-563, 
Oct. 1997, doi:10.1136/jech.51.5.558. 
[25] J. Burt, J. Rick, T. Blakeman, J. Protheroe, M. Roland, and P. 
Bower, “Care plans and care planning in long-term 
conditions: a conceptual model,” Primary Health Care 
Research and Development, vol. 15, pp. 342-354, Oct. 2014,  
doi:10.1017/S1463423613000327. 
[26] Alzheimer’s Association. Daily Care Plan. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.alz.org/help-
support/caregiving/daily-care/daily-care-plan 
[27] J. Diggs, “Activity Theory of Aging,” in Encyclopedia of 
Aging and Public Health, S. Loue & M. Sajatovic, Eds, New 
York: Springer, pp. 79-81, 2008. 
[28] C. Barton, R. Ketelle, J. Merrilees, and B. Miller, “Non-
pharmacological management of behavioral symptoms in 
frontotemporal and other dementias,” Current Neurology and 
Neuroscience Reports, vol. 16, pp. 1-8, Jan. 2016, 
doi:10.1007/s11910-015-0618-1. 
[29] F. Mahoney and D. Barthel, “Functional evaluation: the 
Barthel Index,” Maryland State Medical Journal, vol. 14, pp. 
61–65, Feb. 1965, doi:10.1037/t02366-000. 
[30] NHS South East Clinical Delivery and Networks. Dementia 
Care and Support Planning Generic Toolkit. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.southeastclinicalnetworks.nhs.uk/dementia-
csplanning-toolkit/ 
[31] L. Teri and R. G. Logsdon, “Identifying pleasant activities for 
Alzheimer's disease patients: the pleasant events schedule-
AD,” The Gerontologist, vol. 31, pp. 124-7, Feb 1991, 
doi:10.1093/GERONT/31.1.124. 
[32] S. C. Smith et al., “Measurement of health-related quality of 
life for people with dementia: development of a new 
instrument (DEMQOL) and an evaluation of current 
methodology,” Health Technology Assessment (Winchester, 
England), vol. 9, pp. 1-93, Mar. 2005, doi:10.3310/hta9100. 
[33] American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), 
Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, pp. 593-595, 
2013. 
[34] R. Tuijt, P. Leung, E. Profyri, and V. Orgeta, “Development 
and preliminary validation of the Meaningful and Enjoyable 
Activities Scale (MEAS) in mild dementia,” International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 35, pp. 944-952, May 
2020, doi:10.1002/gps.5316. 
[35] T. Cohen and D. Widdows, “Geometric Representations in 
Biomedical Informatics: Applications in Automated Text 
Analysis,” in Methods in Biomedical Informatics, I. N. 
Sarkar, Ed.,  London: Academic Press, pp. 99-139, 2014. 
[36] S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, C. Ladha, K. Ladha, K. Brittain, and 
P. Olivier, “Empathy, participatory design and people with 
30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

dementia,” CHI 2012: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, May 2012, pp. 
521-530, doi:10.1145/2207676.2207749. 
[37] F. J. M. Meiland et al., “Usability of a new electronic assistive 
device for community-dwelling persons with mild dementia,” 
Aging and Mental Health, vol. 16, pp. 594-591, Feb. 2012, 
doi: 10.1080/13607863.2011.651433. 
[38] Y. Kerkhof et al., “User-participatory development of 
FindMyApps; a tool to help people with mild dementia find 
supportive apps for self-management and meaningful 
activities,” 
Digital 
Health, 
vol. 
26, 
Mar. 
2019, 
doi:10.1177/2055207618822942. 
[39] R. M. Dröes et al., “Social health and dementia: a European 
consensus on the operationalization of the concept and 
directions for research and practice,” Aging & Mental Health, 
vol. 
21, 
pp.4-17, 
Nov. 
2016,  
doi:10.1080/13607863.2016.1254596. 
[40] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. Vernooij-Dassen, J. Eefsting, and 
C, Smits, “Involving people with dementia in the 
development of supportive IT applications: A systematic 
review,” Ageing Research Reviews, vol. 12, pp. 535-551, 
Mar. 2013, doi:10.1016/j.arr.2013.01.002. 
[41] M. Morris, J. Lundell, and E. Dishman, “Catalyzing social 
interaction with ubiquitous computing: A needs assessment of 
elders coping with cognitive decline,” CHI '04 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York: 
ACM, 
Apr. 
2004, 
pp.1151-1154, 
doi:10.1145/985921.986011. 
[42] J. Hoey, T. Pltz, D. Jackson, A. Monk, C. Pham, and P. 
Olivier, “Rapid specification and automated generation of 
prompting systems to assist people with dementia,” Pervasive 
and Mobile Computing, vol. 7, pp. 299-318, Jan. 2011, 
doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2010.11.007. 
[43] A. J. Astell, B. Malone, G. Williams, F. Hwang, and M. P. 
Ellis, “Leveraging everyday technology for people living with 
dementia: A case study,” Journal of Assistive Technologies, 
vol. 8, pp. 164-176, Dec. 2014, doi:10.1108/JAT-01-2014-
0004. 
[44] P. Joddrell and A. J. Astell, “Studies involving people with 
dementia and touchscreen technology: A literature review,” 
JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies, vol. 3, Nov. 
2016, doi:10.2196/rehab.5788. 
[45] B. Fogg and J. Hreha, “Behavior wizard: A method for 
matching target behaviors with solutions,” PERSUASIVE'10: 
Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Persuasive 
Technology, Jun. 2010, pp. 117–131, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
13226-1_13.  
[46] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Behavior change support systems: The 
next 
frontier 
for 
Web 
science,” 
PERSUASIVE'10: 
Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Persuasive 
Technology, Jun. 2010, pp. 4-14, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
13226-1_3. 
[47] U. Reimer, E. Maier, and T. Ulmer, “A Self-Learning 
Application Framework for Behavioral Change Support,” 
Information and Communication Technologies for Ageing 
Well 
and 
e-Health 
Second 
International 
Conference, 
ICT4AWE, Apr. 2016, pp. 119-139, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
62704-5_8. 
[48] T. L. Webb, J. Joseph, L. Yardley, and S. Michie, “Using the 
internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, 
use of behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on 
efficacy,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 12, Feb. 
2010, doi:10.2196/jmir.1376. 
[49] J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer, "The transtheoretical 
model of health behavior change," American Journal of 
Health Promotion, vol. 12, pp. 38–48, Sep.-Oct. 1997, doi: 
10.4278/0890-1171-12.1.38. 
 
 
31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

