39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Digital Users in Pre-Digital Hospital Organisations? 
An Analysis on the Readiness for Electronic Communication 
Between a Hospital and Surgical Patients 
 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
conceicao.granja@telemed.no 
Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
stein.roald.bolle@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvigsen 
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
 
Abstract—Are hospitals and surgical patients ready for elec-
tronic communication prior to surgery? This paper discusses 
the readiness for electronic communication between surgical pa-
tients and a university hospital in Norway. The first step in our 
study approach was to map the main actors involved in pre-op-
erative planning and electronic communication. This work 
mapped six diverse main actors and revealed the need for mul-
tiple approaches to address the e-readiness of the different ac-
tors. The study approach consists of the following: (1) a study of 
the most recent health reforms in Norway, focusing on e-readi-
ness from political and policy perspectives; (2) an in-depth em-
pirical observation and interview study of the pre-operative 
planning process at a university hospital, focusing on the readi-
ness for two-way electronic communication prior to surgery; (3) 
a qualitative interview study of patients’ experiences with sur-
gical cancellations, focusing on the patients’ readiness for elec-
tronic communication; (4) an inquiry into the readiness of the 
hospitals’ electronic health record to integrate two-way commu-
nication and (5) a study of the readiness for electronic patient–
hospital communication from the perspective of the regional 
health authority’s ICT operational unit. The results are re-
ported in six analytical categories based on the identification of 
the main actors in the field. The authors’ conclusion is that Nor-
wegian health policy strongly promotes electronic collaboration 
and that patients and healthcare workers are ready to use new 
electronic tools. However, the hospital as an entity, together with 
the electronic health record system and the authority’s ICT op-
erational unit—all of which are important actors in the field—
are currently not ready for electronic communication between 
patients and the hospital. 
Keywords—e-readiness; electronic communication; ICT; health 
policy; hospitals; surgical departments; healthcare workers; 
patients; electronic health record; health authority; Norway 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this paper is to discuss the readiness for elec-
tronic communication between surgical patients and a univer-
sity hospital in Norway. The interest in the subject, e-readi-
ness, stems from recent work in a research and development 
project, ‘eTeam-surgery’ [1]. The overarching goal of the 
eTeam-surgery project was to develop a tool for electronic 
communication between surgical patients and the University 
Hospital of North Norway (UNN). The idea of the project was 
to actively involve the patient in the pre-operative planning 
process prior to hospitalisation in order to reduce the number 
of surgery cancellations at the hospital.  
For many patients, undergoing surgery is a major life 
event which involves a high level of anxiety before admission 
to the hospital [2][3][4][5]. In most hospitals, surgical depart-
ments are both a major area of investment and the greatest 
source of revenue [1][6][7]. Nonetheless, elective surgeries 
are regularly cancelled, and cancellation rates of 10–40 % 
have been reported [7][8][9]. In Western countries, up to 20 
% of elective surgeries are cancelled on the day of the surgery, 
and this percentage increases if cancellations within the week 
of the scheduled surgery are included. Despite the waste of 
hospital resources, the anxiety and emotional stress placed on 
patients and the frustrations among healthcare workers, surgi-
cal cancellations seem to be commonplace in public hospitals.  
The reasons for elective surgery cancellations vary. In the 
literature, the causes of cancellation are often divided into the 

40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
following two major categories: (a) hospital-related and (b) 
patient-related. Hospital-related reasons encompass such is-
sues as the unavailability of the surgical team [10][11][12], 
incomplete pre-operative study/preparation [13][14], lack of 
surgical/anaesthetic readiness [11][13] and lack of theatre 
time due to the extended duration of scheduled surgeries [13]. 
On the other hand, patient-related causes are mostly due to pa-
tient no-shows or to a patient’s need to reschedule the assigned 
surgical date [11][13].  
At our research site, 50 % of all surgery cancellations were 
identified as avoidable [15], which corresponds with the liter-
ature [7][8][9]. Avoidable cancellations refer to, among other 
things, those involving a lack of information; hence, these are 
cancellations where information existed prior to surgery, but 
was not available when required [9][15][16][17][18][19]. For 
further information on the rate of elective surgery cancella-
tions at the research site and the reasons reported for these 
cancellations, refer to [20]. 
The eTeam-surgery project group consists of an interdis-
ciplinary research team which is studying if and how elec-
tronic communication, prior to hospitalisation, can actively 
involve the patient in the pre-operative planning process, pro-
vide the missing information and thereby reduce cancella-
tions (Figure 1). For further information on the eTeam-sur-
gery project, refer to [21]. A central goal for the eTeam-sur-
gery project was to develop and test a two-way communica-
tion tool that would enable patients to communicate with the 
surgical department by storing the patient’s input in the UNN 
hospital electronic health record (EHR). In this way, patients 
could inform the surgical department about changes in their 
health status or other factors that could potentially affect their 
forthcoming surgery. The eTeam-surgery intervention can be 
seen as part of what Gale and Sultan [22] label ‘a wider trend 
to move medical technologies from the hospital to home’. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of the eTeam-Surgery architecture. 
Developing a tool for electronic collaboration between 
the patient and the hospital is not straightforward. Several 
health information and communication technology (ICT) 
projects have failed to fulfil their expected outcomes. A sub-
stantial amount of the literature in the field of health ICT, 
particularly from the social sciences, covers unsuccessful im-
plementation projects, challenges and unforeseen conse-
quences[23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][3
5][36][37][38]. 
In an attempt to avoid adding to the list of health ICT de-
velopments that are either not used or used differently than 
expected, the eTeam-surgery project addressed the readiness 
for electronic communication between surgical patients and 
UNN prior to developing and testing the tool. In this paper, 
we address the readiness for electronic communication as a 
means to improve the quality and effectiveness of the pre-
operative process.  
The paper is divided into five sections. In the first section, 
the problem of surgical cancellations is introduced and the 
aim of the study is described. In the second section, the back-
ground of the study is presented. It briefly introduces the ex-
isting knowledge on e-readiness and the challenges of ICT in 
healthcare. As will be evident in section three, Materials and 
Methods, our approach to the study of e-readiness consists of 
a broad spectrum of qualitative methods. In this section, a 
brief introduction to the methodology (actor-network theory 
[ANT]) used to map the main actors regarding electronic pa-
tient–hospital communication in pre-operative planning is 
described. The diverse methods of data collection used to 
study e-readiness among the identified actors are also pre-
sented and explained in the third section. The results are dis-
closed and interpreted in the fourth section. In the last section, 
Discussion and Conclusions, the authors elaborate on the 
readiness to use electronic communication among the differ-
ent actors involved in pre-operative planning, and in 
healthcare more generally. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Telecare technologies are advocated by European govern-
ments and industries as innovations of great promise for im-
proving care [39]. In the last decade, the healthcare sector has 
witnessed the introduction of an increased number of telemed-
icine applications, i.e., devices that can monitor, diagnose or 
treat people at a distance from the clinicians through the use 
of ICT [40]. Regardless of whether it is labelled ‘telemedi-
cine’, ‘telecare’ or ‘tele-monitoring’, it has been reported that 
Norwegian patients are well prepared and able to use ICT for 
health purposes [41]. Patients, including the elderly and less 
educated [41][42], are using electronic healthcare services 
[43][44]. In addition to the patients’ readiness for electronic 
communication, a tendency among healthcare workers to use 
personal electronic devices to support their clinical work 
[31][45][46] and communicate with patients [44][47][48] has 
also been reported.  
At the same time, substantial evidence exists in the field 
of health ICT of less successful project implementations 
EHR 
Patient Health Assessment Questionnaire 
EHR 
Structure Data 
Patient 
Two-way Communication 
Patient 
Messages 
Hospital 

41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][33][34][36][37][38]. 
Challenges with implementation, slow diffusion and unfore-
seen consequences of ICT in healthcare, particularly in hospi-
tals, have been extensively described. This knowledge, or 
what we have called the ‘e-readiness paradox’ in the field of 
health informatics, shaped the research question of this paper: 
If patients and healthcare workers are ready for ICT in 
healthcare, but yet at the same time the new digital technolo-
gies are not used as expected, are Norwegian hospitals ready 
for electronic communication during pre-operative planning?  
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The e-readiness paradox—which refers to the reported e-
readiness among patients and healthcare workers related to 
studies of slow diffusion and unforeseen consequences of 
health ICT—illustrates the complexity in the field. It also 
points to the need for a broad approach to the research ques-
tion, ‘Are Norwegian hospitals ready for electronic communi-
cation during pre-operative planning?’ 
Knowledge from the field of qualitative research on health 
ICT, notably ANT [49] and science technology studies (STS) 
[50], was used as a first step in our study. The methodology 
employed an open, empirical approach to determine the actors 
in technology development, and was also used as a first step 
in our study to map the different actors involved in electronic 
communication in relation to pre-operative planning.  
ANT is also called a material-semiotic method, where the 
concept of ‘actor’ is used similarly to the semiotic concept of 
‘actant’, which means that materiality, i.e., hospitals and EHR 
systems, are seen as non-human actors and treated equally as 
human actors. An actor can be any entity that holds a position 
in a discourse [51]. Thus, the methodology is associated with 
the equal treatment of human and non-human actors, and as-
sumes that all entities in a network can and should be de-
scribed in the same terms. This is called the ‘principle of gen-
eralised symmetry’.  
Although it is called a ‘theory’, ANT does not usually ex-
plain ‘why’ or ‘how’ a network takes the form that it does [50]. 
ANT is a way of thoroughly exploring the relational ties 
within a network. The methodology is empirical and descrip-
tive, rather than theoretical and explanatory in its approach. It 
consists of following the actors and mapping their actions 
[50]. In practical terms, this means that the first step of our 
study of e-readiness was to map the main actors involved in 
electronic communication during pre-operative planning.   
 
 
Figure 2. Actors involved in the electronic hospital–patient communication during pre-operative planning at UNN. 
Patients 
Am I ready? 
H 
Healthcare workers 
Are we ready? 
I want you to talk to each 
other, electronically!  
e-Communication 
EHR 
Electronic Health 
Record 
Hospital 
as an entity 
Am I ready? 
Am I ready? 
Norwegian health politics and policy 
ICT operational unit 
Am I ready? 

42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The process of mapping the actors identified six main hu-
man and non-human actors in need of further inquiry. The 
main actors, as illustrated in Figure 2, were as follows: a) Nor-
wegian health politics and policy; b) healthcare workers; c) 
the hospital as an entity; d) patients; e) the EHR system and f) 
the ICT operational unit. Mapping actors is an extensive exer-
cise. This paper does not reflect the entire nuanced process of 
mapping; however, it emphasises the need to carefully con-
sider who the actors are in the field, as it can be much more 
complex than originally anticipated. For analytical reasons, 
the rest of the paper is organised according to the main actors.  
The process of mapping the main actors created a picture 
of the broad network of actors involved in electronic commu-
nication in pre-operative planning. Hence, the second step of 
our research approach consists of five different study designs 
for approaching the e-readiness of the six main actors. The 
five study designs in step two are described below.  
 Health politics and policy  
Norwegian health and social care are based on the classical 
Scandinavian welfare model, which combines financing and 
the provision of universally accessible services mainly within 
the public sector [52]. An important political goal in Norway 
is to provide healthcare on equal terms for all citizens, mean-
ing that local healthcare services should be easily accessible, 
meet clients’ needs and be provided in accordance with polit-
ical priorities. The Norwegian health and social care sectors 
are mainly run by public institutions, which accounted for 
more than 95 % of the health expenses paid by governmental 
institutions in 1996 [53]. Despite a minor increase in private 
health services during the last two decades, governmental ICT 
strategies for the future are an important actor when studying 
e-readiness.  
In order to gain knowledge on the governmental readiness 
for digitised patient–hospital communication, we conducted a 
study of one of the largest public sector reforms in Norway, 
the Coordination Reform [54]. Enhancing coordination be-
tween primary and secondary healthcare has been central in 
Norwegian healthcare policymaking in the last decade. In 
2008, a new Minister of Health and Care worked out plans 
under the key term ‘Coordination Reform’, and the govern-
ment has been implementing these administrative, structural 
and economic reforms since 2012 [52]. The Coordination Re-
form was identified as an important actor regarding e-readi-
ness in Norwegian healthcare.  
In Norway, the healthcare services are divided into four 
health regions, each with their own authorities aimed at plan-
ning, organising and promoting patient care [55]. One way to 
approach the policy implementation of the Coordination re-
form is to look into the regional health authority’s recent strat-
egies and investments in ICT. This study focuses on the north-
ern region, represented by the Northern Norway Regional 
Health Authority (Helse-Nord RHF). In order to gain 
knowledge on the northern health regional ICT policy, we 
studied their website [56]. The ICT strategy of the northern 
health region was identified as one important actor in our 
study of e-readiness.  
Since the national vision and the regional health author-
ity’s strategy for ICT in healthcare correspond, in this paper 
they are considered as one actor in the study of e-readiness.  
 Healthcare workers and the Hospital as an organisation 
The UNN hospital and the healthcare workers involved in 
pre-operative planning are main actors in relation to e-readi-
ness. A new communication tool must be implemented in the 
daily practices at the hospital and taken into use by health pro-
fessionals during the pre-operative planning process. To study 
readiness for electronic communication between surgery pa-
tients and the hospital, we conducted an in-depth empirical 
observation and interview study of the pre-operative planning 
process at UNN. This approach consists of three phases. The 
empirical methodology will be described briefly; for further 
information, refer to [57]. 
Stage 1: Gather data on the hospital’s representation of 
the elective surgery cancellation problem. Inspired by Bacchi 
[58], the aim was to gather knowledge on how the hospital 
represented the elective surgical cancellation problem. One 
internal report from 2008, which contained information on the 
use of resources involved in surgery at the hospital, was iden-
tified and studied [15]. In addition to the report, in 2012, the 
hospital had initiated a Lean Project (which was established 
by the management at UNN as an internal project to reduce 
the cancellation rate) to optimise the elective surgical process. 
Two researchers from the eTeam-surgery group followed this 
project. For further reference on the Lean Project, see [57]. 
Stage 2: Gather data on the pre-operative planning pro-
cess at the hospital. In Stage 2, the pre-operative planning pro-
cess in different departments at UNN was investigated. This 
comprised three weeks of fieldwork and interviews at the sur-
gery and intensive care clinic while following an anaesthesi-
ologist and an anaesthetic nurse. In addition, 13 interviews 
with physicians, nurses and administrative personnel were 
conducted in six different departments. The interviews were 
semi-structured, done at the workplace and lasted from 30 
minutes to two hours. During the first two stages, two depart-
ments were described as more efficient. However, these de-
partments still had a number of cancellations. One of the de-
partments was chosen for an in-depth study in Stage 3.  
Stage 3. Individual, in-depth interviews with professionals 
from all groups involved in pre-operative planning in a spe-
cific department. The chosen department is not revealed due 
to ethical reasons. In Stage 3, representatives from all the pro-
fessional groups involved in the pre-operative planning pro-
cess at UNN were addressed. In this specific department, ex-
tensive knowledge on the pre-operative planning process was 
collected. The department-specific interviews were semi-
structured, done at the workplace and lasted between one to 
two hours.  
The ANT-inspired approach helped us to map the main ac-
tors and their network of relationships. Not unexpectedly, the 
hospital and the involved healthcare workers were identified 
as main actors. Nonetheless, the approach exposed the need to 
treat and describe the hospital as an institution, or as an organ-
isational entity, and the healthcare workers involved in pre-
operative planning at UNN as two separate, equally important 

43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
actors in the field of e-readiness. Hospital and health person-
nel will from now on be considered two important actors in 
this study of e-readiness. 
 Patiens 
Patients are, of course, important actors in patient–hospital 
communication. To investigate the patients’ readiness for 
electronic communication, we interviewed patients who had 
recently cancelled an elective surgery. The category was stra-
tegically chosen due to the patients’ recent experience with 
surgical cancellations and their current incentive to communi-
cate with the hospital on the issue. The relevant patients were 
identified from the hospital’s EHR system. The study of the 
patients’ readiness is part of a larger qualitative phone inquiry 
where a researcher from the eTeam-surgery project inter-
viewed 16 patients who had recently cancelled elective sur-
gery. The interviews were semi-structured, and patients were 
asked about their experiences with elective surgery at the hos-
pital, patient–hospital communication and cancellations of 
surgery. The 16 phone interviews lasted between 15 to 60 
minutes and were recorded and transcribed. In this paper, we 
report on one question from the phone interviews. As a fol-
low-up to the main questions related to how the patients expe-
rienced the communication with the hospital regarding their 
surgical cancellations, the patients were asked, ‘Do you have 
any thoughts on how it [the communication] could be done 
differently?’ 
Despite variations and differences among patients, the ex-
ercise of mapping actors showed that the surgery patient can 
be considered a main actor in our study field of e-readiness.   
 EHR system 
The hospitals’ ICT systems are obvious actors in patient–
hospital communication. This paper focuses on the EHR sys-
tem since it is the system that healthcare workers mainly in-
teract with during the pre-operative planning process. 
In the northern health region, the EHR systems in use are 
provided by DIPS ASA [51]. DIPS ASA is the leading sup-
plier of electronic health records in Norwegian hospitals, and 
is a supplier of systems for the health sector with a special 
focus on the Scandinavian market [51]. DIPS ASA provides 
EHR systems to three of the four health regions in Norway. 
Currently, DIPS ASA, in collaboration with FIKS, an imple-
mentation project initiated by the Northern Regional Health 
Authority, is developing a new EHR system for the region, 
including a new surgery module. 
In the literature, usability, integration and interoperability 
are identified as key topics in the development of ICT for the 
healthcare environment. Usability refers to the adequacy of 
the system for the users’ needs. This is mainly reflected by the 
impact that the system has on the productivity of the process, 
e.g., efficiency, fulfilling work content, time required for data 
entry and interference with the physician/patient relationship. 
The topics, integration and interoperability, generally go hand 
in hand.   
It was the aim of the eTeam-surgery project to combine 
the eTeam system with the EHR to form one system, ensuring 
that they function together efficiently by fulfilling the required 
integration. However, to do so, interoperability is required be-
tween both systems, meaning that they must be able to com-
municate with each other and exchange information. The use 
of data standards ensures that the collected patient health data 
can be integrated in the EHR system and shared among health 
entities. 
In order to study the readiness for a two-way communica-
tion system between patients and the hospital integrated in the 
EHR system, the three aforementioned topics were investi-
gated. Our approach was to study how the EHR was described 
by health personnel and by the EHR vendor. These groups 
were involved in separate interviews and meetings, as well as 
joint workshops focusing on the visions for the future, the lim-
itations and the characteristics of the system. 
 ICT operational unit 
The Northern Norway Regional Health Authority has es-
tablished an operational unit (in Norwegian, Helse-Nord IKT) 
to manage, operate and develop ICT systems for the health 
region, which comprises a total of 11 hospitals [59]. Hence, 
all ICT projects involving any of the hospitals in the health 
region must be approved and accounted for by the ICT opera-
tional unit. The ICT operational unit was identified as one im-
portant actor regarding readiness for electronic patient–hospi-
tal communication. 
In order to establish a secure online solution for electronic 
communication between surgical patients and UNN, a re-
searcher from the eTeam-surgery project attended meetings 
and workshops over a two-year period from 2014 to 2015. 
During this period, the Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care 
and Telemedicine (NST), today called the Norwegian Centre 
for eHealth Research (NSE), i.e., the authors’ research insti-
tution, coordinated the efforts to meet the needs and require-
ments set by the ICT operational unit for electronic communi-
cation. A researcher from the eTeam-surgery project attended 
between 13 meetings. Knowledge gained during the meetings 
was used to address the ICT operational unit’s readiness for 
two-way electronic communication between the patient and 
UNN. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Six main actors were identified in order to explore the 
readiness for two-way electronic communication between the 
patient and UNN within pre-operative planning. The main ac-
tors are categorised as follows: 
a) Norwegian health politics and policy: National and 
regional health authorities’ visions and strategies for 
the future of electronic communication within public 
healthcare; 
b) Healthcare workers: Readiness among the profes-
sionals involved in pre-operative planning to use ICT 
to communicate with patients; 
c) Hospital as an entity: Readiness within UNN as an 
organisation to use two-way electronic communica-
tion with patients;  
d) Patients: Readiness among surgical patients to com-
municate electronically with the hospital; 

44
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
e) EHR system: Readiness of the EHR to support two-
way electronic communication with patients; 
f) 
ICT operational unit: Ranking of priorities and allo-
cation of resources regarding two-way electronic pa-
tient–hospital communication. 
 Norwegian health politics and policy 
In the preface of the Coordination Reform, the Minister of 
Health and Care Services states, ‘In public health spending per 
capita, Norway ranks among the highest of all OECD na-
tions—but we have not achieved a correspondingly high level 
of health in return’ [54]. However, ‘With smart solutions, pa-
tients will receive proper treatment at the right place and right 
time. We will achieve this through the Coordination Reform’. 
[54]. A well-defined goal in the reform (p. 135) is that ‘elec-
tronic communication should be the standard way of com-
municating’ [54].  
In line with the national ambition, an extensive ICT invest-
ment is currently being made in the northern health region, 
including at the UNN hospital, our site of research. The North-
ern Norway Regional Health Authority is investing €62.5 mil-
lion in the FIKS project (from the Norwegian Felles innføring 
kliniske systemer) [60]. On their webpage, the regional health 
authority describes the FIKS project as the largest and most 
interesting ICT investment in northern Norway [56].  
 Healthcare workers 
During our observations and interviews at the hospital, we 
did not experience any resistance from the healthcare workers 
towards electronic communication. On the contrary, aside 
from what can be described as mixed enthusiasm for ‘quick 
IT-fixes’ for complicated clinical issues, most healthcare 
workers expressed frustration over the current cancellation sit-
uation at the hospital. Several stressed the need for new com-
munication tools. 
A theatre nurse linked the need for new ways of commu-
nication to the current ‘quick in, quick out’ trend in Norwe-
gian hospitals. The nurse emphasised that this trend requires 
new ways of communicating with patients prior to hospital ad-
mission in order to prepare them for surgery while they are 
still at home. Before the quick in, quick out movement, nurses 
were responsible for nursing and preparing the patient for sur-
gery after the patient arrived at the hospital. Such preparation 
included, for example, cleaning, shaving and nail trimming, 
according to the hygienic standards required for surgery. To-
day, many patients are responsible for doing these tasks them-
selves, and they must follow the hygiene instructions provided 
by the hospital at home. The nurse’s main concern was related 
to infections. In this context, an electronic communication tool 
between the patient and the hospital was suggested to help pa-
tients prepare for surgery. 
Some of the secretaries were also very much in favour of 
electronic communication with patients. Secretaries are on the 
front line in terms of everyday communication with patients. 
Almost all of them expressed frustration or resignation over 
the current cancellation situation at the hospital, and stressed 
the need for better tools to book, rebook or cancel scheduled 
appointments.  
As a professional group, with some exceptions, physicians 
were less troubled than nurses and secretaries by the estab-
lished hospital communication procedures for patients. Physi-
cians were deeply concerned by the cancellation rate at the 
hospital, but did not necessarily link it to communication is-
sues. Some emphasised that they used the phone to contact 
patients if they needed additional information prior to surgery.   
 Hospital as an entity 
During the inquiry into UNN’s position on the elective 
surgery cancellation problem, one internal report [15] was 
identified and studied, and the Lean project at the surgery and 
intensive care ward was followed and observed. The internal 
report [15] acknowledges the challenges with the continuity 
of patient care in the region, and relates them to poor interac-
tion between the different professional groups involved in sur-
gical practices. The aims of the internal report [15], along with 
those of the Lean project, were to promote the continuity of 
patient care and efficient use of resources in surgery and to 
reduce elective surgery cancellations. Regarding e-readiness 
at the hospital, it is important to note that electronic collabo-
ration as a strategy to improve the continuity of care during 
the pre-operative planning process is not suggested in any of 
the hospital initiatives. 
In addition, the fieldwork at the hospital revealed internal 
variations between the different departments in terms of how 
and by whom surgeries were planned and when the planning 
was done. At the UNN hospital, the different departments had 
developed their own local practices. In some departments, 
senior surgeons did the pre-operative planning. In other de-
partments, this planning involved interdisciplinary teamwork 
between junior and senior physicians, nurses and secretaries. 
Based on the empirical findings, a homogeneous structure for 
the pre-operative planning process at UNN could not be iden-
tified, nor was it possible to describe a standard pre-operative 
planning structure at the selected department. It is the authors’ 
understanding that in order to complete the daily schedule, 
healthcare workers depend on personal and empirical 
knowledge. 
The main findings from the empirical inquiry into the e-
readiness at the hospital were as follows: a) the two identified 
hospital initiatives to reduce surgery cancellations and im-
prove the continuity of care during the pre-operative planning 
process did not include two-way electronic communication; 
and b) heterogeneity was identified in how departments and 
individual professionals carry out the pre-operative planning 
process.  
 Patients 
The respondents to the telephone inquiries were patients 
scheduled for elective surgery who had taken the initiative to 
call the hospital to reschedule the appointed date for surgery. 
Some of these patients were pleased with the existing com-
munication with the hospital (i.e., letters and phone calls) and 
articulated their gratitude towards UNN. It is relevant to note 

45
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that many of the grateful patients named specific health work-
ers who had been particularly helpful during the pre-opera-
tive planning process.  
A majority of the patients that participated in the tele-
phone inquiry had experienced difficulties with patient–hos-
pital communication and expressed readiness for new ways 
of communicating with the hospital. Most patients did not 
come up with any concrete recommendations in response to 
the question, ‘Do you have any thoughts on how it [the com-
munication] could be done differently?’ Rather, the responses 
can be categorised as vague suggestions regarding the poten-
tial for online communication in modern society. One patient 
explicitly suggested an electronic communication system 
where patients could inform the hospital about specific dates 
when surgery was inconvenient, e.g. vacations, attending 
family events. It is the authors’ interpretation that the patients 
expected some sort of interactive communication tool which 
they could use to participate in the planning of the surgery 
date. With respect to readiness for electronic communication, 
we did not identify any differences among patients regarding 
age, gender or level of education. 
 EHR system 
During workshops and meetings with professionals from 
DIPS and FIKS, the EHR system was described as a central 
working tool for elective surgery planning. Nevertheless, the 
phrase ‘poor functionally’ was used to describe the current 
version of the surgery module in the EHR. This is in line with 
the findings from the observations and interviews at the hos-
pital, which revealed that different individuals use this mod-
ule differently in their workflow, and that different depart-
ments also use it in different ways to support the information 
flow. Nevertheless, the EHR system was often referred to as 
the future spine of the hospitals’ ICT services, and huge in-
vestments were made in the development of the EHR system. 
The next step in our study was to approach the EHR ven-
dor in relation to the integration requirements and interoper-
ability of the EHR system. The study revealed that, despite 
implementation and research initiatives, the lack of structured 
data within the EHR system hinders integration with other 
health ICT. Furthermore, the lack of structured data, com-
bined with the non-use of communication standards, limits 
the availability of interoperability interfaces. This creates a 
barrier to achieve the degree of interoperability required to 
establish patient–hospital communication. The implementa-
tion of a communication tool is also restricted by either the 
inexistence or low maturity of the required platforms. How-
ever, tools for electronic communication within the EHR sys-
tem are being tested at UNN, e.g., the Innsyn project [54]. 
Such a scenario demonstrates why the EHR system vendor, 
DIPS ASA, collaborates with the health authority’s FIKS 
project to develop a new EHR system, including a new sur-
gery module.  
Professionals working for FIKS and DIPS, including 
nurses, physicians and engineers, as well as health personnel 
in general, promoted one singular system that health person-
nel would learn how to operate and which would provide 
them with relevant information and services easily and with-
out additional log on. Quite a few professionals expressed in-
terest and enthusiasm for the implementation of the new and 
future surgery module under development. Some health per-
sonnel were enthusiastic and impatient for the new version of 
the EHR. Still, they questioned the possibilities for integra-
tion with other ICT systems in the region, e.g., tools for elec-
tronic patient–provider interactions. The success or failure of 
the huge ICT investments was tied to a functional EHR sys-
tem.  
 The ICT operational unit  
In meetings and workshops with the Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority’s ICT operational unit, electronic 
communication between patients and hospitals was described 
as an aim for future health care. A secure system for two-way 
communication between patients and hospitals is a clear vi-
sion for the northern health region.  
However, the ICT operational unit had several unsolved 
tasks on their agenda due to many large ongoing ICT projects 
and the lack of human resources. Furthermore, they lacked a 
secure platform for testing new functionalities. We also found 
the ambition for contributing to two-way electronic commu-
nication differed at different management levels within the 
ICT operation unit. The policy and willingness varied be-
tween individuals and from meeting to meeting. Neither the 
eTeam-surgery project nor NST were successful in reaching 
an agreement with the ICT operational unit on one solution 
for solving secure two-way electronic communication. 
To this day, the ICT operational unit has not implemented 
a platform to support secure two-way electronic communica-
tion, nor do they have a foundation for pursuing the issue. 
However, the unit is supporting and testing a platform to pro-
vide patients access to their own electronic health record in 
an ongoing project in the health region [54]. 
Summing up the results, see Table I, the strong govern-
mental vision that ‘Electronic communication should be the 
standard way of communicating’ [54] is evident in our find-
ings from the study of e-readiness among healthcare workers 
at the hospital. Apart from what can be described as mixed 
enthusiasm for quick IT-fixes for complicated clinical issues, 
several healthcare workers expressed frustration with the cur-
rent cancellation situation at the hospital and stressed the 
need for new communication tools. Similarly, and in line with 
the governmental vision, the patients in our study requested 
some sort of interactive communication tool, where they had 
access and could participate in the planning and decision 
making of the date of their forthcoming elective surgery.  
 
 

46
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF THE TYPE OF STUDY AND RESULTS HIGHLIGHTS FOR THE IDENTIFIED ACTORS. 
 
Health politics 
and policy  
Healthcare 
workers 
Hospital 
as an entity 
Patients 
EHR system 
ICT Operational 
unit 
Type of study 
Documentary 
study of the Coor-
dination 
Reform 
[54] 
Identification of UNN’s representation of 
the elective surgery cancellation problem 
In-depth empirical observation of the pre-
operative planning process at UNN 
Interviews with professionals from all 
groups involved in the pre-operative plan-
ning process 
Phone interviews 
with patients that 
recently had an 
elective 
surgery 
cancelled 
Interviews, meet-
ings 
and 
work-
shops with vendors 
and users 
Meetings with the 
ICT 
operational 
unit 
concerning 
two-way electronic 
communication 
Results highlights 
Electronic commu-
nication should be 
the standard way 
of communicating 
Stressed the need 
for new communi-
cation tools 
None of the identi-
fied hospital initia-
tives included two-
way 
electronic 
communication 
Heterogeneity 
in 
how departments 
and 
individuals 
carry out the pre-
operative planning 
process 
Requested 
some 
sort of interactive 
communication 
tool 
Lack of structured 
data within the 
EHR system hin-
dered the integra-
tion with other 
health ICT solu-
tions 
Two-way 
elec-
tronic communica-
tion was not pre-
sented as a priority 
in their ICT strat-
egy 
 
 
Regarding e-readiness, electronic communication, as a 
strategy to improve the continuity of care during the pre-oper-
ative planning process, was not suggested in any of the hospi-
tal initiatives identified in this study. In addition, the main 
finding from the empirical inquiry at the hospital was hetero-
geneity in how departments and individual professionals car-
ried out the pre-operative planning process. The study has also 
exposed that, despite implementation and research initiatives, 
the lack of structured data within the EHR system hinders the 
integration with other health ICT solutions. This creates a bar-
rier to achieve the degree of interoperability required to estab-
lish two-way electronic communication. At this point, the re-
gional health authority’s ICT operational unit is not ready to 
open up for two-way electronic communication. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Are Norwegian hospitals ready for two-way electronic 
communication between the patient and hospital during pre-
operative planning? 
Six main actors were mapped and identified as requiring 
further investigation in order to study readiness for two-way 
electronic communication within pre-operative planning at 
UNN. The main actors were as follows: (a) Norwegian health 
politics and policy; (b) healthcare workers; (c) hospital as an 
entity; (d) patients; (e) the EHR system and (f) the ICT oper-
ational unit. 
It is the authors’ conclusion that the Norwegian govern-
ment states a strong wish for electronic communication in the 
Coordination Reform. This conclusion is in line with Tjora 
and Melby’s [61] analysis of the reform, demonstrating the 
government’s attention to the importance of ICT in order to 
succeed in healthcare coordination. 
The empirical study conducted at the UNN revealed that 
nurses and secretaries involved in the pre-operative planning 
are ready for electronic communication. Even though physi-
cians, as a professional group, reported less need for an elec-
tronic communication system than nurses and secretaries, it is 
the authors’ interpretation that they are ready for electronic 
communication. The relative absence of interest is most likely 
linked to work tasks, such as scheduling, traveling logistics, 
general pre-operative information and support, which are the 
responsibility of nurses or secretaries. These are the ones who 
communicate with patients prior to surgery, not the physi-
cians. It is also important to note that some physicians were 
enthusiastic about the possibility of electronic communication 
with patients.  
The nurse’s proposal of an electronic tool to help patients 
prepare for surgery at home illustrates how a nurse pictures 
the future of healthcare. The nurse’s proposal includes the 
need for electronic communication and online care for pa-
tients while they are still at home. The shift from care towards 
telecare is also evident in the literature. Wyatt and Sullivan 
[62] state, ‘In the future, health professionals may move to-
wards spending some of their working lives as telecarers. A 
telecarer is a health professional who delivers responsive, 
high-quality information, services and support to remote pa-
tients or clients using the most appropriate communication, 
such as telephone, email or instant messaging’. 
The study of patients’ readiness identified that surgical pa-
tients expect some sort of interactive communication with the 
hospital. Today, hospital–patient communication is based on 
letters exchanged by post and/or telephone calls between pa-
tients and hospitals. This system does not allow patients to 
participate in the process of scheduling their forthcoming elec-
tive surgery. It is the authors’ interpretation that there is a 
strong wish among surgery patients to coordinate minor sur-
gery with their everyday lives, e.g., the ability to inform the 

47
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
hospital about the dates or weeks they are unavailable to un-
dergo surgery. This reveals their readiness for new ways to 
communicate with the hospital. These findings are in line with 
existing literature that demonstrates how patients, including 
the elderly or less educated, are ready for electronic commu-
nication [41][42][43].  
Regarding e-readiness at the hospital, electronic commu-
nication as a strategy to reduce surgery cancellations is not 
suggested in any of the identified hospital initiatives to im-
prove planning and reduce cancellations. Further, the empiri-
cal study of the pre-operative planning process at UNN 
demonstrates heterogeneity in how departments and individu-
als carried out the planning process. It is the authors’ under-
standing that in order to complete the daily schedule, the hos-
pital depends on the healthcare workers’ personal and empir-
ical knowledge, proactivity and workarounds. The heteroge-
neity and lack of standards in the pre-operative planning pro-
cesses reveal that the hospital, at this stage, lacks the organi-
sational structure required for two-way electronic communi-
cation. Hence, the hospital is not yet prepared for two-way 
electronic communication with patients during pre-operative 
planning. 
The surgery module in the EHR is an unused resource at 
the hospital. At present, money and resources are being in-
vested by FIKS and DIPS ASA, the EHR vendor, to develop 
a new surgical module. However, two-way communication 
with patients is not prioritised by either of them. On the other 
hand, the northern health region has supported initiatives to 
provide patient–hospital communication within the EHR; 
however, to date, this is limited to one project which focuses 
on the patients’ access to their own electronic health record. 
Despite this initiative, it is the authors’ understanding that the 
current EHR is a barrier for two-way electronic communica-
tion between patients and the hospital. 
The governmental vision for electronic communication 
has not materialised in technological solutions or in the prior-
ities of the regional authority’s ICT operational unit. Despite 
massive ICT investments in the region, it is the authors’ un-
derstanding that the ICT operational unit, at this stage, is not 
ready for two-way electronic communication between pa-
tients and UNN. 
This analysis is based on the recognition that in order to 
avoid the e-readiness paradox and to develop and implement 
sustainable electronic communication systems, computer sci-
entists need to identify patterns of information and work flow. 
The authors conclude that Norwegian health policy strongly 
promotes electronic communication, and that healthcare 
workers and patients are ready to use new electronic tools, 
while the hospital as an entity, the current EHR system and 
the ICT operational unit are not yet ready for two-way elec-
tronic communication between patients and UNN.  
While the analysis, and particularly the conclusions, might 
be debated, they are still relevant on multiple levels. For the 
eTeam-surgery project, the study of e-readiness have a great 
impact on future work. Should resources be spent on the de-
velopment and implementation of new technology or should 
they be spent primarily on gathering knowledge on the organ-
isation and how to prepare the hospital for electronic commu-
nication? A relevant question for future work is as follows: Is 
heterogeneity in pre-operative planning processes exclusive to 
our site of research, or are local practices and differences 
among individuals and between departments common in Nor-
wegian hospitals? What about the regional ICT operational 
units? Are they powerful actors in all Norwegian hospitals, or 
are our findings related to local issues, such as lack of re-
sources and bad timing? 
In an applied context, the analysis has relevance for policy 
makers, managers and stakeholder in the healthcare sector, 
e.g., health authorities, vendors and large ICT projects. Are 
the findings applicable to other hospitals in Norway? What if 
today’s hospitals, as organisational entities, are not ready for 
electronic communication with patients? Will a new EHR, ad-
ditional resources and different priorities in the ICT opera-
tional unit solve the barriers for two-way electronic commu-
nication, or do the reported findings illustrate how work is or-
ganised and done in healthcare today? 
In the scientific field of health informatics, the debate on 
e-readiness requires that the concepts of ‘user involvement’ 
and ‘user centred’, as well as the users’ role, need to be revis-
ited. As demonstrated in this paper, the health policy, the hos-
pital and the EHR system are important non-human actors that 
need to be studied, analysed and accounted for in relation to 
the question of e-readiness. A methodology that practices the 
equal treatment of human and non-human actors, and assumes 
that all entities in a network can and should be described in 
the same terms, is useful to map important actors. As we have 
demonstrated, readiness for electronic communication is not 
exclusively about the interaction between patients and health 
personnel. This multi-method approach revealed that some ac-
tors are ready for electronic communication while others are 
not. 
We argue that in order to avoid the e-readiness paradox 
and develop and implement sustainable electronic communi-
cation systems, it is not only human actors—patients and 
healthcare professionals—who need to be ready for electronic 
communication. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Northern Norway Re-
gional Health Authority, Helse-Nord, for funding the research 
project HST 1119-13 and HST 1125-13.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Dyb, C. Granja, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, "Online 
Patients in an Offline Health Care Sector: Are Hospitals Ready 
for Electronic Communication with Patients?," The Seventh 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine, 2015, pp. 26-30. 
[2] M. Johnston, "Anxiety in Surgical Patients," Psychological 
medicine, vol. 10, pp. 145-152, 1980. 
[3] M. J. Pritchard, "Identifying and Assessing Anxiety in Pre-
Operative Patients," Nursing standard, vol. 23, p. 35, 2009. 
[4] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, 
"Patient Reactions to Cancelled or Postponed Heart 
Operations," J Nurs Manag, vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002. 

48
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[5] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Cancelled Elective Surgery: An 
Evaluation," The American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 
1994. 
[6] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of Surgery 
Sequencing and Scheduling Decisions under Uncertainty," 
Health Care Manag Sci, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[7] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. 
Sindhusake, M. R. Fearnside, and P. L. Klineberg, 
"Cancellation of Operations on the Day of Intended Surgery at 
a Major Australian Referral Hospital," Medical Journal of 
Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 2005. 
[8] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. 
Woodward, "Cancelled Elective Operations: An Observational 
Study from a District General Hospital," J Health Organ 
Manag, vol. 21, pp. 54-58, 2007. 
[9] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and 
K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary 
Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & 
Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[10] A. C. f. L. Authorities, t. N. H. S. i. England, and Wales, 
Operating Theatres: Review of National Findings: Audit 
Commission, 2003. 
[11] S. Yoon, S. Lee, H. Lee, H. Lim, S. Yoon, and S. Chang, "The 
Effect of Increasing Operating Room Capacity on Day-of-
Surgery Cancellation," Anaesthesia and intensive care, vol. 37, 
p. 261, 2009. 
[12] A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J. M. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, and S. García-del-Valle, 
"Causes for Cancellation of Elective Surgical Procedures in a 
Spanish General Hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 
2009. 
[13] A. González‐Arévalo, J. Gómez‐Arnau, F. DelaCruz, J. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. Corral, and S. García‐del‐Valle, 
"Causes for Cancellation of Elective Surgical Procedures in a 
Spanish General Hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 
2009. 
[14] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The Impact of 
Pre-Operative Assessment Clinics on Elective Surgical Case 
Cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[15] R. Busund, "Rapport Fra Prosjekt: Optimal Ressursutnyttelse 
Av Opperasjonskapasiteten I Unn," Universitetssykehuset 
Nord-Norge, Norway 2008 (in Norwegian). 
[16] M. B. Ferschl, A. Tung, B. Sweitzer, D. Huo, and D. B. Glick, 
"Preoperative 
Clinic Visits Reduce 
Operating 
Room 
Cancellations and Delays," Anesthesiology, vol. 103, pp. 855-
859, 2005. 
[17] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of Surgery Cancellations after 
Nurse-Led Pre-Assessment in an Elective Surgical Centre: The 
First 2 Years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-699, 2003. 
[18] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, and W. S. Sandberg, "Causes of Cancellations on 
the Day of Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," 
Surgical Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[19] W. A. van Klei, C. L. Rutten, K. G. Moons, B. Lo, J. T. Knape, 
and D. E. Grobbee, "Limited Effect of Health Council 
Guideline on Outpatient Preoperative Evaluation Clinics in the 
Netherlands: An Inventory," Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd, vol. 145, 
pp. 25-9, Jan 6 2001 (in dut). 
[20] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvingsen, "Reduced 
Elective Surgery Cancellations through Patient Involvement in 
Pre-Operative Planning in Norway," eTELEMED 2014, The 
Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 164-169. 
[21] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, "On the 
Development 
of 
a 
Hospital-Patient 
Web-Based 
Communication Tool: A Case Study from Norway," 
MEDINFO 2015: EHealth-enabled Health: Proceedings of the 
15th World Congress on Health and Biomedical Informatics, 
IOS Press, 2015, pp. 438-442. 
[22] N. Gale and H. Sultan, "Telehealth as ‘Peace of Mind’: 
Embodiment, Emotions and the Home as the Primary Health 
Space for People with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disorder," Health & place, vol. 21, pp. 140-147, 2013. 
[23] J. Starling and S. Foley, "From Pilot to Permanent Service: Ten 
Years of Paediatric Telepsychiatry," Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 80-82, 2006. 
[24] P. Whitten, B. Holtz, and L. Nguyen, "Keys to a Successful and 
Sustainable Telemedicine Program," International journal of 
technology assessment in health care, vol. 26, pp. 211-216, 
2010. 
[25] P. Zanaboni and R. Wootton, "Adoption of Telemedicine: 
From Pilot Stage to Routine Delivery," BMC medical 
informatics and decision making, vol. 12, p. 1, 2012. 
[26] M. Berg, "Implementing Information Systems in Health Care 
Organizations: Myths and Challenges," International journal of 
medical informatics, vol. 64, pp. 143-156, 2001. 
[27] R. Heeks, "Health Information Systems: Failure, Success and 
Improvisation," International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 75, pp. 125-137, 2006. 
[28] C. May, M. Mort, F. S. Mair, and T. Finch, Telemedicine and 
the Future Patient: Risk, Governance and Innovation: 
Economic and Social Research Council, 2005. 
[29] C. May and N. T. Ellis, "When Protocols Fail: Technical 
Evaluation, Biomedical Knowledge, and the Social Production 
of 'Facts' About a Telemedicine Clinic," Soc Sci Med, vol. 53, 
pp. 989-1002, Oct 2001. 
[30] M. Mort and A. Smith, "Beyond Information: Intimate 
Relations in Sociotechnical Practice," Sociology, vol. 43, pp. 
215-231, 2009. 
[31] S. Dünnebeil, A. Sunyaev, I. Blohm, J. M. Leimeister, and H. 
Krcmar, "Determinants of Physicians’ Technology Acceptance 
for E-Health in Ambulatory Care," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 81, pp. 746-760, 2012. 
[32] KS, "Ikt I Helse- Og Omsorg 2008-2012 - Strategi- Og 
Handlingsplan," Oslo 2008 (in Norwegian). 
[33] H. K. Andreassen, "What Does an E-Mail Address Add?-
Doing Health and Technology at Home," Social Science & 
Medicine, vol. 72, pp. 521-528, 2011. 
[34] N. Schreurs. (2012) Fiasko Eller Fremtid? Computerworld.  (in 
Norwegian) 
[35] J. C. Wyatt and F. Sullivan, "Ehealth and the Future: Promise 
or Peril?," BMJ, vol. 331, pp. 1391-1393, 2005. 
[36] K. Dyb, T. Solvoll, E. Rygh, and T. Sørensen, "Analysing the 
Use of a Telestroke Service," International Journal On 
Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 5, pp. 179-187, 2013. 
[37] K. Dyb and S. Halford, "Placing Globalizing Technologies: 
Telemedicine and the Making of Difference," Sociology, vol. 
43, pp. 232-249, 2009. 
[38] A. G. Sandaunet, "The Challenge of Fitting In: Non ‐
Participation and Withdrawal from an Online Self ‐ Help 
Group for Breast Cancer Patients," Sociology of health & 
illness, vol. 30, pp. 131-144, 2008. 
[39] J. Pols and D. Willems, "Innovation and Evaluation: Taming 
and Unleashing Telecare Technology," Sociology of health & 
illness, vol. 33, pp. 484-498, 2011. 
[40] N. Oudshoorn, "Diagnosis at a Distance: The Invisible Work 
of Patients and Healthcare Professionals in Cardiac 
Telemonitoring Technology," Sociology of health & illness, 
vol. 30, pp. 272-288, 2008. 

49
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[41] P. E. Kummervold, D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, J.-A. K. Johnsen, 
T. Hasvold, and J. H. Rosenvinge, "Social Support in a Wired 
World: Use of Online Mental Health Forums in Norway," 
Nordic journal of psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 59-65, 2002. 
[42] L. Millsopp, S. Frackleton, D. Lowe, and S. Rogers, "A 
Feasibility Study of Computer-Assisted Health-Related 
Quality of Life Data Collection in Patients with Oral and 
Oropharyngeal Cancer," International journal of oral and 
maxillofacial surgery, vol. 35, pp. 761-764, 2006. 
[43] P. M. Webb, G. D. Zimet, J. D. Fortenberry, and M. J. Blythe, 
"Comparability of a Computer-Assisted Versus Written 
Method for Collecting Health Behavior Information from 
Adolescent Patients," Journal of Adolescent Health, vol. 24, 
pp. 383-388, 1999. 
[44] S. Santana, B. Lausen, M. Bujnowska-Fedak, C. Chronaki, P. 
E. Kummervold, J. Rasmussen, and T. Sorensen, "Online 
Communication between Doctors and Patients in Europe: 
Status and Perspectives," Journal of medical Internet research, 
vol. 12, 2010. 
[45] M. N. Boulos, S. Wheeler, C. Tavares, and R. Jones, "How 
Smartphones Are Changing the Face of Mobile and 
Participatory Healthcare: An Overview, with Example from 
Ecaalyx," Biomedical engineering online, vol. 10, p. 24, 2011. 
[46] B. Dolan. 72 Percent of Us Physicians Use Smartphones. 
Available: http://mobihealthnews.com/7505/72-percent-of-us-
physicians-use-smartphones/ October 2014. 
[47] H. Atherton, P. Sawmynaden, A. Sheikh, A. Majeed, and J. 
Car, 
"Email 
for 
Clinical 
Communication 
between 
Patients/Caregivers and Healthcare Professionals," The 
Cochrane Library, 2012. 
[48] J. Car and A. Sheikh, "Email Consultations in Health Care: 2—
Acceptability and Safe Application," Bmj, vol. 329, pp. 439-
442, 2004. 
[49] J. a. J. H. Law, Ed., Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing 2005, p.^pp. Pages. 
[50] B. Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and 
Engineers through Society: Harvard university press, 1987. 
[51] K. B. Asdal, Brita; Moser Ingunn, Teknovitenskapelige 
Kulturer. Oslo, Norway: Spartacus, 2001. 
[52] T. I. Romøren, D. O. Torjesen, and B. Landmark, "Promoting 
Coordination in Norwegian Health Care," International Journal 
of Integrated Care, vol. 11, p. e127, 10/07 2011. 
[53] T. Sæter and V. Heimly, "En Kort Beskrivelse Av Helsevesenet 
I Norge Tjenester, Enheter Og Organisering, Trender Og Tall," 
KITH R 13/96, Oslo 1996. 
[54] Helse- og omsorgsdepartement, "Samhandlingsreformen," Det 
Kongelige 
helse- 
og 
omsorgsdepartement 
2009 
(in 
Norwegian). 
[55] Helse-NordRHF. Om Helse Nord Rhf  [Internet]. Available: 
http://www.helse-nord.no/om-
helseforetaket/category23156.html 1th of april. 
[56] Helse-Nord. Følg Med På Nord-Norges Største Og Mest 
Spennende 
Ikt-Satsning! 
Available: 
http://www.helse-
nord.no/fiks/category31090.html (in Norwegian). 
[57] C. Granja, K. Dyb, E. Larsen, S. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, 
"Methodology for Health Care Process Modelling: Bringing 
the Health Care Complexity into Health It System 
Development," 
Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Health 
Informatics, Grimstad, 2014, pp. 17-21. 
[58] C. Bacchi Lee, Analysing Policy: Whats the Problem 
Represented to Be?, Frenchs Forest: Pearson Australia, 2009. 
[59] Helse-Nord. Helse Nord Ikt. Available: http://www.helse-
nord.no/helse-nord-ikt/category40976.html February 2016. 
[60] Helse-Nord. Dette Er De Nye Systemene. Available: 
http://www.helse-nord.no/helse-nord-nytt/dette-er-de-nye-
systemene-article90645-1526.html 4 November 2013 (in 
Norwegian). 
[61] A. T. Hagen and L. Melby, Samhandling for Helse: Kunnskap, 
Kommunikasjon Og Teknologi I Helsetjenesten. Oslo: 
Gyldendal Akademisk, 2013. 
[62] J. C. Wyatt and F. Sullivan, "Abc of Health Informatics: 
Ehealth and the Future: Promise or Peril?," BMJ: British 
Medical Journal, vol. 331, p. 1391, 2005. 
 
 
 

