13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
The Role of Adaptive Immersive Technology in Creating Personalised 
Environments for Emotional Connection and Preservation of Identity in Dementia 
Care 
Insights from User Perspectives towards SENSE-GARDEN  
Gemma Goodall1, Ileana Ciobanu2, Ronny Broekx3, Jon Sørgaard1, Iulian Anghelache4, Catalina 
Anghelache-Tutulan4, Mara Diaconu4, Sigrid Mæland5, Therese Borve5, Audun Digranes Dagestad5, Piet 
Bormans6, Marleen Custers6, Katrin Losleben7, Rita Valadas8, Cristina Vaz de Almeida8, Alda Matias8, Andreea 
Marin2, Kristin Taraldsen1, Walter Maetzler9, Mihai Berteanu2, J. Artur Serrano1,10 
1Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, NTNU/Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, Norway 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, ELIAS University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania 
3Innovation Department, ePoint, Belgium 
4 Research & Development Department, Compexin SA, Romania 
5Odda Municipality, Norway  
6Aan de Beverdijk, Vulpia Vlaanderen, Belgium 
7Center for Women’s and Gender Research, UiT The Arctic University of Norway 
8Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa, Portugal  
9Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
10Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research, University Hospital of North Norway 
 
Email: gemma.goodall@ntnu.no, ileanacuk@yahoo.co.uk, ronny.broekx@gmail.com, jon.sorgaard@ntnu.no,  
a.iulian@compexin.ro, catalina.anghelache@compexin.ro, mara.diaconu@compexin.ro, sigrid.meland@odda.kommune.no, 
therese.borve@odda.kommune.no, audun.digranes.dagestad@odda.kommune.no, piet.bormans@beverdijk.be, 
marleen.custers@beverdijk.be, katrin.losleben@uit.no, rita.valadas@scml.pt, cristina.vazalmeida@scml.pt, 
alda.matias@scml.pt, andreea.budrica@gmail.com, kristin.taraldsen@ntnu.no, 
w.maetzler@neurologie.uni-kiel.de, mberteanu@gmail.com, artur.serrano@ntnu.no  
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents early stage research on the 
development of an immersive, multisensory room for people 
living with dementia. Dementia is considered to be a public 
health priority on a global level. Our research addresses the 
challenge of meeting individual needs in dementia care, 
particularly in relation to social and emotional wellbeing. We 
draw upon findings from 52 interviews with users, including 
people 
with 
mild 
cognitive 
impairment, 
professional 
caregivers, and informal caregivers. These interviews were 
conducted to explore initial responses towards a personalised 
multisensory 
room 
called 
SENSE-GARDEN. 
Thematic 
analysis resulted in six themes: benefits for all, focus on the 
individual, past and present, emotional stimulation, shared 
experiences, and challenges to consider. This paper provides 
important theoretical considerations for the role of technology 
in not only the SENSE-GARDEN intervention, but in 
preserving the identities of people with dementia and 
providing opportunities for connection with others. Future 
work in this area should adopt an interdisciplinary approach 
to using technology in dementia care. 
Keywords-dementia; 
virtual 
environments; 
immersive 
technology; 
human 
computer 
interaction; 
interpersonal 
relationships 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This article builds upon a conference paper presented at 
the Fourth International Conference on Human and Social 
Analytics [1]. This extended version of the original paper 
offers detailed results from a preliminary study on a virtual 
adaptive environment for people with dementia.  
Dementia is a syndromal term and can be caused by a 
variety of diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases. 
Memory, behaviour, and communicative abilities are often 
affected [2].  There are approximately 47 million people 
living with dementia worldwide [3]. With this number set to 
increase to 131.5 million by 2050, it is of the utmost 
importance to tackle dementia’s progressive impact on the 
wellbeing of people living with this syndrome.   
The World Health Organization has called for action on 
dementia, presenting it as a public health priority at a global 
level [2]. This action includes a call for research to identify 
ways of supporting the needs of people living with dementia, 
their caregivers, and the needs of society in the context of 
costs, understanding, and awareness. 
In recent years, studies have identified numerous 
complex needs of people with dementia living in long-term 
care. These include the management of challenging 
behaviours, maintenance of social relationships, involvement 

14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
of people with cognitive deficits in meaningful activities, and 
supporting the emotional needs of all [4][5].  
Emotion-oriented approaches to care have been shown to 
be cost-effective ways of improving psychological wellbeing 
and social behaviour amongst people with dementia [6][7]. 
These nonpharmacological approaches are often person-
centred, focusing on the social and emotional needs of the 
individual. Reminiscence rooms, virtual gardens and virtual 
reality forests are examples of how immersive technologies 
have been integrated in emotion-oriented approaches 
designed 
to 
create 
effective 
nonpharmacological 
interventions for people with dementia [8][9].  
However, this area of study has called for further 
research in determining what works best for the individual 
[10]. It has recently been suggested that an individualised 
multisensory environment for people with dementia would 
be a highly beneficial intervention, especially if family 
members are included in the selection of stimuli [11]. Our 
research is in line with this suggestion, creating not only a 
personalised multisensory space and intervention, but one 
that also incorporates immersive technology, all with the 
inclusion of family members, friends, and professional care 
staff. 
This paper presents early stage research on a 
multisensory room, SENSE-GARDEN, that is currently 
being developed as an adaptive, immersive environment 
integrating technology and multisensory stimulation for 
reminiscence in people living with mild to moderately severe 
dementia. We will first provide a brief overview of the 
project (Section II), followed by a description of the 
methodology used in research and development (Section III). 
We will then discuss the results of the interviews in relation 
to each of the six themes identified through thematic analysis 
(Section IV). In Section V, the results are summarised and 
discussed in relation to the role of technology in preserving 
the identity of the person with dementia and facilitating an 
environment in which relationships can be fostered. Finally, 
in Section VI, we conclude with final remarks, the next steps 
for SENSE-GARDEN, and suggestions for future research.  
II. 
SENSE-GARDEN: AN OVERVIEW  
SENSE-GARDEN is a psychosocial intervention that is 
being developed to create individualised reminiscence 
sessions for people living with dementia in residential care. 
The intervention combines the use of technology for 
reminiscence and multisensory stimulation, with human-to-
human informational and emotional communication. 
Prototypes of the SENSE-GARDEN room are currently 
being built across several countries in Europe, namely in 
Norway, Portugal and Romania, with an initial prototype 
already being tested in Belgium. These rooms are filled with 
individualised stimuli such as familiar music, soundscapes, 
imagery, films, and scents in order to stimulate memory and 
encourage active participation of the person with dementia in 
reminiscing activities. Particular emphasis is placed on using 
autobiographical content such as family photographs, music 
from childhood, and films of life events.  
The use of large projection screens, scent dispensers, and 
surround sound systems will integrate the various 
multimedia of the room, creating an immersive environment. 
For example, high-definition imagery of a forest could be 
accompanied with the smell of pine trees and the sound of 
birds, to evoke a completely immersive sensation.   
SENSE-GARDEN will expand on currently established 
sensory rooms, which are also known as ‘Snoezelen’ rooms. 
Deriving from the Dutch terms for ‘sniffing’ and ‘dozing’, 
Snoezelen was originally developed in the Netherlands as a 
therapy for individuals with learning difficulties [12].  
SENSE-GARDEN presents an innovative approach to 
sensory rooms by utilising smart technologies that enable the 
space to adapt to the individual preferences and needs of the 
person with dementia. This focus on autobiographical 
content is achieved through the use of individual user 
profiles. Each profile has an associated media repository 
consisting of digital photographs, films, and music that holds 
significant meaning for the person with dementia.  
Radio frequency identification (RFID) is used to allow 
the SENSE-GARDEN system to identify the user. Upon 
entering the room, the system automatically projects 
autobiographical 
multimedia 
from 
the 
person 
with 
dementia’s user profile.   
The room is designed to be used by two main categories 
of users. The first is the person with dementia (PwD), who is 
also considered the primary user. The second is the 
caregiver, who will either be informal (family/friend) or 
formal (professional care staff). It is anticipated that together, 
the PwD-caregiver dyad will interact with the immersive 
environment to stimulate memory, conversation, sharing and 
engagement.  
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH  
SENSE-GARDEN 
is 
a 
multidisciplinary 
project 
involving partners in Belgium, Norway, Portugal, and 
Romania. 
The 
consortium 
brings 
together 
multiple 
professions 
and 
competencies 
including 
technology 
development, architecture, care home management, health 
sciences and research. 
There have been numerous calls to involve people with 
dementia in the process of designing assistive technologies 
[13][14]. Their contributions are thought to be of crucial 
importance, along with input from their caregivers [15]. 
More recently, user centred design has been recommended 
for the development and implementation of psychosocial 
interventions [16].  
The SENSE-GARDEN project embraces a user centred 
design approach and is working co-creatively with user 
groups throughout all its phases. The aim of this preliminary 
research was to explore initial responses from user groups, so 
that their ideas and feedback may be integrated into the next 
phases of development of SENSE-GARDEN.  
Thus far, 52 qualitative semi-structured interviews have 
been conducted with user groups across Belgium, Norway, 
Portugal, and Romania. The aims of these interviews were to 
collect responses and attitudes towards the SENSE-
GARDEN room concept, and to identify challenges that may 
arise during the course of the project.  
 

15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE I.  RESPONDENT INFORMATION  
Country 
People with Mild Cognitive Impairment 
Informal Caregivers 
Formal Caregivers 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Belgium 
3 
89.6 
2 
1 
6 
57 
1 
5 
4 
31.5 
1 
3 
Norway 
4 
84 
0 
4 
4 
59.3 
0 
4 
4 
38.8 
1 
3 
Portugal 
3 
79.7 
0 
3 
3 
55.7 
0 
3 
3 
44.3 
0 
3 
Romania 
6 
67.2 
3 
3 
6 
50.7 
0 
6 
6 
42.7 
2 
4 
Total 
16 
77.9 
5 
11 
19 
55.3 
1 
18 
17 
39.4 
4 
13 
 
The specific research questions for this study were as 
follows: (1) What are the users’ attitudes towards the concept 
of SENSE-GARDEN? (2) What benefits, if any, do users 
think SENSE-GARDEN could provide in the care of people 
living with dementia?  
In order to answer these research questions, the interview 
was designed in a way that allowed for an in-depth 
exploration of the users’ beliefs surrounding SENSE-
GARDEN. The interview was semi-structured with open-
ended questions and lasted for approximately 30 minutes. 
Interview questions focused on the overall concept of 
SENSE-GARDEN, the individual components of the 
intervention, and potential benefits. 
The respondents included 16 people living with a 
diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment, 19 informal 
caregivers, and 17 professional caregivers. Table 1 gives an 
overview of the respondent information.  
In order to conduct an in-depth exploration of the ideas 
and perspectives given by the users, data was analysed using 
thematic analysis. Thematic analysis is a qualitative method 
in which prevalent patterns of ideas and responses are 
identified amongst data. The analysis procedure for this 
study undertook the following phases, given by Braun and 
Clarke [17]: 
1) 
Familiarisation with the data: All the data was   
thoroughly read and re-read, along with notating initial ideas 
and interpretations of the dataset.  
2) 
Coding: The ideas were used to generate codes, 
which identify interesting features across the data. In this 
study, data was manually coded in an inductive manner, 
meaning that the codes and themes were developed directly 
from the content of the data, rather than being developed by 
pre-existing ideas.  
3) 
Searching for themes: The codes were used to 
search for themes, which represent patterned responses or 
meanings across the data.  
4) 
Reviewing themes: The themes were reviewed to 
ensure that they accurately represent the views of the users 
and the view from the entire dataset.  
5) Defining and naming themes: The essence of each 
theme was identified, along with its relevance to the research 
questions.  
6)  Producing the report: Finally, the themes were 
considered in their relationship to one another, and a 
narrative about the dataset was created. This narrative is 
supported by direct quotes from the dataset.  
 
 
In order to stay true to the ‘voice’ of the users, codes and 
themes were constantly checked back against original data. 
Braun and Clarke [17] emphasise the importance of 
flexibility in thematic analysis and identify the process as 
one of continuous reflection on the reading, shaping, and 
checking of data and themes.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
Six themes were identified through the thematic analysis: 
(A) Benefits for All, (B) Focus on the Individual (C) Past and 
Present, (D) Emotional Stimulation, (E) Shared Experiences, 
and (F) Challenges to Consider. A thematic map is shown in 
Figure 1 to provide a visual summary of all six themes and 
their respective subthemes.  
This thematic map also demonstrates the interactive 
nature of the themes and their relationship to one another. 
Numerous subthemes falling under different main themes are 
related to each other. For example, the subtheme of 
‘stimulating emotional memory’ (under the theme of 
Emotional Stimulation) can be connected to the subtheme of 
‘avoiding negative memories’ (under the theme of challenges 
to consider). In this way, all the themes presented provide an 
overarching narrative of the users’ beliefs, views, and 
attitudes towards SENSE-GARDEN and the technology 
within it.  
The following subsections will discuss each of the six 
themes in turn. The full dataset from the interviews has been 
made available online, along with the interview guide, and 
coding from thematic analysis [18]. 
A. Benefits for All  
There was a resounding view from all users that SENSE-
GARDEN may be able to provide benefit in some way. 
These benefits were grouped into five subthemes: benefits 
for the person with dementia, benefits for the family, benefits 
for professional caregivers, benefits in practice, and benefits 
beyond dementia care.  
 Benefits for the person with dementia. All users believed 
that SENSE-GARDEN has the potential to provide 
numerous benefits for people living with dementia. These 
benefits included improvements in memory, mood and 
overall quality of life: “Stimulating memory and improving 
quality of life, the person with dementia and caregivers can 
enjoy life more”..., “This can enrich their [people with 
dementia] everyday life”...,“I am sure this will be of value. 

16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Thematic map of themes and subthemes identified across the dataset. 
 
The person with dementia gets a good experience every day. 
In this we have faith”. One person with mild cognitive 
impairment discussed the role of the intervention in tackling 
issues of helplessness that are associated with not only 
dementia, but illness in general: “When ill, it is like you are 
closed in a dark place you cannot leave by yourself. SENSE-
GARDEN can help you out”.  
Benefits for the family. Many of the caregivers, both 
informal and formal, commented on SENSE-GARDEN 
being able to provide ways for the family to strengthen 
relationships with loved ones who have dementia: “It’s hard 
to be a relative, so little competence, dialogue is difficult. 
This [SENSE-GARDEN] is a great tool for having a nice 
time together”.  
Benefits for the professional. Formal 
caregivers 
considered SENSE-GARDEN as a tool for getting to know 
people with dementia better. The highly personalised nature 
of the intervention means that staff have the opportunity to 
gain insight into the resident’s life in a way that is perhaps 
not possible in day-to-day care: “The advantage is that you 
can have full focus on the patient, being able to be alone with 
him or her. We get to know the patient better. It creates 
security.”..., “This will also mean that the staff become better 
acquainted with the person with dementia”. Another 
caregiver commented as follows: “It’s good for the staff to 
see the person with dementia in another way”. These 
comments go to suggest that digital media can create 
opportunities for learning more about individuals with 
dementia, which could be especially important for people in 
later stages of dementia, who may not be able to coherently 
express themselves.  
Benefits in practice. As well as presenting individual 
benefits, users believed that SENSE-GARDEN could benefit  
 
 
the healthcare system in terms of cost and practice: “Why 
has nobody thought of this before? Many of these things 
should have already been at the nursing home even if one 
does not have a SENSE-GARDEN”..., “May become 
important in terms of reducing the cost of dementia care over 
time”. 
Benefits beyond dementia care. There was a consensus 
across the respondents that SENSE-GARDEN could also 
provide benefits to people living without dementia: “It is 
always good to go back to childhood and youth, for all of us. 
No need to be a person with dementia”.  
The users’ positive outlook on SENSE-GARDEN 
captures a range of benefits that not only apply to the person 
with dementia, but also to caregivers and care practice as a 
whole. Future studies on SENSE-GARDEN will need to 
incorporate outcome measures that evaluate these various 
aspects.  
B. Focus on the Individual  
The key concept of SENSE-GARDEN is creating an 
environment in which the person with dementia is the central 
focus. The users not only valued this focus on the person 
with dementia, but they also offered their suggestions on to 
how best create an individualised environment. These 
suggestions are grouped into the following subthemes: 
familiarity, meaningful stimuli, sensory stimulation, and 
empowering and engaging.  
Familiarity. With the SENSE-GARDEN being a new 
and unfamiliar concept, both informal and formal caregivers 
stressed the importance of providing a familiar surrounding 
for the person with dementia: “A familiar environment, 
familiar objects to touch, is mandatory”..., “At least for the 
first sessions, the SENSE-GARDEN room must include 

17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
familiar items, besides the personal records used for 
projection and music”.  
Meaningful stimuli. Users believed that the stimuli used 
in SENSE-GARDEN should have significant meaning for 
the person with dementia: “Family photo album, with photos 
from important emotional occasions”..., “Meaning from 
one’s own trips. You must remember a trip, but also the 
reason you went on that trip, the scope”.  
Sensory stimulation. There was an overall positive 
attitude towards SENSE-GARDEN’s proposed methods of 
sensory stimulation. Users commented on the ability for such 
stimulation to trigger memories and improve mood: 
“Imagine what scent can bring forth, the idea of what this 
can do, it’s gorgeous”. There were also numerous 
suggestions for SENSE-GARDEN to broaden its current 
plans for sensory stimuli, such as including tactile elements: 
“Maybe something more for the sense of touch. When you 
see a mountain and smell the fern tree, why not touch a fern 
tree branch?”.  
Empowering and engaging. SENSE-GARDEN was 
perceived as an opportunity for people with dementia to 
actively engage and express themselves: “The person with 
dementia has to be reassured that life has not come to an end 
when diagnosed with dementia, and reality is not limited by 
the walls of the bedroom. They still have things to show and 
share with us all”.  
The suggestions given by the users imply that whilst the 
technology and media within the SENSE-GARDEN needs to 
be individualized, there are additional ways in which 
individualisation can be achieved. This is through caregiver 
facilitation, tactile stimuli, and the physical design of the 
room. All of these factors will need to be taken into 
consideration 
throughout 
the 
development 
of 
the 
intervention.  
C. Past and Present  
Given that SENSE-GARDEN borrows techniques from 
reminiscence therapy, it is of no surprise that discussion 
regarding memories arose during the interviews. However, 
the users identified links between interaction with the past 
and with the present, as well as the impression of overall 
improvement of memory in general. Therefore, the 
subthemes are: interacting with the past, interacting with the 
present, and improving memory over sessions.  
Interacting with the past. In discussing the benefits of 
SENSE-GARDEN, all respondents believed that the 
individualised nature of the virtual environment could trigger 
autobiographical memories. This was linked to helping 
people with dementia connect with their past: “Personal 
videos and photos are important. You resonate with your 
past”.  
Improving memories over sessions. As well as 
stimulating memories of the past, respondents also believed 
that memory could be strengthened over the course of the 
SENSE-GARDEN sessions. Some users suggested using 
visual markers in the SENSE-GARDEN components in 
order to trigger memory in consequent sessions: “Using 
memory anchors will improve experience and stimulate 
reality connection”. An example of this would be to use a 
recent photograph of a familiar place that holds significant 
meaning for the person with dementia. The same photograph 
could then be presented to the user in the next SENSE-
GARDEN session to see if they remember the meaning 
connected to that picture.  
Interacting with the present. There was a suggestion that 
even if the person with dementia does not have the capacity 
for long term memory of the sessions, the individual could 
still benefit from the ‘in-the-moment’ experience of SENSE-
GARDEN: “They probably do not remember afterwards, but 
think about being happy one hour every day. That’s a good 
benefit”. Respondents also considered interaction with the 
past an activity for strengthening self-identity in the present 
moment: “Nowadays we forget who we are. SENSE-
GARDEN will help us all relive forgotten events and 
identities”. 
This symbiotic relationship between past and present has 
been much discussed in regards to selfhood. Surr [19] adopts 
a socio-biographical approach to explain how people with 
dementia use their past in the context of telling their life 
story to others, in order to maintain a sense of self in the 
present. Technology may have much to offer in this 
maintenance of self, ideas of which will be given in detail in 
the discussion section of this paper.  
D. Emotional Stimulation  
Whilst emotion was a prominent topic amongst all of the 
themes, the comments from the users proved emotion to be 
highly complex. It was therefore decided to include a more 
detailed discussion of emotion. The subthemes are as 
follows: 
sensory 
stimulus and 
emotion, 
stimulating 
emotional memory, emotional self-expression, and shared 
emotional experiences.  
Sensory stimulus and emotion. The users believed that 
stimulating the senses through imagery and music could 
stimulate positive emotions in the person with dementia: 
“One connects so much to music, there are a lot of 
emotions”..., “Stimulating senses brings joy and memories”.  
Stimulating emotional memory. The users focused 
primarily on familiar music in being able to stimulate 
emotional memory in the person with dementia. “Just three 
notes will bring back that special moment if music is 
connected to that moment”....,“When we hear a song, we 
think of something and then we will be happy”.  
Emotional self-expression. Individuals with dementia are 
capable of experiencing and expressing a wide range of 
emotions, even in later stages of the disease [6][20]. Building 
upon the idea of sensory stimulation triggering emotional 
memories, the users also believed that SENSE-GARDEN 
could enable people with dementia to express themselves in 
ways that transcend typical verbal communication: “Some 
people stop talking, but they can sing”. Furthermore, they 
believed that people may be able to experience a heightened 
state of feeling through the intervention: “SENSE-GARDEN 
is an intermediary space, between the memories and the here 
and now, a space we can all access and we can remember 
how to feel, by one’s self and together, without shame or 
fear”.   

18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Shared emotional experiences Finally, the discussion of 
emotion went beyond individual feelings. The users 
expressed the value of SENSE-GARDEN in being able to 
help people connect with one another: “Sharing the 
experience is most important for reconnecting”. One person 
with mild cognitive impairment also highlighted the 
importance of how these shared experiences should be 
shaped: “The therapist is very important and can instil peace 
and wellbeing. A special emotional environment must be 
created for SENSE-GARDEN to work.” The idea of creating 
a “special emotional environment” goes to suggest that it is 
not the intervention alone that can provide benefits to the 
relationships, but it is also the individuals present who can 
shape the experience of SENSE-GARDEN.  
This theme has demonstrated the intricate nature of 
emotions, and how they can be manifested through the 
stimulation of the senses, through the remembrance of past 
events, and through our relationships with others.  
E. Shared Experiences  
SENSE-GARDEN is designed to be a joint experience 
between the person with dementia and their caregiver. As 
discussed in the previous subtheme, the users expressed the 
importance of sharing the experience together. This current 
theme goes beyond that of emotions and discusses the shared 
experience in relation to the following subthemes: caregiver 
facilitation, relationships, communicating, and creating 
opportunities through technology. 
Caregiver facilitation. Many users believed that carefully 
planned facilitation of SENSE-GARDEN is required for the 
intervention to work. Particular stress was placed on the 
importance of being accompanied by a familiar individual: 
“We must have people accompany us- internal people we 
know”. Users also believed that effective facilitation could 
shape a positive environment in which the benefits of the 
intervention could be maximised: “The caregiver must be 
well trained and possess good communication skills...to be 
able to support and fructify the person with dementia’s gains 
in terms of cognitive and behavioural improvements”. 
Relationships. Respondents believed that SENSE-
GARDEN could improve understanding and relationships 
between people with dementia and their caregivers- both 
formal and informal. There was a sense of the intervention 
being able to ‘restore’ what dementia had taken away from 
the relationship, such as self-identify and communication: 
“Family and friends can be with the patient as they were 
before”. SENSE-GARDEN was considered a catalyst for 
fostering relationships and providing opportunities for self-
expression and understanding between people with dementia 
and their families. This improvement in relationships was 
considered important in easing caregiver burden: “Improving 
relationships with family members and staff, easing 
caregiver burden on the staff and family”.  
Communicating. During the interviews, discussions 
turned to benefits of creative activity in dementia care. In 
particular, there were strong references to the ability of 
visual media and music to provide alternative forms of 
communication beyond that of verbal means. Users believed 
that the inclusion of music and visual imagery in SENSE-
GARDEN would be able to provide tools for sharing 
information: “Being able to tell stories, if one has lost the 
language, pictures and movies can tell things.” Users also 
believed that SENSE-GARDEN may be able to play a role in 
triggering conversation topics: “If I visit, there are always 
dead moments. This will help to get the life back into the 
conversations.” 
Creating opportunities through technology. Users with 
mild cognitive impairment displayed a sense of exploration 
and adventure when discussing the components of SENSE-
GARDEN. The use of virtual environments was perceived as 
providing ways of visiting new places and experiencing an 
outdoor environment: “Maybe a place you never went to, but 
you want to see”. One user was particularly impressed with a 
component of SENSE-GARDEN called “Life Road”, which 
allows the person with dementia to cycle on a stationary bike 
in front of a film of a familiar place: “We are afraid to ride 
outside so this option is great. To be safe on a bike.” This 
technology was also considered to provide opportunities for 
individuals to see places that they can no longer visit: “My 
mother wants to see her old street again, but we can’t do it. 
With this she can visit again”.  
These quotes from the users have highlighted the amount 
of work that goes into creating meaningful experiences for 
people with dementia. However, with the right kind of 
facilitation, SENSE-GARDEN may be able to provide these 
experiences for not only people with dementia, but also for 
their caregivers.  
F. Challenges to Consider  
This final theme is perhaps one of the most important in 
going forward with the SENSE-GARDEN project. The users 
raised important issues to be aware of when preparing and 
implementing the SENSE-GARDEN intervention. These 
concerns are given in the following subthemes: avoiding 
negative memories, creating personal databases, integrating 
physical activity, managing symptoms of dementia, and 
attitudes towards technology.  
Avoiding negative memories. Many users emphasised the 
importance of avoiding stimuli that could evoke negative 
emotions, such as photographs of relatives who have passed 
away, for example: “It is necessary to note that there are 
memories that are not good, and that it is necessary to have 
very careful prior fieldwork”. 
Creating personal databases. The main purpose of 
SENSE-GARDEN is to create experiences that are tailored 
to the individual with dementia and their past. However, 
users suggested that there might be challenges in collecting 
necessary information to achieve this. Issues included the 
lack of information from family and friends, but potential 
solutions were also offered by the users: “How you create a 
database for a lonely person- general triggers in an 
exploratory approach”..., “The reduced availability of family 
and friends can be a hindrance. The process of collecting 
personal data can be eased by using a questionnaire 
developed for the future SENSE-GARDEN users”. A formal 
caregiver also raised the issue of collecting visual imagery: 
“We have to see who has videos and films because in this 
rural area only a few had them”.  

19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Integrating physical activity. Whilst many of the 
respondents emphasised the importance of physical health, 
issues in implementing physical activity were discussed. One 
user had a concern regarding the use of a stationary bike for 
the “Life Road” component of SENSE-GARDEN: “One 
should reassess the issues of physical activity. For example, 
bicycles must be those where the person rests and pedals 
almost lying down”.  
Managing symptoms of dementia. As in any intervention 
for people with dementia, it is important to consider how 
symptoms will be managed and prevented during the 
sessions: “The person conducting the SENSE-GARDEN 
session will be essential and must have backup for 
interventions when disturbed behaviours occur. You don’t 
know how the person will react, even if what you show was 
a best experience for him”. Other issues relating to 
hallucinations and medication were also raised. 
Attitudes towards technology. There was quite a strong 
sense among the respondents that technology should be 
hidden during the SENSE-GARDEN sessions: “The 
experience will be richer when the technology is hidden”..., 
“The room must be very tempting, persuading- all 
technology must be hidden”. These comments could be 
interpreted in two ways. Firstly, technology should be hidden 
to create a more realistic, immersive environment. 
Contrastingly, it could be that users were referring to the 
potential reservations that some people have against 
technology. Some users explicitly expressed negative 
attitudes towards technology: “Many beware technology”. 
There were also respondents who preferred experiences in 
natural environments compared to virtual scenarios: “I’d 
prefer to walk the person with dementia in a real park”…, 
“SENSE-GARDEN must be just an intermediary step to 
outdoor and social activities.”  
This theme has highlighted that whilst the users see many 
potential benefits for SENSE-GARDEN, they are also aware 
of the challenges that lay ahead. This affirms the inclusion of 
not only caregivers, but also people with cognitive 
impairment in the development of interventions, and the 
value of adopting a user centred design in interventional 
research.  
V. 
DISCUSSION  
The findings from these user interviews have covered a 
large variety of ideas regarding the SENSE-GARDEN 
intervention. Firstly, the respondents were persistent in their 
beliefs that the environment, the facilitation of the 
intervention, and the stimuli all need to be tailored to the 
individual with dementia visiting the SENSE-GARDEN. It 
should be acknowledged that the task of individualisation is 
not an easy feat. As human beings, we are all individualistic 
by nature, with different tastes, preferences, and desires. 
Adding the constantly fluctuating progression of dementia 
to this individuality makes it a difficult task in designing 
technology for these users [21][22]. This is something that 
the SENSE-GARDEN project will have to tackle through 
rigorous work and collaboration with users, technology 
developers, and researchers of various disciplines.  
Secondly, 
the 
respondents also emphasised 
the 
importance of interaction between the SENSE-GARDEN 
stimuli, the person with dementia, and the caregiver. The 
respondents` numerous ideas regarding this interaction can 
be taken forward into a theoretical consideration of 
technology and its role within SENSE-GARDEN.  
A. Technology as the Storyteller: The Potential of Digital 
Media in Preserving Narrative Identity  
Dementia’s 
impact 
on 
memory, 
behaviour 
and 
communicative abilities can have detrimental implications 
for a person’s identity. However, there is evidence to suggest 
that individuals may preserve a sense of self to some extent, 
even in more severe stages of dementia [19][23]. In this 
study, there was an overall sense of the immersive 
environment being able to stimulate autobiographical 
memory, which was valued as important for preserving a 
sense of identity. The perspectives of respondents are in 
agreement with previous research on virtual environments 
for people with dementia. Siraraya and Ang [24] describe the 
virtual world as a ‘memory sanctuary’, in which selfhood 
and relationships are maintained.  
In order to understand how technology and media may be 
able to preserve identity, we have first to consider what 
identity means to people with dementia and how it can be 
shaped by other individuals. The role of others should not be 
underestimated in maintaining the identity of the person with 
dementia. In discussing the needs of people with dementia, 
Kitwood [25] stresses the importance of others in the 
maintenance of personhood. Westius, Kallenberg, and 
Norburg [26] present the notion of ‘intertwined narrative’ in 
which the life story of the person with dementia is integrated 
with the narrative of their family carer. Thus, if the person 
with dementia should become unable to independently recall 
their story, the intertwined narrative of the caring 
relationship may provide the opportunity for the maintenance 
of self.  
Earlier literature presents similar ideas. Mills [27] 
suggests that people with dementia bestow their life stories 
to another, therefore continuing their sense of identity. Mills 
states that in this sense, the narrative of the individual never 
disappears, regardless of the inevitable fading of the person’s 
memory. 
One way of preserving this narrative is through the use of 
digital life books. Digital storytelling, an activity in which 
technology is used to create innovative forms of narrative, 
has been shown to educate nursing home staff about the 
person with dementia [28]. This is especially important for 
people with dementia living in care homes with little or no 
family, a challenge mentioned by one of the users included 
in the present study. Technology and personalised media 
contents may be the answer to not only preserving, but also 
sharing that individual's life story with care staff.  
SENSE-GARDEN could potentially offer a method for 
assisting professional caregivers, family and friends in 
preserving the life story of the person with dementia. 
Furthermore, the technology of SENSE-GARDEN goes 
beyond the “life book” concept by offering an entire 
environment shaped around a person’s life. It offers the 

20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
opportunity for individuals to become completely immersed 
in their past. The next section will discuss the technology’s 
place in the overall environment. 
B. Beyond Physical Space: Creating ‘Emotional’ 
Environments through a Transactional Relationship  
The respondents emphasised the significance of creating 
an environment in which the person with dementia and their 
caregiver could share an emotional experience together. 
Here, respondents applied meaning beyond the physical 
space to include emotional and social factors that contribute 
to the experience of space. In this sense, it is important to 
have a holistic understanding of what constitutes as an 
‘environment’.  
There is growing acknowledgement of the environment 
being defined as more than just a physical space. According 
to literature, an environment is composed of psychosocial 
elements as well as physical factors [29]. In considering how 
an environment can shape social interaction, Freund’s 
concept of space is particularly relevant. He writes “space is 
not merely a place in which social interaction occurs, it 
structures such interaction” [30].  
The way in which an environment simultaneously 
influences the behaviour of individuals and interpersonal 
relationships, and yet is shaped by those persons, can be 
referred to as the transactional relationship. The notion of 
‘transaction’ was firstly used in this context by the 
philosopher John Dewey, who asserted “Everything that 
exists in far as it is known and knowable is in interaction 
with other things. It is associated, as well as solitary, single.” 
[31]. In the context of SENSE-GARDEN, it could be said 
that a transactional relationship exists between the various 
technologies (the intervention environment), the person with 
dementia, and the caregiver. This transactional relationship is 
conceptualised visually in Figure 2. The figure highlights the 
numerous interactions that take place between SENSE-
GARDEN and its users. 
To understand the transactional relationship as a whole, 
one must consider the individual interactions that take place 
between each of the three components:  
Person with dementia and SENSE-GARDEN stimuli: The 
SENSE-GARDEN stimuli has a direct effect on the person 
with dementia, e.g., the system plays a song that evokes a 
positive reaction in the person with dementia. The SENSE-
GARDEN, in turn, will also be influenced by the reactions of 
the person with dementia. Feedback will enable the system 
to learn more about the user with each session and therefore, 
future visits to the SENSE-GARDEN will become 
increasingly personalised. 
Caregiver and SENSE-GARDEN stimuli: The SENSE-
GARDEN stimuli may also have an effect on the caregiver. 
For example, a familiar song might hold significant meaning 
for an informal caregiver, as well as the person with 
dementia. In this way, the caregiver may experience their 
own 
emotional 
reaction 
towards 
particular 
stimuli. 
Alternatively, the caregiver may be indirectly affected by the 
stimuli through emotional contagion. Emotional contagion 
refers to the process of an individual’s emotional state 
becoming triggered by emotions displayed in another person  
 
Figure 2. Conceptual model of the transactional relationship that takes 
place between the person with dementia, caregiver and the SENSE-
GARDEN stimuli during the intervention 
 
[32]. In the context of SENSE-GARDEN, the caregiver’s 
emotions may be shaped in response to the reactions of the 
person with dementia. The caregiver will also be able to 
configure the SENSE-GARDEN environment based on these 
reactions, e.g., they can choose to immediately stop a video 
if it prompts negative behaviour in the person with dementia.  
Person with dementia and caregiver: The interpersonal 
relationship between the person with dementia and the 
caregiver 
will 
shape 
the 
entire 
SENSE-GARDEN 
experience. For example, if the person with dementia and the 
caregiver are spouses with a close relationship, they might 
spend the SENSE-GARDEN session reminiscing on shared 
moments from their past. However, if the session is taking 
place between a person with dementia and a new 
professional caregiver who is not so acquainted with the 
individual, then their session may involve SENSE-GARDEN 
providing prompts for the caregiver in order for them to ask 
questions about the person with dementia’s life.  
Applying this theoretical frame to the SENSE-GARDEN 
environment may provide insight into how the intervention 
works. It will not be possible to gain a full insight into the 
effects of SENSE-GARDEN without studying the numerous 
components of the environment. Later literature on emotion 
echoes Dewey’s view, suggesting a need to study the 
complex relationship between person and environment, for 
emotions cannot be comprehended by one or the other alone 
[33].  
These ideas can be linked to current thoughts on the 
nature of technology design, which has been described as 
“deeply contextual” [22]. Therefore, incorporating the study 
of context, environment and relationships seems appropriate 
for both dementia studies and technology development. The 
interaction between environment and the people within it is 
vital. How does SENSE-GARDEN, and technology as a 
whole, fit into this interaction? What role does it play? Going 
forward, research should adopt a holistic approach to 
evaluating technology, considering the wider context in 
which the technology is situated. 

21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper has demonstrated the value and usefulness of 
including user groups in the development of not only 
innovative technologies, but also of interventions for 
dementia care. Viewing a project through the lens of the user 
can offer contrasting perspectives with fresh insight into 
solutions. In the present study, the user interviews yielded 
valuable insights for the progression of the SENSE-
GARDEN project.   
The users’ value for the relationships within the SENSE-
GARDEN suggests that the social and emotional aspects of 
virtual environments should not be underestimated. This 
view is supported by previous literature which has called for 
more research on social interaction in dementia care settings 
[34]. The results highlight the significance users find in 
fostering relationships through means of self-identity and 
emotional relationships. A focus on social and emotional 
interactions between technology, users, and interpersonal 
relationships could provide very fruitful results in the context 
of dementia care. This research provides rationale for the 
study of emotional engagement and interaction not only in 
the SENSE-GARDEN project, but also in the wider context 
of assistive technologies.  
The next steps for SENSE-GARDEN include a focus on 
this emotional aspect. The full trials, planned for summer 
2019, will adopt a mixed-methods approach to studying the 
intervention. Whilst qualitative methods capture rich 
personal accounts of user experiences, it is important to 
recognise the value of quantitative measures. Therefore, 
physiological data will be collected in addition to data from 
questionnaires, interviews and observation measures. The 
Empatica E4 wristband [35] will be used to collect 
information on heart rate and electrodermal activity (EDA). 
These measures will be assessed during the SENSE-
GARDEN visits, as a reaction to different stimuli. 
Combining this data with qualitative accounts of the SENSE-
GARDEN experience will provide a stronger overview of 
the processes that occur within the intervention.   
This research also provides rationale for theoretical work 
on the role of technology for people with dementia. Firstly, 
ways of meeting individual needs need to be identified. 
Respondents stressed the importance of familiarity for the 
person with dementia, and they raised issues regarding the 
identification of individual preferences and behaviours. 
Secondly, the role of technology as an active contributor 
to environments, and interactions within those environments, 
should not go unnoticed. This paper has discussed the 
SENSE-GARDEN technology in the context of a 
transactional relationship, but other theories may apply.  
Finally, 
this 
paper 
demonstrates 
the 
highly 
interdisciplinary nature of this topic. The users’ comments 
have formed a piece of work that lays at the intersection of 
human centred design, technology, psychology, sociology, 
and arguably the creative arts. Future work within dementia 
care can benefit from incorporating knowledge from these 
various disciplines. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was performed in the frame of the EU project 
SENSE-GARDEN 
(AAL/Call2016/054-b/2017, 
with 
implementation period June 2017 - May 2020) funded by 
AAL Programme, co-funded by the European Commission 
and National Funding Agencies of Norway, Belgium, 
Romania, and Portugal. 
We would like to thank all participants in the study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Goodall et al., “Using Adaptive Immersive Environments 
to Stimulate Emotional Expression and Connection in 
Dementia Care: Insights from User Perspectives towards 
SENSE-GARDEN”, The Fourth International Conference on 
Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2018) IARIA, Jun. 
2018, pp. 37-42, ISBN: 978-1-61208-648-4    
[2] World Health Organization, "Global action plan on the public 
health response to dementia 2017-2025." Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2017. 
[3] M. Prince, "World Alzheimer Report 2015: the global impact 
of dementia: an analysis of prevalence, incidence, costs and 
trends", Alzheimer's Disease International, 2015.  
[4] M. Cadieux, L. Garcia, and J. Patrick, "Needs of People With 
Dementia in Long-Term Care", American Journal of 
Alzheimer's Disease & Other Dementias, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 
723-733, Sep. 2013, doi: 10.1177/1533317513500840 
[5] R. Milte et al., "Quality in residential care from the 
perspective of people living with dementia: The importance of 
personhood", Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, vol. 63, 
pp. 9-17, Mar-Apr, 2016. 
[6] K. Lee, D. Algase, and E. McConnell, "Daytime Observed 
Emotional Expressions of People With Dementia", Nursing 
Research, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 218-225, Jul-Aug. 2013, doi: 
10.1097/NNR.0b013e31829999d7 
[7] E. Finnema, R. Dröes, M. Ribbe, and W. Van Tilburg, "The 
effects of emotion-oriented approaches in the care for persons 
suffering from dementia: a review of the literature", 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 15, no. 2, 
pp. 141-161, 2000. 
[8] G. Gowans et al., “Designing a multimedia conversation aid 
for reminiscence therapy in dementia care environments”, in 
CHI ‘04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ‘04), ACM, April. 2004, pp. 825-836, 
ISBN: 1-58113-703-6. 
[9] W. Moyle, C. Jones, T. Dwan, and T. Petrovich, 
"Effectiveness of a Virtual Reality Forest on People With 
Dementia: A Mixed Methods Pilot Study", The Gerontologist, 
vol. 
00, 
no. 
00, 
pp. 
1-10, 
Mar. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1093/geront/gnw270 
[10] D. Smit, J. de Lange, B. Willemse, J. Twisk, and A. Pot, 
"Activity involvement and quality of life of people at different 
stages of dementia in long term care facilities", Aging & 
Mental Health, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 100-109, Jun. 2015, doi: 
10.1080/13607863.2015.1049116 
[11] Y. Cui, M. Shen, Y. Ma, and S. Wen, "Senses make sense: An 
individualized multisensory stimulation for dementia", 
Medical Hypotheses, vol. 98, pp. 11-14, Jan. 2017. 
[12] J. Hulsegge and A. Verheul, “Snoezelen: Another World”, 
Chesterfield, UK: Rompa, 2005  
[13] R. Orpwood, "Involving People with Dementia in the Design 
Process- Examples of Iterative Design", in Dementia, Design 
and Technology, P. Topo and B. Östlund, Ed. IOS Press, 
2009, pp. 79-95.  

22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[14] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. Vernooij-Dassen, J. Eefsting, and 
C. Smits, "Involving people with dementia in the 
development of supportive IT applications: A systematic 
review", Ageing Research Reviews, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 535-
551, Mar. 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2013.01.002 
[15] M. Marshall, “The Needs of People with Dementia and Their 
Carers and the Potential Role of Design and Technology”, in 
Dementia, Design and Technology, P. Topo and B. Östlund, 
Ed. IOS Press, 2009, pp. 3-8. 
[16] A. Lyon and K. Koerner, "User-Centered Design for 
Psychosocial Intervention Development and Implementation", 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 
180-200, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12154 
[17] V. Braun and V. Clarke, "Using thematic analysis in 
psychology", Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 77-101, 2006. 
[18] G. Goodall et al., “Dataset for “Using Adaptive Immersive 
Environments to Stimulate Emotional Expression and 
Connection 
in 
Dementia 
Care: 
Insights 
from 
User 
Perspectives towards SENSE-GARDEN”, [Data set]. Zenodo. 
doi:10.5281/zenodo.1232156 
[19] C. Surr, "Preservation of self in people with dementia living 
in residential care: A socio-biographical approach", Social 
Science & Medicine, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1720-1730, 2006  
[20] R. Woods, "Discovering the person with Alzheimer's disease: 
Cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects", Aging & 
Mental Health, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 7-16, 2001. 
[21] L. Nygård, “Living with Dementia and the Challenges of 
Domestic 
Technology”, 
in 
Dementia, 
Design 
and 
Technology, P. Topo and B. Östlund, Ed. IOS Press, 2009, 
pp. 9-25 
[22] T. Jiancaro, S. Jaglal, and A. Mihailidis, "Technology, design 
and dementia: an exploratory survey of developers", 
Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 12, 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
573-584, 
Jun. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1080/17483107.2016.1187671 
[23] L. Caddell and L. Clare, "The impact of dementia on self and 
identity: A systematic review", Clinical Psychology Review, 
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 113-126, Feb. 2010.  
[24] P. Siriaraya and C. S. Ang, “Recreating living experiences 
from past memories through virtual worlds for people with 
dementia”, SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM, Apr. 2014, pp. 3977-3986 
[25] T. Kitwood, "The experience of dementia", Aging & Mental 
Health, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13-22, 1997. 
[26] A. Westius, K. Kallenberg, and A. Norberg, "Views of life 
and sense of identity in people with Alzheimer's disease", 
Ageing and Society, vol. 30, no. 07, pp. 1257-1278, Jul. 2010, 
doi: 10.1017/S0144686X10000309 
[27] M. Mills, "Narrative Identity and Dementia: a Study of 
Emotion and Narrative in Older People with Dementia", 
Ageing and Society, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 673-698, Nov. 1997. 
[28] R. Stenhouse, J. Tait, P. Hardy, and T. Sumner, "Dangling 
conversations: reflections on the process of creating digital 
stories during a workshop with people with early-stage 
dementia", Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 134-141, Mar. 2012, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2850.2012.01900.x 
[29] P. Topo and H. Kotilainen, “Designing enabling environments 
for people with dementia, their family carers and formal 
carers”, in Dementia, design and technology, P. Topo and B. 
Ostlund, Eds. Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp. 45-60, 2009.   
[30] P. Freund, “Bodies, disability and spaces: the social model 
and disabling spatial organisations,” Disability & Society, vol. 
16, 
no.5, 
pp. 
689-706, 
2001, 
doi: 
10.1080/09687590120070079  
[31] J. Dewey, Experience and Nature. Courier Corporation, 1958.  
[32] E. Hatfield, J. T. Cacioppo and R. L. Rapson, “Emotional 
Contagion”, Current Directions in Psychological Science, vol. 
2, no. 3, pp. 96-100, Jun. 1993.   
[33] R. Lazarus and S. Folkman, "Transactional theory and 
research on emotions and coping", European Journal of 
Personality, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 141-169, Sep. 1987, doi: 
10.1002/per.2410010304 
[34] J. Mabire, M. Gay, P. Vrignaud, C. Garitte and M. Vernooij-
Dassen, “Social interactions between people with dementia: 
pilot evaluation of an observational instrument in a nursing 
home,” International psychogeriatrics, vol. 28, no.6, pp. 1005-
1015, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1017/S1041610215002483 
[35] Empatica. E4 wristband from empatica. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.empatica.com/en-eu/research/e4/ 
2019.05.27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

