User-Centered Design and Evaluation of an Ambient Event Detector Based on a
Balanced Scorecard Approach
Rainer Planinc, Martin Kampel
Computer Vision Lab
Vienna University of Technology
Vienna, Austria
{rainer.planinc; martin.kampel}@tuwien.ac.at
Stefan Ortlieb, Claus-Christian Carbon
Department of General Psychology and Methodology
University of Bamberg
Bamberg, Germany
{stefan.ortlieb; ccc}@uni-bamberg.de
Abstract—The user-centered design of an e-health system
is a complex endeavor: the conﬂicting interests of multiple
user perspectives have to be balanced throughout the design
process. Moreover, a common understanding of the interplay
between technical, psychological and business aspects has to be
developed among multi-disciplinary project partners. In this
paper, we describe how the European ambient assisted living
project fearless deals with these challenges of a user-centered
design process based on a balanced scorecard approach.
Keywords-Ambient assisted living, ambient event detector, user-
centered design, balanced scorecard.
I. INTRODUCTION
The European ambient assisted living (AAL) project fear-
less1 (“Fear Elimination As Resolution of Elderly’s Substan-
tial Sorrows”) is dedicated to fall detection and inactivity
monitoring in the homes of solitarily living elderly. For this
purpose an autonomously operating ambient event detector
is being developed in a user-centered design process [1]:
technical speciﬁcation of the ﬁrst prototypes is based on two
multi-cultural user requirements surveys targeting elderly
people (N=259), their relatives and trusted persons (N=215)
as well as 22 representatives of care taker organizations.
The prototypes of the ambient event detector have been
tested extensively under laboratory conditions (e.g., [2]–[6])
yielding promising results. At present these results are being
veriﬁed in two longitudinal ﬁeld pilot studies including 45
elderly test users and care taker organizations from Austria,
Germany, Italy, and Spain.
The fearless consortium comprises ten multi-disciplinary
partners from Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain. While
technical partners are working on fall detection algorithms
and setting up a telematics platform for alarm handling, two
care taker organizations are responsible for the recruitment
of elderly test users. Tools for the analysis of user needs
and a continuous user-centered evaluation process are de-
signed and deployed by cognitive psychologists from the
department of General Psychology and Methodology at the
1This work is supported by the European Union under grant AAL 2010-
3-020.
University of Bamberg. Medical experts are counseling the
project consortium in terms of ethical issues. Last but not
least, business experts are responsible for bringing the fear-
less technology to the market. Market research is conducted
and a business model is designed taking different national
health care systems into consideration.
User-centered design is essential for the development of
assistive technologies. Yet, designing an e-health system
becomes a highly complex endeavor as soon as multiple
stakeholders are involved: ﬁrst and foremost, the conﬂict-
ing interests of complementary user perspectives have to
be balanced throughout the design process. Moreover, a
common understanding of the interplay between technical,
psychological and business aspects has to be developed
among multi-disciplinary project partners. In the following
sections of this paper, we describe how the AAL-project
fearless deals with these challenges based on a balanced
scorecard (BSC) approach: Section
II is dedicated to the
current state of technology used in the fearless project.
In Section III the concept of the balanced scorecard is
introduced. An overview of the different stages of user
integration within the fearless project is given in Section IV.
Subsequently, the results of a primary and a secondary
user requirements survey are presented in Section V and
Section VI. Section VII deals with the Technological Impact
Assessment Model, which integrates the results of these
two user requirements surveys. In Section VIII, the speciﬁc
challenges and trade-offs are discussed, which have aroused
in the course of a user-centered design process including
multiple user perspectives. Finally, in Section IX conclusions
are drawn and an outlook is given.
II. CURRENT STATE OF TECHNOLOGY
The structure of the fearless system is depicted in Fig-
ure 1, showing all relevant interfaces and involved end
users. The proposed e-health system consists of sensor units
(Xtion Pro
TM + small PC for data processing) installed at
the elderly’s house or ﬂat. The system is adaptable, hence
standardized interfaces to third parties are provided (e.g.,
burglar alarm system, gas detector). Unusual events (e.g.,
237
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
Organizational workﬂow
falls) are detected automatically and alarms are sent to the
telematics platform. This platform enables relatives and care
takers to handle alarms. Furthermore, the telematics platform
offers interfaces to different standardized electronic health
record systems (e.g., ELGA in Austria) to include health
professionals.
The fearless system works autonomously and raises
alarms wihtout any user intervention, since it is important
to reduce the cognitive load on the user, especially when
dealing with dementia [7]. The use of computer vision
is feasible, since it can overcome the limitations of other
sensor types [8] and no devices need to be worn. Zweng
et al. [6] show that the accuracy of their fall detection
approach is higher compared to 2D cameras when using a
calibrated camera setup and a 3D reconstruction of a person.
Hence, we propose to use a Kinect
TM / Xtion pro
TM, since
3D information is available for distances up to ten meters
without the need for a calibrated camera setup. However, the
SDK is optimized for a range from 0.8 to 3.5 meters and
thus not all features provided by the SDK can be used for
higher distances (e.g., NITE). Moreover, the scene can be
analyzed in more detail (e.g., estimation of the ground plane)
in comparison to standard cameras. Due to the sensor range
of ten meters, one sensor is able to cover one room. The total
number of sensors per ﬂat highly depends on the layout of
the rooms and user preferences. Users with a high risk of
falling may choose to equip their ﬂat with many sensors,
whereas user with a lower risk of falling may choose to
place sensors in rooms with a higher probability of falling
(i.e., living room) only. The fearless system also works with
multiple persons and detects falls not only directly, but also
includes additional heuristics to detect “unusual behaviour”
indicating a fall (e.g., person has disappeared behind a sofa).
Nevertheless, the use of computer vision raises privacy
issues. Due to this fact, the Kinect
TM respectively the Xtion
Pro
TM sensor is used, since depth data can be used to detect
falls accurately (e.g., [3], [4]). Using depth data respects
the privacy of elderly, since neither the person nor the
surrounding can be identiﬁed from depth images. A depth
image only visualizes the position and the distance to the
sensor. Figure 2 (left) shows an example of a depth image
illustrating a person, tables and a mat lying on the ﬂoor.
This visualization illustrates the distances of subjects and
objects to the sensor. The brighter the color in the depth
image, the further away the person or object is. On the
other hand, the darker the object is, the closer to the sensor
it is. Furthermore, black indicates that there is no data
available (e.g., due to sunlight or reﬂections). In contrast,
the corresponding RGB image is shown in Figure 2 (right),
representing the same scene.
The workﬂow of our approach is depicted in Figure 3:
starting with a depth image, the skeleton and ground plane
data is extracted by the use of OpenNI [9]. The skeleton
joints of the shoulder, spine and the center of the hip are
extracted and analyzed using fuzzy logic. Based on the
results of the fuzzy logic, a decision is made if the person
is in an upright position or lying on the ﬂoor. Since only
the skeleton joints are used, the privacy of the elderly is
respected due to the use of an anonymous and abstract
visualization only using lines and dots. An example of this
visualization is shown in Figure 4: the dots are representing
the upper part of the body, whereas the line represents the
major body orientation and the ground ﬂoor. In case of an
alarm, the alarm including this abstract visualization is sent
to the telematics platform, depicted in Figure 3. Moreover,
the alarm is stored and forwarded to the appropriate care
taker organization or relative by using this platform.
III. BALANCED SCORECARD (BSC)
The user-centered design of an e-health system is a
complex endeavor: multiple user perspectives and their con-
ﬂicting interests have to be balanced throughout the design
process. Moreover, a common understanding of the interplay
between technical, psychological and business aspects has
to be created among the multi-disciplinary project partners.
A performance management system can help reduce com-
plexity by drawing our attention to those aspects critical
Figure 2.
Depth image (left) and corresponding RGB image (right)
238
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3.
Technical workﬂow of the fearless system
Figure 4.
Illustrations used for veriﬁcation
a person standing upright
(left) vs. a person lying on the ﬂoor (right)
for success. In 1992, Kaplan and Norton have introduced a
new type of performance measurement system to the ﬁeld of
business administration [10]: the Balanced Scorecard (BSC).
Based on an explicit “theory of business” [11, p. 110] a
BSC combines measures and indicators that reﬂect different
stakeholder perspectives and their conﬂicting interests. Thus,
a BSC enables executives and project managers to “see
whether they have improved in an area at the expense of
another” [10, p. 1]. Basically, a BSC has to give answers to
the following questions:
• Who are the relevant stakeholders?
• What are the needs and expectations of these stakehold-
ers?
• How are stakeholder perspectives interrelated?
• What are appropriate measures and indicators for track-
ing these needs and expectations?
• Which aspects have to be balanced in the user-centered
design process?
In the following sections, we will answer these questions
for the fearless project. The resulting fearless scorecard will
be used for project evaluation in the user-centered design
process of an e-health system.
IV. CONCEPT AND PHASES OF USER INVOLVEMENT
Figure 5 illustrates the integration of the end users within
the fearless project: at the beginning of the project, two
multi-cultural user requirements surveys were conducted in
order to assess the needs (e.g., fears) and expectations of
Figure 5.
User involvement in the fearless project
primary and secondary end users. According to the user
requirements, an initially deﬁned system speciﬁcations are
evaluated by test users and redeﬁned on a regular basis in the
course of two ﬁeld pilot studies. Field pilots in combination
with semi-structured interviews are conducted to ensure that
the fearless system is tailored to the end user’s needs.
Since end users provide regular feedback, the technical
speciﬁcation of the fearless system is adapted throughout
the project.
Who are the stakeholders of the projected e-health sys-
tem? In the fearless project the design process is centered
on two groups of users: Older adults (aged 60+) who
wish to use the e-health system in their private home.
In the following, this group of users is referred to either
as primary users or as clients. Together with their closest
relatives and other trusted persons these potential users are
involved during user analysis and ﬁeld pilots. The second
user perspective is represented by members of care taker
organizations that offer services related to the projected e-
health system. Just like the primary users these people will
be interacting with the fearless system on a daily basis: as
technicians they will be engaged in hardware installation and
maintenance, as members of the call-center staff they will
interact with the telematics platform handling the alarms. In
the following this group of users is referred to as secondary
users. Secondary users are also involved throughout the
design process: from user requirements analysis to ﬁeld pilot
evaluation.
During the ﬁeld pilots the fearless system is installed in
elderly’s ﬂats in Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain. The ﬁeld
pilots consist of two different phases: during phase one, the
ﬁrst prototype of the fall detection system is installed in 16
ﬂats (four ﬂats in each country) to obtain ﬁrst results of
the system. Due to these results the prototype is enhanced
before phase two with more than 40 installations will be
conducted. The aim of the ﬁeld pilots is not only to test
239
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the fall detection system itself, but also to assess technolog-
ical and psychological aspects (e.g., housing-related control
beliefs) as well as integrating care taker organizations and
relatives throughout the project. Furthermore, also ethical
commissions are involved during the ﬁeld pilots to verify
the feasibility of the fearless system from a legal and an
ethical point of view.
The project beneﬁts from the different interdisciplinary
perspectives, from which the results of the ﬁeld pilots are
analyzed. From a technical point of view, the fall detection
algorithm [4] is tested under real settings and is adapted to
the end users’ needs while overcoming the lack of realism
when performing falls in the laboratory. Furthermore, the
overall system including its interfaces as well as the feasibil-
ity of the system setup are evaluated. From an organizational
point of view, end user organizations are able to integrate the
system into their workﬂow and provide feedback to adapt
the system to their needs. Elderly are involved to provide
essential feedback to the technical partners. Additionally, we
expect to reduce their fears by providing safety while using
our system. Since the ﬁeld pilots are conducted with medical
and psychological support, changes and beneﬁts for elderly
can be determined and these assumptions can be veriﬁed.
In summary, the following user groups are involved in the
fearless project:
• Elderly and relatives are involved during the user re-
quirements analysis and during the ﬁeld pilots. Elderly
install the system in their ﬂats during the ﬁeld pilots,
whereas their relatives can receive the alarms if unusual
events are detected.
• Care takers are involved during the user requirements
analysis and are fully integrated during the ﬁeld pilots.
Hence, the care takers’ call centers are integrated and
alarms are forwarded to the appropriate call center. This
allows for an evaluation of the overall workﬂow in case
of an alarm.
V. PRIMARY USER REQUIREMENTS SURVEY
What are the needs and expectations of prospective users?
Of course user involvement starts with a thorough analysis of
primary and secondary user needs. Thus, two multi-cultural
user requirement surveys were conducted prior to technical
speciﬁcation of the ﬁrst fearless prototypes [12]. The ﬁrst
survey addressed the needs and expectations of older adults
(aged 60+), their closest relatives and other trusted persons.
Based on the results of this survey we sought for answers
to the following questions: What do elderly people actually
fear? Which functions of an e-health system would be
desirable in order to resolve these fears? Besides, two more
speciﬁc questions were targeted: Where do falls occur? How
much are users willing to spend on an ambient event detector
and the services related to it? 259 potential primary users
from Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain (Catalonia) took
part in this survey. The participants were aged between
59 and 101 years (M = 73.6; SD = 8.3; Mdn = 73.0).
Additionally, we surveyed 215 relatives and trusted persons
of potential primary users. All participants either ﬁlled in a
questionnaire or participated in a standardized face-to-face
interview. Primary users answered questions about resources
and deﬁcits of their private home, previous falls and fears
related to a broad variety of critical incidents (e.g., falls, ﬁre,
housebreaking, etc.). Besides, they were asked to specify
preferred functions and an appropriate pricing for a custom-
tailored ambient event detector. Relatives and trusted persons
answered these questions from a third-person perspective
[12]. Across all cultures suffering a stroke in the absence of
others was perceived as the most troubling event by primary
users and relatives alike followed by events related to falling
(Figure 6). Elderly people from Austria, Italy and Spain were
particularly worried about housebreaking whereas solitarily
living elderly from Austria and Germany reported fear of
social isolation. The most preferred functions for a new
ambient event detector were fall and ﬁre detection followed
by a burglar alarm function, gas detection and inactivity
monitoring (Figure 7). In terms of pricing primary users and
their relatives stated that hardware must not cost more than
200 Euros whereas monthly expenses for services related
to the fearless system should be less than 50 Euros. From
the survey data a set of seven requirements was derived:
maintenance of social networks, stabilization of internal
housing-related control beliefs, enhancement of falls efﬁcacy
and mobility, reliable fall and ﬁre detection, adaptability
(system should allow for additional functions, e.g., burglar
alarm), and last but not least affordability [12].
VI. SECONDARY USER REQUIREMENTS SURVEY
A second requirement survey was conducted in order
to capture the needs and expectations of professional care
takers [12]. On the basis of this survey data we sought for
answers to the following questions: Which functions should
an innovative e-health system provide in order to meet the
needs and expectations of care taker organizations? Which
aspects of a new e-health system are critical for success?
22 participants from Austria (n=3), Germany (n=7), Italy
(n=10), and Spain (n=2) either ﬁlled in a questionnaire or
participated in a standardized face-to-face interview. They
answered questions about their previous experience with
current tele-care devices (e.g., panic button) and their expec-
tations towards innovative e-health technology. Furthermore,
they were asked to specify preferred functions and an
appropriate pricing for an ambient event detector. In spite of
its size the expert sample reﬂects a broad variety of different
organizations and professions from the ﬁeld of healthcare:
members of research organizations, SMEs and large care
taker organizations were included. The participants were
employed either by proﬁt (n=8) or non-proﬁt (n=14) or-
ganizations [12]. Across different healthcare systems and
individual areas of expertise four functions were favored by
240
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6.
Prevalent fears of elderly people and their relatives across the four cultures
professionals: fall and ﬁre detection, inactivity monitoring,
and gas detection (Figure 7). Requirements for an innova-
tive ambient event detector could be identiﬁed as follows:
data protection, usability, accreditation, interoperability, and
reasonable costs for hardware and services. Due to a severe
shortage of trained care personnel in their countries, experts
from Germany put special emphasis on low staff intensity
in terms of installation, maintenance and handling of the
e-health system [12].
VII. TECHNOLOGICAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT MODEL
How are the two user perspectives interrelated? What are
appropriate measures for a user-centered outcome evalua-
tion? In order to answer these two main research questions
the Technological Impact Assessment Model (TIAMo) has
been developed by psychologists from the University of
Bamberg [12]. One of the basic assumptions of the TIAMo
is that user perspectives can be arranged hierarchically
according to the value added chain. First of all, an innovative
e-health system has to meet the needs and expectations of
service providers. Otherwise corresponding services will not
be available for primary users in the ﬁrst place - of course
this does not apply to the cases in which the fearless system
is used independently from a care taker organization (e.g., by
primary users and their relatives). Thus, our model suggests
that the secondary user perspective forms the basis of the
TIAMo (Figure 8). In the following sections, we will take a
closer look at the requirements for each user perspective. The
interdependencies between single requirements are described
by arrows. The arrows point to the necessary conditions for
each requirement. For example, whether the e-health system
is affordable or not depends among other factors on the costs
for services, which again depend on staff intensity.
A. Measures and Criteria for the Secondary User Perspec-
tive
In accordance with the results of the corresponding re-
quirement survey the secondary user perspective is repre-
sented by a set of eight variables: (1) privacy and data pro-
tection, (2) usability, (3) reliability of fall and ﬁre detection,
(4) staff intensity, (5) accreditation, (6) costs for hardware
and (7) services as well as (8) interoperability, illustrated in
Figure 9.
Privacy and data protection. Of course compliance with
national and European data protection laws is a sine qua
non for an e-health system. What are appropriate criteria for
evaluating privacy and data protection? Within the European
Union Germanys data privacy act is the most restrictive.
Thus, it will be applied to the fearless system as a standard
for the handling of personal data.
Usability. Besides privacy and data protection usability is
the most essential requirement. An e-health system has to be
reliable and easy to handle. Important pieces of information
(e.g., the current status of the client) have to be displayed
241
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7.
Preferred functions across user perspectives and different cultures
comprehensibly. Usability aspects are closely related to staff
intensity: only if the fearless system functions reliably it
may relieve rescue staff. Only if it is easy to operate it
will not require intensive training. What are appropriate
measures for usability evaluation? A log-ﬁle template has
been created to document any technical problem that occurs
during pilot implementation. It is ﬁlled in by the professional
care taker in charge and forwarded to the project partners
responsible for technical support and outcome evaluation. In
addition, a self-devised “Expert Checklist” was developed by
psychologists from the University of Bamberg is handed out
to the professional care takers after a single test installation
has been completed. They are asked to rate the overall
usability of the fearless system on a ﬁve point rating scale
(Item E09: “Compared with the tele-care devices we have
been using so far usability and handling of the fearless
system are very good” ; 1 = “I strongly disagree” to 5 = “I
strongly agree”). Apart from the “Expert log-ﬁle” and the
“Expert Checklist” the usability of the telematics platform is
also evaluated in a separate usability study, which comprises
a participatory observation and a subsequent interview. The
participatory observation takes place in a laboratory at the
University of Bamberg. Participants are asked to navigate the
telematics platform and to respond to a series of test alarms
that are generated by the conductor of the study. Afterwards
the participants are interviewed about their user experience
and point out areas of improvement.
Reliability. A crucial aspect of usability of the fearless
system is its reliability in terms of fall detection. To measure
the reliability of the system, the number of false alarms
/ false positives (FP) is evaluated. This number can also
be compared to similar alarm systems (e.g., panic button)
since a button push without the actual need for help can be
considered as false positive. How do we assess reliability
of fall detection? The applied fall detection approach is
introduced and evaluated under laboratory conditions by
Planinc and Kampel [4], [13]. Falls are simulated according
to the scenarios deﬁned by Noury et al. [14] and by adding
additional scenarios deﬁned by Planinc and Kampel [13].
These scenarios are simulated by two subjects, simulating
each scenario twice. This results in an overall set of 72
videos, containing 40 falls and 32 no-falls. The approach
used in the fearless system yielded an accuracy of 98.6 % on
72 videos, resulting in one FP in the whole dataset. This FP
occurs due to a tracking error after a fall, since the person is
not tracked correctly while getting up again. Hence, a second
242
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 8.
Technological Impact Assessment Model (TIAMo) describing the interdependencies of user requirements
fall is detected within the same sequence but as this fall does
not occur in the time interval speciﬁed in the ground truth
annotation, it is marked as a FP. Furthermore, the use of the
Kinect
TM offers practical advantages: it is robust to changing
lighting conditions, also works also during the night and the
installation in real homes is simpliﬁed by using only one
sensor without the need for a complex calibration.
Staff intensity. Especially for care taker organizations
from Germany it is difﬁcult to recruit qualiﬁed care person-
nel. Also for the sake of labor costs operating the fearless
system should be less labor intensive than a conventional
tele-care systems (e.g., panic button). How do we assess staff
intensity? The “Expert Checklist” contains three items tar-
geting staff intensity (“Compared with the tele-care devices
we have been using so far the fearless system is very efﬁcient
in terms of staff intensity.”), maintenance (“Compared with
the tele-care devices we have been using so far the fearless
system needs very little maintenance.”) and training effort
(“Compared with the tele-care devices we have been using
so far the fearless system can be operated without intensive
training.”) related to the fearless system. Each of these items
features a ﬁve point rating scale ranging from 1 = “I strongly
disagree” to 5 = “I strongly agree”.
Accreditation means that the fearless system is ofﬁcially
certiﬁed and listed as an assistive device. As accreditation
is a major precondition for reimbursement it contributes to
the affordability of the projected e-health system. What are
appropriate criteria for accreditation? National as well as
European criteria for certiﬁcation are applied to the fearless
system.
Affordability / Costs for hardware and services. The
projected e-health system and the services related to it
should be affordable even for elderly people with limited
ﬁnancial resources. What are appropriate criteria for afford-
ability? According to our survey data the hardware should
be less than 200 Euros and monthly expenses for services
related to it should not exceed 50 Euros.
Interoperability means that hardware and software of
the e-health system should be compatible with the given
IT-environment of care taker organizations. An e-health
system that is interoperable with an existing infrastructure
contributes to affordability as it does not require subsequent
investments. How do we assess interoperability? Interoper-
ability of the fearless system is operationalized by one item
of the “Expert Checklist”: “In general the fearless system
is compatible with existing hardware and software and
provides all necessary interfaces”. Employees of care taker
organizations who have worked with the fearless system
243
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

during pilot implementation phase are asked to rate their
approval of this statement on a ﬁve point rating scale ranging
from 1 = “I strongly disagree” to 5 = “I strongly agree”.
B. Measures and Criteria for the Primary User Perspective
The TIAMo characterizes the primary user perspective by
a set of ﬁve requirements (Figure 8): (9) housing-related
control beliefs, (10) fear of falling/falls efﬁcacy (older
persons conﬁdence in performing everyday tasks without
falling) (11) mobility and (12) maintenance of social net-
works, illustrated in Figure 10. In addition, overall housing
satisfaction is assessed. The requirement “affordability” is
covered by “costs for hardware” and “costs for services” in
the secondary user perspective.
Housing-related control beliefs. People who state a
strong internal housing-related control belief are convinced
that they are in control of their private home environment
[15]. By contrast people with external control beliefs feel
that their life is either controlled by powerful others (e.g.,
“I rely to a great extent upon the advice of others when it
comes to helpful improvements to my apartment / house”
[15]) or by mere chance (e.g., “Having a nice place is all
luck. You cannot inﬂuence it; you just have to accept it”
[15]). Older people displaying a high level of externality are
prone to feelings of helplessness and depression. Therefore,
reducing external control beliefs and/or sustaining an inter-
nal housing-related control belief must be considered as pre-
requisites for fear resolution and psychological well-being.
How do we assess housing-related control beliefs? In order
to capture housing-related control beliefs 16 items from
the Housing-related Control Beliefs Questionnaire (HCQ)
by Oswald et al. [15]) were included into our feedback
questionnaire. The HCQ is a 24-item questionnaire “based
on the widely used psychological dimensions of Internal
Control (8 items, sum-score), External Control: Powerful
Others (8 items, sum-score), and External Control: Chance
(8 items, sum-score)” [16, p. 192]. Participants are instructed
to rate their approval of certain statements (e.g., “Having
a nice place is all luck. You cannot inﬂuence it; you just
have to accept it” [15]) on a ﬁve-point rating scale ranging
from 1 = “not at all” to 5 = “very much”. Due to the poor
psychometrical quality of the internal control scale only the
two external control subscales (8 items + 8 items) of the
HCQ were included into our feedback questionnaire.
Fear of falling refers to the worries of an older person in
terms of falling in his/her home. Fear of falling has serious
consequences for older people [17]. Elderly who are very
worried about falling tend to limit their physical activities
in order to reduce their risk of falling. Since fear resolution
is the main objective of the fearless system this variable
will be examined closely during pilot implementation. For
the measurement of fear of falling we prefer the construct
falls efﬁcacy. Falls efﬁcacy is deﬁned as an “older persons
conﬁdence in performing a series of everyday tasks without
falling” [18, p. 299]. How do we assess fear of falling/falls
efﬁcacy? According to Tinetti et al. [18] the Falls Efﬁcacy
Scale (FES) can be considered as a valid estimate for fear
of falling. Thus, our feedback questionnaire includes the
complete Falls Efﬁcacy Scale (FES) by Tinetti et al. [18].
The FES consists of 16 Items describing activities that may
be challenging for elderly (e.g., “Reaching for something
above your head or on the ground”). For each activity
participants are asked to rate their concerns in terms of
falling in the course of this particular activities on a ﬁve
point rating scale ranging from 1 = “not at all concerned”
to 5 = “very concerned”.
Mobility refers to the test users level of physical activity
in terms of locomotion. By enhancing falls efﬁcacy we
expect the fearless system to disinhibit mobility among our
test users. Ideally, this effect is not limited to the range of
the ambient event detector. Thus, for mobility assessment
we have combined indicators for indoor as well as outdoor
activities (e.g. grocery shopping). Enhancing mobility is
an important objective of the fearless system since it is a
prerequisite for social participation.
Social participation refers to the frequency of test users
social activities and the number of different people involved
in these activities. Social bonds are a powerful source of
self-conﬁdence. Installing an automated event detector in the
private home of an elderly person may affect social activities.
The impact of the fearless system on social activities has to
be examined throughout the pilot phase.
How do we assess mobility and social participation? The
Nordic mobility-related participation outcome evaluation of
assistive device intervention (NOMO) by Brandt et al. [19]
allows for a combined assessment of mobility and social
participation: 21 items of the NOMO capturing the “fre-
quency of mobility-related participation and ease/difﬁculty
in mobility during participation” [19, p. 18] have been in-
cluded into the feedback questionnaire. Each item describes
a certain activity of daily living, which requires physical
activity (e.g., washing clothes or garments). The participants
are instructed to estimate how frequently they conduct this
activity (e.g., “How often do you do grocery shopping?”).
For our feedback questionnaire these questions have been
slightly modiﬁed: Participants are asked to estimate how
frequently they have conducted certain activities in the
course of the last month (e.g., “In the last month how often
did you do grocery shopping?”). Moreover, the multiple
choice format of the NOMO has been replaced by a cloze
(“About x times.”). The feedback questionnaire reﬂects the
test users personal view in terms of mobility. For outcome
assessment this self-report data is very valuable, yet it may
be biased (e.g., by selective memory processes). Thus, every
test user will be equipped with a portable step counter device
in order to collect more objective data on his/her level of
physical activity.
Housing satisfaction describes the overall ”satisfaction
244
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 9.
Overview of measures and indicators based on data from the secondary user perspective
Figure 10.
Overview of measures and indicators based on data from the primary user perspective
with the condition of the house“ [16, p. 192]. Introducing
a novel assistive technology such as the fearless system
to the homes of our test users is likely to affect their
housing satisfaction. In our feedback questionnaire housing
satisfaction is captured by a single item measure (“Are you
happy with the condition in your home?”). This item was
taken from the more extensive Housing Options for Older
People (HOOP) by Heywood et al. [20]. It is answered on
a ﬁve point rating scale ranging from 1 = “deﬁnitely not”
to 5 = “yes, deﬁnitely”.
VIII. CHALLENGES IN THE USER-CENTERED DESIGN
PROCESS
Which aspects have to be balanced in the user-centered
design process? At ﬁrst glance, the requirements described
in the TIAMo seem perfectly compatible. Yet a closer look
reveals at least four goal conﬂicts that have to be addressed
and balanced in the process of system development and
evaluation: (1) affordability versus technical performance,
(2) need for control versus automation, (3) security versus
privacy, (4) social needs versus personnel intensity. These
four trade-offs are described and design recommendations
are discussed in the following sections.
245
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 11.
Resolution of the Kinect
TM sensor depending on the distance
[21]
A. Affordability versus Technical Performance
Research in the ﬁeld of depth-sensor technology is very
dynamic. Depth-sensors are relentlessly being improved
in terms of accuracy and range. Although cutting-edge
technology excels todays off-the-shelf sensors it is still
comparatively expensive. Thus, a trade-off between technical
performance and affordability has to be found. Since the
Kinect
TM sensor was introduced by Microsoft in 2010, a
cheap depth sensor (in comparison to other depth sensors) is
available. An evaluation of the depth sensor by Pramerdorfer
[21] showed the feasibility of the Kinect
TM sensor for fall
detection. The precision of the sensor is analyzed depending
on different distances, lighting conditions and surfaces.
The accuracy of the sensor is reduced at higher distances
but results in resolution being high enough to detect falls
properly. Figure 11 shows the dependency of the accuracy
(here resolution per pixel) and the distance: at a distance
of one meter, the resolution is less than one centimeter.
Whereas at a distance of nine meters, the resolution is above
20 cm per pixel, resulting in a reduced accuracy. However,
in comparison to more accurate but more expensive devices
(e.g., Pmd CamCube, Fotonic P70, Argos 3D) the accuracy
of the Kinect
TM is sufﬁcient to detect falls reliably.
The Kinect
TM uses structured light to obtain depth in-
formation from a scene. This results in the drawback,
that the Kinect
TM can only be used indoors since direct
sunlight interferes with the structured light and thus no
depth information can be obtained. This trade-off was made
in the fearless project due to the goal of providing an
affordable system. However, the new version of the Kinect
TM
presented in 2013 already uses time of ﬂight for obtaining
depth information and thus will be more stable to different
lightening conditions (especially including direct sunlight).
B. Need for Control versus Automation
In 2008, guideless underground trains were introduced
to the public transportation system of the city of Nurem-
berg, Germany [22]. Many senior citizens opposed to these
plans. They felt uncomfortable being at the mercy of an
autonomously operating transportation system and signal-
ized that in the future they would choose other means of
transportation where conductors of “ﬂesh and blood” are
available in case of an emergency. This example illustrates
a second challenge we are facing in the user-centered
development process of an automatically operating event
detector: primary users need for control versus the beneﬁts
of automated fall detection. Internal control beliefs are
deﬁned as a strong conﬁdence in ones abilities to control
ones own life. On the contrary, people displaying external
control beliefs feel that their life is controlled either by
environmental factors (e.g., powerful others) or by mere
chance. A strong notion of internal control is essential for
psychological well-being in general and fear resolution in
particular [23]. To a certain extent control beliefs vary across
different life domains. Housing-related control beliefs refer
to a persons private home: elderly people stating strong
internal housing-related control beliefs are convinced that
they can exert control over their private home environment.
By contrast, people with external control beliefs feel that
their life is either controlled by powerful others or by mere
chance. Older people displaying a high level of externality
are prone to feelings of helplessness and depression [24].
How does this relate to the fearless system? From a
technical point of view reliability and accuracy of fall
detection and inactivity monitoring can be improved by
automation. A conventional panic button for example is
useless if the client passes out or forgets to wear it. Yet
from a psychological point of view, automation always
implies giving away control to a technical device. In case
of a panic button an alarm is actively released by the
client himself/herself. Thus, introducing an autonomously
operating ambient event detector to the private home of an
elderly person must not undermine his/her internal housing-
related control beliefs. How can we compensate this loss
of control due to automation? First of all, we recommend
a user interface, which provides immediate feedback and
allows for active control of the ambient detector. Immediate
feedback means that there is a user interface, which gives
answers to the following questions: What is the current
status of the system? Is it working properly? Does it require
maintenance? Has an alarm been released? Active control
means that the system can be switched on and off, that
alarms can also be released manually and that false positives
can be cancelled by the user.
From a technical point of view, these requirements can
be integrated in the system easily: LEDs can symbolize
the current status of the system (e.g., light blue = system
active, red = alarm triggered, no light = system off) and an
easy accessible on/off switch maintains the control beliefs
of elderly since they are able to switch the system off
at any time. Furthermore, the system can be combined
246
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with the already established contact devices already used in
combination with the panic button: in case of a triggered
alarm, voice communication to a call center, care taker
organization or relative can be established and thus the
fearless system is an additional device enhancing the safety
of elderly in their homes.
C. Security versus Privacy
In case of an alarm the fearless system generates a visu-
alization of the scene at the clients home. This visualization
is sent to the care taker organization for alarm veriﬁcation.
Based on these visualizations, employees of the care taker
organization have to discriminate between, e.g., a fall and
a false alarm. The quality of these visualizations gives rise
to a third goal conﬂict: fast and correct alarm veriﬁcation
requires very detailed images, whereas for the sake of
privacy protection a low level of resolution is desirable (see
[25], [26]).
How can we solve this goal conﬂict? For instance, alarm
veriﬁcation via depth-images could be replaced by direct
voice contact in case of an alarm. Many care taker orga-
nizations already use direct voice contact in combination
with a panic button device: in case of an alarm the client
receives a veriﬁcation call from the call-center of the care
taker organization. If the client answers this call, his/her need
for assistance can be speciﬁed. If not, further measures are
taken (e.g., an ambulance is sent to the clients home). If this
well-tried routine was combined with the fearless sensors the
dilemma between security and privacy could be resolved.
Allowing for direct voice contact between clients and care
taker staff brings us to the next crucial trade-off between
the clients need for communication and personnel intensity
on the service providers side. However, this solution only
applies to the ﬁnal system. During the technical development
within the fearless project and the pilot phases A and B,
another trade-off needs to be found. The veriﬁcation image
is needed not only for care taker staff to decide whether a fall
has occurred or not, but also for technical staff developing
the system and thus not only information if a false alarm has
occurred but also why this false alarm has occurred need to
be gathered. Hence, different visualizations are developed as
shown in Figure 12. Most information is included in RGB
images, allowing to verify if a fall occurred and identifying
the problem of false alarms easily. However, due to the lack
of privacy protection, no RGB images are transmitted at
any time. Depth images are used during the pilot phase in
order to verify if a fall occurred and the system is working
properly. These images were found to be a trade-off during
the pilot phases were the system is still under development
but the privacy aspects need to be considered. However,
if the technical system is working properly, more abstract
visualizations (e.g., top-view and 3 dots representing the
upper body with respect to the ground ﬂoor) can be applied
in order to allow the veriﬁcation of false alarms by care
takers. Evaluation showed that the visualization containing
only the ground ﬂoor, three dots and a line is even more
helpful than a top view image showing the shape of a person
lying on the ﬂoor since it can be interpreted more easily.
Nevertheless, a direct voice communication is seen as the
best way to verify if a fall has occurred while respecting the
privacy of elderly.
D. Social Needs versus Personnel Intensity
In the ﬁeld of AAL a strong emphasis is usually put on
self-determination and independence of elderly people. Yet
social relatedness and the feeling of belonging to a valued
group (e.g., family, neighborhood, religious community, etc.)
are equally important for our psychological well-being as
humans. Moreover, our needs for autonomy and afﬁliation
are dynamically interrelated and cannot be treated as sep-
arate entities [27]. For instance, the ability to interact and
communicate with members of a valued group adds to an
elderly persons notion of competence. As an elderly persons
level of functioning is gradually decreasing, social bonds
play an increasingly important role in stabilizing control
beliefs. Thus, the relevance of afﬁliation for the resolution
of elderlies fears has to be taken into account.
In our primary user requirement survey we have found that
social isolation is a problem particularly for solitarily living
elderly from Austria and Germany [12]. In addition, our
secondary user requirement survey shows that many false
positive alarms that are raised by client’s wearing a panic
button actually reﬂect their need for afﬁliation: they press
the button because they are longing for someone to speak
to. As a consequence some care taker organizations do not
consider these events as false positives but as a different kind
of alarm, which requires as much attention as for example a
severe fall. For these organizations providing social support
is part of their mission. On the other hand, dealing with these
“false positives” is staff intensive. In our secondary user
requirement analysis the issue of staff intensity was often
raised by representatives of care taker organizations from
Germany. Since mandatory civil service has been abolished
in Germany trained care personnel is scarce and labor costs
are increasing.
How does this relate to the fearless system? In case of
a fall the fearless system releases an alarm automatically.
Veriﬁcation images of the scene can be used for alarm
veriﬁcation by members of the care taker organization. Thus,
no social interaction (e.g., via direct voice contact) takes
place between clients and care taker personnel. For the staff
of care taker organizations this may be beneﬁcial in terms
of staff intensity. For primary users this procedure is likely
to yield acceptance issues: as in the case of the guideless
underground trains elderly users might prefer a care taker
of “ﬂesh and blood” to an efﬁcient yet anonymous e-health
system. This results in the fact, that the fearless system
may server as additional system for fall detection, when
247
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 12.
Usability versus privacy protection
a client is not able to push the button but not replacing
an already established panic button system. However, this
increases staff intensity on the care taker’s side. Thus, yet
another trade-off has to be found.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have outlined a performance measure-
ment system that has been tailored to the speciﬁc challenges
of the AAL-JP project fearless. Based on the Technological
Impact Assessment Model (TIAMo) its measures reﬂect two
different user perspectives: older adults as primary users
and care taker organizations as secondary users. Moreover,
it describes the interplay of technical, psychological and
business aspects related to the projected e-health system.
By creating a common understanding of different user
perspectives among our multi-disciplinary project partners
this balanced scorecard will guide our actions in the next
stages of the user-centered design process. What are the next
steps to be taken? A pilot study is planned during which the
fearless system will be installed in the private homes of
45 test users from Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain. This
pilot study lasts four months including pre-test and follow-
up test, during which test users and care taker personnel
will be contacted on a regular basis to assess the measures
described in the fearless scorecard.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank the whole fearless project team,
since techniques and ideas of many researchers involved are
used.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Planinc and M. Kampel, “E-Health System Development
based on End User Centered Design,” in Proceedings of The
Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2013).
Nice, France: IARIA
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 83–86.
248
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2] D. Anderson, J. M. Keller, M. Skubic, X. Chen, and Z. He,
“Recognizing falls from silhouettes.” in 28th Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE on Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2006, vol. 1, New York, Jan. 2006, pp.
6388–6391.
[3] G. Mastorakis and D. Makris, “Fall detection system using
Kinects infrared sensor,” Journal of Real-Time Image Pro-
cessing, Mar. 2012.
[4] R. Planinc and M. Kampel, “Introducing the use of depth
data for fall detection,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1063–1072, May 2012.
[5] C. Rougier, E. Auvinet, J. Rousseau, M. Mignotte, and J. Me-
unier, “Fall Detection from Depth Map Video Sequences,” in
Toward Useful Services for Elderly and People with Disabili-
ties, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Abdulrazak,
S. Giroux, B. Bouchard, H. Pigot, and M. Mokhtari, Eds.
Montreal: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6719, pp.
121–128.
[6] A. Zweng, S. Zambanini, and M. Kampel, “Introducing a Sta-
tistical Behavior Model into Camera-Based Fall Detection,” in
6th International Symposium on Visual Computing (ISVC’10),
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, G. Bebis, R. Boyle,
B. Parvin, D. Koracin, R. Chung, R. Hammoud, M. Hussain,
T. Kar-Han, R. Crawﬁs, D. Thalmann, D. Kao, and L. Avila,
Eds., vol. 6453.
Las Vegas: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2010, pp. 163–172.
[7] R. Lubinski, Dementia and Communication.
B.C. Decker,
Inc.: Philadelphia, 1991.
[8] A. Mihailidis, B. Carmichael, and J. Boger, “The Use of
Computer Vision in an Intelligent Environment to Support
Aging-in-Place, Safety, and Independence in the Home,”
Gerontechnology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 173–189, Sep. 2002.
[9] (2013, Nov.) Openni. [Online]. Available: www.openni.org
[10] R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, “The balanced scorecard:
measures that drive performance,” Harvard Business Review,
vol. 1, pp. 71–79, 1992.
[11] A. M¨uller, Strategisches Management mit der balanced score-
card.
Kohlhammer: Stuttgart, 2000.
[12] S. Ortlieb, G. Strefﬁng, and C. C. Carbon, “There is Nothing
More Practical than a Good Theory: Designing an Ambient
Event Detector based on a Technological Impact Assessment
Model (TIAMo),” in AAATE.
IOS Press, 2013, to appear.
[13] R. Planinc and M. Kampel, “Robust Fall Detection by Com-
bining 3D Data and Fuzzy Logic,” in ACCV Workshop on
Color Depth Fusion in Computer Vision, J.-I. Park and J. Kim,
Eds.
Daejeon, Korea: Springer, 2012, pp. 121–132.
[14] N. Noury, P. Rumeau, A. K. Bourke, G. OLaighin, and J. E.
Lundy, “A proposal for the classiﬁcation and evaluation of
fall detectors,” Biomedical Engineering and Research IRBM,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 340–349, 2008.
[15] F. Oswald, H.-W. Wahl, M. Martin, and H. Mollenkopf,
“Toward Measuring Proactivity in Person-Environment Trans-
actions in Late Adulthood,” Journal of Housing For the
Elderly, vol. 17, no. 1-2, pp. 135–152, 2003.
[16] F. Oswald, O. Schilling, H.-W. Wahl, A. F¨ange, J. Sixsmith,
and S. Iwarsson, “Homeward bound: Introducing a four-
domain model of perceived housing in very old age,” Journal
of Environmental Psychology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 187–201,
2006.
[17] R. G. Cumming, G. Salkeld, M. Thomas, and G. Szonyi,
“Prospective Study of the Impact of Fear of Falling on
Activities of Daily Living, SF-36 Scores, and Nursing Home
Admission,” The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological
Sciences and Medical Sciences, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. M299–
M305, 2000.
[18] M. E. Tinetti, D. Richman, and L. Powell, “Falls Efﬁcacy as a
Measure of Fear of Falling,” Journal of Gerontology, vol. 45,
no. 6, pp. pp. 239–243, 1990.
[19] A. Brandt, C. L¨ofqvist, I. J´onsdottir, T. Sund, A.-L. Salmi-
nen, M. Werngren-Elgstr¨om, and S. Iwarsson, “Towards an
instrument targeting mobility-related participation: Nordic
cross-national reliability.” Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine,
vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 766–772, Oct. 2008.
[20] F. Heywood, C. Oldman, and R. Means, “Housing and Home
in Later Life,” Housing Studies, vol. 18, no. 6, Nov. 2002.
[21] C. Pramerdorfer, “Evaluation of Kinect Sensors for Fall
Detection,” in Computer Graphics and Imaging / 798: Signal
Processing, Pattern Recognition and Applications.
Inns-
bruck, Austria: ACTAPRESS, 2013.
[22] Stadtanzeiger N¨urnberg, “Senioren wollen die fahrerlose U-
Bahn meiden,” N¨urnberg, April 23, 2008.
[23] A. Bandura, “Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control,” 1997.
[24] P. K. Presson and V. A. Benassi, “Locus of control orientation
and depressive symptomatology: A meta-analysis.” Journal of
Social Behavior & Personality, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 201–212,
1996.
[25] A. J. Bharucha, A. J. London, D. Barnard, H. Wactlar, M. A.
Dew, and C. F. Reynolds, “Ethical Considerations in the
Conduct of Electronic Surveillance Research,” The Journal
of Law, Medicine and Ethics, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 611–619,
Sep. 2006.
[26] H. Sohn, W. De Neve, and Y. M. Ro, “Privacy Protection in
Video Surveillance Systems: Analysis of Subband-Adaptive
Scrambling in JPEG XR,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems for Video Technology, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 170–177,
Feb. 2011.
[27] N. Bischof, “Das R¨atsel ¨Odipus. Die biologischen Wurzeln
des Urkonﬂikts von Intimit¨at und Autonomie,” 2001.
249
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

