 
  
Identifying the Building Blocks of Protein Structures from Contact Maps Using 
Protein Sequence and Evolutionary Information 
 
Hazem Radwan A. Ahmed 
School of Computing and Information Science  
Queen’s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada. K7L 3N6  
Email: hazem@cs.queenu.ca  
Janice I. Glasgow 
School of Computing and Information Science  
Queen’s University 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada. K7L 3N6  
Email: janice@cs.queensu.ca
 
 
Abstract— 1D protein sequences, 2D contact maps and 3D 
structures are three different representational levels of detail 
for proteins. The problem of protein 3D structure prediction 
from 1D protein sequences remains one of the challenges of 
modern bioinformatics. The main issue here is that it is 
computationally complex to reliably predict the full 3D 
structure of a protein from its 1D sequence. A 2D contact map 
has, therefore, been used as an intermediate step in this 
problem. A contact map is a simpler, yet representative, 
alternative for the 3D protein structure. In this paper, we focus 
on the problem of identifying similar substructural patterns of 
protein contact maps (the building blocks of protein 
structures) using a structural pattern matching approach that 
incorporates protein sequence and evolutionary information. 
These substructural patterns are of particular interest to our 
research, because they could potentially be used as building 
blocks for a computational bottom-up approach towards the 
ultimate goal of protein structure prediction from contact 
maps. The results are benchmarked using a large standard 
protein dataset. We assess the consistency and the efficiency of 
identifying these similar substructural patterns by performing 
different statistical analyses (e.g., Harrell-Davis Quantiles and 
Bagplots) on different subsets of the experimental results. We 
further studied the effect of the local sequence information, 
global sequence information, and evolutionary information on 
the performance of the method.   The results show that both 
local and global sequence information are more helpful in 
locating short-range contacts than long-range contacts. 
Moreover, 
incorporating 
evolutionary 
information 
has 
remarkably improved the performance of locating similar 
short-range contacts between contact map pairs.    
 
Keywords - protein structure prediction; contact map; case-
based 
reasoning; 
evolutionary 
information; 
sequence 
information. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since the human genome sequence was revealed in April 
2003, the need to predict protein structures from protein 
sequences has dramatically increased ‎[2]. Proteins are 
complex macromolecules that are associated with several 
vital biological functions for any living cell. Such as, 
transporting oxygen, ions, and hormones; protecting the 
body from foreign invaders; and catalyzing almost all 
chemical reactions in the cell. Proteins are made of long 
sequences of amino acids that fold into three-dimensional 
structures. Because protein folding is not easily observable 
experimentally ‎[3], protein structure prediction has been an 
active research field in bioinformatics as it can ultimately 
broaden our understanding of the structural and functional 
properties of proteins. Moreover, predicted structures can be 
used in structure-based drug design, which attempts to use 
the structure of proteins as a basis for designing new ligands 
by applying principles of molecular recognition ‎[4]. 
  In recent decades, many approaches have been proposed 
for understanding the structural and functional properties of 
proteins. These approaches vary from time-consuming and 
relatively expensive experimental determination methods 
(e.g., X-ray crystallography ‎[5] and NMR spectroscopy ‎[6]) 
to less-expensive computational protein modeling methods 
for protein structure prediction (e.g., ab-initio protein 
modeling ‎[7], comparative protein modeling ‎[8], and side-
chain geometry prediction ‎[9]).  
Although 
the 
computational 
methods 
attempt 
to 
circumvent the complexity of the experimental methods 
with an approximation to the solution (predicted protein 
structures versus experimentally-determined structures), 
analyzing the three-dimensional structure of proteins 
computationally is not a straightforward task. Hence, two-
dimensional representations of protein structures, such as 
distance and contact maps, have been widely used as a 
promising alternative that offers a good way to analyze the 
3D structure using a 2D feature map ‎[19]. This is because 
they are readily amenable to machine learning algorithms 
and can potentially be used to predict the three-dimensional 
structure, achieving a good compromise between simplicity 
and competency ‎[45].  
Despite the exhaustive research done in an effort to 
reliably predict the structure of proteins from their 
sequences, the gap between known protein sequences and 
computationally predicted protein structures is continuously 
growing because of the computational complexity associated 
with the problem ‎[10].  The “Divide and Conquer” principle 
is applied in our research in an attempt to handle such a 
complex problem, by dividing it into two separate yet 
dependent subproblems, using a Case-Based Reasoning 
(CBR) approach ‎[18]. Firstly, a contact map representing the 
contacts between amino acids is predicted using protein 
33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
sequence information. Secondly, protein structure is 
predicted using its predicted contact map ‎[19].  
Since contact map prediction offers a possible shortcut to 
predict protein tertiary structure, researchers have considered 
various approaches with encouraging results for predicting 
protein contact maps from sequence information and 
structural features. Approaches of protein contact map 
prediction 
vary 
from 
those 
that 
apply 
neural 
networks ‎[11]‎[12], to those that consider support vector 
machines ‎[13] and association rules ‎[14]. Various statistical 
approaches have also been attempted, including correlated 
mutations ‎[15]‎[16] and hidden Markov models ‎[17].  
    Our research focuses on the problem of protein structure 
prediction from contact maps. In particular, we apply a CBR 
framework ‎[18] to determine the alignment of secondary 
structures based on previous experiences stored in a case 
base, along with detailed knowledge of the chemical and 
physical properties of proteins ‎[19].  
    The proposed CBR framework is based on the premise 
that similar problems have similar solutions. CBR solves 
new problems (e.g., protein structure prediction) by adapting 
the most similar retrieved solutions of previously solved 
problems.  Several challenges arise here: firstly, how to 
retrieve the contact maps from the case-base with the most 
similar solutions (substructural patterns); secondly, how to 
adapt the new problem “query protein” to the retrieved 
solutions “template proteins”; thirdly, how to evaluate the 
adapted solution in an attempt to have a close solution to the 
native structure of the query protein, which will be saved as a 
new case in the repository of the CBR system for a later use. 
These three challenges correspond to the three main phases 
of our CBR system: Retrieval, Adaptation, and Evaluation, 
as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.    CBR framerwork for determining protein structure from 
contact maps. 
  The main challenge of the Retrieval phase for our 
problem domain is to find the template contact maps with the 
most similar solutions to the query contact map. Thus, it is 
necessary to have a robust similarity measure for contact 
maps to reliably compare each new contact map (i.e., a new 
case), with the contact maps in the case-base (i.e., previously 
solved cases). This measure is used so that the retrieved 
contact maps from the case-base have substructural patterns 
(e.g., secondary structures and structure motifs) that are in 
common with the new contact map.  
Proposing an approach to determine and locate regions of 
similarity between contact map pairs help to identify these 
common or similar substructural patterns between the query 
contact map and every similar retrieved template contact 
map (known structure) from the case-base, which is crucial 
for the Adaptation phase of the CBR system. The main 
objective of this phase is to adapt the retrieved solutions to 
the new problem in the following way. All amino acid 
residues in the common substructural patterns for the 
current query contact map that have corresponding residues 
in the template structure are given the coordinate 
information from these residues [13]. This paper, an 
expansion of the work in ‎[1], primarily focuses on the 
Adaptation phase, with the goal of identifying similar 
substructural patterns between protein contact map pairs 
using both sequence and evolutionary information. 
     The paper is organized as follows: Section II provides 
the reader with the background material required to 
understand the concepts used in our study. It describes 
distance and contact maps, gives examples of structural 
patterns of contact maps, and discusses protein similarity 
relationships at different representational levels of detail, as 
well as the structural classification of protein domains. 
Section III presents the experimental setup and the details of 
the multi-regional analysis of the contact map method used 
in our experiments. Section IV discusses the experimental 
benchmark dataset used in the study and shows the 
performance of the proposed method using statistical 
analyses, including a quantile-based analysis and a 
correlation analysis. The final section highlights the 
contributions, summarizes the main results of the study, and 
presents a set of potential directions for future research.   
II. 
BACKGROUND MATERIAL 
Contact and distance maps provide a compact 2D 
representation of the 3D conformation of a protein, and 
capture useful interaction information about the native 
structure of proteins. Contact maps can ideally be calculated 
from a given structure, or predicted from protein sequence.  
The predicted contact maps have received special attention 
in the problem of protein structure prediction, because they 
are rotation and translation invariant (unlike 3D structures). 
While it is not simple to transfer contact maps back to the 
3D structure (unlike distance maps), it has shown some 
potential to reconstruct the 3D conformation of a protein 
from accurate and even predicted (noisy) contact maps ‎[20].   
A. Distance and Contact Maps 
A distance map, D, for a protein of n amino acids is a 
two-dimensional n x n matrix that represents the distance 
between each pair of atoms of the protein. The distance may 
34
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
be that between alpha-carbon atoms (Cα) ‎[21], beta-carbon 
atoms (Cβ), or it may be the minimum distance between any 
pair of atoms belonging to the side chain or to the backbone 
of the two residues ‎[22]‎[23]. While the best definition for 
inter-residue distance is the minimum distance between 
side-chain or alpha-carbon atoms with a cut-off distance of 
around 1.0 Ångstrom (0.1 nm) ‎[24], backbone atom-based 
definitions (e.g., Cα or Cβ distances) with longer distance 
cut-offs 
are 
more 
readily 
projected 
into 
three 
dimensions ‎[26]. As shown in Figure 2(a), the darker the 
distance map region is, the closer the distance of its 
corresponding atom pairs is.  The distance information can 
be further used to infer the interactions among residues of 
proteins by constructing another same-sized matrix called a 
contact map.  
A contact map, C, is a two-dimensional binary 
symmetric matrix that represents pairs of amino acids that 
are in contact. A pair of residues is considered to be in 
contact if the distance between their alpha-carbon atoms is 
less than or equal a predefined threshold, i.e., their positions 
in the three-dimensional structure of the protein are within a 
given distance threshold (usually measured in Ångstroms), 
as shown in Figure 2(b).   
An element of the ith and jth residues of a contact map, 
C(i,j), can be defined as follows ‎[19]: 
                               1;    if  D(i,j)    Threshold 
         C(i,j) =   
                                0;    otherwise 
Where D(i,j) is the distance between amino acids i and j, 1 
denotes contacts (white), and 0 denotes no contacts (black). 
 
According to extensive experimental results presented 
in ‎[25], contact map thresholds, ranging from 10 to 18 Å 
allow the reconstruction of 3D models from contact maps to 
be similar to the protein’s native structure. In this paper, 
different contact map thresholds were applied in a series of 
experiments in order to find the contact map threshold that 
best suits our experiments.  
 
 
(a)                                               (b) 
Figure 2.  (a) Distance map for a protein of 99 amino acid residues. (b) 
contact map for the same protein of 99 amino acids after applying a 
distance 
threshold 
of 
10 
Ångstrom 
on 
its 
distance 
map.                                     
(local contacts < 3.8 Å are ignored – refer to Section III-C for details.) 
As shown in Figure 3, a threshold of 8 Å missed some 
topological information about the protein, whereas a 
threshold of 12 Å added many contacts that are irrelevant to 
the topology of the protein. This suggests that a threshold of    
10 Å is a good compromise; therefore, it was adopted in our 
experiments. 
Figure 3.  Applying different thresholds for a substructural pattern of 
contact map. 
B. Structural patterns of Contact Maps 
Different 
secondary 
structures 
of 
proteins 
have 
distinctive structural patterns in contact maps. In particular, 
an α-helix appears as an unbroken row of contacts between 
i, i ± 4 pairs along the main diagonal, while beta-sheets 
appear as an unbroken row of contacts in the off-diagonal 
areas. A row of contacts that is parallel to the main diagonal 
represents a pair of parallel β-sheets, while a row of contacts 
that is perpendicular to the main diagonal represents a pair 
of anti-parallel β-sheets ‎[26]. Furthermore, contacts between 
secondary structure elements could also be recognized 
through a contact map. In general, contacts between           
α-helices and other secondary structure elements appear as 
broken rows or “tire tracks”. If the two contacting elements 
are both helices, then the contacts appear in every 3 or 4 
residues in both directions, following the periodicity of the 
helix. If one of the elements is a β-sheet, a periodicity of 2 
in the contacts will appear, since the side chains in strands 
alternate between the two sides of the β-sheet ‎[26]. 
C. The Classification of Protein Domains 
The Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) database 
was designed by G. Murzin et al. ‎[32] to provide an easy 
way to access and understand the information available for 
protein structures. The database contains a detailed and 
comprehensive 
description 
of 
the 
structural 
and 
evolutionary relationships of the proteins of known 
structure. Structurally and evolutionarily related proteins are 
classified into similar levels in the database hierarchy. 
Evolutionarily-related proteins are those that have similar 
functions and structures because of a common descent or 
ancestor.  The main levels in the classification hierarchy of 
the SCOP database are as follows: 1) Family level that 
implies clear evolutionary relationship, 2) Superfamily level 
that implies probable common evolutionary origin, and 3) 
Fold  level that implies major structural similarity.  
D. Protein Similarity Relationships 
Understanding protein similarity relationships is vital for 
the further understanding of protein functional similarity 
and evolutionary relationships. Although a protein with a 
35
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
given sequence may exist in different conformations, the 
chances that two highly-similar sequences will fold into 
distinctly-different structures are so small that they are often 
neglected in research practice ‎[30]. This suggests that 
sequence similarity could generally indicate structure 
similarity. Furthermore, a pair of proteins with similar 
structure has similar contact maps ‎[31]. Therefore, as shown 
in Figure 4, by the transitivity relationship, a logical 
inference could be drawn regarding the association between 
sequence similarity and contact map similarity. The premise 
of the method of multi-regional analysis of contact maps in 
this paper is based on this transitive similarity relationship 
between contact map and protein sequence (via structure).  
That being said, the counter relationships between 
contact map and sequence similarity, as well as structure 
and sequence similarity, are still questionable. This is due to 
the fact that protein structures are evolutionarily conserved 
better than protein sequences ‎[33], since the protein 
sequences evolve rapidly compared to protein structures. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Protein similarity relationships at different levels of detail. 
III. 
METHOD AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP  
This section describes the multi-regional analysis of the 
contact maps method used in the experiments. The method 
examines whether sequence similarity information helps in a 
pattern matching approach to locate regions of similarity in 
contact maps (the target substructural patterns) that 
correspond to local similarities in protein structures. The 
first stage of this method aims to align pairs of protein 
sequences for each combination pair of contact maps to find 
the most local similar subsequences. The next stage aims to 
quantify the similarity of contact maps regions that 
correspond to these similar subsequences found in the first 
stage. Finally, different statistical analyses were considered 
to evaluate the performance of the method, and to determine 
how well local protein sequence similarity leads to 
corresponding local contact map similarity. 
A. Experimental Dataset 
The benchmark Skolnick dataset is adopted for our 
experiments. The Skolnick dataset is a standard benchmark 
dataset of 40 large protein domains, divided into four 
categories as shown in Table I. It was originally suggested 
by J. Skolnick and described in ‎[34]. The dataset has been 
used in several recent studies related to structural 
comparison of proteins ‎[34]‎[35]‎[36]. The 40 protein 
domains are: 1b00A (1), 1dbwA (2), 1nat (3), 1ntr (4), 
1qmpA (5), 1qmpB (6), 1qmpC (7), 1qmpD (8), 1rn1A (9), 
1rn1B (10), 1rn1C (11), 3chy (12), 4tmyA (13), 4tmyB (14), 
1bawA (15), 1byoA (16), 1byoB (17), 1kdi (18), 1nin (19), 
1pla (20), 2b3iA (21), 2pcy (22), 2plt (23), 1amk (24), 
1aw2A (25), 1b9bA (26), 1btmA (27), 1htiA (28),       
1tmhA (29), 1treA (30), 1tri (31), 3ypiA (32), 8timA (33), 
1ydvA (34), 1b71A (35), 1bcfA (36), 1dpsA (37), 1fha (38), 
1ier (39), and 1rcd (40).  
Each domain entry contains a name and its assigned 
index in parentheses. The domain name is the PDB code for 
the protein containing it. If multiple protein chains exist, the 
chain index is appended to the PDB code.   
TABLE I.  
PROTEIN DOMAINS IN SKOLNICK DATASET  
Categories 
     Global sequence   
           similarity 
Sequence length 
(residues) 
Domain 
indices 
1 
      15-30%    (low) 
124 
1-14 
2 
 7-70%     (Med) 
170 
35-40 
3 
 35-90%   (High) 
  99  (Short) 
15-23 
4 
 30-90%   (High) 
 250 (Long) 
24-34 
B. Sequence Analysis 
For the sequence analysis stage, we align every 
combination pair of sequences. The SIM algorithm ‎[37] is 
used for this purpose. This algorithm employs a dynamic 
programming 
technique 
to 
find 
user-defined, 
non-
intersecting alignments that are the best (i.e., with the 
highest similarity score) between pairs of sequences. The 
results from the alignments are sorted descendingly 
according to their similarity score ‎[38].  
In this method, we are only interested in alignments of 
subsequence of at least 10 residues, and at most 20 residues. 
We are not interested in alignments of length less than 10 
residues because these alignments would not form a 
complete substructural pattern (for example, the lengths of 
alpha helices vary from 4 or 5 residues to over 40 residues, 
with an average length of about 10 residues ‎[39]). We are 
also not interested in long alignments because most methods 
for contact maps analysis are known to be far more accurate 
on local contacts (those contacts that are clustered around 
the 
main 
diagonal), 
than 
nonlocal 
(long-range) 
contacts ‎[40]. Thus, to eliminate one source of uncertainty 
of the long-range contacts, alignments of a length greater 
than 20 residues are not considered.  
In this experiment, a large penalty for opening a gap is 
used, since it is evident that affine gap scores ‎[27]‎[28] with 
a large penalty for opening a gap and a much smaller one 
for extending it, have generally proven to be effective. 
Opening gap penalty is a penalty for the first residue in a 
gap, and extended gap penalty is a penalty for every 
additional residue in a gap. Therefore, in our experiments, 
the open and extended gap penalties are set to 10 and 1 
respectively. In an effort to analyze pairs of protein 
sequences, the best 100 local sequence alignments are 
generated from every pair of sequences. Then, a selection 
strategy is used to select the two alignments of 10-20 
36
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
residues with the most and least similarity score (to check 
the performance in case of low and high similarity).  
As for the substitution matrix, BLOSUM62 was adopted 
to score sequence alignment. The BLOSUM substitution 
matrix was developed by Henikoff ‎[41] as a new approach 
for the Percent Accepted Mutation (PAM) scoring matrix 
that was developed earlier by Margaret Dayhoff who 
pioneered this approach in the 1970's ‎[29]. Unlike PAM, the 
BLOSUM62 matrix did an excellent job in detecting 
similarities even for distant protein sequences.   
C. Contact Map Analysis 
The second stage of the method is to locate contact map 
regions that correspond to the most and least similar protein 
subsequences. In order to unbiasedly analyze the diagonal 
contact map regions, we ignored local contacts between 
each residue and itself on the main diagonal. Comparing the 
main diagonal of contact maps (protein backbone) will 
neither add meaningful information for their similarity nor 
dissimilarity (for example, even too distant contact maps 
will share a similar main diagonal). Furthermore, local 
contacts with distance less than 3.8 Å are ignored, based on 
the fact that the minimum distance between any pair of 
different residues cannot be less than 3.8 Å ‎[40]. 
    Two common similarity measures for binary data that can 
be used to measure contact map similarity are Simple 
Matching 
Coefficient 
(SMC) 
‎[43] 
and 
Jaccard’s     
Coefficient (J) ‎[44]. SMC is based on the Hamming 
distance. If two contact map regions have the same size, we 
can use SMC to count the number of elements in positions 
where they have similar values. SMC is useful when binary 
values hold equal information (i.e., symmetry).  
 
   
S
C
C
SMC
00
11 

                               (‎1) 
where C11 is the count of nonzero elements (contacts) of 
both contact maps, C00 is the count of zero elements (no- 
contacts) of both contact maps, and S is the contact map size 
(i.e., the square of the sequence length for the contact map). 
In contact maps, however, binary values do not hold 
equal information because of the fact that zero values hold 
no information (they mean there is no contact between 
protein residues) as opposed to non-zero values where 
contacts between protein residues occurred. Another 
drawback of SMC is that it considers counting zero values 
for both contact maps (C00). These regions represent the 
“double absence” where there are no contacts for both 
contact maps, making them of less interest in this study. 
On the other hand, Jaccard’s Coefficient (J) is widely 
used in information retrieval as a measure of similarity. It is 
suitable for asymmetric information on binary (and non-
binary) variables where binary values do not have to carry 
equal information, resolving the first issue of SMC. 
Furthermore, Jaccard’s Coefficient (J) does not consider 
counting zero elements in the matrix (no contacts), 
removing the effect of the “double absence” that has neither 
meaningful contribution to the similarity, nor the 
dissimilarity, of contact maps. Therefore, Jaccard’s 
Coefficient was chosen as the contact map similarity metric 
that best suits our experiments. 
00
11
C
S
C
J


                                        (‎2) 
Where C11 is the count of nonzero elements (contacts) of 
both contact maps, C00 is the count of zero elements (no- 
contacts) of both contact maps, and S is the contact map size 
(i.e., the square of the sequence length for the contact map). 
D. Sequence Gap and Region Displacement Problem  
The displacement problem happens when a pair of 
aligned subsequences is very similar (greater than 70%), but 
their corresponding diagonal contact map regions are not as 
similar (less than 50-60%). This is noticed to occur as a 
result of a slight shift in the aligned subsequence pair either 
because of a gap in the alignment, or because of a slightly 
shifted alignment. In this case, if the right displacement is 
considered for one of the aligned subsequence in the correct 
direction with the correct number of residues, their 
corresponding diagonal contact map regions will perfectly 
overlay one another and their similarity can go up to 90%, as 
shown in Figure 5. The current experimental setup, however, 
(e.g., open gap penalty, extended gap penalty, etc.) are 
optimized to minimize the displacement problem. As shown 
in Figure 7, the proposed method was successful in locating 
the exact correct boundaries of contact map regions that 
perfectly overlay one another, in an effort to maximize their 
similarity. That is, if any boundary is shifted only by one or 
two residues, the local contact map similarity will be 
significantly dropped, as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6.   
Figure 5.  One example of the calculated region boundaries (n1 = 94 &     
n2 = 95) shows that the selected boundaries have the maximum Jaccard’s 
coefficient (J = 94%) as opposed of 68% and 56% if the lower boundary is 
shifted by only one residue at a time, or 62% and 53%  if the upper 
boundary is shifted by one residue at a time, instead. 
Figure 6.   Another example of the calculated region boundaries of (Ex. b)  
also shows that the selected boundaries have the maximum Jaccard’s 
coefficient (J = 73%) as opposed of 62% and 50% if the lower boundary is 
shifted by only one residue at a time, or 58% and 50% if the upper 
boundary is shifted by one residue at a time, instead.  
37
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. The Big Picture 
To see the big picture of the problem, an all-against-all 
pair-wise analysis is performed on the benchmark Skolnick 
dataset, yielding several hundreds of pairwise alignment 
instances. The entire results of sequence and contact map 
similarity of each pairwise instance are presented as a 2D 
scatter plot to study the correlation between them, as shown 
in Figure 8. This figure draws a clear distinction between 
the correlation between sequence similarity and their contact 
map similarity in the diagonal area (short-range contacts), 
and the correlation between sequence similarity and their 
contact map similarity in the off-diagonal areas (long-range 
contacts).  
Firstly, for long-range contacts, no matter how high the 
sequence similarity is the majority of the corresponding 
contact map similarity is very low (less than 20%). Thus, 
even high sequence similarity cannot help to suggest 
corresponding similarity for the long-range contacts.    
Secondly, for the short-range contacts, the plot reveals two 
different trends: 1) when sequence similarity is low (less 
than 60%), contact map similarity is indiscriminately 
dispersed between a very low similarity level (35%) and a  
 
 
 
very high one (90%), making it hard to reliably associate 
low sequence similarity to short-range contact map 
similarity. 2) When sequence similarity is high (greater than 
60%), contact map similarity is apparently clustered in the 
upper-right corner of the plot (around 80%), suggesting a 
high correlation between local sequence similarity and 
short-range contact map similarity.  
   
 
Figure 8.  A 2D scatter plot showing the correlation between sequence 
similarities and their corresponding contact map similarities in the diagonal 
area (short-range contacts) and the off-diagonal areas (long-range contacts). 
Figure 7.  An illustration of the displacement problem between two highly-similar proteins (1AMK & 1AW2A). The gap length is subtracted from the 
start position of the upper boundary (n1 of Ex. a) and the lower boundary (n2 of Ex. b), since contact maps have no representation of gaps.  
 
38
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
B. Harrell-Davis Quantiles 
In an effort to improve performance in locating similar 
patterns in the diagonal regions of contact map pairs, 
evolutionary information (represented in SCOP family 
information) is proposed to be incorporated with the 
sequence information. As described in ‎[36], the 40 protein 
domains of the Skolnick dataset are classified into five 
SCOP families.  Based on SCOP family information, the 
results are distributed into four different groups: 1) the first 
group includes the results of pairs of protein subsequences 
that are most similar and of the same SCOP family. 2) The 
second group includes the results of pairs of protein 
subsequences that are most similar and of a different SCOP 
family. 3) The third group includes the results of pairs of 
protein subsequences that are least similar and of the same 
SCOP family. 4) The last group includes the results of pairs 
of protein subsequences that are least similar and of a 
different SCOP family.  
Quantile-based analysis is performed to compare the four 
different groups. The qth quantile of a dataset is defined as 
the value where the q-fraction of the data is below q and the 
(1- q) fraction of the data is above q. Some q-quantiles have 
special names: the 2-quantile (0.5 q) is called the median (or 
the 50th percentile), the 4-quantiles (0.25 q) are called 
quartiles, the 10-quantiles (0.1 q) are called deciles, and the 
100-quantiles are called percentiles. The 0.01 quantile = the 
1st percentile = the bottom 1% of the dataset, and the 0.99 
quantile = the 99th percentile = the top 1% of the dataset.  
Using the online R statistics software in ‎[46], the Harrell-
Davis method for 100-quantile estimation is computed for 
this study. The Harrell-Davis method ‎[48] is based on using 
a weighted linear combination of order statistics to estimate 
quantiles. The standard error associated with each estimated 
value of a quantile is also computed and plotted as error bars, 
as shown in Figure 10.  Error bars are commonly used on 
graphs to indicate the uncertainty, or the confidence interval 
in a reported measurement. Figure 10(a) clearly shows that 
the results of contact map similarity of the same family are 
much better (higher) than those of a different family as in      
Figure 10(b). This supports the previous hypothesis that 
incorporating evolutionary information with sequence 
information 
improves 
the 
performance 
of 
locating 
remarkably better (highly-similar) diagonal contact map 
region.  Comparing Figure 10(a) and Figure 10(c) reveals 
that low sequence information considerably deteriorates the 
method performance, even for the results of the same SCOP 
family.  Whereas, comparing Figure 10(c) and Figure 10(d) 
demonstrates that with low sequence information, the 
performance is almost the same (poor), no matter if the 
protein pairs are of the same or of a different SCOP family.   
C. Bagplots 
A bagplot, initially proposed by Rousseeuwet et al. ‎[49],  
is a bivariate generalization of the well-known boxplot ‎[50]. 
In the bivariate case, the “box” of the boxplot changes to a 
convex polygon forming the “bag” of the bagplot. As shown 
in Figure [9], the bag includes 50% of all data points. The 
fence is the external boundary that separates points within 
the fence from points outside the fence (outliers), and is 
simply computed by increasing the bag by a given factor. 
Data points between the bag and fence are marked by a light-
colored loop. The loop is defined as the convex hull 
containing all points inside the fence.  The hull center is the 
center of gravity of the bag. It is either one center point (the 
median of the data) or a region of more than one center 
points, usually highlighted with a different color. Therefore, 
the classical boxplot can be considered as a special case of 
the bagplot, particularly when all points happen to be on a 
straight line. The bagplot provides a visualization of several 
characteristics of the data: its location (the median), spread 
(the size of the bag), correlation (the orientation of the bag), 
and skewness (the shape of the bag) ‎[49].  
 
 
Figure 9.  Basic elements of a generic bagplot. 
In this statistical analysis, we study the effect of the 
global sequence similarity on the method performance. Thus, 
the factor that varies in this analysis is the global similarity 
information, while other factors will be fixed at their best 
settings obtained from Figure 10(a). In particular, 1) for the 
local similarity information, the subsequence pairs of the 
most local similarity will be used. 2) For the region of 
similarity, short-range contacts in the diagonal area will be 
considered. 3) For the evolutionary information, protein pairs 
will be of the same protein SCOP family.  According to the 
global similarity information of the four categories of the 
Skolnick dataset (shown in Table I), the pair-wise results are 
further grouped into four clusters. Namely, 1) Low vs. Low, 
2) Med vs. Med, 3) High vs. High (Short), and 4) High vs. 
High (Long). Using the online R statistics software in ‎[47], 
the bagplots are computed for each cluster, in an effort to 
perform an in-depth correlation study of the experimental 
results between short-range contacts and most similar local 
subsequences at different ranges of global similarity. 
Although the available samples at the best settings are found 
to be considerably few, the global sequence information 
does appear to affect the method performance, as shown in 
Figure 11. For example, in Figure 11(a), even at the best 
settings, the center of gravity of the bag is fairly low (around 
~62% for contact map similarity) in the case of low global 
similarity (15-30%). As for the rest of plots, the center of 
gravity is higher and remains almost the same (around 80% 
for contact map similarity), when global sequence similarity 
is medium and high. Samples of the retrieved contact map 
regions with highly-similar substructural patterns using the 
proposed pattern matching approach are shown in Figure 12.     
39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
Figure 10.  Harrell-Davis quantiles for different categories of the results, along with the error bars of the associated standard error for each reported quantile. 
(a) Shows the first category of the results of pairs of protein subsequences that are most similar and of the same protein class. (b) Shows category 2 of pairs 
of protein subsequences that are most similar and of the different protein class. (c) Shows category 3 for pairs of protein subsequences that are least similar 
and of the same protein class. (d) Shows the last category of pairs of protein subsequences that are least similar and of the different protein class.  
Figure 11.  Bagplots for different clusters of the pair-wise results of most similar local subsequences and short-range contacts. (a) Shows the results of first 
cluster of pairs of protein sequences that are of low global sequence similarity (15-30%). (b) Shows the results of pairs of protein sequences that are of 
medium global sequence similarity (7 – 70%). (c) Shows the results of pairs of protein sequences that are of high global sequence similarity (35 – 90%) and 
short length (99 residues). (d) Shows the results of pairs of sequences that are of high global sequence similarity (30-90%) and long length (250 residues).  
40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the case-based reasoning framework 
for protein structure prediction from predicted contact maps 
with the focus on locating similar substructural patterns 
between the query and template contact maps, as a necessary 
step for the Adaptation phase of the framework. In this 
paper, a structural pattern matching approach that 
incorporates both protein sequence and evolutionary 
information is proposed, with the ultimate goal of identifying 
the building blocks of proteins in a computational bottom-up 
approach to protein structure prediction from contact maps. 
A standard benchmark dataset of carefully-selected 40 large 
protein domains (Skolnick dataset) is adopted for this study 
as the experimental dataset. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first-of-its-kind 
study to utilize sequence and evolutionary information in 
locating similar contact map patterns, with no comparable 
state-of-the-art results. The paper provides an extensive 
analysis for the three different factors believed to affect the 
performance of short-range pattern matching in the diagonal 
area, in particular, 1) local sequence information, 2) 
evolutionary 
information, 
and 
3) 
global 
sequence 
information. Firstly, for local sequence information, high 
sequence similarity (above 60%) has demonstrated (using a 
scatter-plot analysis) to be a good indicator of a 
corresponding high diagonal contact map similarity (around 
70-90%). This correlation, however, does not appear to be 
suitable  when  contacts  are  long-range  (i.e.,  in  the  off-
diagonal areas of contact maps), or when local sequence 
similarity is low (less than 60%). Secondly, for evolutionary 
information, the results proved (using a quantile-based 
analysis) to be considerably higher when protein pairs have a 
clear evolutionary relationship, i.e. when they are of the 
same SCOP family.  Lastly, for global sequence information, 
the results are observed (using a bagplot analysis) to be 
superior when the global sequence similarity is not low 
(more than 30%).  
Possible future work to improve pattern matching in the 
diagonal area would be to perform a dynamic expandable 
multi-regional analysis of contact maps to reduce any 
possibility of region displacement. That is, we may consider 
looking further in the neighborhood of the corresponding 
regions of similar local subsequences.  As for the off-
diagonal areas, alternative approaches could be employed 
instead of sequence and evolutionary information that both 
did not appear helpful in these areas due to the fuzzy nature 
of long-range contacts at the off-diagonal areas of contact 
maps ‎[26]. We are currently looking into exploring Swarm 
Intelligence techniques ‎[51] as a promising way to tackle the 
problem in the off-diagonal areas of contact maps, where 
the most uncertain, yet important, long-range contacts exist.     
Figure 12.  Samples of retrieved contact map regions with similar substructural patterns of 18 contact map pairs with similaty ≥ 75%. 
 
41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. R. Ahmed and J. I. Glasgow, "Incorporating Protein Sequence and 
Evolutionary Information in a Structural Pattern Matching Approach 
for Contact Maps", The 3rd International Conference on 
Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies 
(BIOTECHNO'11), Venice, Italy, 2011.  
[2] F. Collins, M. Morgan, and A. Patrinos, “The human genome project: 
lessons from large-scale biology,” Science, vol. 300, 2003,              
pp. 286–290.  
[3] R. D. Schaeffer and V. Daggett, “Protein folds and protein folding,” 
Protein Engineering, Design and Selection, Vol. 24, no. 1-2, 2010, 
pp. 11-19.  
[4] A. C. Anderson, “The process of structure-based drug design,” 
Chemistry and Biology, vol. 10, 2003, pp. 787–797. 
[5] J. Drenth, “Principles of protein X-ray crystallography,” Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1999, ISBN 0-387-98587-5.  
[6] M. Schneider, X. R. Fu, and A. E. Keating, "X-ray versus NMR 
structures as templates for computational protein design," Proteins, 
vol. 77,     no. 1,  2009, pp. 97–110.  
[7] A. Kolinski (Ed.), "Multiscale approaches to protein modeling," 1st 
Edition, Chapter 10,  Springer, 2011, ISBN 978-1-4419-6888-3. 
[8] P. R. Daga, R. Y. Patel, and R. J. Doerksen, "Template-based protein 
modeling: recent methodological advances," Current Topics in 
Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 10, no. 1, 2010 , pp. 84-94. 
[9] C. Yang et al., "Improved side-chain modeling by coupling clash-
detection 
guided 
iterative 
search 
with 
rotamer 
relaxation," 
Bioinformatics, 2011, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr00. 
[10] F. Birzele and S. Kramer, “A new representation for protein 
secondary structure prediction based on frequent patterns,” 
Bioinformatics, vol. 22, 2006, pp. 2628–2634. 
[11] G. Pollastri and P. Baldi, “Prediction of contact maps by GIOHMMs 
and recurrent neural networks using lateral propagation from all four 
cardinal corners,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, 2002, pp. 62–70. 
[12] P. Fariselli, O. Olmea, A. Valencia, and R. Casadio,  “Progress in 
predicting inter-residue contacts of proteins with neural networks and 
correlated mutations,” Proteins, vol. 5, 2001, pp. 157–62.  
[13] Y. Zhao and G. Karypis, “Prediction of contact maps using support 
vector machines,” Proceedings of 3rd IEEE International Symposium 
on BioInformatics and BioEngineering (BIBE), Bethesda, MD,  2003,  
pp. 26–36. 
[14] M. Zaki, J. Shan and C. Bystroff, “Mining residue contacts in proteins 
using local structure predictions,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 33, no. 5, 2003, pp. 789-801.  
[15] D. Thomas, G. Casari and C. Sander, “The prediction of protein 
contacts from multiple sequence alignments,” Protein Eng. vol. 9, 
1996, pp. 941–948. 
[16] M. Singer, G. Vriend and R. Bywater, “Prediction of protein residue 
contacts with a PDB-derived likelihood matrix,” Protein Eng.,       
vol. 15, 2002, pp. 721–725. 
[17] Y. Shao and C. Bystroff, “Predicting interresidue contacts using 
templates and pathways,” Proteins, vol. 53, 2003, pp. 497–502. 
[18] J. Kolodner,  “An introduction to case-based reasoning,” Artificial 
Intelligence Review, vol. 6, 1992, pp. 3-34. 
[19] J. Glasgow, T. Kuo, and J. Davies, “Protein structure from contact 
maps: a case-based reasoning approach,” Information Systems 
Frontiers, Special Issue on Knowledge Discovery in High-
Throughput Biological Domains, Springer, vol. 8, no. 1, 2006,         
pp. 29-36. 
[20] I. Walsh, A. Vullo,  and G. Pollastri, "XXStout: improving the 
prediction of long range residue contacts,” ISMB 2006, Fortaleza, 
Brazil. 
[21] M. Vendruscolo, E. Kussell and E. Domany, “Recovery of protein 
structure from contact maps,” Folding and Design, vol. 2, no. 5, 
1997, pp. 295-306.  
[22] P. Fariselli and R. Casadio, “A neural network based predictor of 
residue contacts in proteins,” Protein Eng. vol. 12, 1999, pp.15–21. 
[23] L. Mirny and E. Domany, “Protein fold recognition and dynamics in 
the space of contact maps,” Proteins, vol. 26, 1996, pp. 391–410. 
[24] M. Berrera, H. Molinari, and F. Fogolari, “Amino acid empirical 
contact energy definitions for fold recognition in the space of contact 
maps,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 4,  no. 8, 2003. 
[25] M. Vassura et al., “Reconstruction of 3D structures from protein 
contact maps,” Proceedings of 3rd International Symposium on 
Bioinformatics Research and Applications, Berlin, Springer, vol. 
4463,  2007, pp. 578–589. 
[26] X. Yuan and C. Bystroff, “Protein contact map prediction,” in 
Computational Methods for Protein Structure Prediction and 
Modeling,  Springer, 2007, pp. 255-277, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-
68372-0_8. 
[27] O. Gotoh, ”An improved algorithm for matching biological 
sequences,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 162, 1982,  pp. 705-708.  
[28] S. F. Altschul and B. W. Erickson, “Optimal sequence alignment 
using affine gap costs,” Bull. Math. Biol., vol. 48, 1986, pp. 603-616. 
[29] M. Dayhoff, “A model of evolutionary change in proteins, ”Atlas of 
Protein Sequence and Structure,  vol. 5, no. 3, 1978, pp. 345 – 352.  
[30] E. Krissinel, “On the relationship between sequence and structure 
similarities in proteomics,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, 2007, pp. 717–
723. 
[31] Dictionary of secondary structure of proteins: available at 
http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/gv/dssp/, 11.06.2012. 
[32] A. G. Murzin, S. E. Brenner, T. Hubbard, and C. Chothia, “SCOP: a 
structural classification of proteins database for the investigation of 
sequences and structures,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 247, 1995, pp. 536–540. 
[33] Gunnar W. Klau, “Comparing structural information in the life 
sciences: from RNA to metabolic networks,” Symposium on 
Bioinformatics and Biomathematics, 2007.  
[34] G. Lancia, R. Carr, B. Walenz, and S. Istrail, “101 Optimal PDB 
structure alignments: A branch-and-cut algorithm for the maximum 
contact map overlap problem,” Proceedings of Annual International 
Conference 
on 
Computational 
Biology 
(RECOMB), 
2001,               
pp. 193-202.  
[35] W. Xie and N. V. Sahinidis, ”A branch-and-reduce algorithm for the 
contact map overlap problem,” Proceedings of RECOMB of Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics, Springer, vol. 3909, 2006, pp. 516-529.  
[36] P. Lena, P. Fariselli, L. Margara, M. Vassura, and R. Casadio, “Fast 
overlapping of protein contact maps by alignment of eigenvectors,” 
Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 18, 2010, pp. 2250-2258. doi: 10.1093 
[37] H. Xiaoquin and W. Miller, “A time-efficient, linear-space local 
similarity algorithm,” Advances in Applied Mathematics, vol. 12, 
1991, pp. 337-357. 
[38] SIM: Alignment Tool for Protein Sequences, available at 
http://ca.expasy.org/tools/sim-prot.html, 11.06.2012. 
[39] V. Arjunan, S. Nanda, S. Deris, and M. Illias, “Literature survey of 
protein secondary structure prediction,” Journal Teknologi, vol. 34, 
2001,  pp. 63-72. 
[40] Y. Xu, D. Xu, and J. Liang (Eds.), “Computational methods for 
protein structure and modeling,” Springer, Berlin, 2007, ISBN: 978-
1-4419-2206-9  
[41] Henikoff and Henikoff, “Amino acid substitution matrices from 
protein blocks,” Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 
USA, vol. 89, 1992, pp. 10915-10919. 
[42] S. F. Altschul and B. W. Erickson, “Optimal sequence alignment 
using affine gap costs,” Bull. Math. Biol., vol. 48, 1986, pp. 603-616. 
[43] K 
Teknomo, 
Similarity 
Measurement, 
 
available 
at: 
http:\\people.revoledu.com\kardi\ tutorial\Similarity, 11.06.2012. 
[44] L. Lee, “Measures of distributional similarity,” Proceedings of the 
37th annual meeting of ACL, 1999, pp. 25–32. 
42
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
  
[45] H. R. Ahmed and J. I. Glasgow,  “Multi-regional analysis of contact 
maps towards locating common substructural patterns of proteins,”    
J Communications of SIWN,  vol 6,  2009, pp.90-98. 
[46] P. Wessa,  “Harrell-Davis quantile estimator”,  in Free Statistics 
Software, Office for Research Development and Education, 2007, 
URL: http://www.wessa.net/rwasp_harrell_davies.wasp/, 11.06.2012.  
[47] P. Wessa, “Bagplot,” in Free Statistics Software,  Office for Research 
Development and Education, 2009,  URL: http://www.wessa.net/ 
rwasp_bagplot.wasp/, 11.06.2012. 
[48] F. E. Harrell and C. E. Davis, “A new distribution-free quantile 
estimator,” Biometrika, vol. 69, 1982, pp. 635-640.  
[49] P. J. Rousseeuw, I. Ruts, and J. W. Tukey, “The bagplot: A bivariate 
boxplot,” The American Statistician, vol. 53, 1999, pp. 382–387.  
[50] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: a 
simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann Intern Med, vol. 110, 
1989, pp. 916-921. 
[51] S. Das, A. Abraham and A. Konar, “Swarm Intelligence Algorithms 
in Bioinformatics,” Studies in Computational Intelligence. vol. 94, 
2008,  pp. 113–147. 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

