289
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Continuous Noninvasive Arterial Blood Pressure Monitor 
with Active Sensor Architecture 
 
Viacheslav Antsiperov 
Department of Physical and Quantum Electronics 
 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology 
Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia 
e-mail: antciperov@cplire.ru 
Gennady Mansurov 
Laboratory of Diagnostic Systems 
Kotel’nikov Institute of REE of RAS 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: gmansurov@cplire.ru
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents the latest results of developing a 
new method of noninvasive continuous blood pressure 
monitoring. This method is based on the principle of pulse 
wave compensation. It is shown that sensors for such a 
measurement should be not only smart, but also active. In this 
connection, the concept of smart sensors is expanded to the 
concept of active sensors. The technical design of the active 
sensor for noninvasive pressure measurement is described. The 
results of active sensor calibration and testing are under 
discussion. The last section of the report is devoted to the 
development of software for active sensor control - its 
intellectual stuffing. In this section is described and justified a 
new principle of active measurement of quasi-periodic 
processes - pulse wave compensation based on prediction 
patterns. The progress achieved in the research and the ways 
for further investigation are outlined in the conclusion. 
Keywords - smart and active sensors; compensation method; 
arterial blood pressure monitoring. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Advancements in semiconductor industry substantiate a 
dramatic growth of rate of innovations in a wide range of 
human activities 
- from computer technology and 
communications to home appliances and transport. This 
acceleration is due mainly to delivering smaller, cheaper, 
more reliable solutions able to integrate critical functions 
such as analog circuits, and embedded microprocessors in a 
single 
device. 
New 
packaging 
technologies 
and 
methodologies have also improved the cost and reliability of 
the assembly of packages with small footprints. For example, 
chip-scale packages have reduced semiconductor package 
sizes to the dimensions of the die inside. Other innovations, 
such as the use of a known good die or foldable printed 
circuit 
boards, 
have 
also 
provided 
considerable 
miniaturization in the overall space occupied by the 
electronic portion of the modern devices. 
Medical technology is a broad field where the above 
innovations play a crucial role in sustaining health. The 
development of medical devices and equipment has made 
significant contributions to improving the health of people all 
around the world. From “small” innovations like healthcare 
gadgets that help a person to monitor and manage serious 
health conditions like asthma, heart problems (see Fig. 1), 
diabetes, etc., to larger, more complex technologies like MRI 
machines, artificial organs, and robotic prosthetic limbs, 
technology has undoubtedly made an incredible impact on 
medicine.  
 
 
Figure 1.  An example illustrating the incredible progress in medical 
technology: the ECG monitor evolution from the first commercial huge 
size machine (1911), consuming a lot of electrical energy, to a pocket-sized 
healthcare gadget (2016), powered by a compact battery. 
 
It should be noted that the development of low-cost, low 
power, multi-functional medical devices, that are small and 
can communicate in wireless manner over short distances, 
like ECG monitor shown in Fig. 1, is only the visible tip of 
the modern medical technology iceberg. Its main core is that 
medical 
devices 
are 
getting 
smarter. 
Embedded 
microprocessors, SOC (System On a Chip), SBC (Single 
Board 
Computers), 
integral 
PDAs 
(Personal 
digital 
assistants) and advanced sensor technology are all common 
elements of today’s medical devices. The computing power 
of microprocessors and high performance peripherals 
provide the ability to support several simultaneous processes: 
the sensor management, signal processing, data collection 
and analysis, wired and wireless communications and user 
interface. This gives unlimited possibilities in the design of 
medical devices. On the other hand, it leads to myriad ways 
of combining the components in developing well-defined 
purpose devices, and, accordingly, it requires to investigate a 
lot of possible solutions and to find the optimal one. 
In this paper our experience in the development of a 
modern high-tech medical device - arterial blood pressure 

290
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(ABP) monitor is presented and the results obtained in its 
implementation, including the main result - the elaboration 
of the basic architectural components concept, named an 
Active Sensor by analogy with the Smart Sensor (see Fig. 2) 
are discussed. Initially, these results have been briefly 
considered at the Second International Conference on Smart 
Portable, Wearable, Implantable and Disability-oriented 
Devices and Systems (SPWID 2016) [1]. In this article they 
will be discussed in detail.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II 
provides a detailed discussion of the Smart Sensor and the 
Active Sensor concepts. It also gives strong arguments in 
favor of the Active Sensor concept for developing medical 
devices. Section III gives a short overview of existing non-
invasive ABP monitoring methods. Section IV introduces a 
new method of ABP monitoring proposed by the authors – 
pressure compensation method. Section V describes in detail 
the structure and design of the sensor developed. In Section 
VI the results obtained in real experiments with active ABP 
monitoring are reported. In Section VII some ways to 
overcome the shortcomings associated with the incomplete 
compensation of time–varying blood pressure caused by a 
simplified structure of the PID (proportional–integral–
derivative) feedback controller are scheduled. Finally, the 
Conclusion briefly summarizes the problems discussed in the 
article. 
II. 
 FROM SMART SENSORS TO ACTIVE SENSORS 
One of the main trends in developing modern devices and 
instruments in medicine as well as in a rather broader field – 
the development of industrial control and monitoring 
systems – is a full implementation of smart sensors [2].  
The basic architectural components of the Smart Sensor 
are shown in Fig. 2 (a more detailed description can be found 
in 
IEEE 
1451 
Standards, 
created 
by 
the 
IEEE 
Instrumentation and Measurement Society’s TC-9 Technical 
Committee on Sensor Technology). The Smart Sensor 
consists of four main components: the Sensing Unit (SU) that 
collects real-world analog data, the Signal Conditioning 
circuitry and the Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) 
destined to condition and convert data to the digital domain, 
and, finally, microprocessor (μP), which by means of 
Applications installed performs the main tasks of the Sensor. 
Task processing can be supported by Memory and 
Communication Unit; some results can be displayed by 
Local User Interface (IEEE 1451 general model of a Smart 
Sensor). 
The most important component of the Smart Sensor 
architecture is certainly a microprocessor (μP). As mentioned 
above, the computing power of microprocessors provides 
both the ability to support multiple simultaneous processes 
and the processing of data associated with each of them. 
Data processing can be very complicated: nonlinear, 
adaptive 
to 
data 
variability, 
incorporating 
artificial 
intelligence (AI) elements, etc. However, it should be noted 
that due to the unidirectional data flow from SU to the 
microprocessor, the latter does not affect the conditions of 
data measurement – it can only manipulate in some way the 
data measured. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The principal components architectures of Smart Sensor (green) 
[2] and Active Sensor (blue) [1]. The latter extends the circuit of Smart 
Sensor by adding the Sensing Unit control sub-circuit. 
 
The above fact is of little importance in artificial systems, 
whose behavior is stationary or is forecasted at least 
statistically. The situation is different when somebody deals 
with living systems, e.g., with a human. As noted in [3], due 
to highly non-linear, non-equilibrium nature of living 
systems even the slightest differences in the physiological 
state of the bio-system used and in the conditions obtained in 
a experiment can, in consequence of deterministic chaos, 
assume singular importance.   
We came face to face with this situation and its inherent 
problems when a few years ago began to develop a smart 
medical device – arterial blood pressure (ABP) monitor. At 
that time we thought that supplying the classic tonometer by 
some tracking system, followed by block forming pressure 
dynamics prediction and flexible active sensor controller 
based on the prediction, we will be able to monitor ABP 
continuously in time in absolute units – in mmHg. It is 
possible because such a device would have to implement the 
proposed earlier compensation method for measuring the 
pressure. Of course, to compensate the variable pressure in 
real time that monitor had to include powerful computational 
tools. We believe, that the use of embedded microcontroller 
with smart applications can produce much better results than 
a standard digital tonometer can. So, the use of a built-in 
microcontroller (μC) and its periphery gives the monitor 
characteristic features of smart sensors, as shown in Fig. 2. 
But it turned out, that for the realization of this idea we had 
to go even one-step further – to introduce a SU control 
feedback loop, which depends on data observed. Thus, the 
idea of an Active Sensor was created, whose components 
architecture expands the architecture of the Smart Sensor. 
The basic architectural components of the Active Sensor 
are shown in Fig. 2. The Active Sensor circuit extends the 
circuit of the Smart Sensor by adding the Sensing Unit 
control sub-circuit. In contrast to the data measurement path, 
the control sub-circuit is directed in the opposite way - from 
the microprocessor to SU, although composed essentially of 
the same, but performing the inverse functions components - 
Digital 
to 
Analog 
Converter 
(DAC) 
and 
Control 
Conditioning circuitry. Thus, if in the Smart Sensor SU is 

291
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
simply, 
in 
unidirectional 
way 
connected 
to 
the 
microprocessor, in the Active Sensor it is included in a loop 
circuit consisting of the data measuring and controlling sub-
circuits. 
Before moving on to the practical implementation of the 
above rather abstract concept of an Active Sensor, it is 
appropriate to review briefly the set of ideas and approaches 
existing today in the field of non-invasive arterial blood 
pressure monitoring. 
III. 
ABP MONITORING APPROACHES 
One of the first (1876) noninvasive devices suitable for 
measuring 
human 
arterial 
blood 
pressure 
was 
a 
plethysmograph invented by Etienne Jules Marey. Its 
functioning was based on the recording of pulsed changes in 
the limb volume caused by ABP pulsations [4]. Upon 
measurements, the patient’s forearm was placed into 
plethysmograph, which was filled with warm water. A 
change in the blood content in the forearm arteries resulted in 
water displacement from the plethysmograph, which in turn 
moved the float and stylus that recorded the plethysmogram, 
as shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Marey’s device for measuring ABP: the plethysmograph O is 
connected with both reservoir V that is filled with water and hung up on a 
block B and a mercurial manometer M; the volume change is written in 
sooty tape K by a stylus connected with float E [4]. 
 
In the Marey’s experiment, volume changes were 
recorded at constant pressure in the plethysmograph O, 
which was set by the height level of water reservoir V and 
reflected in monometer M connected to O. In his 
experiments, Marey obtained many interesting results; he 
found the dependence of the plethysmogram amplitude on 
the plethysmograph pressure [4]. In principle, on the bases of 
these data, as it became known later, Marey could have 
determined the two main parameters of ABP, both systolic 
and diastolic pressure. However, due to difficulty of the 
implementation and ambiguity of interpretation of the result, 
Marey’s plethysmographic method was not used for a long 
time (about 100 years). At the end of the 19th century, more 
attention was paid to methods of measuring ABP that are 
based on sphygmomanometry, monitoring of changes in the 
character of the heart pulses (tense pulse, soft pulse, etc.), 
which is manifested in micromovements of arterial walls. 
The main task of sphygmomanometer devices was to find 
such an external pressure on an artery that would balance the 
counterpressure of the blood with the bloodstream ceasing 
and the pulse, correspondingly, disappearing. The most 
successful sphygmomanometer out of the first devices was 
the device of Samuel von Bashe, created by him in 1881. 
With its help he determined systolic pressure, although only 
approximately. Gustav Gartner in 1899 improved this device 
and referred to it as a tonometer. 
The search for a noninvasive way to measure ABP 
culminated in two discoveries that made successes in the 
cardiological studies in the 20th century possible: description 
of Riva-Rocci’s sphygmomanometer in 1896 and discovery 
of Korotkoff’s sounds in 1905. Riva-Rocci’s method is 
compression of a brachial artery using a special cuff that 
relates to a mercurial manometer. Air is pumped into the cuff 
using a bulb until the pulse in a radial artery disappears and, 
then, it is slowly released. ABP is determined by manometer 
indications, when the pulse appears. Thus, the device makes 
it possible to assess systolic pressure. Korotkoff’s discovery 
of the particularities of sound effects upon decompression of 
a brachial artery in 1905 underlies an alternative method for 
determining systolic and diastolic ABP. It is believed that 
Korotkoff’s sounds relate to impairments in the laminar flow 
of blood in arteries upon their crossclamping. This 
impairment is accompanied by shock phenomena, and their 
sound makes it possible to hear the pulse within the range 
between systolic and diastolic ABP.  
Technological advances in the field of microelectronics 
and computer engineering made it possible in the second half 
of the 20th century to improve Riva Rocci’s and Korotkoff’s 
classic method for measuring ABP [5]. The improvements 
were mainly connected with the intention to maximally 
exclude the effect of the human factor on measurements. 
Thus, it was found that the most convenient estimate of the 
pulse for automatic procedures of determination of 
parameters of ABP is the amplitude of pressure oscillations 
in an occlusion cuff, a fact that was discovered by Marey a 
hundred years before! In 1976 the first bedside automatic 
instrument for measuring ABP (Dinamap825), which 
employed a modified method of Marey’s, was produced. The 
transition from a plethysmograph to a typical occlusion cuff 
combining a device for creation of external compression and 
a pulsation sensor, which is not very accurate, but acceptable 
for measuring ABP, gave birth to a new oscillometric 
technique. Today, a portion of automatic and semiautomatic 
AP meters that are based on the oscillometric technique 
constitute 
approximately 
80% 
of 
all 
the 
devices. 
Manufacturers intensely compete in the field of study of 
algorithms for processing measured data to increase the 
accuracy and reliability of the results obtained. Recent 

292
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
devices have an increased intelligence level (including fuzzy 
logic models), and they could be fully related to smart 
sensors (see Fig. 2).  
The methods mentioned assume a single measurement of 
the ABP parameters. It is often sufficient for general 
assessment of the state of the cardiovascular system. 
However, there are many situations that require continuous 
beat-to-beat ABP monitoring. At the worst, it is implemented 
invasively directly inside one of the peripheral arteries upon 
introduction of a catheter into it. However, since invasive 
methods relate to patient discomfort and there is a risk of 
complications upon introduction of a catheter, noninvasive 
methods are preferable for routine measurements. 
Jan Peňáz was among the first to put forward a method of 
continuous non-invasive blood pressure monitoring [6]. His 
method described in 1973 was aimed at reducing the risks of 
arterial cauterization. The Peňáz method employed the idea 
of “vascular unloading”, based on the assumption that in the 
“unloaded state” the pressure inside the blood vessel is equal 
to the outside pressure. 
The basic element of the device proposed by Peňáz is a 
small finger cuff (Fig. 4 (A)) that has an infra-red (IR) light 
source on one side and a light receiver on the opposite side. 
The blood volume of the finger is estimated via the 
absorbance of IR light. The signal obtained by such a 
plethysmograph is further used in a feedback loop to control 
the pressure in the cuff. The pressure is controlled in such a 
way that blood volume in the finger is kept constant in time 
and equal to the volume, which corresponds to the unloaded 
vessels state defined during the calibration process. In this 
case the oscillations of the controlling pressure are 
approximately equal to pressure in the arteries. Later some 
formulae were proposed for recalculating pressure from 
finger vessels to brachial arteries, which made it possible to 
verify the method with respect to classical procedures.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Modern approaches to ABP monitoring systems. 
 
Another technique, which provides continuous non-
invasive blood pressure monitoring is arterial tonometry [7]. 
Like the Peňáz method arterial tonometry is based on pulse 
oscillation estimates, but here the principal of arterial 
unloading is different. In this case the cuff is placed on the 
wrist, so the sensor is over the radial artery (Fig. 4 (B)). The 
sensor presses the artery to the radial bone until it is flattened 
enough but not occluded. At this intermediate position 
arterial wall tension becomes parallel to the tonometer 
sensing surface and arterial pressure is then the remaining 
stress (perpendicular to the surface) measured by the sensor. 
The pressure needed to flatten but not occlude the artery is 
known as the “proper hold-down pressure” and is calculated 
by a complicated algorithm, which includes the preliminary 
estimate of systolic, diastolic and pulse pressures over a 
range of “hold-down pressures”. 
Currently, the devices employing these methods include 
the CNAPTM (Peñáz’s approach, Fig. 4 (A)) and T-line from 
Tensys Medical (arterial tonometry approach, Fig. 4 (B)). 
The methods of continuous non-invasive blood pressure 
monitoring have both advantages and disadvantages [5]. We 
believe that the main drawback of these non-invasive 
methods is the following: irrespective of the method of 
vascular unloading the control of the unloading is exercised 
using integral parameters (blood vessels filling, overall 
sensor force, sensor displacement, etc.).  It enables 
monitoring an average pulse wave of ABP but does not 
guarantee the details of the pulse form. We proposed a new 
method of arterial blood pressure monitoring that is aimed at 
local unloading of arterial walls by compensating local 
pressure. 
IV. 
COMPENSATION BASED APPROACH TO ABP 
MONITORING   
When analyzing well–known methods of non–invasive 
continuous measurement of blood pressure, we conclude that 
the best results of monitoring non–stationary dynamics of 
blood pressure are achieved by the so–called compensation 
methods or methods like them.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Measuring physical quantities using the compensation method: 
(A) measuring object weights Wu using a balance scale; (B)a bridge circuit 
of measurement of unknown resistance Ru; (C) measuring pressure Pu in 
aggressive media by controlling the undeformed state of a membrane. 
 
Compensation methods are applied for measurement of 
various physical quantities and are based on the 
compensation of an unknown measured value by controlled 
counter value and nullification of their difference. The 
simplest example of the compensation method is the use of 
balance scales on which unknown mass Wu is measured 

293
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
using a set of weights Wv, Fig. 5 (A). A scale null indicator is 
a vertical position of a beam or connected arrow pointer. 
The compensation methods are high-precision, applied 
for mechanical and electrical measurements, and can be 
implemented in the form of bridge and half-bridge circuits 
(Figures. 5 (B), 5 (C)). In some cases, to increase 
measurement precision at deviations from zero that are less 
than the discreteness of a controlled physical quantity, a 
calibrated scale of a null detector can be used. Note that 
compensation methods are usually used to measure the static 
variables – constant unknown resistance Ru in bridge circuit 
– Fig. 5 (B) and the steady pressure Pu in aggressive 
environment – Fig. 5 (C). 
We 
consider 
the 
compensation 
method 
as 
the 
fundamental basis to measure the varying blood pressure. 
The application of this method for measuring the non–static 
dynamic quantity has become possible for two reasons. First, 
the fact that blood pressure changes are not so fast, its 
rhythm is of the order of one beat per second, and its 
spectrum fits into the range of a few tens of Hz. Second, 
there are relatively cheap high-performance microcontrollers 
(ATMEL, MICROCHIP, STMicroelectronics, etc.) available 
at present, for which the ABP dynamics represents almost 
quasi-static changes.  
V. 
THE STRUCTURE AND DESIGN OF THE SENSOR  
As noted above, our method of measuring ABP is aimed 
at local, without cuffs, unloading of arterial walls by means 
of compensating intra–arterial pressure by controlled 
pressure. Our method of measurement is like the method of 
bridge measurement of unknown pressure Pu in Fig. 5 (C), 
but it has dynamic, “adaptive” features as in the Peňáz 
method [6]. The appearance of the device developed for 
continuous ABP monitoring and its typical use for measuring 
intra–arterial pressure is presented in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Active sensor for continuous blood pressure monitoring with a 
fluid-filled SU camera and an aperture covered by an elastic membrane; its 
typical arangement on the patient’s wrist. 
 
Note that the device developed (Figures 6 (A), 6 (B)) 
conforms exactly to the concept of an Active Sensor (see 
Section II, Fig. 2). The main role here is played by the 
programmable microcontroller μC (STM32L152RBT), that 
has the communication I/O (USB) on one side, and on the 
other side it has pm (pressure monitor – data measuring sub-
circuit) and pc (pressure control – SU controlling sub-circuit) 
interfaces to the measuring unit SU (sensor unit). 
The data measuring sub-circuit pm contains membrane 
displacement indicator SC (signal conditioning) and pressure 
gauge with instrument amplifier M. The SU controlling sub-
circuit pc includes the pump PD and the chip for pump 
control CD (control driver). Both sub-circuits – pm and pc – 
are tubes coming from the fluid-filled cavity of the 
measuring unit SU. SU is a camera with an aperture covered 
by an elastic membrane (of red color in Fig. 6(D)) and 
containing a thin rod with one end attached to the membrane, 
the other end partially overlaps IR-radiation flux inside 
optoelectronic infrared pair IRp. Thus, this rod gives us a 
way to measure the membrane deformation as it serves as an 
indicator of displacement. 
When the pressures in the SU chamber and directly 
behind the membrane differ, the latter is deformed with 
respect to one side or another and the rod is shifted in the 
direction of the deformation. This displacement leads to a 
change in the shuttering of the radiation flow IRp, which is 
then recorded by the displacement indicator SC. If the SU 
pressure is chosen so that the membrane returns into a flat, 
undeformed state, then the pressure out of SU can be 
measured due to the equality of the pressures on both sides 
of the membrane. If SU is established directly above the 
radial artery as it shown in Figures 6 (C), 6 (D), then we 
measure the arterial pressure under the assumption that it is 
equal to the external pressure. This constitutes the idea of the 
compensation method that we proposed. 
Our last improvement of the ABP monitor presents a 
somewhat different technological SU implementation. Here a 
fluid, filling SU camera is substituted by the air. We had to 
make this step as the previous construction of the ABP 
monitor had to be supplied by sealed SU camera to prevent 
fluid leakage. To prevent the permeability, it requires to 
supply the monitor by additional control tools and additional 
mechanical components, which could bring about a 
considerable complication of device setup. Thus, it was 
decided to develop a monitor with a chamber filled with air, 
because small air leakage being acceptable in this case.  
Moreover, it turns out that a substitute of working liquid 
by air opens new ways of SU construction implementation – 
a controlled air leakage could be used as a toll controlling 
pressure in the SU chamber. It turned out that in this case it 
can be done without the elastic membrane covering the 
aperture! The skin surface within SU aperture could act as a 
membrane. 
The appearance of the ABP monitor with air filled SU 
chamber and its general structure are shown in Fig. 7. 
Besides the main chamber with compensating air pressure P 
over aperture (similar in construction to fluid filled SU 
chamber) there are channels diverting air with their chambers 
and pressure Pout gauges. These channels are located near the 
aperture on the surface of the SU contacting with wrist. 
Thus, here like in the previous version of ABP monitor is 
possible to pick out two sub-circuits – pm (data measuring 
sub-circuit) and pc (controlling sub-circuit). The pm sub-

294
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
circuit by means of an outer pump controls the compensating 
pressure P in a main chamber of SU. The pc sub-circuit 
measures the difference ΔP = P – Pout, based on which the 
control is carried out. The control is aimed at providing such 
meanings of ΔP, that ensure minimum air flow from aperture 
to the channels diverting air. This implies the existence of 
the thinnest channel between the SU surface and the surface 
of wrist. In other words, the aim of the control is to keep the 
dynamics of the compensating pressure in such a way that 
the surface of the skin would be separated from the SU, but 
would not move away from it, as shown in Fig. 7 (C). In 
general, construction described reminds a sensor for classical 
tonometry forward in [8], but the advantage of our ABP 
monitor is that it enables to make direct pressure 
measurement and it does not have mobile mechanical parts.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Active sensor for continuous blood pressure monitoring with an 
air-filled SU camera and without a membrane; its typical arangement on 
the patient’s wrist. 
 
The new construction of ABP monitor undoubtedly fully 
corresponds to the concept of the Active Sensor. Moreover, 
it uses the same microcontroller and applications exercising 
data processing and control were modified slightly. The first 
experiments gave the same results, which were obtained by 
the authors earlier and will be described in the next section. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS WITH THE SENSOR DEVELOPED  
The qualitative description of the functioning of the ABP 
monitor given above could be illustrated by quantitative 
results obtained by authors in the experiments with the 
device. Fig. 8 (A) gives the dependence of the SU membrane 
deformation displacement (in units of the ADC of the 
displacement indicator SC) on a uniform increase in the 
pressure inside SU at constant external pressure (the pressure 
difference at the membrane P is the indications of M in 
mmHg that are counted from the atmospheric pressure). It 
follows from the plots that in small (±5 mmHg) range of 
pressure difference on both sides of the membrane the signal 
of the displacement indicator SC is proportional to it. Fig. 8 
(B) presents similar dependences of the displacement of the 
membrane of SU and pressure P inside SU (that is counted 
from the atmospheric pressure) upon the compensation of 
uniformly increasing external pressure, with the pressure 
control pc being on. The compensation pressure P is created 
by a pump, when the voltage with pulse-width modulation, 
which in turn is formed by the microcircuit CD, is applied to 
its driver PD. 
Without specifying the details of the mechanism of 
formation, note that the resulting P is proportional to the 
control signal y, which is directed by the microcontroller μC 
to CD in response to the membrane displacement ε that is 
measured by SC (and preceding stored values). The control 
algorithm was initially chosen as the simplest PID controller 
[9], with its control signal yj at the time moment (reading) j 
being formed according to the classic recurrence formula:  
 

yj yj-1kI ε jkp ε j ε j-1kd ε j 2ε j-1  ε j-2

 
where yj-1 is the preceding signal, ε j ε j-1  ε j-2 are the current 
and preceding displacements of the membrane from the flat 
position, and kI kp kd are the PID integral, proportional and 
derivative coefficients, that are selected empirically. It 
follows from the plots in Fig. 8 (B), that using PID 
controlling (1) it is possible for a sufficiently wide range of 
changes of the external pressure (10–170 mmHg) to keep the 
membrane of SU near the equilibrium position. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The dynamics of the SU membrane displacement (ADC units) 
in response to changes of the pressure difference inside and outside the SU. 
 
Based on the calibration data numerous experiments on 
monitoring blood pressure were carried out. The results of 
one of the measurements are given in Fig. 9. The lower part 
of the figure graph shows that the use of the PID control 
makes it possible to hold the membrane close to undistorted 
(flat) state for all the time of blood pressure measurement. 
The quality of such regulation can be estimated by the value 
of uncompensated difference in pressures equivalent 
(proportionate) to deviations of the membrane from the flat 
position (a kind of the membrane jitter).  
 
 
Figure 9.  The dynamics of the SU membrane displacement  (ADC units) 
while compensating the time-varying outside blood pressure.  

295
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
To illustrate the compensation Fig. 9 (top) shows a graph 
of pressure P inside the chamber SU (the data from pressure 
gauge M), as well as the same data corrected by the 
membrane jitter values. In comparison with P the 
uncompensated difference in pressures ΔP is not large. Fig. 9 
also shows that P, on average, coincides with the estimate of 
ABP, but at the moments of a rapid change in the pulse 
waveform the controller cannot trace these changes. 
The overall impression of the first results of monitoring 
blood pressure with the help of the above–described active 
sensor is ambivalent. On the one hand, the sensor does its 
task – it can be used not only to measure the main parameters 
of blood pressure – systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
(range of ABP), but also to observe the varying pulse wave, 
and not through indirect measurements but by measuring the 
pressure itself (in mmHg). On the other hand, as it could be 
initially assumed, a simple PID controller does not provide 
full compensation, which leads to the distortion of the pulse 
wave components. Practically, the compensation algorithm 
based on PID control proved to be very difficult in changing 
its settings. 
VII. PULSE PRESSURE COMPENSATION CONTROL ON THE 
BASIS OF PULSE WAVE PATTERNS  
These shortcomings associated with the incomplete 
compensation of time–varying blood pressure have a simple 
explanation.  
Firstly, the PID controller used is the special case of 
linear regulators class and it is well known that linear 
methods for treating biological signals, especially, linear 
adaptation methods are used in limited ranges of their 
changes and only under strictly controlled (for example, 
laboratory) conditions. This is due to highly non-linear non–
equilibrium nature of living systems [3]. Even a small 
change in physiological state can lead to considerable 
changes in the result. 
Secondly, PID control takes into account only local 
characteristics of the signals, as it is customary in the theory 
of dynamic systems. In the case of dynamic systems, such a 
regulation is natural, as such systems are deterministic. 
However, living systems and their subsystems are known to 
be poorly described by models of dynamic systems, even if 
there is a freedom of choice of corresponding differential 
equations coefficients. Living systems are much more 
consistent with models of stochastic, non–deterministic 
systems.  
Thirdly, in solving technical problems low order of PID 
control is preferred due to its ease of implementation.  When 
somebody deals with a complex biomedical signal, 
particularly, an ABP signal, low order of control is a 
drawback.   
These facts indicate that the pulse wave of blood pressure 
is much more like a wideband pulse signal than the sum of 
harmonic components. In view of the foregoing it can be 
assumed that a random point process is a closer 
mathematical model of blood pressure pulsating. A point 
process is an increasing sequence of time moments (points) 
of certain homogeneous events, such as the arrival pulse 
wave, with a random length of time intervals between them. 
Excluding the changes in the pulse wave pattern, and treating 
them as a stream of homogenous sequence of events, it 
would be legitimate to use theoretical methods dealing with 
the problems associated with the heart rate. 
One such well-developed theory today is the theory of 
radar signal processing. A major problem of this theory is 
determining the unknown arrival time of an electromagnetic 
pulse emitted by the radar and reflected from a target. The 
method of matched filtering should be noted as one of the 
most effective methods for solving this problem. In this 
method the filter response is matched with the radar pulse, so 
that the maximum signal of the filter output is observed at 
the time, when the reflected pulse arrives. Essentially, the 
matched filter generates a covariance of sent and received 
pulses, and it is well known that if both pulses have the 
same, up to a constant factor, shape, the maximum of the 
covariance will be achieved when they coincide. The 
corresponding displacement between pulses will estimate the 
time of arrival. 
The principle of the matched filtering could be 
interpreted in a different way, more suitable for our tasks. 
Let us assume at some moment, the time T between the ABP 
pulse wave is known along with the shape of the current 
pulse, further considering the shape of the next pulse to be 
the same as the current one, the future of signal can be easily 
predicted.  
 
 
Figure 10.  Two methods of predicting the pulse signal future: (A) - by PID 
regulation and (B) - based on the local quasi-period (QP) estimate.  
 
For this purpose, it should take an existing fragment of 
the signal of duration T, immediately preceding the current 
time and move it to the time T into the future (see Fig. 10). 
From the theory of the matched filter, it follows that the 
expected ABP pulse will coincide with the prediction. This 
idea is illustrated in Fig. 10, which also shows a comparison 
of the proposed signal prediction with the prediction carried 
out by PID. As stated above, the PID controller makes a 
prediction based on current, local estimates of the 

296
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
fundamental frequency, the amplitude of the main 
component and amplitudes of neighboring harmonics.  
VIII.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Summing up the results of the investigation it should be 
noted that for compensatory ABP measurement specifically 
the current pattern of the pulse wave efficiently predicts the 
expected signal. This pattern must be dirigible enough to 
change significantly with changes in the state of the object 
measured as well as changes in the conditions of its active 
measurement. 
For this reason, realized by the classic regulators 
including the PID controllers, patterns in the small 
parametric models of ABP waves are of little use for active 
blood pressure measurement. An idea of forming the 
adequate patterns in the task is given in the above qualitative 
reasoning. It is based on the property of quasi-periodicity of 
ABP signal.  
This property lies in the fact that high variability of the 
period of heart contractions occurs only at long time 
intervals, whereas at short time intervals of several seconds 
or a few heart beats its changes are generally small and fall 
within a couple of percent.  
Therefore, estimating the current period, more precisely 
the quasi-period T and getting a pulse wave pattern as a 
signal fragment of T duration immediately preceding the 
current time moment gives us a good pattern of the pulse 
wave. Thus, the task of building a pattern for current pulse of 
the signal is reduced to the task of effective evaluation of its 
current quasi-period.   
The results of developing a new method for monitoring 
ABP using active sensors and their control based on the 
pulse wave patterns that have been discussed in this study 
have demonstrated their high potential in numerous 
experiments that have been performed by us to test and 
improve the device developed. This makes it possible for the 
authors to voice the hope of good prospects of further 
development up to its adoption in healthcare practice in the 
very near future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by RFBR (Russian Foundation 
for Basic Research) grant 14-07-00496-a. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Antsiperov, G. Mansurov, and B.Bonch-Bruevich, 
“Development of an Active Sensor for Non-invasive Arterial 
Blood Pressure Monitoring,” Proc. of the 2-d International 
Conference on Smart Portable, Wearable, Implantable and 
Disability-oriented Devices and Systems (SPWID 2016), 
2016 - Valencia, Spain, pp. 1–5, ISBN: 978-1-61208-480-0. 
Available: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article 
&articleid=spwid_2016_1_10_80004/ 2016.11.12. 
[2] M. Chaudhari and S. Dharavath, “Study of Smart Sensors and 
their Applications,” Intern. J. of Adv. Research in Computer 
and Comm. Engineering, vol. 3(1), Jan. 2014, pp. 5031–5034. 
[3] W. Klonowski, “From conformons to human brains: an 
informal overview of nonlinear dynamics and its applications 
in biomedicine,” Nonlinear Biomedical Physics, vol. 1, article 
5, 
2007, 
DOI: 
10.1186/1753-4631-1-5. 
Available: 
https://nonlinearbiomedphys.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1
186/1753-4631-1-5 / 2016.11.12.  
[4] E.-J. Marey, “Pression et vitesse du sang,” in Physiologie 
Experimentale, Masson, Paris, 1876.  
[5] E. Chung, G. Chen, B. Alexander, and M. Cannesson, “Non-
invasive continuous blood pressure monitoring: a review of 
current applications,” in Front Med, vol. 7(1), 2013, pp. 91-
101. 
[6] J. Peňáz, “Photoelectric measurement of blood pressure, 
volume and flow in the finger,” Digest of the 10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Medical 
and 
Biological 
Engineering, Dresden, 1973, p.104. 
[7] G. Drzewiecki, J. Melbin, and A. Noordergraaf,  “Arterial 
tonometry: review and analysis,” in J Biomech., vol. 16(2), 
1983 , pp. 141-152. 
[8] G. L. Pressman and P. M. Newgard, "A Transducer for the 
Continuous External Measurement of Arterial Blood 
Pressure," in IEEE Transactions on Bio-medical Electronics, 
vol. 10, no. 2, 1963, pp. 73-81. 
[9] K. Astrom and T. Hagglund, “PID Controllers: Theory, 
Design and Tuning,” 2nd Edition, Triangle Park, North 
Carolina: Instrument Society of America, 1995.  

