A Biologically Accurate Simulation of the Locomotion of Caenorhabditis elegans
Roger Mailler, Jacob Graves, Nathan Willy, and Trevor Sarratt
Computational Neuroscience and Adaptive Systems Laboratory
University of Tulsa
Tulsa, United States
{mailler, jacob-graves, nathan-willy, trevor-sarratt}@utulsa.edu
Abstract—The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is an im-
portant model organism for many areas of biological research
including genetics, development, and neurobiology. It is the
ﬁrst organism to have its genome sequenced, complete cell
ontogeny determined, and nervous system mapped. With all of
the information that is available on this simple organism, C.
elegans may also become the ﬁrst organism to be accurately
and completely modeled in silico. This work takes a ﬁrst
step toward this goal by presenting a biologically accurate,
3-dimensional simulated model of C. elegans. This model
takes into account many facets of the organism including
size, shape, weight distribution, muscle placement, and muscle
force. It also explicitly models the environment of the worm
to include factors such as contact, friction, inertia, surface
tension, and gravity. The model was tuned and validated using
video recordings taken of the worm to show that it accurately
depicts the physics of undulatory locomotion used to forward
and reverse crawl on an agar surface. The main contribution
of this article is a new, highly detailed 3D physics model and
supporting simulator that accurately reproduces the physics of
C. elegans locomotion.
Keywords-Simulation, Biology, Caenorhabditis elegans, Mod-
eling
I. INTRODUCTION
Nearly
50
years
ago,
Sydney
Brenner
introduced
Caenorhabditis elegans as a model for studying develop-
mental biology and neurology. Because of its simplicity, it
has become one of the best understood organisms on the
planet being the only one to have its cell lineage, genome,
and nervous system completely mapped. However, despite
all of the effort that has gone into uncovering the secrets
behind ”the mind of the worm,” we still lack a compelling
systems-level understanding for how the neurons and the
connections between them generate the surprisingly complex
range of behaviors that are observed in this relatively simple
organism.
One potential approach to addressing this issue is to use
computer simulations that model aspects of the worm’s body
and nervous system [1]. For example, numerous computer
simulations have been created that replicate the locomotion
of C. elegans [2], [3], [4], [5].
Like all models, these simulations make simplifying as-
sumptions that make them computationally tractable at the
expense of accuracy. Each of them, for instance, represents
Figure 1.
Basic anatomy of an adult hermaphrodite.
the body as a set of uniformly distributed points in two-
dimensional space. This prevents them from replicating the
proper weight distribution, and more importantly, the non-
uniform placement of the muscles that are used to generate
locomotive force in the actual worm. In addition, they
also fail to directly simulate the environment, but instead
apply constant frictional forces at these discrete points along
the body. These simplifying assumptions limit the ability
of these simulations to accurately depict the non-uniform
friction that results from the worm’s contact with the world
around it and subsequently the complex neural control that
is needed to generate the worm’s characteristic sinusoidal
pattern of locomotion.
Leveraging the tremendous increases in computational
power and advances in numeric methods, this work, which
is an extended version of the work presented in [1], seeks
to rectify these deﬁciencies by developing a biologically
accurate 3D model of the body of C. elegans in a virtual en-
vironment that mirrors the physical properties of its natural
world. This simulator, which has been under development
for nearly two years, is built using an open-source 3D
game and physics engine. The model accurately depicts the
physical properties of the real organism including its non-
uniform weight, size, shape, and musculature. In addition,
the simulator models the interaction between the worm and
its environment to include surface tension, friction, inertia,
and gravity.
This paper presents this new model and demonstrates that
it faithfully reproduces forward and reverse crawling of C.
elegans on an agar surface. The model is cross validated
using video recordings of worms that were converted to
quantitative data by image analysis software. During our
validation, we found that, during forward locomotion, the
forces generated by the muscles may decrease as the wave
propagates from the worm’s head to its tail. Although we
82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

found no mention of this in the literature, the placement of
the muscles in the worm’s body, along with video analysis
of the worm’s crawling gait seem to support our ﬁnding. We
also have found that in order to replicate reverse locomotion
that the force generated by the muscles needed to be higher,
the wavelength shorter, and the wave propagation slower.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section
II, a brief introduction to the anatomy of C. elegans is
given along with a review of other approaches to modeling
this organism. In Section III, we present the underlying
simulation technology used in this work as well as provide
a detailed description of the physics model. In Section IV,
the methods and techniques used to tune and validate the
system are described with Section V discussing the results.
Finally, in Section VI, we present our conclusions.
II. BACKGROUND
This section provides the necessary background on the
anatomy of C. elegans as well as the state-of-the-art in
computer simulations of this organism.
A. Caenorhabditis elegans Anatomy
Caenorhabditis elegans is a small (1 millimeter in length)
nematode that can be found living in the soil of many parts
of the world. It lives by feeding on bacteria and is capable
of reproducing in about 3 days under the right conditions.
C. elegans can either be male or hermaphrodite, with males
occurring at a low frequency in the population. They repro-
duce by either self fertilization in the hermaphrodite or by
mating a male and hermaphrodite. Hermaphrodites lay about
300 eggs during their approximately 15 day lifespan.
C. elegans (see Figure 1) is a very simple organism,
with only 959 cells in the adult hermaphrodite and 1031
in the adult male [6]. Like other members of the nematode
(Nematoda) family, the body of C. elegans is composed
of two concentric tubes separated by a pseudocoelom. The
inner tube is in the intestine and the outer tube consists
of the hypodermis, muscles, nerves and the gonads. The
pseudocoelom is ﬁlled with a hydrostatically pressurized
ﬂuid that helps maintain the shape of its body.
C. elegans maintains an outer cuticle, which is secreted
by the hypodermis. During the lifespan of the worm, it
molts its cuticle four times, punctuating the four phases
of its life cycle. The cuticle, containing mostly collagen,
is tough although not rigid. Adult nematodes have lateral,
longitudinal seam cells on the surface of their cuticle that
form treads (alae). When on a solid surface, the nematode
crawls on one side with a set of treads contacting the surface.
The main body wall muscles of C. elegans are arranged
in four rows, two dorsal and two ventral. Each row consists
of 23 or 24 muscle cells that are arranged in an interleaving
pattern [7]. Toward the anterior of the worm, the cells occur
in overlapping pairs with less overlap and pairing occurring
toward the posterior. The worm moves by propagating
Figure 2.
Physics model of the nematode C. elegans
waves either forward or backward along its body creating
a sinusoidal pattern of locomotion.
C. elegans has a simple nervous system consisting of
302 neurons with about 2000 neuromuscular junctions, 5000
chemical synapses, and 700 gap junctions in the adult
hermaphrodite [8]. Most of these cells are located near the
pharynx and in the tail. Processes from these neurons form
a ”nerve ring” that surrounds the pharynx or are part of
bundles that run the length of the body. The most noticeable
of these bundles are the ventral and dorsal nerve cords.
The nervous system receives input primarily from sensilla
located in the head of the worm that are connected to sensory
neurons that extend from the nerve ring. The nerve ring
sends its output through motor neuron axons that are in the
ring itself or located in the ventral or dorsal nerve cords.
Most neurons in C. elegans have simple structures with one
or two processes [9]. Despite their apparent simple structure,
neurons in C. elegans have a diverse set of voltage-gated,
chemically-gated, and mechanically-gated ion channels, use
many of the neurotransmitters found in vertebrates, and ex-
hibit a complex mechanism for vesicle production, docking,
priming, and release. There is considerable evidence the
neurons in C. elegans use acetylcholine, GABA, dopamine,
serotonin, glutamate, and a set of peptides in communicating
with one another [8]. Acetylcholine is used as the primary
excitatory neurotransmitter in motor neurons [10]. GABA is
used as both an inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmitter
[10]. Dopamine appears to inﬂuence egg-laying and exists
in the male reproductive apparatus [11], [12]. At least ten
cells in hermaphrodites seem to signal with serotonin. The
strongest inﬂuence appears in the pharynx [13], although it
inﬂuences egg-laying behavior as well [14]. Finally, gluta-
mate seems to be used as both an excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitter in motor and sensory neurons [15].
Neurons in C. elegans appears to contain both voltage-
gated potassium and calcium channels [10], but recent
advances in electro-physiological techniques have demon-
strated that they seem to lack voltage-gated, sodium channels
[16]. Because of this, these studies have found that neurons
in the organism lack traditional, fast action potentials found
in vertebrates. Instead, patch-clamping studies have been
able to demonstrate non-linear, graded depolarization as a
result of outward potassium ﬂow, which is regulated by
inward calcium ﬂow [16].
Even though the nervous system of C. elegans has been
83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3.
Uniform, two-dimensional model of C. elegans
physically mapped [9], the properties, roles, and interdepen-
dencies of many of the neurons are still unknown. Much
of what is known about the role of individual neurons in C.
elegans comes from behavioral studies of worms that have a
genetic mutation or have undergone laser micro-dissection.
As the name implies, laser micro-dissection works by killing
an individual cell or group of cells using a laser [17].
Once the cells have been ablated, the behavior of the
worm is observed and the role of the neuron identiﬁed. For
example, using laser ablation, the role of many of the cells in
pharyngeal pumping have been determined [18] and several
classes of inter-neurons (AIY, AIZ, and RIB) have been
found to be involved in controlling locomotion [19], [20].
In addition, the suspected roles of the D-type motor neurons
have been uncovered using this technique [21]. More recent
work has uncovered the importance of mechano-sensation
in determining swimming gait in the worm by ablating the
ALM touch receptor neuron [22].
There are a number of ways to measure the behavior
of C. elegans. The most prominent techniques that are
used include measuring changes in frequency, amplitude, or
gait during locomotion [23], [3] and using chemotaxis and
thermotaxis assays [24].
Even with these techniques, many questions about the
function of the nervous system remain unanswered. For
example, there are currently three hotly debated theories
that attempt to explain how the nervous system generates
and propagates waves through the worm’s body given its
pattern of connectivity. The ﬁrst theory is that the gap
junctions between muscle cells or the motor neurons aid
in the propagation of the wave [9], [25]. The second theory
is that C. elegans undulatory motion could be controlled by
a central pattern generator (CPG) like the related nematode
Ascaris [26], [27]. The third theory is that stretch receptors,
mechanically-gated ion channels, contained within A-type
and B-type motor neurons ”sense” a wave and then propa-
gate it.
B. C. elegans Simulators
All of the simulators that have, thus far, been created
for C. elegans are designed to address speciﬁc questions
about the biology of the worm that cannot be answered
using standard biological techniques. The earliest use of a
C. elegans speciﬁc simulator can be found in the work of
Niebur and Erdos [2], [27]. Their simulator was designed to
investigate the physical mechanics that are used to propel
the organism and to determine if stretch receptor control
Figure 4.
Screenshot of the ALIVE Simulator
could be responsible for generating the worm’s characteristic
sinusoidal wave.
To show that stretch receptors could create the sinu-
soidal wave, Niebur and Erdos created a simpliﬁed two-
dimensional model of the worm that represents the contact
between the worm’s body and an agar surface (see Figure
3). Their model uses 40 points, 20 on the left and 20 on
the right, which are evenly distributed along the length of
the body. Each point is connected to the points that are
contra-lateral, anterior, and posterior to it by springs that
represent the cuticle of the worm. The model is powered by
muscles that are connected to the points along the length of
the worm. Locomotion occurs when the simulated nervous
system causes the muscles to contract. The simulator then
updates the position of each of the points based on the forces
being created by the muscles, the elasticity of the cuticle,
the interior pressure, and the frictional forces of the body’s
contact with the surface.
Although they did not create an accurate model of the
nervous system, Niebur and Erdos were able to demonstrate
that sinusoidal waves could be produced by stretch receptors
located on the motor neurons that control the body wall
muscles of C. elegans. Other researchers have extended
their model in an effort to further strengthen the stretch
receptor hypothesis. For example, Wakabayashi extended it
by adding diagonal springs for stability and then used the
resulting model to investigate several potential locomotion
control methods including central pattern generator and
stretch receptor control [4]. Using a fairly accurate recreation
of the locomotion neural circuit, Cohen et al. have made
extensive use of this model to study the use of stretch
receptors for creating the phase lag of the wave [28], [5],
discount the role that gap junctions play in muscle control
[29], and most recently to demonstrate that the worm uses
a single gait in liquids of varying viscosity [30].
Several other models have been created that explicitly
model the physical body of C. elegans. For example, Suzuki
et al., used a 12-link rigid segment model to replicate the
84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table I
BODY SEGMENT SIZES (ALL NUMBERS IN µm)
i
li
ri
i
li
ri
i
li
ri
1
50
24
10
45
40
19
35
40
2
10
28
11
30
40
20
50
40
3
15
34
12
55
40
21
55
40
4
25
40
13
40
40
22
30
40
5
20
40
14
50
40
23
40
38
6
25
40
15
40
40
24
50
32
7
20
40
16
50
40
25
100
24
8
40
40
17
55
40
9
30
40
18
40
40
worm’s response to touch [31]. Ronkko and Wong, on the
other hand, used a three-dimensional particle-based model
to explore the worm’s swimming and crawling behavior
in various substrates including agar, water, and soil [32].
Finally Ferree, Marcotte, and Lockery built a model worm
that moves forward at a constant velocity, but changes
direction using a neural network that has been trained to
replicate chemotaxis behavior [33], [34].
A number of simulators have also been constructed that
model aspects of the nervous system without explicitly
modeling the body of the worm. The work of Karbowski
et al. simulates the neural circuits involved in locomotion
[3]. Using a custom simulator, Wicks, Roehrig, and Rankin
built a model of the neural network that controls the tap
withdrawal response and by systematically analyzing it, were
able to derive a possible functional relationship between
some neurons in this circuit [35].
III. SIMULATOR
To develop the core of our simulation framework (see
Figure III), we chose to use a Java-based high performance
3D game engine called the Java Monkey Engine (JME) [36].
Originally created by Mark Powell and now in its third
major revision, JME provides all of the major features found
in commercial quality game engines including loading and
manipulation of 3D meshes, lighting and shadows, sound
effects, animation, and terrain. JME uses a scene graph
based API that allows developers to easily modify composed
objects in their scene and the game engine to quickly cull
branches of the graph during rendering. This makes it both
easy to use and exceptionally fast.
At the core of our simulation framework is the Open
Dynamics Engine (ODE) [37], which interfaces with JME
using JME Physics [38]. ODE is designed to simulate
articulated rigid body physics. Objects in the simulation
are built from various 3D shapes that are connected to one
another by joints. ODE allows users to specify the properties
of the objects including weight, surface friction, and center
of gravity. Joints can be created between the objects and up
to six degrees of freedom are supported.
ODE uses a highly stable, ﬁrst-order implicit Euler in-
tegrator. Although not quite as accurate as a fourth-order
Runge-Kutta integrator, it is remarkably fast and with small
enough time steps provides very realistic physical approxi-
mations. ODE handles contact and friction using a version of
the Dantzig Linear Complementarity Problem (LCP) solver
that was described in [39]. However, it uses a faster Coloumb
friction model to optimize speed. ODE is used in a number
of research and commercial robotics simulators including
Gazebo [40], Marilou [41], and Webots [42].
A. Physics Model
Because ODE is designed to simulate rigid objects, we
modeled the body as set of 25 discrete segments Si =
{1, · · · , 25} (see Figure 2). As a notational convenience we
refer to segments by their index number and use the subscript
i in equations to denote the segment Si. Each segment is
represented using a 3D box whose width and height are
estimated by the radius, ri, taken from photographs of living
worms and length, li, are given by the spacing between
subsequent muscle cell locations along the worm’s anterior-
posterior axis (see Table I). These muscle cell locations,
which are taken from [43], represent the main points of
powered articulation along the body .
The volume of each segment can be calculated by
vi = 4r2
i × li
(1)
and their mass, wi, is a fraction of the total mass W and
can be calculated by
wi = W × vi
vtotal
(2)
This representation creates non-uniform weights and sizes
for the individual sections of the worm. This, in turn,
impacts the shape and frictional properties associated with
the contact surface between the worm and its environment.
Subsequent segments of the body, Si and Si+1, are con-
nected to one another by a powered rotational joint, Jk. Like
segments, we use the notational convenience of referring to
the joint by its index number and use the subscript k to
denote joint Jk. These joints have 2 degrees of freedom
and have an angle at time t that is represented as a 3D
vector ⃗θk(t). The angular velocity of this joint ⃗vk(t), is also
represented as a vector with each element being the change
in the corresponding angle over time.
The values of ⃗θk(t) and ⃗vk(t) are calculated by the
underlying physics engine based on the various forces that
are acting on the joint and the segments they connect. This
is the topic of the next section.
B. Dynamics
At any given time there are a number of forces that act
on the body of the worm. These include gravity, friction,
surface tension, inertia, elastic forces from the cuticle, force
associated with internal pressure, dampening forces caused
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table II
PARAMETERS USED IN THE SIMULATION
Parameter
Description
Value
Units
L
Total length of the body
1000
µm
W
Total mass of the body
5 · 10−9
kg
S
Surface Tension
2.0 · 104
G
F max
m
Max muscle cell force
6.5 · 10−12
N
θmax
m
Max muscle cell bend
π
10
rad
ks
Torsional spring constant
20 · 10−12
N · m/rad
kp
Torsional pressure constant
0.63 · 10−12
N · m/rad
b
Torsional damping constant
0.2 · 10−12
N · m · s/rad
µl
Coefﬁcient of lateral friction
0.5
µa
Coefﬁcient of axial friction
5 × 10−3
λf
CPG wavelength
22
joints
∆tf
CPG update interval
150
ms
λr
CPG wavelength
18
joints
∆tr
CPG update interval
250
ms
Figure 5.
Cross-section showing the location of the muscle cells
by the incompressibility of liquid, and forces exerted by the
muscles.
Fortunately, ODE handles gravitational, inertial, and fric-
tional forces that act on the worm by allowing users to
specify the mass (for computing gravitational and inertial
forces) and the size, shape, and frictional coefﬁcients for
each of the segments of the body (for computing frictional
forces). Tables I and II list the values that are used in our
simulation.
Notable among these are the values for lateral and axial
friction along with the value for surface tension. Currently,
there are no exact values for the friction between the body of
the worm and an agar surface. However, researcher believe
that the alae that run the length of the worm’s body act
similar to an ice skate blade and creates very low axial
friction while providing as much as 100 times the amount
of lateral friction [2]. In our simulations, we have adopted
an axial friction coefﬁcient that is similar to a skate on ice,
which is reported to be 0.005 [44] and use a value 100 time
this amount for the lateral friction coefﬁcient.
Unlike most organisms, the life of C. elegans is domi-
nated by the force of surface tension, not gravity [45]. In
fact, estimates for the surface tension experience by the
worm are somewhere between 10,000 and 100,000 times
the force of gravity [46]. At ﬁrst, these numbers appear to
be outrageously high, however we have recently conducted
experiments using a high speed centrifuge, which, to our
utter amazement, deﬁnitely show that the worms have no
problem adhering to agar at forces of over 8,000 Gs.
For our simulations, we chose to use a value of 20,000
Gs, which is simulated using a directional acceleration of
20000 × −9.81m/s2.
The forces that act on the joints are computed by our
simulator about 100 times per second during each update of
the physics model. The total force applied to a joint Jk at
time t is calculated using the following equation:
⃗F T
k (t) = ⃗F M
k (t) + ⃗F S
k (t) + ⃗F P
k (t) + ⃗F D
k (t)
(3)
where ⃗F M
k
is the force exerted by the muscles, ⃗F S
k is the
force exerted by the elastic cuticle, ⃗F P
k is the force exerted
by the interior hydrostatic pressure, and ⃗F D
k is a dampening
force.
1) Muscle Forces: Muscle forces in C. elegans are pro-
duced by muscle cells that are attached to the cuticle of
the body. These cells are arranged parallel to the anterior-
posterior (AP) axis of the body in four rows with two rows
on the dorsal and two rows on the ventral side. Figure 5
show a cross section of C. elegans showing the location of
the muscles cells approximately half way down the AP axis.
As can be seen in this ﬁgure, the muscle cells are offset by
approximately 30 degrees left and right of the dorsal-ventral
midline. Muscle cells are, therefore, named based on their
AP position in the row and the row’s position relative to the
dorsal-ventral and left-right mid-lines. For example , the 7th
muscle cell in the dorsal, right row is called MDR07. For
simplicity, we refer to the set of muscle cells located at joint
k as mk = {MDLk, MDRk, MV Lk, MV Rk}.
For most of the worm’s body, this offset has very little
effect because the innervation pattern activates both the left
and right muscle cells on a single side of the worm at
the same time. This is not true in the head where a more
complex innervation pattern allows the worm to lift its head
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by activating the muscle on the left or right side at the same
time.
We accounted for the offset placement of the muscle cells
by calculating the force generated by each cell independently
and multiplying that force by ˆn, which is a unit vector
normal to the surface of the worm. The normal vector is
easily computed by ˆn = (0, ± cos(θ), ± sin(θ)) with signs
being set appropriately according to quadrant location of the
muscle cell. The following equation is used to calculate the
muscle force applied to joint k at time t:
⃗F M
k (t) =
X
m∈mk
am × Fm(⃗θk(t)) ∗ ˆn
(4)
In the equation, am is the current activation level, a graded
signal, of the muscle based on the inputs from the neurons
innervating muscle cell m and Fm(⃗θk(t)) is the maximum
force that the cell can produce given its current length.
To compute Fm(⃗θk(t)), we used a linear approximation to
the Hill equation for the force/length relationship of muscle
cells [47].
Fm(⃗θk(t)) = (0.5ks − F max
m
θmax
m
) × |⃗θk(t)| + F max
m
(5)
Here, F max
m
is the maximum force that the cell produces
at resting length, θmax
m
is the maximum angle that the joint
can be displaced as a result of the contraction of the muscle
and ks is the spring constant associated with the elastic
cuticle. The slope of this line is based on the spring constant
of the cuticle such that these forces come to equilibrium
when |⃗θk(t)| = θmax
m
and both the right and left muscle are
fully activated. This, by no means, limits the maximum bend
angle of the joint. Both external and inertial forces can cause
a joint to exceed θmax
m
. The values for these constants (Table
II) were chosen based on values from [48] and [4] and were
tuned using videos of worms during forward locomotion (see
Section IV).
2) Spring, Pressure, and Damping forces: Whereas mus-
cle force causes the body to deviate from it resting state,
there are a number of forces that act to restore it. One of
these forces is the elasticity of the cuticle, which can be
modeled as a simple spring. Below is the equation for the
force exerted by this spring:
⃗F S
k (t) = −0.8 × ks × ⃗θk(t)
(6)
The value for ks is strongly related to the maximum
muscle force and was chosen to be ks = 4 ∗ F max
m
. This
creates a relationship between these values such that the
average force applied over the range of dorsal or ventral
muscle contraction is 1
2F max
m
.
Along with the force created by the cuticle, internal
pressure of the worm’s body also exerts a restorative force.
Recent measurements of the relationship between the elastic
Table III
SYNAPTIC WEIGHTS USED IN THE SIMULATION.
Forward
Reverse
k
ωf
k
k
ωf
k
k
ωr
k
k
ωr
k
1
0.35
13
0.77
1
0.10
13
1.00
2
0.42
14
0.77
2
0.20
14
1.00
3
0.70
15
0.70
3
0.30
15
1.00
4
0.77
16
0.62
4
0.40
16
1.00
5
0.77
17
0.54
5
0.50
17
1.00
6
0.77
18
0.46
6
0.60
18
1.00
7
0.77
19
0.39
7
0.70
19
1.00
8
0.77
20
0.39
8
1.00
20
1.00
9
0.77
21
0.39
9
1.00
15
1.00
10
0.77
22
0.39
10
1.00
22
1.00
11
0.77
23
0.39
11
1.00
23
1.00
12
0.77
24
0.39
12
1.00
24
1.00
cuticle and the hydrostatic pressure using a piezoresistive
displacement clamp have shown that the restorative force
has a cuticle to pressure force ratio of 4 to 1 [49]. We used
these ﬁnding to normalize the force associated with these
two factors. Below is the equation we use for calculating
the force associated with internal pressure:
⃗F P
k (t) = −0.2 × ks × θmax
m
(7)
We explicitly do not model the relationship between the
change in volume and pressure as the body bends. We
ignored this factor because it has been reported that total
body volume does not change signiﬁcantly over the worm’s
range of motion [2], [4]. This indicates that pressure acts a
constant, not dynamic, restorative property, so we treat it as
such.
Lastly, because of the structure and composition of the
worm’s body, it acts like a ﬂuid-ﬁlled shock absorber. So,
we apply a damping force to model the resistance that the
body has to rapid changes in position using the formula
below:
⃗F D
k (t) = −b × ⃗vk(t)
(8)
The value for b was derived through experimentation and is
in line with value reported in [4].
C. Locomotion Control
Because the major focus of this paper is on investigat-
ing a realistic physics model of C. elegans, we chose to
implement a simple CPG for locomotion control similar
to the one found in [2]. The CPG works by setting the
activation level of the D-type interneuron that drives the
B-type motor neurons during forward locomotion, and the
A-type motor neurons during reverse locomotion. During
forward locomotion this is done by setting the value in the
ﬁrst joint, k = 1 at each time t using the following formula:
ak=1(t) = sin(2π
λf
× t)
(9)
where λf is the wavelength for forward locomotion.
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6.
Methodology used to construct and validate the simulator.
At each successive time step t + ∆tf, the wave is
propagated down the body such that for 2 ≤ k ≤ 24
ak+1(t + ∆tf) = ak(t)
(10)
The value of ∆tf sets the characteristic frequency of the
body wave for forward locomotion (see Table II). Initially,
all of the activation levels are set to 0 and between subse-
quent updates the interneurons are held at their last activation
level.
During reverse locomotion, the CPG sets the activation of
the interneuron controlling the motor neurons in the last joint
and propagates the wave from back to front. The wavelength
and frequency of this wave is determined by the parameters
∆tr and λr.
The actual activation levels of the muscle cells am are
dictated by three factors: (1) the activation level of the
interneuron at the joint (ak), (2) whether the worm is moving
in forward or reverse, which determines if the A or B-type
motor neuron is being activated by the interneuron, and (3)
the synaptic strength of the connection between the motor
neuron and the muscle cell ωf
k or ωr
k. The following equation
shows this relationship during forward locomotion:
am = ak × ωf
k
(11)
In a close approximation to the cross inhibition circuit
in C. elegans, when ak is positive, the activation of the
ventral muscles (MVL and MVR) are positive and the dorsal
muscles (MDL and MDR) are 0. However, when ak is
negative, the activation of the dorsal muscles (MDL and
MDR) becomes positive and the ventral muscles (MVL
and MVR) are 0. The synaptic strength between the motor
neurons and muscle cells were determined experimentally
using data derived from video analysis of the worm in
motion. Table III gives the weights that were found to
produce a very close approximation to the gait of the worm
during forward and reverse locomotion.
IV. TUNING AND VALIDATION
The value of a simulation can only be measured by cross-
validating the data it produces against reality. In constructing
and validating our simulation, we followed the process
outline in Figure 6. The next phase of construction for the
simulation was to tune and cross validate its performance
against real worms. To do this, we used the C. elegans N2
wild type strain, which we obtained from the Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center (CGC) at the University of Minnesota.
Figure 7.
Screenshot of the WormAnalyzer
A. Materials and Methods
Maintenance and culturing of worms was performed as
outlined in [50]. Worms were grown on standard NGM Lite
plates with OP50 1CGJ E. Coli and incubated at 20◦C.
The worms analyzed in these experiments were young adult
worms (or, a mixture of young adult and adult worms),
transferred while in L4 larval stage to freshly seeded OP50
plates the night before ﬁlming [51]. Worms were recorded
on modiﬁed NGM Lite agar plates (3.0g KH2PO4, 0.5g
K2HPO4, 2.0g NaCl, and Agar, without the addition of
peptone or cholesterol) made speciﬁcally for the clarity
of the recorded image. Worms were transferred to ﬁlming
plates via a worm pick and ﬁlmed within thirty seconds of
transfer, in order to take advantage of the higher locomotion
activity exhibited by worms shortly after transfer. We found
that this produced the most reliable and longest sustained
locomotor activity.
Worms were ﬁlmed using a Leica S8 APO Stereomi-
croscope ﬁtted with a ScopeTek MDC320 digital camera,
outputting at a resolution of 1024x768 at 5 frames per
second. The microscope was held at the 16x magniﬁcation
setting during ﬁlming, with the illumination mirror angled to
obtain images with the highest possible contrast. Individual
worms were ﬁlmed for ﬁve minutes, during which the agar
plate was moved manually, to re-position the worm within
the microscope’s ﬁeld of view. A total of 487 minutes of
raw video in 96 ﬁles was collected.
B. Image Processing
After collecting the video, we edited it to remove plate
repositioning. Using consumer video editing software, we
manually cut the raw footage and produced around 3.75
hours or 50,000 individual frames of forward locomotion
and 21,000 frames or 2.33 hours of reverse locomotion.
To analyze this footage, we developed software, called
the WormAnalyzer (see Figure 7, that is written in Java and
based on the Java Media Framework (JMF). To do this, a
set of JMF processors were constructed into a processing
pipeline that converted each frame of the raw color video
into a set of pixel locations that describes the position of the
worms body. The WormAnalyzer software batch processes
footage at about 5 times faster than real time. The analysis
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

pipeline we constructed is similar to that described in [51]
with some minor improvements.
The ﬁrst processor in the pipeline converts the video
frames to grayscale and normalizes. This algorithm creates
a histogram of color intensity for all pixels within a frame
[52]. Using a threshold, we identify which intensities com-
pose the majority of the image. This range of intensities
is then converted to an easily identiﬁable solid color. This
greatly diminishes the background noise that, if on the
borders of a worm, can resist binarization and small object
removal, ultimately skewing the thinning process.
Although the ﬁrst step in the process converts the image to
grayscale and removes most of the background, the second
processor in the pipeline converts it to a binary image using
a local thresholding algorithm. This algorithm uses a sliding
3 X 3 window to determine whether a given pixel should be
converted to black (foreground) or white (background). This
processor colors the pixel black if the standard deviation of
the intensity of the pixel and its surrounding pixels is greater
than the mean of the entire image, or if the mean intensity
of the pixel and its surrounding pixels was greater than
the background pixel intensity. Because the ﬁrst processor
converts the background to a solid color (white), this phase
creates a very accurate binary image.
Next, we remove small objects from the image using
a region labeling algorithm that indexes each pixel in the
image according to the region that it belongs to. Once all of
the black regions are labeled, we remove all of the regions
except for the largest. This isolates the worm (colored black)
onto a white background. We then used the same method
to ﬁll holes in the worms image by inverting the colors
such that only the largest white region is maintained (the
background).
The resulting binary image, now just the worm and
the background, is passed through an implementation of
the 8-distance, one-pass asymmetric thinning algorithm
(OPATA8) devised by Deng et al [53]. With noise resis-
tance, better connectivity, and less erosion, the OPATA8
implementation more quickly reduces the image to the core
skeleton than the previously used triple pass thinning algo-
rithm [54]. The resultant shape can have multiple endpoints
but is ultimately trimmed down to a single representative
skeleton by selecting the line connecting the two endpoints
farthest from one another using the Floyd-Warshall algo-
rithm [55].
The output of this process is a set of text ﬁles, which
we refer to as body ﬁles. Each body ﬁle contains one line
per frame of video with each line giving a timestamp and
the pixel locations of the body of the worm. The number
of pixels (or length of the body) is dependent on the size
of the worm and also exhibits some variability due to the
binarization of the image and subsequent thinning.
Because we wanted to gather statistics based on a nonuni-
form segmentation of the worms body, it was necessary
Figure 8.
Features of C. elegans locomotion
to identify the location of the worms head. To aid in this
process, software was developed to show the ﬁrst frame of
each video ﬁle in a directory. To indicate the location of the
head, a researcher simply clicked on the head end of the
worm. A head tag was then inserted into the corresponding
body ﬁle that identiﬁed the location of the head in the ﬁrst
frame. With the head tag in place, subsequent frames of
the video were properly rearranged such that the end point
closest to the last head location was identiﬁed as the head.
This turns out to be a very robust and reliable mechanism if
the video being processed was taken at high enough frame
rates.
These head-tagged body ﬁles are then post-processed in
batches. The software takes a directory of head-tagged body
ﬁles and produces skeleton ﬁles that provide a description of
the location and position of each segment of the worm. Like
the simulator, the size of these segments are not uniform,
but are based on the muscle placement as reported in [43].
For convenience, the simulator also creates skeleton ﬁles in
exactly the same format as the WormAnalyzer. This allows
us to directly compare the output from both processes using
the same metrics calculated in exactly the same way.
The skeleton ﬁles are then processed to extract features
of the worms movement using a technique similar to the
one reported in [23]. Currently, this software extracts 49
features from the worms motion including the velocity of
the centroid of the worm, the amplitude of the worms body,
the average angle at each joint location, and the angular to
simulated results velocity of each joint (see Figure 8). The
software outputs data ﬁles that give these features on a frame
by frame basis and a set of summary statistics that can be
further analyzed using statistical packages.
C. Simulator Data Collection
To collect data from the simulator, the physics model of
the worm was instrumented to output the position of each
of the joints ﬁve times a second to a skeleton ﬁle. The CPG
was ﬁrst set to generate forward locomotion and 20 minute
long data runs were performed. At the end of each run, the
simulator was restarted. We then repeated the experiment
while running the CPG in reverse. In total 48,000 data points
of both forward and backward locomotion were collected,
accounting for approximately 5 hours of runtime. We then
processed the skeleton ﬁles using the WormAnalyzer.
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Forward
(b) Reverse
Figure 9.
Comparison of locomotion velocity and amplitude of C. elegans to simulated results
V. DISCUSSION
Figures 9, 10, and 11 present the results of both the
analysis of the video and the simulator. The results for
the video are similar with the results obtained in both [3]
and [23]. Essentially, it can be seen that the amplitude of
the body during forward locomotion is about 21.5% of the
length of the body and the instantaneous centroid velocity
is about 126 µm/sec. For reverse locomotion we obtained
an average amplitude of 24.5% of the length of the body
and a centroid velocity of 128 µm/sec. These number are
similar to the values reported in [23], which gives a forward
centroid velocity of 180 ± 30 µm/sec and an amplitude of
19.27 ± 2.34%. We believe the discrepancy in velocity is a
result of the worms occasionally pausing during our video
recordings. We found that obtaining such a slow velocity
was very difﬁcult in the simulations.
Figures 10 and 11 show that as the wave propagates
down the body that its amplitude decreases as is evident
by the bend angles that are produced in these regions. This
is similar to the shape of the average ﬂex angles that are
reported in [3]. However, we noticed that in our video
results, the bend angles increase near the tail of the worm
as opposed to continuing to decrease as was reported in [3].
When comparing the video results to the simulated results
we see that, with the exception of the angles at the head and
tail of the worm, our simulator accurately reproduces the
velocity, amplitude, individual angles, and angular velocities
of the real worm. We have analyzed the reason for the
discrepancy at the head and tail and have concluded that it
is caused by data that is not being collected at high enough
resolution. The simulation uses a worm of 100 units long
with each unit representing 10µm. This makes the second
segment of the worm exactly 1 unit in length. When using
integers to represent the location of the joints connected to
this segment to calculate the angles, it allows only values
that are multiples of 45◦. The same error is probably being
introduced in the video analysis, but is stabilized by the
variability of the worm’s length. Overall, these factors effect
the analysis, but not the actual behavior of the simulated
worm, which by all appearances precisely reproduces the
motion of the real organism.
Analytically, the frequency of the CPG used to drive
forward locomotion is about 0.3Hz. Even though this is
within one standard deviation of the value of 0.36±0.08 Hz
for N2 wild type reported in [23], it is still slightly below
the expected value. This is entirely expected as the velocity
that we produce is lower and the amplitude slightly higher
than was reported in that work. We are very conﬁdent that
changing the values of either λf or ∆tf will cause our
simulation to reproduce the values they report.
To drive reverse locomotion, the frequency of the CPG
is about 0.22Hz. This value is less than the one used for
forward locomotion, but a lower frequency was also reported
in [3] for reverse locomotion.
We would also like to mention that the process of tuning
a CPG to produce the gait of the worm was a very difﬁcult
endeavor. There were two issues that we encountered that
complicated the task. First, if the weight of the synapse
between the interneurons and the motor neurons are uniform,
then the model has a tendency to tail whip during forward
locomotion. This is caused by a decrease in the wavelength
of the wave as it propagates down the body when the worm
is in motion, which causes high inertial forces to be exerted.
On further investigation we found references to this decrease
in wavelength in living worms [22], [30]. To compensate
for this effect, we decreased the weight associated with
muscles in the rear of the worm, which not only removed
the tail whip, but normalized the bend angles to match those
observed in the video analysis.
We believe that this indicates that during forward loco-
motion the worm generates most of its propulsive forces
using the muscles located in the anterior. The posterior
portions of the worm are likely to apply just enough force
to maintain the wave and prevent a loss of energy due to
drag. The physiological layout of the worm’s musculature
seems to support this claim as about 63% of the muscles lie
90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

anterior of the AP midline. We also believe that this has not
been observed in other simulations because of the uniform
representation of individual segments of the body, the lack
of torsional inertial force, and the lack of explicit modeling
of the friction caused by variations in surface contact.
The second issue we encountered was the difference in
muscle force needed for forward and reverse locomotion.
When we ﬁrst attempted reverse locomotion, we simply
reversed the wave pattern. We quickly noticed that the worm
was unable to move because the lower concentration of
muscles near the tail could not produce enough force. By
increasing the maximum muscle force, we were able to get
the worm to move in reverse, but then needed to scale back
the synaptic weights used during forward locomotion. This
could indicate two things. First, it may that the muscles don’t
need to be ﬂexed with full force during forward locomotion
because of their placement. The smaller amplitude and
increased frequency used during forward locomotion seem
to support this conjecture. It may also indicate that the actual
worm does not generate more force while reversing, but is
generating it in a different way, driving the movement using
the anterior muscles. A more detailed analysis of dynamics
of reverse locomotion is needed in order to determine if one
or both of these hypotheses is true.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented a new, biologically accurate,
three dimensional model of the body of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. We tuned and validated this model
against values derived from both current literature and from
analysis of video recordings taken of the worm during for-
ward and reverse locomotion. In the process of performing
the tuning, we discovered two new insights into the mech-
anisms of locomotion employed by C. elegans. First, our
model shows that worms may derive most of their forward
propulsive force from the muscles in the anterior portion
of their body with the posterior portions just propagating
the wave in an energy minimizing way. Second, we found
that in order to perform reverse locomotion that the muscles
needed to generate 23% more force than used while moving
forward. This may indicate that moving forward actually
requires less force from each of the muscles or that reverse
locomotion is also predominantly driven using its anterior
muscles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the CGC for providing the
N2 strains used in this paper, Melanie Smith for insightful
discussions, Mike Michalek for his assistance in editing the
video ﬁles, Jason Avery for culturing and videotaping the
worms, and the members of the Rand Lab at the Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation (OMRF) for providing their
protocols and support on numerous occasions.
The authors gratefully acknowledge support of the De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency under DARPA
grants HR0011-07-C-0060. Views and conclusions con-
tained in this document are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the ofﬁcial opinion or policies, either
expressed or implied of the US government or of DARPA.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Mailler, J. Avery, J. Graves, and N. Willy, “A biologi-
cally accurate 3d model of the locomotion of caenorhabditis
elegans,” in Proceedings of First International Conference
on Computational and Systems Biology and Microbiology
(BIOSYSCOM), 2010.
[2] E. Neibur and P. Erd¨os, “Theory of the locomotion of ne-
matodes: Dynamics of undulatory progression on a surface,”
Biophysics Journal, vol. 60, pp. 1132–1146, November 1991.
[3] J. Karbowski, G. Schindelman, C. Cronin, A. Seah, and
P. Sternberg, “Systems level circuit model of c. elegans un-
dulatory locomotion: mathematical modeling and molecular
genetics,” Journal of Computational Neuroscience, vol. 24,
pp. 253–276, 2008.
[4] M. Wakabayashi, “Computational plausibility of stretch
recpetors as the basis for motor control in c. elegans,”
Master’s thesis, University of Queensland, 2006.
[5] J. Bryden and N. Cohen, “Neural control of caenorhabditis
elegans forward locomotion: the role of sensory feedback,”
Biological Cybernetics, vol. 98, pp. 339–351, 2008.
[6] W. B. Wood, The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
Cold
Springs Harbor Laboratory Press, 1988, ch. Introduction to
C. elegans Biology.
[7] M. Driscoll and J. Kaplan, C. elegans II. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, 1997, ch. Mechanotransduction.
[8] J. Rand and M. Nonet, C. elegans II.
Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, 1997, ch. Synaptic Transmission.
[9] J. White, E. Southgate, J. Thomson, and S. Brenner, “The
structure of the nervous system of the nematode caenorhab-
ditis elegans,” in Royal Society of London Philosophical
Transactions, ser. Series B, vol. 314, 1986, pp. 1–340.
[10] J. Richmond and E. Jorgensen, “One gaba and two acetyl-
choline receptors function at the c. elegans neuromuscular
junction,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 2, pp. 791–797, 1999.
[11] J. Sulston, M. Dew, and S. Brenner, “Dopaminergic neurons
in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans,” Journal of Compar-
ative Neurology, vol. 163, pp. 215–226, 1975.
[12] R. Lints and S. Emmons, “Patterning of dopaminergic neuro-
transmitter indentity among caenorhabditis elegans ray sen-
sory neurons by a tgfβ family signaling pathway and a hox
gene,” Development, vol. 126, pp. 5819–5831, 1999.
[13] S. Srinivasan, L. Sadegh, I. Elle, A. Christensen, N. J.
Faergeman, and K. Ashraﬁ, “Serotonin regulates c. elegans
fat and feeding through independent molecular mechanisms,”
Cell Metabolism, vol. 7, pp. 533–544, 2008.
91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Forward
(b) Reverse
Figure 10.
Comparison of bend angles in C. elegans to simulated results
(a) Forward
(b) Reverse
Figure 11.
Comparison of bend velocities in C. elegans to simulated results
[14] C. Trent, N. Tsung, and H. Horvitz, “Egg-laying defective
mutants of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans,” Genetics,
vol. 104, pp. 619–647, 1983.
[15] A. Hart, S. Sims, and J. Kaplan, “Synaptic code for sensory
modalities revealed by c. elegans glr-1 glutamate receptor,”
Nature, vol. 378, pp. 82–85, 1995.
[16] M. Goodman, D. Hall, L. Avery, and S. R. Lockery, “Active
currents regulate sensitivity and dynamic range in c. elegans
neurons,” Neuron, vol. 20, pp. 763–772, 1998.
[17] C. Bargmann and L. Avery, “Laser killing of cells in
caenorhabditis elegans,” Methods in Cell Biology, vol. 48,
pp. 225–249, 1995.
[18] L. Avery and H. Horvitz, “Pharyngeal pumping continues
after laser killing of pharyngeal nervous system of c. elegans,”
Neuron, vol. 3, pp. 473–485, 1989.
[19] E. Tsalik and O. Hobert, “Functional mapping of neurons
that control locomotion behavior in caenorhabditis elegans,”
Journal of Neurobiology, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 178–197, 2003.
[20] J. Gray, J. Hill, and C. Bargmann, “A circuit for naviga-
tion in caenorhabditis elegans,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, vol. 102, pp. 3184–3191, 2005.
[21] S. McIntire, E. Jorgensen, and H. Horvitz, “The gabaergic
nervous system of caenorhabditis elegans,” Nature, vol. 364,
pp. 334–337, 1993.
[22] J. Korta, D. A. Clark, C. V. Gabel, L. Mahadevan, and A. D. T.
Samuel, “Mechanosensation and mechanical load modulate
the locomotory gait of swimming c. elegans,” Journal of
Experimental Biology, vol. 210, p. 23832389, 2007.
[23] C. J. Cronin, J. E. Mendel, S. Mukhtar, Y.-M. Kim, R. C.
Stirbl, J. Bruck, and P. W. Sternberg, “An automated system
for measuring parameters of nematode sinusoidal movement,”
BMC Genetics, vol. 6, no. 5, February 2005.
[24] C. Bargmann and I. Mori, C. elegans II. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, 1997, ch. Chemotaxis and Thermotaxis.
[25] M. Driscoll and J. Kaplan, C. Elegans II.
Cold Springs
Harbor Laboratory Press, 1997, ch. Mechanotransduction.
[26] A. Stretton, R. David, J. Angstadt, J. Donmoyer, and C. John-
son, “Neural control of behavior in ascaris,” Trends in Neu-
roscience, vol. 8, pp. 294–300, 1985.
[27] E. Neibur and P. Erd¨os, “Theory of locomotion of nematodes:
Control of the somatic motor neurons by interneurons,”
Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 51–82, 1993.
[28] J. Bryden, “A simulation model of the locomotion controllers
for the nematode caenorhabditis elegans,” Master’s thesis,
University of Leeds, 2004.
[29] J. H. Boyle and N. Cohen, “Caenorhabditis elegans body wall
muscles are simple actuators,” Biosystems, vol. 94, pp. 170–
181, 2008.
92
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[30] S. Berri, J. H. Boyle, M. Tassieri, I. A. Hope, and N. Cohen,
“Forward locomotion of the nematode c. elegans is achieved
through the modulation of a single gait,” HSFP Journal,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 186–193, 2009.
[31] M. Suzuki, T. Tsuji, and H. Ohtake, “A dynamic body model
of the nematode c. elegans with touch-response circuit,” in
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics, 2005, pp. 538–543.
[32] M. R¨onkk¨o and G. Wong, “Modeling the c. elenags nematode
and its environment using a particle system,” Journal of
Theoretical Biology, vol. 253, pp. 316–322, 2008.
[33] T. Ferree, B. Marcotte, and S. Lockery, “Neural network
models of chemotaxis in the nematode caenorhabditis ele-
gans,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
M. Mozer, M. Jordan, and T. Petsche, Eds. MIT Press, 1997,
pp. 55–61.
[34] T. Ferree and S. Lockery, Computational Neuroscience:
Trends in Research.
Plenum Press, 1998, ch. Chemotaxis
Control by Linear Recurrent Networks.
[35] S. Wicks, , C. Roehrig, and C. Rankin, “A dynamic network
simulation of the nematode tap withdrawal circuit: Predica-
tions concerning synaptic function using behavioral criteria,”
The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 4017–4031,
1996.
[36] M. Powell, “Java monkey engine v2.0.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.jmonkeyengine.com
[37] R. Smith, “Open dynamics engine.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.ode.org
[38] O. S. Project, “Java monkey engine physics v2.0.” [Online].
Available: https://jmephysics.dev.java.net/
[39] D. Baraff, “Fast contact force computation for nonpenetrating
rigid bodies,” in Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 94, July 1994,
pp. 23–34.
[40] O.
S.
Project,
“Gazebo.”
[Online].
Available:
http://playerstage.sourceforge.net/index.php?src=gazebo
[41] AnyKode,
“Marilou.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.anykode.com
[42] Cyberbotics,
“Webots
v6.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cyberbotics.com/
[43] L. R. Varshney, B. L. Chen, E. Paniagua, D. H. Hall, and
D. B. Chklovskii, “Structural properties of the caenorhabditis
elegans
neuronal
network,”
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.citebase.org/abstract?id=oai:arXiv.org:0907.2373
[44] J. de Koning, G. de Groot, and G. J. van Ingen Schenau,
“Ice friction during speed skating,” Journal of Biomechanics,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 565–571, 1992.
[45] D. L. Riddle, T. Blumenthal, B. J. Meyer, and J. R. Priess,
C. elegans II.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1997,
ch. Introduction to C. elegans.
[46] N. Szewczyk, Basic Biology for Engineers.
NASA Ames,
2003, ch. Unit 4.2: C. elegans Biology.
[47] A. V. Hill, “The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants
of muscle,” in Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
ser. B, vol. 126, 1938, pp. 136–195.
[48] J. H. Boyle, J. Bryden, and N. Cohen, “An integrated neuro-
mechanical model of c. elegans forward locomotion,” in Neu-
ral Information Processing: 14th International Conference,
ICONIP 2007.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008,
pp. 37–47.
[49] S.-J. Park, M. B. Goodman, and B. L. Pruitt, “Analysis of
nematode mechanics by piezoresistive displacement clamp,”
in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 104,
no. 44, 2007, pp. 17 376–17 381.
[50] S. Brenner, “The genetics of caenorhabditis elegans,” Genet-
ics, vol. 77, pp. 71–94, 1974.
[51] W. Geng, P. Cosman, C. C. Berry, Z. Feng, and W. R. Schafer,
“Automatic tracking, feature extraction and classiﬁcation of
c. elegans phenotypes,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1811–1820, October 2004.
[52] M. Nixon and A. Aguado, Feature Extraction and Image
Processin, 2nd ed.
Academic Press, 2008.
[53] W. Deng, S. S. Iyengar, and N. E. Brener, “A fast parallel
thinning algorithm for the binary image skeltonization,” The
International Journal of High Performance Computing Appli-
cations, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 65–81, 2000.
[54] T. Zhang and C. Y. Suen, “A fast parallel algorithm for thin-
ning digital patterns,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 236–239, March 1984.
[55] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein,
Introduction to Algorithms (3rd ed.).
MIT Press., 2009, ch.
Chapter 25: All-Pairs Shortest Paths.
93
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

