A CTS2 Based Terminology Service for Managing Semantic Interoperability in the 
Italian Federated Electronic Health Record
Elena Cardillo and  Maria Teresa Chiaravalloti 
Institute of Informatics and Telematics 
National Research Council, IIT - CNR 
Rende, Italy 
Email: elena.cardillo@iit.cnr.it, maria.chiaravalloti@iit.cnr.it 
 
 
Abstract -  Semantic interoperability is crucial for data and 
document 
exchanges 
between 
and 
among 
Healthcare 
Information Systems, and to assure efficient communication 
among the different domain experts involved in the patient 
process of care. In this context, integrated terminology services 
offer the chance to manage clinical code systems, both 
standard and local, as well as value sets, through a series of 
functionalities such as searching, querying, import/export, 
cross-mapping, etc. This paper describes the approach used for 
the implementation of an integrated terminology service, 
namely Servizio Terminologico Integrato, in the Italian 
Federated Electronic Health Record setting. The service is 
based on Common Terminology Service Release 2 by Health 
Level 7, which is the main referenced standard in the domain 
and has the aim to support domain experts and healthcare 
organizations in managing medical terminologies for ensuring 
semantic interoperability. Preliminary tests show promising 
results and the usefulness of such a service, above all for the 
retrieval of coding systems mapping and updates. The main 
output of this paper is the implementation in the Italian 
healthcare setting of an open source, standard-based and 
bilingual 
integrated 
terminology 
service 
to 
support 
professionals and stakeholders in sharing, querying and 
maintaining official and up-to-date terminological artifacts. 
Keywords -  Code Systems; Semantic Interoperability; 
Terminology Services; Common Terminology Service Release 2 
(CTS2); Healthcare. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays interoperability is the word most commonly 
associated to e-health services. It essentially means that 
different systems are able to communicate among each other, 
exchange data, and, above all, reuse them. The general aim is 
ensuring a worldwide availability of information at the right 
time and place, in order to deliver better clinical services and 
improve healthcare. Interoperability is a required function for 
the proper use of Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems, 
which remain simple data containers if they do not have the 
chance to dialogue using the same language. Standardized 
coding systems are the lingua franca of medical data, as they 
allow to uniquely identify the same concept regardless of the 
language, synonyms or local names that could be used to 
refer them. The advantages of standards are commonly 
recognized and their usefulness increases over time as they 
are employed in numerous health-related Information 
Technology applications. Nonetheless, their use is not 
always as easy as it may appear and health professionals 
often complain about the lack of adequate support systems. 
Managing clinical terminologies is not only a matter of 
making them available to the users, but their management 
needs to include further functions to offer a complete 
plethora of services allowing a meaningful use of standards. 
To pursue this aim, there is the need for  a standard protocol 
to manage terminology standards in the same way across 
multiple healthcare facilities. This role is covered by 
integrated terminology services, which offer the possibility 
to interact with terminologies according to a series of 
standardized functionalities, such as research, hierarchical 
tree navigation, structured query, cross mapping.  
The objective of this paper, which is an invited extension 
of [1], is to describe the approach used for designing and 
developing an integrated terminology service, called STI 
(acronym of the Italian Servizio Terminologico Integrato), to 
provide support in the use of the clinical coding systems in 
the Italian Healthcare setting, in particular to ease the main 
functionalities that users, including both Regions and health 
facilities, and domain experts, could need in managing 
terminologies and codes in the documents required in the 
national federate EHR infrastructure (corresponding to the 
Italian acronym FSE, meaning “Fascicolo Sanitario 
Elettronico”), realized by the Italian National Research 
Council (CNR) in accordance with the Digital Italy Agency 
(AgID). This infrastructure allows the exchange of clinical 
documents among the regional EHR systems [2].  
In this framework, semantic interoperability is a non-
trivial issue, especially because, over time, regional and local 
coding systems and habits have proliferated. In [3] authors 
provide a detailed overview of the main issues for the 
semantic interoperability implementation in Italy. To provide  
general guidelines on the use of the FSE, the Prime Minister 
Decree No. 178/2015 [4] was issued, also making some 
medical terminologies mandatory, and detailing their use in 
the two kinds of documents (Patient Summary and 
Laboratory Report) included in the minimum unit expected 
in the FSE first implementation phase.  
To develop the STI terminology service, the standard 
protocol Common Terminology Services Rel. 2 (CTS2) [5] 
by Health Level 7 (HL7) was tested. 
75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The paper is organized as follows. Section II gives an 
overview of the state of the art on semantic interoperability 
and the main features of CTS2. Section III describes the 
material used within the Italian implementation of the STI 
system and Section IV addresses the content approach. 
Section V shows some preliminary results. Discussion and 
conclusions in Section VI close the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Semantic Interoperability: projects and initiatives 
The adjective semantic conveys the deep meaning of 
interoperability as it overcomes lexical and syntactical 
issues to deal with the meaning of the exchanged 
information. The best EHR system would be useless without 
semantic interoperability, as it could not unambiguously 
interpret data received from other systems. In fact, Semantic 
Interoperability in healthcare is defined as “the ability of a 
healthcare system to share information and have that 
information properly interpreted by the receiving system in 
the same sense as intended by the transmitting system” [6]. 
Projects 
and 
initiatives 
address 
the 
semantic 
interoperability issue trying to propose effective solutions to 
solve it. Regarding European Community (EU) initiatives 
and projects, it is worth mentioning the FP7 project 
Semantic Interoperability for Health Network, whose main 
aim was the implementation of the necessary infrastructure 
and 
governance 
to 
allow 
sustainable 
semantic 
interoperability of clinical and biomedical knowledge at the 
European level [7]. Furthermore, the EHR4CR project [8] 
dealt with the development of a semantic interoperability 
service platform, which includes a mediation model for 
multiple standards integration and harmonization. It was 
tested in 11 EHR systems of 5 EU Countries. Finally, the 
Trillium Bridge and Trillium Bridge II projects involve EU 
Countries and US for the creation of a shared model of an 
International Patient Summary (IPS), to improve semantic 
interoperability of e-health systems beyond EU borders [9].   
Also, international standards organizations proposed 
protocols for semantic interoperability. The main one is the 
CTS2 standard proposed in the Healthcare Service 
Specification Program (HSSP), a joint HL7 and Object 
Management Group (OMG) initiative [10], where HL7 
provided the requirements as a Service Functional Model 
(SFM), and OMG developed the formal specification of the 
standard. CTS2 is a cohesive model and specification for 
representing, accessing, querying, exchanging and updating 
terminological resources (e.g., Code Systems, Value Sets, 
Mappings), built on the RESTful (Representational state 
transfer) Architectural Style. More recently, HL7 proposed 
the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) 
Specification [11], another standard for exchanging 
healthcare information electronically, which, compared to 
the previous HL7 standards, is more consistent and easy to 
implement, thanks to its built-in extension mechanism to 
cover the needed content. In fact, specific use cases can be 
implemented by combining resources together through the 
use of resource references. 
In the literature, different initiatives aimed at developing 
terminology 
integration 
platforms 
or 
services 
were 
launched. Initial studies and applications focused, for 
example, on the use of the Unified Medical Language 
System (UMLS) Metathesaurus, developed by the US 
National Library of Medicine [12], which includes more 
than 100 biomedical vocabularies integrated on the basis of 
a common Semantic Network and mapped among them. 
Researchers use 
UMLS 
to create knowledge-based 
representation for controlled terminologies of clinical 
information 
and 
to 
extract 
and 
validate 
semantic 
relationships. Particularly relevant are also the HETOP 
terminology service [13] and the LexGrid initiative [14]. 
The former includes cross lingual multi-terminological 
mappings on a semantic basis, while the latter promotes the 
use of common terminology models to accommodate 
multiple vocabulary and ontology distribution formats, as 
well as the support of multiple data storing for federated 
vocabulary distribution. On the contrary, PyMedTermino 
[15] implements a generic model and has a separate 
database for each terminology to be included into the 
service. This allows for better preservation of the original 
architecture of each terminology and the easy integration of 
post coordinated terminologies. PyMedTermino supports 
advanced operations, such as derived queries, on the 
concepts set, which are not usually feasible into other 
terminology services. Nonetheless, its limits are: exclusive 
Python implementation, no OWL ontologies link, low 
quality of the UMLS mapping. Luna et al. [16] describe the 
implementation of an interinstitutional and transnational 
Remote Terminology Service, which uses local interface 
terminologies (in the form of a thesaurus) mapped to 
reference 
terminologies 
(such 
as 
the 
Systematized 
Nomenclature of Medicine - Clinical Terms, namely 
SNOMED-CT) to allow users to enter free text diagnosis 
and procedures and get back coded content. It is also 
possible to select preferred reference terminology among the 
standardized clinical classification systems, as the service 
uses the SNOMED-CT cross matchings. The service reveals 
its 
utility 
in 
polysemy, 
synonyms 
and 
acronyms 
management, but it is only available for Spanish.  
In the last few years, much effort has been spent on the 
application of the abovementioned CTS2 standard to 
develop terminology services, such as that realized by the 
Mayo Clinic Informatics, which is the most internationally 
relevant [10]. D2Refine Workbench platform, for example, 
aimed at standardizing and harmonizing clinical study data 
dictionaries [17]. Focused on laboratory catalogues, the 
experience of the Partners HealthCare System of Boston, 
applies the CTS2 Upper Level Class Model to represent and 
harmonize the structure of both local laboratory order 
dictionaries and reference terminologies [18]. Peterson et al. 
presented, instead, a design user-centered approach, based 
on the use of Extraction, Transformation and Loading (ETL) 
76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

procedures in CTS2-based terminology services [19]. The 
main advantages of this service are: i) adaptability, ii) 
interoperability, 
because 
of 
the 
numerous 
standard 
vocabularies included, iii) usability, since it is focused on 
users’ needs. In the wake of these projects, we propose a 
multi-layer CTS2 implementation that is not only based on 
ETL procedures, but also allows mapping (and their 
validation) between local dictionaries and standardized code 
systems, including semantic enrichment through external 
ontological references.  
Interesting applications of CTS2 can also be found in the 
European context, where the main implementation is the 
Standard Terminology Services (STS) provided by the 
French non-profit development standards and services 
organization PHAST [20]. Other implementations are the 
following: the Austrian national patient health record 
ELGA, where all relevant clinical terminologies are 
provided through a CTS2-conformant terminology server 
[21]; and the Terminology Server, realized by the University 
of Applied Science of Dortmund, which also offers a 
collaboration environment to develop terminologies in a 
team [22]. Finally, in Italy, the existing implementations of 
CTS2-based terminology services are proprietary solutions, 
i.e., the Distributed Terminology Assets Management 
system (DITAM), a software designed by Codices-
Noemalife that offers standard terminology services through 
a federate architecture [23]; and the HQuantum (a spin-off 
of the University of Genova) with the Health Terminology 
Service (HTS) [24], which is especially focused on the 
management and integration of local laboratory data through 
the LOINC standard. These two solutions were evaluated as 
non-fitting for the purpose of our project because they are 
subject to license, while the FSE project required an open 
and reusable solution. Furthermore, they were, at the time of 
the initial efforts on this activity, only partially developed 
and tested, and this would have implied a lot of 
customization effort. 
B. CTS2 HL7 overview 
As stated in the ANSI/HL7 V3 CTS R2-2015 standard 
[5], “the HL7 Common Terminology Services (HL7 CTS) is 
an API specification that is intended to describe the basic 
functionalities that will be needed by HL7 Version 3 
software implementations to query and access terminological 
content. It is specified as an Application Programming 
Interface (API) rather than a set of data structures to enable a 
wide variety of terminological content to be integrated within 
the HL7 Version 3 messaging framework without the need 
for significant migration or rewrite”. The standard, currently, 
consists of: 
 
CTS2 Normative Edition v1.0 and the Service 
Functional 
Model 
(SFM), 
which 
serve 
as 
Functional Requirements Documents, defining the 
capabilities, 
responsibilities, 
inputs, 
outputs, 
expected behavior and a set of core functionalities 
to support the management, maintenance, and 
interaction with ontologies and medical vocabulary 
systems. 
 
CTS2 Technical Specification, which serves as a 
technical specification document to define the 
precise API interface specifications for CTS2 
implementation compliance in Simple Object 
Access Protocol (SOAP). 
The CTS2 Information Model specifies the structural 
definition, attributes and associations of Resources common 
to structured terminologies such as Code Systems, Binding 
Domains and Value Sets. In particular, in the CTS2 Service 
Functional Model the following semantic entities are 
distinguished (see [5] for details): 
 
Code Systems – defined as a collection of codes 
with associated designations and meanings. To 
meet the requirements of a code system as defined 
by HL7, a given code must refer to one and only 
one meaning within the code system. A code 
system in CTS2 Functional Model can be of 
different types:  
o 
Set of codes – a flat list of code/term pairs; 
o 
List of terms – a set of words (or tokens), 
each one associated with an unambiguous 
definition, if used in a specific context; 
o 
Thesaurus – a controlled vocabulary, i.e., a 
(semi-) structured set of words or locutions 
(structured 
according 
to 
semantic 
relations) whose aim is to allow and 
facilitate 
information 
retrieval 
and 
navigation; 
o 
Classification 
system 
– 
a 
set 
of 
hierarchically organized categories or 
classes used to organize and aggregate data 
in a specific domain of knowledge or for a 
specific aim; 
o 
Ontology – a formal representation or a 
conceptualization of a given domain of 
reality. 
 
Value Sets – defined as uniquely identifiable sets of 
valid concept representations (Codes), where any 
concept representation can be tested to determine 
whether or not it is a member of the value set. More 
practically, they are subsets of codes, classes or 
descriptions of entities selected from one or more 
code systems and grouped for a specific purpose 
(e.g., a value set of units of measures, a value set of 
anatomical parts, etc.). 
 
Maps – a set of formal rules that permits concepts 
(EntityDescription) transcoding from a starting 
value set or code system to a second one. 
 
Concept Domains – metasyntactic variables in 
database models, messages or other representative 
forms. 
 
Entity Description – the definition of a concept in 
the context of a particular terminological system. 
 
Association – the semantic statement (subject – 
predicate – object) that associates entities within the 
same code systems or in different code systems. 
77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
The Computational Model specifies the services 
descriptions and interfaces needed to access and maintain 
structured terminologies. The main CTS2 profiles and 
functionalities are: 
a) Search/Query 
Profile: 
i.e., 
“read-only” 
functionalities and availability of the resources to 
the client. It includes: reading of a resource, a code 
or a concept; browsing or visualization of the tree of 
a resource; the download of a resource. 
b) Terminology Administration Profile: i.e., “write” 
administrative functionalities. It includes: import of 
a resource; creation of mappings between the 
imported resources; the possibility to use updates 
and notifications. 
c) Terminology Authoring Profile: i.e., “read-write” 
functionalities. They are intended for an application 
used by specialized users (e.g., translators, or 
domain 
experts) 
to 
create 
and 
maintain 
terminological resources. 
More specifically: 
 
Read – is the direct access to the contents of a 
resource via URI, local identifier or, where 
applicable, a combination of an abstract resource 
identifier and version tag (e.g., LOINC/Current 
version). 
 
Query – is the ability to access, combine and filter 
lists of resources based on their content and user 
context. 
 
Import and Export – correspond to the ability to 
import external content into the service and/or 
export the contents of the service in different 
formats. 
 
Update – is the ability to validate load sets of 
changes into the service that updates its content. 
 
History – is the ability to determine what changes 
occurred over stated periods of time. 
 
Maintenance – is the ability to create and commit 
sets of changes. 
 
Temporal – is the ability to query on the state of the 
service at a given point in the past (or in the future). 
 
Specialized – are service specific functions such as 
the association reasoning services, the map entry 
services and the resolved value set services. 
The CTS2 Development Framework is a development 
kit for rapidly creating CTS2 compliant applications. It 
allows users to create plugins, which may be loaded into the 
Development Framework to provide REST Web Services 
that use CTS2 compliant paths and model objects. Since it is 
plugin based, users are only required to implement the 
functionality that is exclusive to their environment. Thus, 
CTS2 
Development 
Framework 
provides 
all 
the 
infrastructures and utilities to help users create plugins. 
Given the short time available to develop the service, in this 
work, we reused the mentioned CTS2 Development 
Framework toolkit provided by Mayo Clinic Informatics 
[10] available from Github, which is useful for rapidly 
creating CTS2 compliant applications, and, at the moment, 
it is recognized as the most complete and documented. 
Furthermore, the community that uses the Development 
Framework is wide and quite reactive. 
III. 
MATERIAL 
The terminology service was designed taking into 
account both the CTS2 main functionalities requirements 
and the structures of the medical coding systems required by 
the law. More specifically, the standards to be used are: 
 
ICD-9-CM (International Classification of Diseases 
– 9th revision – Clinical Modifications) [25], 
developed by the World Health Organization 
(WHO): its use is required in the Patient Summary 
for coding relevant and chronic diseases, in 
Prescriptions and in Discharge Letters for coding 
diagnoses; 
 
ATC 
(Anatomical 
Therapeutic 
Chemical 
Classification) [26], developed and maintained by 
the WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics 
Methodology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health: 
its use is required in the Patient Summary for 
coding adverse reactions to food and medication, 
the medication plan, and vaccinations; 
 
AIC (Autorizzazione all’Immissione in Commercio) 
[27], developed and maintained by the Italian 
Medicines Agency (AIFA): as for ATC, its use is 
required in the Patient Summary for coding adverse 
reactions to medication, the medication plan, and 
vaccinations; 
 
LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and 
Codes) [28], developed by the Regenstrief Institute 
Inc.  in Indianapolis: its use is required in the 
Laboratory Report for coding performed tests and 
their specialty or class. LOINC codes are also used 
for identifying the clinical document type, when it is 
structured according to the HL7 Clinical Document 
Architecture rel.2 (CDA2). 
As each resource has a different structure, the most 
suitable solution was integrating them into the STI 
Knowledge Base allowing the correct visualization and 
searching into each of them. ICD-9-CM, for example, is a 
classification, which has a hierarchical tree structure so in 
the visualization it needed the use of indentations and 
expandable/collapsible branches for navigating the tree; 
LOINC, instead, is more like a nomenclature, without any 
hierarchical structure (codes are progressive and not 
informative). Furthermore, each LOINC code has associated 
numerous information to be visualized, which are 
discriminative in choosing a code rather than another, so it 
was necessary to realize a personalized form to access 
LOINC code details (e.g., System, Scale, Method, etc.).  
As further explained in Section IV.B, a great deal of 
effort was spent on the collection of the different versions of 
each standard and on the re-structuring of the available files 
according to the CTS2 concept model, to integrate them in 
the STI Knowledge Base. In addition to the standard 
78
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

terminologies required by the law, some other resources, 
such as value sets and local files mapped to the code 
systems, were integrated into STI. The first type includes 
files of synonyms of LOINC and ICD-9-CM terms, which 
could be used as further research items to find a specific 
code. For the second type, local files mapped to the code 
systems were included in STI because they are useful as 
both basis of comparison for who is working on the same 
type of mapping and collector of local synonyms of the 
official terms used in the standard clinical terminologies. At 
the moment, the service includes: 
 
106 local tests from 6 different laboratories in the 
Umbria Region mapped to LOINC 2.54; 
 
154 local tests from a laboratory in the Campania 
Region mapped to LOINC 2.34; 
 
1071 local tests from 6 different laboratories in the 
Calabria region mapped to LOINC 2.54. 
IV. 
APPROACH 
The proposed solution consists of a standard-based and 
web-based distributed software infrastructure, which was 
required to be designed open and extendable. It aims to 
support the production, integration, maintenance, and use of 
the terminological resources according to the CTS2 protocol. 
To design and develop the terminology service, an Agile 
methodology was applied. This led to an iterative 
development of the system functionalities, starting from the 
core ones and continuing with further iterations in the 
process of analysis and development. Each iteration and 
progress in the design and development of the functionalities 
were submitted to tests by terminology and domain experts. 
A. STI Architecture 
The STI Architecture (Figure 1) was designed and 
realized by using Full Open Source integrated components: 
 
Liferay 6.2. CE [29] as environment to create the 
Web Application. It manages simultaneous user 
accesses, content versioning and classification. The 
platform functionalities were realized through the 
development of appropriate portlet allowing the 
management of: i) search and visualization of code 
systems; ii) administration management of import 
and elimination of code systems. 
 
Kettle (Pentaho Data Integration) [30], used to 
realize ETL procedures for data integration during 
data migration from different Database Management 
Systems. ETL procedures include: i) heterogeneous 
data 
aggregation; 
ii) 
data 
transport 
and 
transformation, 
by 
performing 
data 
cleaning 
operations, or scheduled-based data storing, on the 
destination database. ETL procedures are mostly 
used in the construction and population of the 
Knowledge Base. 
 
Virtuoso Open Source Edition [31], developed by 
OpenLink, used for the management of ontologies 
and data in RDF. RDF data can be queried through 
SPARQL endpoints, to facilitate the connection with 
structured dataset derived from other sources.  
 
CKAN [32], for the management and publication of 
Open Data. This open source software allows for 
cataloging datasets and describes them across a 
range of metadata that, on the one hand, help users to 
navigate through information, and on the other hand, 
facilitate indexing of the same datasets on search 
engines. In the present work CKAN is useful to 
export data (i.e., resources in STI) in the Open Data 
format and to publish them on open data platforms. 
Strengths of this architecture and implementation are: i) 
all the components are open source; ii) it is scalable, modular 
and easy to maintain; iii) it is installable on open 
environment without the need for a license. 
B. The STI Knowledge Base 
The implementation of the STI Knowledge Base started 
with the integration of the basic elements, represented by the 
code systems. They were processed by ETL procedures, in 
order to enrich them with knowledge derived from external 
services. The modeling of the basic entities contained in 
these code systems (i.e., medical concepts) was made 
through Porting on the Database. 
The definition of the STI Knowledge Base was based on 
four application layers: 1) the Data layer; 2) the Integration 
layer; 3) the Semantic layer (or Interoperability layer); and 
4) the Presentation layer. 
1) The Data layer: it is represented by the CTS2 
Conceptual Model, for the representation of the different 
types of resources and semantic relationships, and by a 
relational database, containing the useful facilities to 
integrate the resources, in particular code systems, in 
compliance with CTS2. Each concept of the code systems 
represents the basic entity that composes the atomic 
information of the conceptual model and is classified 
according to the structure defined in the HL7 standard, in 
XML format. In the STI Knowledge Base, the main code 
systems and terminology standards, described in Section III, 
are included in different versions after a readaptation of 
their structure to the CTS2 model, but at the same time, 
maintaining their specifications. In particular, versions of 
the code systems included in the STI Knowledge Base are:  
 
ICD-9-CM Italian 2007 version, counting more than 
16,000 codes. Since the official CSV file distributed 
by the Ministry of Health is incomplete (it includes 
only the hierarchical structure, thus the codes and 
the label of the diagnoses), it was necessary to 
integrate it. To this aim, we reused an ontological 
version of the system that was built for another 
project, where each ICD-9-CM code has multiple 
associated information: i) official description, ii) 
alternative 
descriptions, 
i.e., 
synonyms, 
iii) 
inclusions criteria, iv) exclusions criteria, v) 
information about the coding of a primary diagnosis 
vi) information about the coding of additional 
diagnoses, vii) further notes. In order to provide 
access to this additional information, a customized 
form for ICD-9-CM code details was built.
79
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 1. STI Architecture – Deployment Diagram 
 
 
 
LOINC Italian and English versions 2.34 (required 
by the cited Decree), 2.52, 2.54, 2.56, 2.58, 2.61 and 
2.63 (it includes the latest updates of the system, 
released in December 2017). See Table I for details 
about LOINC terms. In order to correctly integrate 
LOINC in the STI Knowledge Base, we needed to 
upload, for each version, three CSV files: i) the 
Italian DB, LOINC_IT (it has limited number of 
fields associated to each code, with respect to the 
English 
version); 
ii) 
the 
English 
database, 
LOINC_DB (whose structure and fields changed 
several times over successive versions), and iii) the 
file including the changes of the mapping codes 
from one version to another, named Map_to. 
Regarding the LOINC_DB, it was necessary to 
make all the versions compliant with the structure of 
the last updates (v. 2.63) and to align the CSV of the 
Italian version to the same structure.  
 
AIC January 2017 version (the latest available 
updates on the AIFA website [27] at this time, 
including more than 18,000 medicines codes). 
More specifically, AIC related files are published 
on the AIFA website as separate files according to 
the type of drugs. In particular, there are four 
different CSV files: i) equivalent_medicines file, 
which includes for each AIC code the mapping to 
the active ingredient and thus the corresponding 
ATC code; ii) Class_A_medicines, including 
essential medicines and those for chronic illnesses 
(some of them can also appear in the equivalent 
medicines file); iii) Class_H_medicines, including 
medicines used only in hospital facilities, which 
can therefore not be sold in public pharmacies 
(some of them can also appear in the equivalent 
medicines file); and iv) Class_C_medicines, 
including drugs that are not licensed by the Italian 
National Health Service and are therefore to be 
paid by patients (all AIC codes in this file are 
mapped to the corresponding ATC code). These 
four files were separately integrated into the STI 
Knowledge Base and ETL processes were used to 
clean and normalize data, in order to avoid 
concepts overlap.  
 
ATC Italian 2014 version (the latest one freely 
available at this time), which counts about 5,000 
codes. As for ICD-9-CM, access and navigation of 
the ATC classification tree was provided. 
As AIC and ATC cover the same semantic area, a cross 
mapping file is constantly updated and available, but not in 
the form of a unique CSV file with 1-1 mappings. As 
mentioned above, in fact, only two of the four collected files 
contain mappings to ATC. In order to create a complete 1-1 
mappings file, ETL processes were trained to perform 
mapping extraction processes from the data into the 
Knowledge Base. Figure 2 shows the ETL process related to 
the import of AIC and ATC and the extraction of their 
mappings.
 
80
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 2. Mappings extraction via ETL: AIC – ATC example 
 
As can be observed, the main job is MAPPING ATC-
AIC. From the previous ETL job, expanding the 
transformation “Import Mapping ATC AIC” we obtain the 
transformation to import mapping data extracted from the 
Database (4 files of AIC and ATC). In particular, where an 
explicit mapping in the different CSV files was not 
available, it was created by matching the active ingredient 
of the medicine and by querying external resources (i.e., the 
AIFA drugs database) in case of ambiguities (i.e., multiple 
AIC codes associated to one active ingredient), the status 
changes in AIC, and ATC code updates (considered that we 
did not use the latest version of the system in our 
Knowledge Base). The final mapping file establishes 
mappings from one ATC code to multiple AIC codes, in 
fact AIC uniquely identifies branded medications while 
ATC encodes the medication active ingredient. This file was 
stored as a Mapping resource into the STI in order to give 
the chance to have a cross reference between the two code 
systems. In the Semantic layer, the basic information 
included in the code systems is enriched by semantic 
content and correlations derived from the Integration layer. 
Table I gives some statistics about the content integrated in 
STI Knowledge Base. As observable, not all the code 
systems are mapped, except for the AIC – ATC, and some 
local catalogues mapped to LOINC. Since we did not find 
official and available mappings between the other resources, 
we provided, as explained in Section V, a functionality to 
edit mappings directly on the STI platform, under specific 
permissions and subjected to validation by administration 
users. 
 
 TABLE I. STI KNOWLEDGE BASE STATISTICS 
Resources 
Version 
N. of Concepts 
(En) 
N. of Concepts 
(It) 
LOINC 
2.34 
+ 60,000 
43,152 
LOINC 
2.52 
+ 72,000 
58,045 
LOINC 
2.54 
+ 73,000 
61,419 
LOINC 
2.56 
 80,000 
60,837 
LOINC 
2.58 
+ 80,000 
63,367 
LOINC 
2.61 
 85,000 
63,367 
LOINC 
2.63 
+ 86,500 
66,204 
ICD-9-CM 
2007 
16,100 
16,100 
ATC 
2014 
- 
5,530 
AIC 
January 
2017 
- 
18,309 
Umbria_laboratories 
tests 
Catalogues 
- 
LOINC 2.54 Mapping 
2016 
- 
106 
Campania_laboratory
_tests 
Catalogue 
- 
LOINC 2.34 Mapping 
2012 
- 
154 
Calabria_laboratories 
tests 
Catalogues 
– 
LOINC 2.54 Mapping 
2016 
- 
1,071 
AIC – ATC Mapping 
2017 
- 
18,309 
Total 
 
+ 571,500 
475,970 
2) The Integration layer: it is used for the phase of 
design and modelling of the data transformation process, 
81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

semantic enrichment by means of external endpoints, and 
for the internal organization of data in the Knowledge Base. 
To this aim, we used the Kettle component and ETL 
procedures. In STI, ETL is a key process to bring all the 
data derived from code systems, which are heterogeneous in 
their structures and formats, in a standard, homogeneous 
environment. In particular, during the transformation phase, 
imported code systems are manipulated to be compatible 
with the target system (CTS2 model). In some cases, the 
necessary transformation rules are trivial, but in other 
situations (as happened for AIC and LOINC files, which 
changed database structures over successive releases) it may 
be necessary to sort, unite, and aggregate data. Pentaho 
Kettle provides a wizard that guides in the migration 
process, defining the source database server, the destination 
one, the mapping of the data types, and so forth, so that 
migration does not cause data loss. 
The population of the Knowledge Base can be: 
 
manual, through the Web Application interface, by 
means of the compilation of specific forms and the 
selection of the relationships and classifications in 
the Knowledge Base; 
 
through Rest services. The system will allow to 
import resources within the Knowledge Base; 
 
semi-automatic, through the use of specific ETL 
systems that guarantee the information extraction 
and enrichment by querying external services, and 
finally adding the data to modelled knowledge. 
3) The Semantic layer: it is based on the use of 
ontologies to extend data related to the atomic units 
(concepts in STI) with external components that have the 
related knowledge (e.g., the ontologies related to LOINC or 
ICD-9-CM concepts available in Bioportal [33]). To this 
aim, the Virtuoso platform was used. In particular, for each 
LOINC, ATC, or ICD-9-CM concept, it is possibile to query 
the Virtuoso platform in order to retrieve additional 
semantic/ontological information (e.g., the semantic type 
class of the LOINC concept Hemoglobin A, code “45208-6” 
is Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein, or for example the 
LOINC concept Aciclovir, code “1-8”, is a pharmaceutical 
substance whose semantic type is Nucleic Acid, Nucleoside, 
or Nucleotide). 
4) The Presentation layer:  it is the interface that uses 
the Knowledge Base, characterized by the conceptual 
entities and enriched by a series of information. In 
particular, each concept in the Knowledge Base was 
enriched by the following information provided by using 
different panels in the interface: 
 
code details, including information derived from 
the structure of the code system;  
 
status and versioning, including information on the 
changes of the status of a code and on the different 
versions available in the system; 
 
relationships, including the relationships of a 
precise concept to other concepts in the code 
systems (e.g., the hierarchical relationships of the 
three digit ICD-9-CM code 282 Hereditary 
hemolytic anemias to its leaf codes, etc.); 
 
mapping, where all the mappings of the selected 
code/concept to other resources available in the 
STI Knowledge Base are visualized, if present; 
 
HL7 Specifications, including information needed 
to exchange data according to HL7 standard, i.e., 
Code, Code System OID, Code System Name, 
Code System Version, and concept Display Name; 
 
ontology, which gives access to the components 
LodView, to visualize the RDF data of a concept, 
and LodLive, to navigate the graph of a concept in 
the ontology derived from the external resource 
Bioportal. 
An important aspect of the STI Knowledge Base is that 
all the resources, where applicable, were imported in 
bilingual versions. In particular, LOINC, ATC and ICD-9-
CM are available in English and in their official Italian 
version. The Italian version is in most cases aligned to the 
corresponding English one. Exceptions are LOINC, where 
the Italian translation, as all other international LOINC 
translations, is always aligned to the previous LOINC 
English version; and the Italian translation of ATC, 
available in the system as version 2014, since it was not 
possible to collect the last Italian updates by the responsible 
government agencies. 
C. Web services development  
Considering the CTS2 functionalities described in 
Section II.A, we selected and implemented the following 
services in STI: 
 
Reading: reads the list of resources in STI and 
shows complete information on a single resource; 
 
Search: allows to search the resources for 
keywords or in particular fields thanks to the 
application of personalized filters; 
 
Import: allows to import the resources (being them 
code systems, value sets or mappings) into the 
Knowledge Base; the dataset within the CKAN 
component; RDF/OWL graphs into the Virtuoso 
triple store; 
 
Export: allows to export complete resources or the 
results of specific queries in CSV or JSON 
formats; 
 
Update: allows the editing of the Knowledge Base 
content; 
 
Mapping: allows the visualization of the existing 
mappings or the editing of new cross-mappings 
between the resources in STI; 
 
Editorial workflow: allows the approval of a 
particular resource or change in the Knowledge 
Base, as well as the validation of new mappings 
created by users with special permissions. The 
82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

validation can be carried out only by administrative 
users. 
The listed services are to be used through specific Rest 
Services useful for the reuse of the STI functionalities and 
for the interoperability with other systems. They will allow 
interoperability 
among 
the 
systems 
Liferay-CKAN-
Virtuoso. For the development of these services, the Spring 
Web MVC framework was used. It provides Model-View-
Controller (MVC) architecture and ready components that 
can be used to develop flexible and loosely coupled Web 
applications. The MVC pattern results in separating the 
different aspects of the application (input logic, business 
logic, and UI logic), while providing a loose coupling 
between these elements.  
In a Linked Data perspective, STI service allows 
semantic enrichment of a resource, thus obtaining 
relationships with related resources, by querying exposed 
SPARQL endpoint, such as the Bioportal one. 
D. Web Application Development 
Regarding the Web Application, the system covers the 
following functionalities: 
 
User 
registration, 
authentication, 
roles 
and 
permissions management. 
 
CMS management (platform browsing management, 
content and versioning management, etc.). 
 
Multilingualism/bilingualism 
management 
(possibility to switch from Italian to English 
language when browsing a resource). 
 
Resource utilization by means of the Reading Web 
service. 
 
Search of one or more resources or concepts by 
means of the Search Web service. 
 
Resource and workflow management. 
 
Import and Export. 
 
Mapping between resources. 
 
Use 
of 
ontological 
resources 
and 
graphs 
visualization by means of Lodlive. 
 
Browsing of the RDF resources with LodView, 
linked to the Virtuoso SPARQL endpoint. 
 
Use of SPARQL endpoint for the resources stored in 
Virtuoso. Virtuoso will expose the resources in the 
RDF/TTL format via the SPARQL endpoint, 
allowing the most technical and expert users to make 
more sophisticated queries. 
 
Management of the STI dataset imported in CKAN. 
The Web Application allows to navigate the available 
resources according to the type (i.e., Code System, Value 
Set, Mapping). After the selection of a specific resource, 
depending on the original structure, it is possible to navigate 
the hierarchical tree, to directly select a code and visualize 
its details; or to search on the selected code system by using 
filters or full text search. It has to be noticed that when 
looking for a specific LOINC code, the service returns not 
only the exact matched code but also all the LOINC codes 
that have been redirected to it for guiding the users’ 
mapping choices. This is particularly useful as it shows at 
the same time and for the same concept deprecated or 
discouraged terms and their correspondent new reference 
code, facilitating also double check and updates of the 
already performed mappings. The interface of the 
navigation functionality was built taking inspiration from  
the cited Terminology Server, the CTS2 implementation 
provided by the abovementioned University of Applied 
Sciences and Arts of Dortmund. 
V. 
RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
STI service was released in its beta version in April 
2017, as both Web service and Web application. It contains 
four standard code systems, which are those prescribed by 
the Law Decree regarding FSE, in their Italian and English 
versions, and also some mapping resources (local mapping 
to LOINC and AIC-ATC mappings). They can be accessed 
through the CTS2 main functionalities, such as searching, 
querying, navigation. Versions available are both those 
fixed by the cited law (i.e., LOINC 2.34 – December 2010) 
and the most recent ones (i.e., LOINC 2.63 – December 
2017), so users can choose which one best fits their needs.  
The service is open to the possibility of uploading 
additional code systems, mapping and value sets. They will 
be integrated, as it was for the four standards already 
available in the STI, taking into account their peculiar 
structure so to ensure a proper use of them. Furthermore, 
more local files mapped to the standard code systems can be 
uploaded by the system administrators after validation of 
their correctness. Regarding the mapping, there is also the 
chance, for users with special permissions (e.g., physicians, 
laboratory technicians, etc.), to create mappings between the 
available resources directly through the STI platform by 
using the Cross-Mapping functionality. During the cross-
mapping, users have to qualify the mapping that they are 
creating between two concepts belonging to two different 
code systems, by selecting the type of association between 
the two selected concepts (e.g., choosing if two concepts are 
synonyms, clinically correlated, or if one is the hypernym of 
the other, etc.). These cross-mappings, in any case, will be 
validated by the system administrators before becoming 
effective and saved in the STI Knowledge Base. Regarding 
the interoperability services, as said in Section IV, STI 
allows external applications, e.g., other terminology services 
installed at a regional level, to make requests to the Web 
service, which are those provided by the CTS2. In 
particular, the following examples are given: 
1. Entity Description Query Service 
Example: Search the entity “Immunoglobulina” in the 
code systems ICD-9-CM and LOINC: 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/entities?matchvalu
e=immunoglobulina&page=0&maxtoreturn=20&co
desystem=ICD9-CM  
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/entities?matchvalu
e=immunoglobulina&page=0&maxtoreturn=20&co
desystem=LOINC&format=json 
 
83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
2. Code System Version 
Example: LOINC version 2.56: 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/codesystem/LOIN
C/version/2.56/entities?matchvalue=immunoglobuli
na&page=0&maxtoreturn=20&format=json 
3. Entity Description Read Service 
Example: Read the detailed information of AIC code 
19227038: 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/codesystem/AIC/v
ersion/16.01.2017/entity/AIC:19227038 
4. Association Query Service 
Example 1: Existing cross-mapping associated to the 
ATC v. 2014 code “B02AA01”. 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/associations?list=tr
ue&codesystemversion=2014&sourceortargetentity
=B02AA01&format=json 
Example 2: List of mappings between the code systems 
LOINC v. 2.54 and ATC v. 2014 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/associations?list=tr
ue&changesetcontext=LOINC 
(2.54) 
- 
ATC 
(2014)&format=json 
5. Entity Description Query Service 
Example: List of mappings between a local code system 
(e.g., Umbria) and LOINC v. 2.54: 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/codesystem/LOIN
C/version/2.54/entities?page=0&maxtoreturn=250&
matchvalue=LOCAL_CODE_LIST:Umbria&forma
t=json 
6. Export Service 
Example: Export in JSON format the Italian version of 
LOINC v. 2.58 and of AIC v. January 2017: 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/exporter?codesyste
m=LOINC:2.58&language=it&format=json 
 
http://sti.iit.cnr.it/cts2framework/exporter?codesyste
m=AIC:16.01.2017&aictype=classe_h 
The developed terminology service also has a FAQ 
section including the most common questions about code 
systems used in the FSE setting, questions about the Service 
and CTS2 itself, and finally, a Documentation section where 
it 
is 
possible 
to 
consult 
or 
download 
technical 
documentation about the service, such as the User Manual, 
documents related to the STI design and development, and a 
tutorial explaining its use and functionalities. 
In order to test the functionalities and suitability of STI, 
we recruited a sample of test users, belonging to some of the 
Italian Regions that already implemented the FSE 
infrastructure. 
On 
one 
hand, 
we 
provided 
special 
permissions to Domain Experts (e.g., General Practitioners 
and Laboratory technicians) in order to let them use both 
free functionalities (e.g., concept search, navigation of the 
resources, download) and the Cross-Mapping functionality, 
to create clinical/semantic mappings directly through STI. 
On the other hand, we asked regional technical referent 
users to query the Web service from their local application 
to make requests such as those provided above (e.g., to have 
the list of all the map_to codes in order to verify if some of 
their mappings changed the LOINC reference code). Figure 
3 and Figure 4 show respectively the search and cross-
mapping activities performed by a domain expert (more 
specifically a Laboratory technician) for the concept  
Glucose.
 
 
Figure 3. STI Web Application screenshots showing the Search functionality for the concept “Glucose” in LOINC 
Parameters: 
* matchvalue= a string for fulltext search or a query in the Lucene 
syntax for more complex search on indexed fields 
* page= page number (starting from 0) 
* maxtoreturn= number of elements per page  
* codesystem= code system to query (mandatory) 
* codesystemversion= code system version to query (optional) 
* format= required format (e.g., "json") 
84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 4. STI Web Application screenshots showing the Cross-mapping between the LOINC code 2339-0 “Glucose” and ICD-9-CM 
 
In a Linked Data perspective, the STI users with 
appropriate permissions are able to manage graphs and, in 
the future, will be able to import data in RDF format within 
the 
STI 
Virtuoso 
platform. 
To 
support 
Virtuoso, 
OpenRefine is proposed [34], for guaranteeing the 
connection to ontology models, and thus the connection of 
the CSV fields in the STI DBMS to the corresponding RDF. 
Figure 5 shows a scheme that clarifies this workflow. This 
will permit to access and reuse STI resource in additional 
and innovative ways:  
 
through the browsing of RDF resources using 
LodView, which will be connected to the SPARQL 
endpoint of STI Virtuoso platform; 
 
through LodLive, allowing the user to navigate and 
explore a graph within the Linked Data Cloud, as 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 5. Data import scheme within the STI Virtuoso platform and graphs browsing 
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

. 
 
 
Figure 6. Navigation of the graph related to the concept “Diabete Mellito” in the resources exposed by STI Virtuoso. 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
This paper describes the design and development of a 
bilingual (Italian – English) integrated terminology 
service, named STI, based on the CTS2 HL7 standard. 
The service includes for now the four code systems 
required by the FSE Law Decree, but it is open to the 
possibility to integrate further terminologies in the future.  
Designing a terminology service is a non-trivial 
pursuit, especially 
when resources 
with different 
structures need to be integrated and available for different 
uses. This was the first issue of this work, as it required a 
personalized design and implementation for each code 
system uploaded into the STI Knowledge Base. For 
example, LOINC has multiple informative axes, which 
were reported into both the main visualization screen (the 
six fundamental axes) and an openable window tagged 
with different labels. Nonetheless, importing LOINC into 
the service was challenging because its database structure 
changes 
as 
versions 
evolve. 
So, 
a 
preliminary 
normalization step was carried out in order to uniform 
names and values of the fields of the different versions. 
Moreover, when dealing with AIC, as the system is 
released in four separate files, ETL procedures needed to 
be trained to import each of them every time there is an 
update, and check if mappings to ATC are present in the 
new AIC files or if they need to be extracted by following 
the procedure described in Section IV.B.2). All the above 
mentioned issues are an obstacle to the flexibility and 
scalability of the service. Furthermore, it was not always 
easy finding updated versions of the four code systems, 
especially in computable format, such as CSV files, and 
for some of them both master English and translated 
Italian files are not available (i.e., ATC). The chance to 
visualize 
ontology 
representation 
of 
the 
clinical 
terminologies is not usable for all the versions of the 
systems. This is an interesting possibility offered by the 
STI that needs to be improved in the future releases of the 
service. Efficiency and effectiveness of an EHR also 
depend on the possibility of unambiguously exchanging 
and understanding incoming information.  
Semantic interoperability improves significantly thanks 
to the implementation of a terminology service, especially 
if it is compliant to a standard such as HL7 CTS2, which is 
widely adopted. The services offered (e.g., searching, 
querying, and cross mapping) are particularly useful when 
national or local code systems need to be linked to 
standard classification systems. This interoperability also 
strongly depends on the alignment between terminologies 
and their quality. This work shows the path that has been 
taken, also thanks to the recent advancements promoted by 
the law and by the AgID and CNR collaboration within the 
context of FSE projects, to align Italian FSE with 
international initiatives that promote the use of integrated 
management services of medical terminologies. 
Nonetheless, it has to be considered that the 
implementation of integrated terminology services is just 
the beginning of the process. In fact, the most important 
aspect in managing medical terminologies is the 
maintenance over time to update resources and coordinate 
processes such as transcoding, translation, and licensing. 
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In fact, maintenance of such a system is the real challenge: 
systems change, errors are made, and the lifecycle of 
mappings and data must be considered. Sometimes, 
mappings can be contextual and absolute consistency is 
very hard to achieve. That evidences the need for a 
dedicated governmental authority that coordinates the 
entire process. 
Among the several advantages provided by STI use in 
the Italian FSE framework there are: 
 
the possibility to share official terminologies, and 
their updates between the FSE central node and 
the services used by the local/regional FSE nodes; 
 
the possibility to configure policies (roles and 
authorizations) and to model the organization of 
the system (concerning production/editing of the 
terminological resources) through terminology 
management roles; 
 
the compliance of the data model and application 
services with the CTS2 standard (Normative 
Standard CTS2 Version 1.2); 
 
the delivering services of terminological resources 
with standard protocols and formats (JSON, 
CSV); 
 
the possibility to make advanced searches with 
personalized filters according to the code system 
selected, 
and 
to 
find 
additional 
semantic 
information by navigating their ontological 
graphs; 
 
the distribution as open source tool, with a GNU 
GPL license. 
Some 
of 
these 
advantages 
and 
functionalities 
characterize 
STI 
if 
compared 
to 
existing 
CTS2 
implementations, especially at a national level. In fact, the 
terminology services cited in Section II.A, even if more 
sophisticated from a technical and architectural point of 
view (e.g., in the cited DiTAM service, the possibility to 
have many local terminology service nodes connected to 
the central DiTAM node in a federated network), are: 
proprietary, thus more difficult to be used by a Public 
Administration; less precise in the structuring and 
visualization of the code systems; and, to our knowledge, 
do not allow the access to the resources as Linked Data, or 
their ontological graphs; and, finally, they do not provide 
bilingual access as provided in STI.   
Among the improvements currently underway on the 
STI, we can mention: i) an extension of the service data 
model, and of the Knowledge Base, in order to guarantee 
modeling, semantic integration and managing also of other 
types of code systems used at the national level but also 
local code systems (regional laboratory catalogues, 
regional catalogue for prescriptions and services, etc.); ii) 
the definition of a general structure for importing and 
mapping in order to make the service more flexible and 
scalable; iii) the definition of new ETL processes rules for 
the code systems integration and mapping; iv) the 
development of new functionalities supporting the 
maintenance of the system like the CTS2 History (i.e., the 
ability to determine which changes occurred over stated 
periods of time) and the Update services (the ability to 
validate load sets of changes into the service that updates 
its content); v) the improvement of the cross-mapping 
functionality to allow mapping editing by applying new 
association types; vi) the extension of the export 
functionality also to query results and mapping tables 
(currently the service allows exporting available code 
systems, in their different versions, but does not allow to 
export extracts of them or query results tables).  
The ability to share, query and maintain official and 
up-to-date terminological artifacts using an accepted 
standard terminology service interface, such as STI will 
allow standard terminology content to be readily 
disseminated and validated, and becomes more useful as 
organizations (healthcare facilities, Regions, Ministry of 
Health, 
and 
national 
Standard 
Development 
Organizations) in the FSE context begin to undertake the 
enhancement and maintenance of terminologies to support 
language translations, jurisdictional extensions to standard 
code systems, or maintenance and development of local 
terminologies, avoiding the proliferation of heterogeneous 
resources, and local tools and technologies to manage 
terminologies. The use of STI as an open source 
Terminology Service in the FSE context, whose 
functioning 
is 
directly 
linked 
to 
the 
level 
of 
interoperability and the degree of security of the sensitive 
data processed among the different Regional systems, 
gives the chance to Regions and local healthcare facilities 
to comply with a series of regulations and, in particular, 
with the modifications to art. 68 of the Legislative Decree 
82/2005 - “Digital Administration Code” (CAD) [35], all 
aimed at giving a preferential road to the use of free 
software. 
Finally, the creation of a terminology management 
service, such as STI, to be used in the context of the Italian 
FSE, is not only a way to reach semantic interoperability, 
but it represents a better support to healthcare 
professionals for improving the quality of clinical data 
ensuring maximum benefits along the healthcare process 
and the cooperation among different healthcare providers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the projects Realizzazione di 
Servizi 
della 
Infrastruttura 
Nazionale 
per 
l’Interoperabilità per il Fascicolo Sanitario Elettronico 
(prot. IIT 0005723, 01/09/2015) and Realizzazione dei 
servizi 
e 
strumenti 
a 
favore 
delle 
Pubbliche 
Amministrazioni per l’attuazione del Fascicolo Sanitario 
Elettronico (agid.AOO-AgID.REGISTRO UFFICIALE 
(I).0021033.31-12-2015) funded by the Agency for Digital 
Italy. A special thanks goes to LINK Management and 
Technology S.p.A. for the support in the development of 
the STI Web Service. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Cardillo and M. T. Chiaravalloti, “Towards the 
Development of a CTS2-based Terminology Service in the 
Italian Federated Electronic Health Record”, SEMAPRO 
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances 
in Semantic Processing, 2017, pp. 12-21. 
[2] M. Ciampi, A. Esposito, R. Guarasci, and G. De Pietro, 
“Towards Interoperability of EHR Systems: The Case of 
Italy”,  ICT4AgeingWell, 2016, pp. 133-138. 
[3] E. Cardillo, M. T. Chiaravalloti, and E. Pasceri, 
“Healthcare Terminology Management and Integration in 
Italy: Where we are and What we need for Semantic 
Interoperability”, 
European 
Journal 
of 
Biomedical 
Informatics,  vol. 12 (1): pp. en84-en89, 2016. 
[4] Prime Ministerial Decree [Law (general)] n. 178, 29 
September 2015, “Regolamento in materia di fascicolo 
sanitario elettronico. (15G00192)”, GU Serie Generale 
n.263, 11-11-2015.URL:  
http://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2015/11/11/15G00192
/sg [accessed: 05-15-2018].  
[5] ANSI/HL7 V3 CTS R2-2015, HL7 Common Terminology 
Services - Service Functional Model Specification, Release 
2, 
 
February 
2015, 
URL:  
https://hssp.wikispaces.com/specs-cts2 [accessed: 05-15-
2018].  
[6] European Community, “Directive 2011/24/EU of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 9th March 2011 
on the application of patients' rights in cross-border 
healthcare” 
[Available 
from: 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:0
88:0045:0065:EN:PDF]. 
[7] Semantic Interoperability for Health Network FP7-ICT-
2011-7, URL: http://www.semantichealthnet.eu/ [05-15-
2018]. 
[8] C. Daniel, D. Ouagne, E. Sadou, K. Forsberg, M. Mc 
Gilchrist, E. Zapletal, et al.,  “Cross border semantic 
interoperability for clinical research: the EHR4CR semantic 
resources and services”, AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 
2016, pp. 51–59. 
[9] Trillium Bridge II - Reinforcing the Bridges and Scaling up 
EU/US Cooperation on Patient Summary, H2020-EU.3.1.5. 
- Methods and data, URL: http://www.trilliumbridge.eu/ 
[accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[10] CTS2 Development Framework, Mayo Clinic Informatics, 
URL: https://github.com/cts2/cts2-framework [accessed: 
05-15-2018]. 
[11] Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR), Health 
Level 7 Specification, URL: https://www.hl7.org/fhir/ 
[accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[12] O. Bodenreider, “The Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS): integrating biomedical terminology”, Nucleic 
Acids Res: vol. 1; 32(Database issue); pp. D267–D270, 
2004 DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh061. 
[13] J. Grosjean, G. Kerdelhué, T. Merabti, and S. J. Darmoni, 
“The HeTOP: indexing Health resources in a multi-
terminology/ontology and cross-lingual world”, 13th 
EAHIL Conference,  2012, ceur-workshop, vol. 952, 2012. 
URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-952/paper_17.pdf [accessed: 
05-15-2018]. 
[14] J. Pathak, H. R. Solbrig, J. D. Buntrock, T. M. Johnson, and 
C. G. Chute, “LexGrid: A Framework for Representing, 
Storing, and Querying Biomedical Terminologies from 
Simple to Sublime”, Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association: JAMIA. vol. 16(3), pp. 305–315, 
2009, DOI:10.1197/jamia.M3006. 
[15] J. B. Lamy, A. Venot, and C. Duclos, “PyMedTermino: an 
open-source generic API for advanced terminology 
services”, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 
2015, vol. 210, pp. 924-928. 
[16] D. Luna, G. Lopez, C. Otero, A. Mauro, C. Torres 
Casanelli, 
and 
F. 
González 
Bernaldo 
de 
Quirós, 
“Implementation of Interinstitutional and Transnational 
Remote Terminology Services”, AMIA Annu Symp Proc, 
2010; pp. 482–486. 
[17] D. K. Sharma, H. R. Solbrig, E. Prud’hommeaux, K. Lee, J. 
Pathak, and G. Jiang, “D2Refine: A Platform for Clinical 
Research 
Study 
Data 
Element 
Harmonization 
and 
Standardization”, AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2017; 
2017,  pp. 259–267. 
[18] L. Zhou, H. Goldberg, D. Pabbathi, A. Wright, D.S. 
Goldman, C. Van Putten, et al., “Terminology modeling for 
an enterprise laboratory orders catalog”, AMIA Annu 
Symp Proc., 2009, pp. 735-739. 
[19] K. J. Peterson, G. Jiang, S.M. Brue, and H. Liu, 
“Leveraging Terminology Services f or Extract-Transform-
Load Processes: A User-Centered Approach”, AMIA Annu 
Symp Proc. 2017, pp. 1010-1019. 
[20] Standard Terminology Services (STS), PHAST, URL: 
http://www.phast-association.fr/accueil_doc_sts/ [accessed: 
05-15-2018]. 
[21] C. Seerainer and S. W. Sabutsch, “eHealth Terminology 
Management in Austria”, Studies in health technology and 
informatics, vol.228, pp. 426-30, 2016. 
[22] Terminology Server, University of Applied Sciences and 
Arts, 
Dortmund, 
URL: 
http://www.wiki.mi.fh-
dortmund.de/cts2/index.php?title=Hauptseite 
[accessed: 
05-15-2018]. 
[23] DiTAM, 
Codices 
S.r.l.. 
2014. 
URL: 
http://www.codices.com/prodotti/ditam.html. 
[accessed: 
05-15-2018]. 
[24] R. Gazzarata, M. E. Monteverde, E.Vio, C. Saccavini, L. 
Gubian, I. Borgo, and M. Giacomini, “A Terminology 
Service compliant to CTS2 to manage semantics within the 
regional HIE”, EJBI – Vol. 13(1), pp. 43–50, 2017. 
[25] International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision 
Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM), Italian version, Italian 
Ministry 
of 
Health 
URL: 
http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/documentazione/p6_2_2_1
.jsp?lingua=italiano&id=2251 [accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[26] Anatomical 
Chemical 
Therapeutical 
(ATC), 
WHO 
Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology 
Norwegian 
Institute 
of 
Public 
Health 
URL: 
https://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/  [accessed: 05-15-
2018]. 
[27] Autorizzazione all’Immissione in Commercio (AIC), 
Agenzia 
Italiana 
del 
Farmaco. 
URL: 
http://www.agenziafarmaco.gov.it/en . [accessed: 05-15-
2018]. 
[28] Logical 
Observation 
Identifiers 
Names 
and 
Codes 
(LOINC), Regenstrief Institute, URL: https://loinc.org/  
[accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[29] Liferay 6.2., URL: https://www.liferay.com/downloads . 
[accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[30] Pentaho Data Integration ( ETL ) a.k.a Kettle, URL: 
https://github.com/pentaho/pentaho-kettle [accessed: 05-
15-2018]. 
[31] Virtuoso, 
OpenLink 
Software, 
URL: 
https://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/ . [accessed: 05-15-2018] 
[32] CKAN, URL: https://ckan.org/ . [accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[33] P. L. Whetzel, N. F. Noy, N. H. Shah, P. R. Alexander, C. 
Nyulas, T. Tudorache, et al., “BioPortal: enhanced 
functionality via new Web services from the National 
Center for Biomedical Ontology to access and use 
ontologies in software applications”, Nucleic Acids Res. 
2011 Jul;39, pp. W541-5. Epub 2011 Jun 14. URL: 
https://bioportal.bioontology.org/  [accessed: 05-15-2018]. 
[34] Open Refine, URL: http://openrefine.org/ . [accessed: 05-
15-2018]. 
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[35]  Legislative Decree 7 March (2005), n. 82. Codice 
dell'amministrazione digitale. In GU Serie Generale n.112, 
16-05-2005 - Suppl. Ordinario n. 93 [available from: 
http://www.agid.gov.it/sites/default/files/leggi_decreti_dire
ttive/dl-7-marzo-2005-82_0.pdf]. 
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

