95
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Intelligent Insulin Pens 
A promising technology toward smart diabetic management systems     
 
Mohammed Kalkattawi, Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Japan, Tokyo 
e-mail: {M.Kalkattawi, Tatsuo}@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Ever since their introduction, insulin pens have been 
playing a critical role within the Multiple Daily Injections. 
Insulin pens were originally a solution created to offer a couple 
of enhancements in injection. They were appreciated for their 
simplicity and accuracy. Recently, intelligent insulin pen 
technology has been introduced to offer a new direction toward 
enhancing the management of Multiple Daily Injections 
therapy. In general, technologies have always been playing a 
major role in the enhancement of insulin delivery; it has been 
more notable within the pumps therapy practices. For Multiple 
Daily Injections in particular, the use of technology was 
relatively limited, but with the introduction of intelligent 
insulin pens, there is an expectation that the Multiple Daily 
Injections therapy would elevate into a higher level of 
standards. Because the technology is still barely known among 
the groups of diabetic patients, the paper first presents a 
couple of assessment studies to evaluate the necessity of the 
intelligent insulin pen technology among diabetic patients. 
Based on the outcomes, patients and practitioners saw great 
potentials within this technology. Nevertheless, the study 
concluded that the intelligent insulin pens technology itself 
would be essential for certain groups among the diabetic 
patients, but for the general use, this technology could be a 
good alternative to the regular insulin pens. The intelligent 
insulin pens technology still needs to implement more functions 
that can serve the general diabetic patients. One feasible 
suggestion to achieve this goal is to extend this technology 
through the utilization of smart devices and ubiquitous 
technology. In the second stage, in order to examine the 
possibility of the previous point, a series of pilot studies was 
conducted to oversee their influence on the regular 
management. Based on the assessment study outcomes, a smart 
reminder system was proposed to test the influence on 
medication adherence and daily routines. The system utilizes 
the technology of smart devices and intelligent insulin pens. 
The final outcomes showed that the system could be a good 
support to the regular routines, and it had the potential to 
promote a better compliance toward the insulin medication.                  
Keywords-Electronic Medicine; Diabetes Mellitus; Multiple 
Daily Injections; Smart Systems; Ubiquitous Technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Study Overview  
This paper presents a continuation of a previous 
qualitative study [1], which was conducted for the intelligent 
insulin pens technology assessment. It also includes 
additional results from new usability studies, interviews and 
a series of pilot experiments. The previous study was aiming 
to survey the importance of using intelligent insulin pens 
technology as part of the MDI therapy. In this extended 
study, a new goal was added to the main objective in the 
previous study. The new extended study aimed to test the 
feasibility of extending the functionality of intelligent insulin 
pens through the utilization of ubiquitous technologies.       
The previous study highlighted the potential existed 
within current models of intelligent insulin pens. It 
concluded that the intelligent insulin pens can be a good 
option as an alternative to the current available instruments, 
but the intelligent insulin pens technology itself is not 
necessarily essential for the majority of diabetic patients. In 
the previous study, the experience of intelligent insulin pens 
technology was mostly based on demonstration and visual 
aids materials. At the current stage of this study, we had 
results from patients, who had actual experience with this 
technology itself. The study included also some opinions 
from a number of specialized practitioners; these results were 
helping to give insights about the importance of the 
technology from the primary care side. Additionally, the 
previous 
study 
highlighted 
the 
role 
of 
ubiquitous 
technologies in expanding the functionality of the intelligent 
insulin pens.  The current stage of this study showed some 
evidence—through a couple of pilot studies—that can 
support the previous claimed idea.    
This paper is organized in the following manner: The 
second part of this section gives some historical background 
about the evolution of the insulin pens instrument. Section II 
gives some information about the technologies existed within 
diabetes mellitus. It presents some information about the 
devices that have widely been used for diabetic management, 
and then it highlights the role of smart devices within 
diabetes mellitus. Section III provides some assessment 
studies for the intelligent insulin pens technologies. Section 
IV presents some pilot studies for the connectivity between 
intelligent insulin pens and smart devices. Finally, Section V 

96
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
concludes this paper by summarizing its contents and 
outcomes, and then it points to the limitation and future 
directions of this research. 
B. The Evlution of Insulin Pens   
 Originally, the launch of insulin pens came in 1985 by 
the Danish company Novo Nordisk [2]. The main aim was to 
find a more practical instrument that can replace the 
traditional syringes and insulin vials. The introduced solution 
managed to ease the insulin dose administration, especially 
among elderly and young patients. It has always been noted 
for its accuracy and simplicity [3]. Currently, in most parts of 
the world, insulin pens have already surpassed traditional 
syringes, and they have become the main instrument for the 
MDI therapy [4]. Both types of instrument have some 
similarities between them, e.g., mechanical-driven motor for 
dosing; however, they differ in how to prepare and adjust the 
dose.  
In the regular syringes case, patients need to insert the 
syringe inside the insulin vial, and then start pulling the end 
of the instrument to let the medication fill in. On the other 
hand, the vial—called cartridge here—for insulin pens is 
inserted inside the instrument itself. Patients just need to 
adjust the required amount using the dose knob at the end of 
the instrument, and then by pushing the button at end of the 
pen, the dose can easily be administered.  
There are a couple of advantages of using insulin pens 
instead of using regular syringes. First, the pushing 
mechanism can prevent the air bubbles from coming inside 
the vial, i.e., air bubbles can reduce the accuracy of the 
administered dose. Second, the dose knob at the end of the 
pen is easier for dose adjustment and more visible to most 
patients. Finally, the insertion of vial inside the pen itself 
makes it more convenient for storage and carrying.  
Nevertheless, there are still some disadvantages in using 
insulin pens. First, the overall cost of using insulin pens is 
higher when compared to regular syringes [5]. Second, the 
dosing mechanism in insulin pens is considered slower than 
regular syringes. During the dosing process, the patient needs 
to push through the whole insulin vial. As a result, this 
requires the patient to keep the instrument inside the skin few 
extra seconds [6]. This is to make sure that the dose has been 
fully and correctly drawn out of the vial. Finally, unlike 
regular syringes, patients cannot mix two different types of 
insulin in the same pen, e.g., Regular and NPH insulin; 
however, this is might not be a major issue since most of the 
new types of insulin are actually not mixable, e.g., Insulin 
Glargine and Insulin Glulisine.  
As per the upgrading cycle of insulin pens, from the days 
of their introduction, insulin pens had very slow upgrading 
movements. Most of these upgrades were minor ones. For 
example, some of the upgrades were mainly related to the 
outer designs and weights. Others had some enhancements 
with the dosing process, yet the functions and mechanism 
concept have remained the same until just few years ago [7].  
We started to see some significant upgrades in 2007 
when Eli Lilly and company introduced their HumaPen® 
Memoir™ model [8]; it was the first model to introduce the 
memory function. Basically, this model can keep records of 
date, time and dose amount for a number of administered 
doses. The main purpose is to remind the patient about last 
taken doses in order to avoid the risks of double or missing 
doses. The dosing mechanism retains the same mechanism as 
regular insulin pens, i.e., mechanical-driven motor. The 
model has been discontinued due to some commercial issues 
[9].  
In 2012, Novo Nordisk introduced the same memory 
function within two of their own models NovoPen® 5 [10] 
and NovoPen Echo® but in a totally different concept; 
basically, rather than keeping the records of date and time, it 
shows the total dosage taken within the last 12 hours. In 
addition to that, Novo Nordisk introduced a smaller scale 
dosing, i.e., scale of 0.5 unit, within their NovoPen Echo® 
model for young patients, who usually have higher insulin 
sensitivity than regular patients [11]. Once again, the dosing 
mechanism remains mechanical-driven like all the previous 
models.  
A new intelligent model has recently been introduced 
exclusively within parts of Europe and South Korea [12]. 
The model was manufactured by the Korean company 
Diamesco Co.,Ltd, which specializes mainly in insulin 
pumps manufacturing. The introduced model borrowed a 
couple of features originally existed within pump devices. 
The most significant feature is replacing the dosing concept 
from mechanical-driven motor into digital-driven motor. The 
feature eliminates the need of human-force and it provides 
more precise dosing scale, i.e., 0.1 unit scale. Another 
remarkable feature is the ability to keep a large number of 
dosing records, i.e., more than 100 records, which can also 
be transferred to personal computers. This is additional to 
some other features such as alarming for battery and empty 
cartridge, pre-saving doses and countdown for dose 
administration. The model has been marketed in Europe as 
Pendiq Intelligent Insulin Pens and SmartPlus in South 
Korea.  
This latest model of the intelligent insulin pens was used 
as the main subject within this stage of the study. This model 
was used within the usability studies to test the use of 
technological solutions within MDI therapy. It was used also 
within the pilot studies that test the integration between 
ubiquitous technologies and the intelligent insulin pens 
technology.      
 
II. 
THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGIES IN MANAGING 
DIABETES 
This section gives a brief background about the role of 
technology in facilitating and enhancing the insulin delivery. 
It also highlights the differences between the Insulin pumps 
and MDI therapies from the technical side. Lastly, it gives 
some background about the current uses of smart devices 
under the diabetes mellitus. 
A. Technologies and Insulin Deliveries  
Among the distinctive types of insulin delivery for 
diabetes 
mellitus, 
insulin 
pumps 
rely 
heavily 
on 
technologies. The use of technologies in insulin pumps has 
made them distinguishable with multiple features for diabetic 

97
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Multiple Daily Injections (MDI). 
 
management [13]. For example, pumps now can keep 
updating you about insulin and glucose levels running within 
the body; they can ease the calculation of bolus doses by 
providing a built-in list for food data associated with 
carbohydrates values; lastly, they can keep records of doses, 
which can also be synced to personal devices like PC and 
smart devices. Furthermore, the technological nature of 
insulin pumps has allowed easily creating new models with 
new functions.  
One remarkable example, which can elaborate this point, 
is the insulin pump pad— known as Omnipod in the market 
[14]. Unlike the other insulin pumping models, pump pad 
comes tubeless packed in one single unit. Each unit of these 
pump pads is packed with all the necessary components for 
insulin pumping delivery, i.e., the insulin reservoir, cannula 
and infusion set. Each unit is also embedded with wireless 
connectivity module. The patient can set the infusion and 
doses through a dedicated wireless remote. The main 
advantage here is providing a solution that allows more 
flexible movements, and eliminates the exposure of skin to 
the outer environment. The last two points have always been 
major hindrances within pumping delivery, especially among 
patients, who are doing heavy activities like athletics [15].  
The inclusion of wireless modules within pumps has 
opened the door to create more new solutions such as the 
semi closed-loop pumps [16]. The solution is integration 
between the pump devices and continuous glucose 
monitoring devices (CGM). Basically, the patient can view 
the CGM readings directly on pumps, and then the patient 
can adjust the delivery rate manually according to the 
readings. The CGM module can issue an automated 
suspension of insulin fusion in the case of Hypoglycemia 
detection. The method is still suffering from some technical 
issues due to the inaccuracy of CGM reading, but it is still 
under continuous enhancements. If developers managed to 
create a CGM with accurate reading, it will be possible to 
create what is called the closed-loop pumping solution [17]. 
This is the optimal automated solution, which can imitate the 
actual work of human pancreas.  
Although the technological enhancement within pumps, 
such as the inclusion of wireless communication, opened the 
door to create more creative solutions, it invited some new 
challenges here as well. For example, the controlling through 
remote 
devices 
makes 
the 
pumps 
vulnerable 
to 
communication risks like hacking and malicious attacks. 
Some earlier articles reported that a couple of experiments 
could manage to hack and control pump pad remotely in the 
absence of patient’s awareness [18]. A couple of solutions 
have been proposed to avoid such an issue but it is still 
getting a major attention from the researchers [19]. The point 
here is there is a need to give careful consideration to the 
challenges associated within any new proposed technical 
solutions.  
On the other hand, as it was stated before, insulin pens 
have mostly remained simple without any sophisticated 
technologies for quite some time. Insulin pens, which have 
been used for MDI therapy mainly, rely heavily on the 
patient’s cognitive skills and some other companion devices 
like glucometers. For MDI routines in particular, there are 
two types of doses (Figure 1). The first type is Basal, i.e., 
long acting dose, which lowers the glucose level out of the 
dining time, e.g., between meals or sleeping time. The 
dosage amount is usually determined by the primary care and 
should be taken within a fixed period of time, i.e., every 24 
hours; for example, the Glargine type in Figure 1. The other 
type is called bolus, i.e., short (fast)-acting dose, which is 
usually taken before or after meals. The patient needs to 
know the value of the carbohydrates intake in order to adjust 
the dose according to that value; for example, check the 
Glulisin type in Figure 1. The patient needs also to measure 
the glucose level before taking any dose, especially in the 
morning, in order to check if the dose needs any adjustment 
or not. For example, if the glucose level is lower than the 
regular, the patient needs to decrease the usual dose, and if 
the glucose level is higher, then the dose has to be increased. 
This is to avoid the occurrence of any Hypo/Hyperglycemia 
episodes.  The main purpose from having these two different 
types is to imitate the normal insulin secretion in non-
diabetic individuals. 
 Therefore, glucometer devices are considered vital 
within MDI routines. Nevertheless, the technology within 
glucometer is mostly simple without any sophisticated 
features. 
Some 
recent 
models 
have 
started 
the 
implementation of simple smart features such as smart 
indicators and directions [20]; however, there are some other 
models that managed to include sophisticated features such 
as wireless connectivity for cloud computing utilization [21]. 
As per CGM, they were mainly developed for pump users 
only, but there were some researches that showed benefits of 
using CGM within MDI routines [22]. Aside from the 
glucometers, smart devices can also be used within the MDI 
therapy; however, their uses are currently limited. More 
details will be given in the next section about the uses of 
smart devices within the diabetes mellitus.  
MDI and insulin pumps are still holding the top positions 
among other methods for external insulin delivery. Both 
methods have their own pros and cons within their uses. For 
example, insulin pumps have been remarkable for their 
glycemic control performance [23], but at the same time, 
they require extensive training to master, and require 
continuous on-body attachment. On the other hand, insulin 
pens within MDI, require almost no effort to master, and 

98
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN INSULIN PENS 
AND INSULIN PUMPS 
Comparison between insulin pens and insulin pumps 
Features 
Insulin Pens 
 Pumps 
Level of accuracy and precision 
Lower 
Higher 
Flexibility and convenience 
Higher 
Lower 
Costs 
Lower 
Higher 
Performance and glycemic control 
Lower 
Higher 
Level of risks 
Lower 
Higher 
Ease of mastering 
Higher 
Lower 
Level of complexity 
Lower 
Higher 
Hight-tech and upgradability    
Lower 
Higher 
 
 
they are greatly flexible to use, but at the same time, they 
require much dedication to doses management from the 
patient’s side. Table I gives a brief summary for the 
differences between MDI and insulin pumps therapies [1].  
Nevertheless, as it was implied within this section, there 
is a wide gap between them in terms of technological 
utilization. Insulin pumps have evolved greatly into better 
shapes than their early days, while insulin pens have almost 
remained unchanged. Technology has great potential to ease 
the complicated management of diabetes. MDI routines need 
to follow the same footsteps as insulin pumps. They need to 
start effectively utilizing some of the latest available 
technologies, 
such 
as 
cloud 
computing, 
wireless 
communication or smart devices. The intelligent insulin pens 
as mentioned before could be a good step toward this point. 
The solution kept some of the features originated within 
regular insulin pens, such as dosing flexibility, but at the 
same time, it implemented several new features never existed 
before, such as the digital-driven motor. 
B. Smart Devices and Diabetes 
Most smart devices available now in the market have 
powerful processing and multitasking capabilities. Beside the 
basic functions, i.e., making calls or messages, you can also 
browse the Internet, take pictures or even play video games 
on them. In addition to that, with the current generation of 
wireless network, the connectivity within these devices has 
become so high. The previous listed features of smart 
devices have made them more likable among their users. 
Moreover, because the user interfaces within these devices 
have become easier and manageable than previous 
generations of user interfaces, regular users, who lack deep 
technical knowledge, can now use these devices more 
skillfully than before [24]. Smart devices are now playing 
major roles within our daily routines: shopping, entrainment, 
education and of course healthcare as well.  
For diabetes in particular, there is an enormous number 
of applications developed specifically for the diabetic users. 
Most of these applications circulate around four types of 
functions: patient’s records, decision support, education and 
social communication [25].  
Patient’s records functions are mainly related to any 
diabetic data, such as the daily blood tests, daily doses, 
carbohydrate intake and burned calories. Most of these 
applications require the patients to enter the data manually, 
but few of them can be synchronized with glucometers or 
other sensors for direct data upload [26].   
For decision support functions, they are mainly related to 
the management of daily activities, i.e., medication, meals 
and exercise. For example, the collected diabetic data can be 
used to create charts known as trends. These trends can be 
observed to detect any fluctuation within the patient’s 
glucose values. Additional useful applications are functions 
like 
medication 
reminders 
and 
carbohydrates 
ratio 
calculators. The previous listed functions can help the patient 
to take the right decisions regarding the attempted routines, 
such as doing more exercises, consuming the proper amount 
of carbohydrates or taking the right amount of dosages.      
For education functions, they generally give information 
related to the diabetes itself, such as guidelines, tips about 
medication and food or deep knowledge about symptoms 
and side effects. There are some applications—still under 
clinical trials—that aim to make these applications more 
personalized; these applications can give information based 
on the patient’s profile [27]. 
As per the communication functions, they are mainly 
related to the communication between patients and 
practitioners or through social media, i.e., FACEBOOK, 
Blogs or Internet groups. Communication with practitioners 
can help smoothing the exchange of information between the 
two parties or setting up regular follow-ups. For social 
media, it is an alternative way to find some support outside 
the clinics. Through this communication, patients can be out 
of their diabetic isolation, and they can share some of their 
diabetic experience among other members.  
With all the previous functions and features, using smart 
phones under the diabetes mellitus is still considered a non-
standard practice and very limited [28]. Most of these 
applications are still not recognized by official organizations, 
such as US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [29]. The 
absence of these types of recognition makes them barely 
known 
among 
practitioners 
and 
less 
trusted 
for 
recommendations.  
Moreover, some functions could be useful, but it might 
be difficult for some patients to handle them without enough 
experience. For example, providing trend charts for analysis 
can be useful, but not all the patients can interpret them 
smoothly without experts’ aid.  
For communication functions in particular, security and 
reliability of information are critical issues here. For 
example, concerning the communication through social 
media, the major issues come from the authenticity of 
provided information; some of this information can actually 
be advertisement disguised as users’ comments [30]. 
Providing false diagnoses or medication to the patients 

99
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2.  Total number of participants & age groups. 
 
without the practitioners’ supervision can lead to multiple 
high risks. Similarly, advertisement can take advantage of 
social media to advertise products by giving false comments 
or recommendations. Keeping Internet groups or forums free 
from false information and advertisement is still a big 
challenge within social media for healthcare.  
Finally, most of the standard diabetic gadgets are closed-
sources, i.e., they do not share their data protocols with third 
parties. As a result, most of these applications lack the 
capability to sync data with standard diabetic devices. The 
diabetic management by itself is a difficult mission; adding 
extra tasks like the manual data entry to the key mission 
would not be appealing to some patients. Few diabetic 
gadgets in the market have started to utilize the powerful 
environment of smart devices, but it is still very limited and 
needs more support from specialized organizations and 
practitioners [31].   
In general, most of the efforts focus on how to digitize 
the long-established diabetic practices. For example, rather 
than noting the daily blood test results in the patient’s 
diabetic physical diary, the patients can instead write them 
digitally on their smartphones. Nevertheless, in reality, both 
methods are requiring the same amount of efforts and time; 
furthermore, the data on the phone is not being utilized 
smartly to enhance the patient’s daily management. The 
main point here is that rather than focusing on creating 
solutions that would only digitize usual practices related to 
diabetes, it would be more ideal to create smart solutions, 
which can ease the diabetic tasks or encourage a better 
compliance. For example, a more practical solution is to 
provide a way to upload all the data to the phone effortlessly, 
and then utilize them to provide smart functions or 
directions, e.g., tagging them with some other diabetic data 
automatically. There are few diabetic gadgets applied the 
previous example. An American-based company Telcare Inc 
developed a new type of cloud-based glucometer [32]. The 
glucometer utilizes the cellular communication to upload 
patient’s daily blood test automatically to any personal 
devices through a cloud server. Some other developers 
created glucometer kits that can be attached to the 
smartphone itself, and then the phone itself can do all the 
glucometer functions like any standard devices [33].   
 
III. 
ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENT INSULIN PENS 
TECHNOLOGY AMONG DIABETIC PATIENTS 
This section gives details about the assessment study 
conducted for the intelligent insulin pens. It highlights the 
research method first, and then it states all the collected 
results. Lastly, the section concludes with a brief discussion 
about the observed results. 
A. Assessment Study and Research Method 
Qualitative surveys and interviews were conducted 
through two stages among individuals related to the diabetes 
mellitus. The first stage was conducted through online 
communities. This was either by sending them direct emails 
or by recruiting them through online groups [1]. The second 
stage was conducted physically through specialized clinics. 
25 individuals were recruited through the Ministry of Health 
Training, Postgraduate Studies and Research Center in 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.  
In addition to that, during this stage, oral interviews were 
conducted as well among practitioners related to diabetes 
mellitus. The total number of participants in both stages was 
101 diabetic individuals, and the number of interviewed 
practitioners was 5 individuals.  
The study was focusing on patients who were using 
insulin medication as part of their treatment. All the cases 
that reported using oral medication only have been excluded 
from this study. The questions were directed toward patients 
or their caregivers. The questions focused on the following 
information: patients’ general information (i.e., age, gender, 
use of smart devices, etc.); patients’ diabetic information 
(i.e., period of diagnoses, diabetes types, types of insulin 
therapy, 
data 
management, 
etc.); 
patients’ 
Hypo/Hyperglycemia encounter (i.e., number of episodes, 
possible reasons, etc.).  
During the second stage, additional experiments have 
been conducted: first observing the administration of doses 
using regular insulin pens, and then observing the patients 
while using intelligent insulin pens.  
In the last two parts of the survey, the questions were 
focusing on intelligent insulin pens in particular; for 
example, best features, expected improvement or overall 
impression. The last part focused on the future direction of 
intelligent insulin pens; in particular, it concerns the potential 
in the connectivity between smart devices and intelligent 
insulin pens. Lastly, interviews with practitioners were 
concerning the following information: the use of smart 
devices under diabetes mellitus; the preferred format for 
patients’ records; the overall impression for the intelligent 
insulin pens; and the overall impression for the connectivity 
with smart devices. The summary of results and experiments 
are enlisted below in the next section. 
B. Summary of the Assessment Study Results 
1) Patients’ General Information: As per the groups of 
age, 32% of the participants were from the young and 
teenage groups. Participants, who were between the age of 
20s and 40s, were about 39%. The remaining participants 

100
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Smart devices users. 
 
29% were in the age of 50s or above (Figure 2). Female and 
male participants were about 56% and 44%, respectively. 
We inquired about the usage of smart devices within daily 
routines, we found that 81% of the participants were using 
smart devices regularly, the remaining 19% indicated either 
non-use of smart devices or use of simple devices only, i.e., 
landlines and regular cell phones. 
 
2) Patients’ Diabetic Information: The majority of 
participants were from the Type 1 group 66%, while the 
remaining 34% were from the Type 2 group. Participants, 
who were diagnosed recently with diabetes, i.e., less than 5 
years, were about 25% of the whole group. Participants, who 
had more than 15 years of diabetic experience, were about 
43%. The remaining 32% were having between 5 to 15 years 
of diabetic experience.  
For insulin therapy, participants who indicated using two 
types of insulin at the same time were about 62% of the 
whole group. The remaining 38% indicated using one type of 
insulin only, i.e., long acting in the case of type 2 and fast 
acting in the case of pump users. Most of the participants 
72% reported that they were using insulin pens (and 
occasionally syringes as well), while syringes only users 
were about 17%. Participants, who were under insulin 
pumping, were about 11%.  
We inquired the participants about the mistakes during 
insulin administration, i.e., missing doses, double doses or 
inaccurate dosage. 24% of participants reported that they 
were frequently running into some mistakes with their 
insulin administration, while 39% were sometimes running 
into some mistakes. The remaining 37% reported that they 
were rarely running into any mistakes.  
For keeping records of diabetic data, 57% of participants 
were keeping tracks of daily blood tests; 21% of participants 
were keeping tracks of carbohydrates intake; 44% of 
participants were keeping tracks of daily insulin doses. 41% 
of participants indicated that they preferred physical format, 
i.e., physical dairies, while 37% of them preferred the digital 
ones. Only 20% of participants reported that they preferred 
both ways—digital and paper—at the same time. The 
remaining 2% of participants indicated another preferences 
other than the two methods, such as the usage of voice memo 
or self-memory.  
We inquired the participants, who were using smart 
devices regularly, about the usage of smart devices under 
diabetic management. Only few participants 30% indicated 
using their smart devices for their diabetic management 
(Figure 3). 
 
3) Patients’ Hypo/Hyperglycemia Encounter: 35% of 
participants reported that they were frequently running into 
Hypoglycemia episodes every month, while 31% were 
sometimes running into Hypoglycemia episodes every 
month. The remaining 34% reported that they were rarely 
running into any Hypoglycemia episodes every month. 45% 
of participants reported that they were frequently running 
into Hyperglycemia episodes every month, while 35% were 
sometimes running into Hyperglycemia episodes every 
month. The remaining 20% reported that they were rarely 
running into Hyperglycemia episodes every month. The 
likely main reasons for encountering Hypoglycemia were 
due to: 51% insufficient amount of carbohydrates in meal, 
27% excessive activities, 21% over medication or mistakes 
and only 1% for other reasons, i.e., not from the specified 
list, such as illness, high insulin sensitivity or oversleeping. 
On the other hand, the likely main reasons for 
Hyperglycemia were due to: 62% extra amount of 
carbohydrates in meal, 16% lack of activities, 12% 
insufficient amount of insulin or mistakes and 10% indicated 
other personal reasons, i.e., not from the specified list, such 
as stress, illness or poor control. 
 
4) Patients’ Views about Intelligent Insulin Pens 
Technology: Latest technologies of intelligent insulin pens 
were presented to the participants. The presentation was 
done through two stages. The first stage was done through 
demonstration and visual aids embedded within the survey 
materials. The second stage was done through interviews and 
a couple of usability studies. It was found out that the 
majority of the participants 80% never heard of or used 
intelligent insulin pens before this study.  
After that, remarkable features available within current 
models were highlighted within a list, and then the 
participants were asked to pick the most preferable features, 
i.e., the ones considered essential for the diabetic 
management. The highlighted features were (ranked by the 
highest collected scores from patients’ sides): 
 
1. Memory feature  
(i.e., keeping records of doses, date and time). 
2. Alarming system 
(e.g., blockage, dosing countdown and low battery). 
3. Syncing data to PC.   
4. Precise scale  
(i.e., 0.1 unit scale). 
5. Pre-saving time period and dosage amount  
(i.e., automatic dosing adjustment). 

101
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5.  Connectivity with smart devices. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Importance of intelligent insulin pens. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Importance of the connectivity with smart devices. 
 
6. Switching between manual and digital modes  
(i.e., in case of battery outage). 
 
Following that, the participants were inquired about the 
expected improvements after using this type of technology. 
The majority of the participants were expecting to encounter 
fewer Hypoglycemia and Hyperglycemia episodes. Easier 
management and data collection came in the second place. 
Precise dosing capability for each meal and then 
encountering fewer mistakes came as the last two in the rank.  
The participants were asked about hindrances that would 
prevent them from obtaining this type of technology. The top 
hindrance went to the availability within the local market. 
High cost came as the second one. Complexity and then 
compatibility with insulin brands came as the least two 
reasons.  
Finally, the participants were asked to rate the 
importance of intelligent pens for diabetic management. In 
the scale of 5 = essential to 1 = useless, 37% of participants 
thought that intelligent insulin pens would be 5 = essential 
for them, while 26% could be 4 = useful. On the other hand, 
4% of the participants thought it could be 2 = unnecessary, 
and 5% thought it could be 1 = useless for diabetic 
management. The remaining groups 28% were 3 = neutral 
about them (Figure 4).   
 
5) Patients’ Views about the Connectivity between 
Intelligent Pens and Smart Devices: In the last section, 
assuming that intelligent insulin pens and other diabetic 
devices could have the capability to communicate with smart 
devices (Figure 5), and at the same time, they could manage 
to provide the following functions: 
 
1) Automated reminder and confirmation for doses 
2) Automated data collection and sync with software 
managers 
3) Warning and error detectors while dosing 
4) Remote controlling through smart devices 
 
The participants were asked once again how they would 
evaluate the importance of using smart devices under this 
vision. Similarly, in the scale of 5 = essential to 1 = useless, 
49% of the participants rated this type of communication as 
5 = essential, while 26% rated as 4 = useful. One the other 
hand, 4% the participants considered this as 2 = unnecessary 
and 7% as 1 = useless. The remaining 14% were 3 = neutral 
to the idea (Figure 6).  
The participants were asked which feature from the 
above list could be considered essential for their 
management. The automated reminder and data collection 
features were ranked as the first and second, respectively, 
while the warning and remote controlling features were 
ranked the third and fourth, respectively. 
 
6) Results from the Usability Study: Within the second 
stage of the interviews and usability study, we added a two 

102
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
PARTICIPANTS OF ORAL INTERVIEWS  
Primary 
Care (P.C.) 
Age 
Gender 
Intelligent 
pen 
technology 
rate 
Connectivity 
with smart 
devices rate 
1st P.C. 
30-49 
Female 
4 
5 
2nd  P.C. 
30-49 
Female 
3 
4 
3rd  P.C. 
30-49 
Female 
5 
5 
4th  P.C. 
30-49 
Female 
5 
5 
5th  P.C. 
30-49 
Male 
3 
4 
Rating scale of 5 = essential to 1 = useless 
 
extra experimental sessions. The first session was to evaluate 
the compliance while administering the doses, while the 
second session was to evaluate the intelligent insulin pens 
usability. Among the 25 participants 22 of them reported 
using insulin pens to take their doses. The patients were 
observed while administering their own doses with insulin 
pens. The recommended instructions state that the patient 
should wait few seconds before removing the pen from the 
body [6]. Among the 22 cases, only 4 cases did not follow 
the appointed instructions. As for the other patients, they 
were following the recommended instructions but the 
waiting time to take out the pen varied from patient to 
patient.  
After that, we gave instructions to all the 25 participants 
explaining the use of intelligent insulin pens. The model used 
in this experiment was the intelligent insulin pen 
manufactured by Diamesco Co., Ltd [12]. Most of the 
participants managed to use the intelligent pen on their own 
after repeating the instruction at least once after the first set 
of instructions. Some of the positive comments that we got 
from the participants were: the large screen makes the dosing 
more visible and easier for adjustment; the digital-motor 
eliminates the need for finger-force; the pen gives 
countdown before removing the pen from the body.  
For the other functions, such as viewing memory data or 
replacing cartridges, there were some difficulties in 
mastering them among the participants. The participants 
needed to follow the instructions multiple times in order to 
manage these functions on their own. Some of the negative 
comments that we got regarding the intelligent pens were: 
the intelligent pen was considered heavier and bulky 
compared to regular insulin pens. Also, some patients 
considered the intelligent pen slower in dosing compared to 
regular ones. This is because the used model forces you to 
prim the pen before dosing. Some patients believed that the 
priming step should be optional here rather than being 
compulsory. 
 
7) Results of the Oral Interview with Diabetic 
Practitioners: Table II provides the list of participants along 
with some brief information. Regarding the recommendation 
of using smart devices under diabetes mellitus, the 1st P.C., 
2nd P.C. and 4th P.C. pointed out that they were using smart 
devices regularly, but they were lacking the experience in 
finding any application under the local language for their 
recommendation. The 3rd P.C. pointed out that she was 
using smart devices regularly and at the same time she was 
recommending using them for diabetic management; i.e., 
mainly for dose reminders and monitoring calories through 
wearable sensors. The 5th P.C. pointed out that he was also 
using smart devices regularly and was recommending his 
patients to use smart devices as well. Most of the 
recommendations were for communication with the primary 
care, blood test applications and diabetic education as well. 
Both of them did not point to any specific applications.       
As per the preferred format for patients’ records, the 1st 
P.C. and 2nd P.C. pointed out that they preferred both types 
of format, i.e., digital and paper, since there were some 
patients that have limited technical skills. They wanted to 
keep it flexible for all patients. The 3rd P.C. preferred paper 
format; she thought that generating digital record was still 
too difficult for the majority of patients. The 4th P.C. 
preferred using digital format to avoid any misreading of 
patient’s data due to bad handwriting or any similar issues. 
The 5th P.C. preferred digital format in order to keep them 
within his PC as references.   
As per the intelligent insulin pens technology, after 
conducting a couple of experiments, the 1st P.C. chose 
dosage auditing system and the alarming functions as her 
best features available within current models. She pointed 
out that the auditing system would give more background 
regarding the patient’s daily routines, while the alarming 
system would keep the patient alerted and assure a proper 
dose administration. The 2nd P.C. thought that the intelligent 
pen with the current features had limited uses, which might 
not be useful for all types of patients. The 3rd and 4th P.C. 
appraised the auditing system and PC data syncing functions. 
They thought that both features would help them to 
understand the patient better and keep more references about 
them. Additionally, they believed that both features would 
help the patients effectively as they would able to associate 
the data with their daily routines. In this way, it would 
reduce the number of encountered Hypo/Hyperglycemia 
episodes. Moreover, it would prevent missing or duplicating 
doses. The 5th P.C. thought that the audit system and digital-
motor were good features, but he still believed that not all 
patients would able to use the intelligent pens smoothly 
without any difficulties. The overall rate of the intelligent 
insulin pens technology for each P.C. was summarized in 
Table II.   
For the main hindrances that might prevent the patients 
from obtaining this technology, the 1st P.C. and 2nd P.C. 
thought that the availability within the local market would be 
a major concern here; in addition to that, the 1st P.C. thought 
that the auditing system itself might actually be a possible 
hindrance for using such a technology. Some patients have 
the habit of concealing part of their daily information while 
reporting to their primary care. So using such a device would 
stop them from keeping up with these habits. The 3rd P.C. 

103
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and 5th P.C. listed high prices and complexity—especially 
among elderly—as the main hindrances for using this 
technology. The 4th P.C. thought that both high cost and 
local availability would be the main hindrances for obtaining 
this instrument.  
For the connectivity with the smart devices, the overall 
rate regarding this capability was summarized in Table II. 
The 1st P.C. thought that the automated reminder function 
would be the first choice for her. The 2nd and 5th P.C. 
thought that the automated data collection feature would be 
extremely important, as it would ease the mission of 
collecting patients’ data. The 3rd and 4th P.C. thought that 
providing an interactive interface would allow different types 
of features, such as easy control, flexible dose adjustment or 
carbohydrates ratio calculation. 
C. Discussion and Analysis of the Assessment Study  
Overall, the data showed that most of the participants had 
no experience with the intelligent insulin pens before this 
study, but the overall ratings of intelligent insulin pens were 
mostly positive among the participants. Few cases had 
negative views toward the technology. Most of these cases 
were patients, who have been under insulin pumps therapy. 
There were still quite a number of participants, around 28%, 
who do not mind this technology, but at the same time they 
cannot see great advantages in its usage. It is still difficult to 
have an absolute conclusion about the importance of the 
intelligent pens—as compared to other methods—from this 
study only.  
As per the evaluation of the intelligent pens features, 
Memory feature was ranked the first in the scoring rank.   
There were about 63% of participants who reported liability 
of dosing errors, either frequently or occasionally. So 
apparently, the memory feature would get the major attention 
among these participants. 
In the second place came the alarming feature. The 
feature was probably appreciated as it helps to keep the 
patients alert about battery and insulin cartridge level, and at 
the same time, it also helps to assure a better dose 
administration, i.e., because of the automated alarm 
countdown while administering the dose. It would save the 
effort of doing the counting manually.   
For the precise scale and data transfer both features got a 
lower rank than the previous two. This was because only 
certain groups would appreciate these features. Precise scale 
is certainly critical for those who might have high insulin 
sensitivity. The case is common among children and 
athletics. In our data, young participants were about 32% of 
the group, while people, who picked the excessive exercises 
as the main reason for Hypoglycemia, were about 27%. Both 
groups were not dominant in the sample, so certainly precise 
scale would not get a higher rank than the previous two 
features.  
Similarly, for transferring data to PC, the feature got 
lower ranks than the other features. The feature itself has the 
potential to ease the collection of doses records. 
Nevertheless, the group who reported keeping tracks of daily 
doses was less than half, about 44%. Many participants 
among the other groups did not appreciate the importance of 
doses records collection; so, as a result, the feature of 
transferring data to PC was less appreciated among these 
individuals. On the other hand, the feature itself was greatly 
appreciated by primary cares; it would ease monitoring the 
adherence of insulin medication among patients.   
Pre-saving doses got a lower rank within the list; 
although the majority of the participants 62% were using two 
types of insulin, the feature was assumed to get a higher rank 
and gain more appreciation from the patients. Nevertheless, 
because some patients make regular adjustment in daily 
bases for each meal to match the carbohydrates intake, it 
could be possible that this feature would be meaningless to 
them. Pre-saved dose function will limit the flexibility of 
adjustment. Basically, patients will keep re-adjusting all the 
pre-save doses similar to the regular manners. The feature 
could be more appreciated if they were for example 
implemented with some smart features; for example, like 
including an alarm or warning for not taking the dose during 
the usual time. Such a feature could be useful for those who 
would frequently forget to take their meal doses either before 
or after their meal.  
Finally, as per the ability to switch from digital mode to 
manual mode, this feature would be useful in the case of 
battery outage; however, with the availability of the alarm 
feature, it became less meaningful; because it can notify 
when the battery would reach low level. Moreover, in such a 
case, the patient can switch to regular insulin pens without 
the need to switch to the manual mode itself.  
The question here now is how important this technology 
would be for diabetic patients. Most patients saw some 
promising potentials within this technology, but we need to 
look deeper into the actual characteristics of the technology 
itself. The two unique features within the current 
technologies are the data memory and precise scale. For the 
use of data memory in particular, if the patient is among the 
individuals, who regularly encounter dosing mistakes—like 
one of the 24% of our participants, then this kind of solution 
can be essential in order to avoid any risks of serious 
Hypo/Hyperglycemia. Similarly, if the patient is one of the 
individuals, who have high sensitivity to insulin, this kind of 
solution will provide a high flexibility of dose scaling. Other 
than this, both features will be great options for general 
groups; the patient might not need to use them in regular 
bases, but in some occasions, they would be handy, i.e., 
during busy schedules or heavy exercise routines. The large 
data memory itself might be useful as reference for 
individuals like primary cares, but for the patients, it would 
be more useful if they can be associated with other diabetic 
data to enhance the self-management.  
In general, most of the patients were hoping for a fewer 
number of Hypo/hyperglycemia episodes after using this 
technology, but at the same time, in the data, participants 
indicated that the most likable reason for these episodes was 
due to inaccurate carbohydrates intake. Encountering these 
episodes because of mistakes came as the least reason among 
the other ones. Unfortunately, there is no feature available 
within current models, which can give precise carbohydrate 
intake values, i.e., like the one available within pumps. From 
the hindrance side, participants and primary cares indicated 

104
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that the availability within local market and high prices 
would be the two likely reasons for passing on this 
technology. Unluckily, current models are still suffering 
from one of these two issues or both. For high cost in 
particular, high cost can be a hindrance, but if the solution 
could justify its effectiveness, patient might pass on costs for 
the favor of ideal performance. This case can actually be 
observed among the users of insulin pumps. Although pumps 
are well known for their high costs, they are still a popular 
solution among Type1 patients, especially in United States. 
This is because pumps have been known for their remarkable 
performance and convenient management [34].  
During our usability study, complexity as well got some 
attention also among some participants and primary cares. 
Intelligent pens were noted for being a little complicated 
than regular insulin pens, however, mastering them is still 
not hard as the insulin pumps. The complexity in our data 
could not get a higher value because most of the participants 
were from the middle-aged groups. If most of the 
participants were from the elderly groups, we might see a 
higher value for complexity as a hindrance.   
We can conclude here that current solutions of intelligent 
pens can be essential for certain groups of patients, but for 
the general, it is a good option if the patient could justify 
their needs over the existing hindrances.  
 
IV. 
CONNECTIVITY OF SMART DEVICES AND 
INTELLIGENT INSULIN PENS  
In our last section of our survey questions, which was 
related to the connectivity with smart devices, we saw some 
changes within the evaluation of intelligent insulin pens 
under the proposed vision. We could see some evident 
movement from the neutral group side to the positive group 
side. There were some other movements from the neutral 
sides to the negative sides but they were only few, especially 
among users who do not use smart devices regularly. We 
inquired the patients to pick the most desirable feature 
among the proposed list in order to locate the start point of 
our pilot studies. Since the patients were more concerned 
about 
creating 
solution 
that 
would 
remind 
them 
automatically about their own doses, we decided to conduct 
a series of experiments under this vision. The main objective 
is to test their usability and effectiveness on the regular 
management.  
This section gives some details regarding a series of pilot 
studies, which were conducted to test the feasibility and 
usability of connecting intelligent insulin pens technology 
with smart devices. The section first gives some background 
about the current smart technology and their capabilities, and 
then it states some details about the proposed system used for 
this study. After that, the section highlights the experiment 
details, and then it lists all the observed results. Lastly, the 
section concludes with a brief discussion and analysis about 
the obtained results.  
A. The Role of Ubiquitous Technologies in Enhancing the 
Intelligent Insulin Pens 
The intelligent insulin pens showed some potential in 
providing a couple of helpful features for insulin delivery; 
however, the technology still needs more improvement to 
make them highly effective for the majority of diabetic 
patients. The issue is that this improvement could lead to 
some major concerns, such as additional manufacturing cost 
or complicated user interface. Intelligent insulin pens have 
already a huge difference in their prices compared to regular 
insulin 
pens. 
Moreover, 
mastering 
its 
use 
is 
not 
straightforward as regular insulin pens; it requires some time 
to fully adopt the user interface and handle all the functions. 
This means adding more features within the unit in the 
future, such as carbohydrates calculators or smart reminders 
functions, would raise the cost of each unit, and it could 
complicate the interface even further.    
Alternatively, rather than adding extra processing 
modules within the unit itself, we can focus on the 
connectivity with ubiquitous technologies, such as smart 
devices and cloud computing. As it was stated before, smart 
devices are remarkable for their powerful processing 
capability and simple user interface. They can act as an 
extension unit for intelligent insulin pens to do some 
sophisticated tasks such as automated reminder function or 
automated dose adjustment.   
In addition to that, technologies such as cloud computing 
can play a major role in this type of extension. Exchange of 
data and commands could effortlessly be managed between 
the two technologies through the cloud communication.  
Multiple sectors, e.g., communication, gaming, e-commerce, 
etc., are already utilizing the cloud computing technology 
within their practices; yet, the healthcare sector is still a little 
bit slow in following the same example [35]. The reasons 
could go back to the differences between regulations in 
handling healthcare data [36], or the risks associated with the 
multiple threats surrounding the cloud technology [37]. 
Nevertheless, we cannot ignore how helpful the cloud 
computing have become in handling our daily data. Luckily, 
experts are aware of this potential and they are trying 
multiple ways to overcome the risks associated with the 
healthcare data [38].  
B. The Proposed Reminder System 
General recommendations state that the patient should 
associate medication time with daily routines, e.g., bedtime 
or mealtime; however, additional recommendations suggest 
using reminder systems to back up daily routines; the reason 
is that daily routines are liable to changes or alteration. 
Studies found out that smart devices are the most common 
way among patients to remind themselves about their own 
medication [39], and several other studies proved that the use 
of smart devices managed to improve the adherence among 
patients [40][41].  
Nevertheless, most of the results from these studies were 
relying on patients’ self-reporting. Unfortunately, it was 
found that self-reporting were liable to alteration and human-
errors [42]. For this reason, it would be better to create smart 

105
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 7.  Cloud-based reminder system. 
 
TABLE III.  
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 
ID 
Gender 
Usage of 
Smart Devices 
Age 
Study  
Completion  
P1 
Male 
High 
21-39 
YES 
P2 
Male 
Low 
60-75 
YES 
P3 
Male 
High 
40-59 
YES 
P4 
Female 
Average 
40-59 
YES 
P5 
Female 
High 
40-59 
YES 
P6 
Male 
Low 
60-75 
YES 
P7 
Female 
Average 
40-59 
YES 
P8 
Male 
Low 
60-75 
YES 
P9 
Female 
Low 
60-75 
YES 
P10 
Male 
High 
40-59 
YES 
P11 
Female 
Average 
21-39 
NO 
P12 
Female 
Low 
40-59 
NO 
P13 
Male 
Low 
40-59 
NO 
 
solutions that can automatically keep tracks of dose 
administration.  
There are some examples from several conducted studies 
concerning the previous point. One study applied the 
gamification concept to keep tracks of the medication and 
adherence level [43]. In this study, the patients competed 
with each other through social media to maintain the highest 
rank of adherence level among the group members. Other 
studies used wearable computing to keep tracks of 
medication routines [44].           
Following the same directions, we proposed a smart 
cloud-based reminder system using smart devices and 
intelligent insulin pens. With the proposed system, we 
conducted a couple of pilot studies to test the usability of the 
system and its potential among diabetic patients.      
The suggested system (Figure 7) is similar to some 
cloud-based reminders system available within current 
generation of smart devices, i.e., Apple®’s iPhone or 
Android based devices. In these devices, as soon as the user 
would set a reminder, it would be activated automatically in 
all the devices associated with the user’s account through the 
cloud services; similarly, the user can deactivate, i.e., check 
the reminder, from any device available in hands at that 
moment.  
We would like to apply the same concept for doses 
reminder; however, rather than allowing the patients to 
deactivate the reminder alarm manually, the device should 
automatically check the collected records within the 
intelligent pens and verify if the patient has taken the 
required dose or not. If the device could not find the required 
record, it would keep snoozing the patient until it would 
make sure that the patient has taken the required dose.  
This system would be specifically useful for the daily 
basal type of doses, i.e., background insulin doses such 
Glargine or Detemir.  
This type of doses requires to be taken within a fixed 
period of time, i.e., 12 or 24 hours, in order to assure a better 
glycemic control [45]. Applying this type of systems can 
encourage the patient to adopt a better compliance to the 
diabetic management and, consequently, the patient would 
keep maintaining a high level of adherence to the 
medication. 
C. The Pilot Studies and Research Method 
Three usability studies were conducted with 13 
participants in total; each one of this study lasted 3 weeks. 
The first two experiments were part of another study [46]. 
Additional study was conducted and analyzed for this 
research. Table III summarizes the information concerning 
the participants.  
All the patients were using Insulin Glargine as part of 
their medication. Three individuals withdrew in the middle 
of the study due to a couple of reasons, i.e., busy schedule or 
technical difficulties, while the remaining ten participants 
continued till the end of the studies. The experiments in the 
studies were split into two phases.  
The first phase of the experiment lasted 10 days. It 
focused on the interaction of patients with the intelligent 
insulin pens and measuring the patients' adherence level.   
The second phase of the experiment also lasted 10 days; 
however, this time the focus was on the interaction between 
the patients and the proposed cloud-based reminder system. 
The adherence level was measured here as well to oversee 
the influence of the system on this data.  
For the first phase, the patient was asked to follow the 
same usual routines for taking the basal dose using the 
intelligent pens. For the second phase, the patient had to use 
the proposed reminder installed within the personal smart 
device. The patient was directed to take the medication every 
day on the same determined time. The patient was allowed to 
take the medication within 30 minutes earlier or 30 minutes 
later from the appointed time. Basically, the system will 
check the data within the intelligent insulin pen. If the 
required dose was taken, the reminder would automatically 
be deactivated, and then a confirmation message would be 
sent to the patient. If the administration of the dose could not 
be confirmed, snooze would be activated for every 10 
minutes. The snooze would be kept activated until either the 

106
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 8.  Level of adherence results. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Response speed results. 
 
TABLE IV.  
RESPONSE SPEED SCORES 
Scores 
Period of time 
Patient’s Awareness 
5 
Before the time 
Mostly responded before 
the 1st alarm 
4 
On time 
Mostly responded to the 
1st alarm 
3 
10 minutes passed 
Mostly responded to the 
2nd alarm 
2 
20 minutes passed 
Mostly responded to the 
3rd alarm 
1 
30 minutes passed 
Or more than 30 minutes 
earlier 
Mostly responded to the 
last alarm or 
miscalculated the assigned 
time 
0 
Dose not taken 
 
confirmation or until a period of 30 minutes from the first 
alarm. After that, a message would be sent to the patients 
stating that “the dose was not administered within the 
appointed time and it should be administered as soon as 
seeing this message”.   
The system was partially based on the Wizard of Oz 
prototyping concept [47], but from the patients’ side the 
system actions were fully automated. The main tools used 
for this experiment were: 
 
1. 4 x intelligent insulin pens. 
2. 4x portable laptops with pre-installed diabetic 
management software.  
3. Smart reminders with cloud feature installed in the 
patient’s personal devices.  
 
The level of adherence was measured based on 
SANOFI’s directions for their insulin Glargine [48], i.e., 
“once a day” and “within 24-hour”. If the patient managed to 
take the dose within the assigned period, a full score would 
be given. If the patient administered the dose outside the 
assigned time, a half score would be given. If the patient did 
administer the dose during that day, no score would be 
given.  
We conducted another measurement to evaluate the 
speed of response to the issued alarms. Table IV summarizes 
the scoring method for the response speed. After that, one 
day was dedicated to collect participants’ feedback for both 
phases. 
 
D. Summary of the Pilot Studies Results 
1) Scoring Data: Figure 8 summarizes the results of the 
adherence level before and after applying the cloud-based 
reminder system, while Figure 9 summarizes the scores for 
the response speed to the alarm system. For the level of 
adherence, most of the patients had either the same level of 
adherence or slightly better after applying the system, while 
four cases showed notable differences within the measured 
level, especially for the second and third participants.  
For the response speed level, the results of the cases 
showed that most of the participants were likely respond the 
second alarm. This means that this group might require a 
medium level of alarming, i.e., at least two to three snoozing 
alarms. Three cases showed an immediate response to the 
alarming system, which means this group might require a 
low level of alarming, i.e., maximum two snoozing alarms. 
Two cases only showed a low level of response speed to the 
alarming system, which means they might need more than 
three alarms in order to administer their medication on time. 
 
2) Patients' Feedback: Most of the participants had 
positive views toward the systems. The participants’ 
opinions have been grouped according to their reminding 
behavior before using the system.  
For those who used to have a regular reminder system, 
like remainder apps or devices, they considered the system as 
an upgrade to the usual reminders. This was because the 

107
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
system could automate the snoozing function and post-
acknowledgment for the doses.  
For those who were associating their dose time with daily 
habits, they reported that the system was as good backup for 
the daily habits. They felt that the system is more reliable 
because daily habits were liable to changes or alteration.  
For those who were not following any of the previous 
two methods, they felt that the system helped a lot to 
maintain the dose time, especially under busy schedule 
routines.  
The ability to run the system on multiple devices was 
apprised a lot. When one device would be down for any 
reason, the second one will act as a backup.  
Few cases showed less appreciation to the system. The 
main reason could be that their use of smart devices was 
limited to basic functions only, i.e., calling or messaging 
only. The most notable negative feedback was the inability to 
customize the alarming system. The sound level and type of 
tunes were limited in the systems, this sometimes caused 
some inconvenient for the participants; it caused missing at 
least the first alarm in a couple of cases.  
The other negative view was the Internet communication 
dependency. Since the system relies heavily on the cloud 
servers, it requires keeping the devices connected to the 
Internet all the time. Sometimes it is hard to maintain this 
condition due to communication lost or weak signals.      
The patients were inquired about the main reasons for not 
administering the dose on time while using the system. Some 
cases reported that they were receiving the alarms but they 
could not take the dose on time because they left their digital 
pens at home or office. Another cases were due to heavy 
sleeping; some participants missed the alarm while sleeping 
because the sound was not loud enough to wake them up. 
Another reason was due to the engagement of certain 
activities that prevented them from being excused to take 
their own doses on the appointed time, i.e., being in a 
meeting or giving some lectures. 
E. Discussion and Analysis for the Pilot Studies 
The pilot studies were divided into two phases of pilot 
studies. The first phase was focusing on observing patients' 
regular routines, while in the second phase, patients were 
asked to rely on the proposed reminder system for managing 
the doses time; the proposed reminder system here acted as 
an extension feature for the intelligent insulin pens. The 
purpose was to see the influence of the applied reminder 
system on the patients’ compliance.  
After evaluating the obtained results for adherence, we 
found that participants, who were using regular reminder 
systems or daily routines to remind themselves about the 
doses, had some advantage from the system. First, the 
participants managed to maintain the same high adherence 
level in the second experiment without any extra effort, i.e., 
no need to adjust the reminder manually. Second, the system 
was more reliable because all the confirmation and snoozing 
processes were done automatically without any external 
alteration. This system among these types of patients could 
act as a good support for the regular daily routines.  
For the participants, who were not following any 
methods to remind themselves about their own doses, 
benefited more from the proposed reminder system. Even 
under busy schedule, participants achieved to maintain a 
better management for their own doses. This kind of system 
could help this type of patients to sustain a better compliance 
toward the medication directions.   
As per the second measurement related to the alarm 
response. The response speed results showed that this kind of 
system should offer some customization level personalized 
for each user. For example, people, who have limited uses of 
smart devises, might need to be reminded more frequently 
than regular cases; similarly, heavy sleeper might need a 
louder or more noticeable notification to wake them up.  
As per the patients’ feedback in using the system, the use 
of intelligent insulin pens along with this kind of reminder 
system was greatly appreciated among most of the 
participants. Also, since this system is utilizing cloud 
services, it can be available within multiple numbers of 
personal devices. This would make the system more portable 
and convenient for use.      
Some cases, especially among participants with limited 
technical knowledge, had less appreciation to the whole 
system, which combines intelligent insulin pens and the 
proposed reminder system. The reasons could go back to the 
limited uses of smart devices or to the hindrances available 
within intelligent insulin pens technology itself.   
For a final word about future development within this 
types of researches, For systems that are similar to the 
proposed reminder system within this research, these kinds 
of systems rely heavily on using an advanced type of 
devices, which can record and exchange data among other 
devises. The exchange of data should be done in an intuitive 
way, which do not require the user’s involvement, such the 
communication through cloud computing. In our proposed 
system, unfortunately, current model of intelligent insulin 
pens do not have the capability to achieve the previous 
function, which allows exchanging the doses data with other 
devices automatically. The study relied on other methods, 
such as the Wizard of Oz, in order to the give intuition of 
automated data exchange to the participants within this 
study. Future development of intelligent insulin pens might 
need to focus on how to make the data exchange smoother 
and intuitive for the users, such as the utilization of cloud 
communication.        
On the other hand, among the feedback in this study, 
some of the participants showed some concerns toward the 
use of intelligent pens technology itself, such as large size or 
complicated user interface. Such hindrances would directly 
affect the overall convenience of the whole system. In this 
study, the system relies heavily on using intelligent insulin 
pens for data collection. Nevertheless, if the intelligent 
insulin pens are not user friendly enough, then the user will 
not able to utilize useful functions such as the reminder 
system. In the future, when creating new solutions, 
developers should try to retain some of the convenience 
originated within former solutions, for example, in our 
particular case, regular insulin pens are being noted for their 
lightweight design, which ease carrying them around, while 

108
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
on the other hand, the design of intelligent insulin pens is 
considered bulky compared to regular insulin pens. It could 
be difficult to find a good balance between enhancement and 
convenience, but the main objective is how to make a new 
introduced solution more appealing among the users. At the 
end, the ability to use the technology without difficulties will 
contribute in simplifying the diabetic management itself.          
V. 
CONCLUSION AND  FUTURE WORK 
In general, technology has had a significant role in 
enhancing the insulin therapy. This was noted evidently 
within the evolution of insulin pump therapy. For MDI, 
before the arrival of intelligent insulin pens technology, the 
use of technology was limited to a couple of diabetic gadgets 
such glucometer and smartphones. The advent of intelligent 
insulin pens technology could be a promising evolution 
toward a smart MDI management system. Nevertheless, in 
order to examine the intelligent insulin pens necessity among 
diabetic patients, a couple of assessment studies were 
conducted among insulin dependent individuals.  
The assessment studies included a couple of question 
related to the diabetic management and evaluation of the 
intelligent insulin pens technology. The study required a 
group of diabetic patients, who were mainly relying on 
insulin as part of their diabetic treatment. . The recruitment 
for 
participants 
was 
done 
initially 
through 
online 
communities, and then physically through diabetic clinics at 
alter stage.. The outcome of the study found that the patients 
in general had positive opinions toward the technology itself. 
The memory function was the most favorable feature among 
the other ones. The patients were still longing for more 
features and upgrades from these kinds of technology of 
intelligent insulin pens.  
Judging on the outcomes, we found that the technology 
in its current shape could be essential for certain diabetic 
groups, but for the general insulin dependent patients, the 
technology could be a better alternative if the patient could 
justify the needs and overlook its current hindrances. In order 
to make the technology more functional for general diabetic 
group, more functions should be made to enhance the 
diabetic management itself.  
Nevertheless, approaching such a goal might have a 
negative impact on the cost and complexity of the 
technology itself. Alternatively, we suggest focusing on the 
connectivity between this technology and ubiquitous 
technologies, such as smart devices and cloud computing. To 
demonstrate this point, a couple of pilot studies were 
conducted based on the outcomes of the assessment study.  
The pilot studies included a Wizard of Oz prototype 
system tested among insulin dependent patients. The 
suggested system was a smart reminder system, which 
utilizes a couple of technologies like intelligent insulin pens, 
smart devices and cloud communication. The outcomes of 
the study were mostly positive among the patients. It is 
believed that the proposed system could be a good support 
for the daily diabetic management, and it would help to 
promote a better compliance toward the insulin medication. 
A couple of negative outcomes were observed, which were 
likely related to the limited uses of technologies. The main 
goal is to simplify the management of diabetes mellitus 
itself. For this reason, future developments should focus in 
how to keep new technologies user-friendly as much as 
possible. Failing to maintain this might affect negatively on 
the usage of these introduced technologies, and it would 
complicate the diabetic management even further. 
Finally, there were a couple of limitations within this 
study. First, the sample size of the participated patients was 
relatively small.  Results from this study cannot be 
representative. If we need to have an absolute conclusion 
about the intelligent insulin pens technology evaluation, we 
need to collect a large sample size that would be enough for 
statistical type of studies. Moreover, the conducted usability 
testes were short period studies, which were enough to 
observe the overall impression and collect limited 
information. Longer period studies can inspect more on the 
positive and negative outcomes of using the technology, and 
it can oversee the influence on the glycemic control. 
Similarly, for the smart reminder system pilot studies, the 
system was based on the Wizard of Oz prototyping, which 
was enough to collect some impression about the function 
itself and observe the interaction with the system.  
Future studies should implement a full working prototype 
for a longer period of study. The goal is to find more about 
the positive and negative impacts while using the system, 
and once again, to observe the influence on glycemic control.  
These kinds of long-term studies require at least three 
months of continuous experiments and direct supervision 
from diabetic practitioners. We hope by investing in these 
studies, we would able to provide a contribution toward 
simplifying the complexity of diabetic management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Our thanks to DiabetES FB group and all the people who 
helped us with survey recruitment process.  
Also, our thanks to Dr.Khadija Basheihk, a consultant 
family medicine and diabetologist at Ministry of Health 
Training, Postgraduate Studies and Research Center in 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, for her consultation and arrangement 
of physical studies.  
A special thanks to Ms.F.Kalkattawi for her help in the 
recruitment and coordination with the participants, and to 
Ms. Hadia Nusrat for her consultation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Kalkattawi and T. Nakajima, "Intelligent Insulin Pens A 
luxurious instrument or an essential gadget ? — A qualitative 
study," in eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
TinkMind, 2015, pp. 217-223. 
[2] J. Rex, K. H. Jensen, and S. A. Lawton, "A review of 20 
years’ experience with the   Novopen® family of insulin 
injection devices," Clinical drug investigation, vol. 26, no. 7,   
Jul. 2006, pp. 367-401. 
[3] B. M. Wright, J. M. Bellone, and E. K. McCoy, "A Review of 
Insulin pen Devices and Use in the elderly Diabetic 
population," Clinical medicine insights, Endocrinology and 
diabetes, vol. 3, Nov. 2010, pp. 53. 

109
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[4] T. L. Pearson, "Practical aspects of insulin pen devices," 
J.Diabetes Sci.Technol., vol. 4, no. 3, May 1, 2010, pp. 522-
531. 
[5]  R. R. Rubin and M. Peyrot, "Factors affecting use of insulin 
pens by patients with type 2 diabetes," Diabetes Care, vol. 31, 
no. 3, Mar 2008, pp. 430-432. 
[6] https://www.bd.com/resource.aspx?IDX=23379 2015.11.30  
[7]  J. Selam, "Evolution of diabetes insulin delivery devices," 
Journal of diabetes science and technology, vol. 4, no.3, May 
2010, pp. 505-513. 
[8] D. A. Ignaut and W. J. Venekamp, "HumaPen® memoir™: A 
novel insulin-injecting pen with a dose-memory feature," 
Expert review of medical devices, vol. 4, no. 6, 2007, pp. 793-
802. 
[9] M. Pisano, "Overview of insulin and non-insulin delivery 
devices in the treatment of diabetes," P.T., vol. 39, no. 12, 
Dec. 2014, pp. 866-876. 
[10] L. Xue and K. H. Mikkelsen, "Dose accuracy of a durable 
insulin pen with memory function, before and after simulated 
lifetime use and under stress conditions," Expert opinion on 
drug delivery, vol.10, no.3, Mar. 2013, pp. 301-306. 
[11] B. S. Olsen, S. K. Lilleøre, C. N. Korsholm, and T. Kracht, 
"Novopen Echo® for the delivery of insulin: a comparison of 
usability, functionality and preference among pediatric 
subjects, their parents, and health care professionals," Journal 
of diabetes science and technology vol.4, no.6, Nov. 2010, pp. 
1468-1475. 
[12] A. Brown et al., “ CLOSERLOOK” (Report presented at the 
47th annual meeting for European Association for the Study 
of Diabetes, Lisbon, Portugal, September 12-16, 2011). 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.pendiq.com/de/insulin-
pen/pressecenter 2015.11.30 
[13] G. Scheiner, Until There Is a Cure: The Latest and Greatest in 
Diabetes Self-Care, Michigan: Spry Publishing LLC, 2013. 
[14] H. Anhalt and N. J. V. Bohannon, "Insulin patch pumps: their 
development and future in closed-loop systems," Diabetes 
technology & therapeutics, vol. 12, no. S1, Jun. 2010. pp. S-
51. 
[15] M. J. Lenhard and G. D. Reeves, "Continuous subcutaneous 
insulin infusion: A comprehensive review of insulin pump 
therapy," Arch.Intern.Med., vol. 161, no. 19, Oct. 2001, pp. 
2293-2300. 
[16] J. C. Pickup, "Semi-closed-loop insulin delivery systems: 
Early experience with low-glucose insulin suspend pumps," 
Diabetes Technol.Ther., vol. 13, no. 7, Jul. 2011, pp. 695-698. 
[17] R. Hovorka, "Continuous glucose monitoring and closed-loop 
systems," Diabetic medicine, vol. 23, no. 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 1-
12. 
[18] Stilgherrian, "Lethal medical device hack taken to next level," 
CSO Online (Australia), Oct 21, 2011. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.cso.com.au/article/404909/lethal_medical_device
_hack_taken_next_level/ 2015.11.30 
[19] C. Li, A. Raghunathan and N. K. Jha, "Hijacking an insulin 
pump: Security attacks and defenses for a diabetes therapy 
system," in e-Health Networking Applications and Services 
(Healthcom), 2011 13th IEEE International Conference on, 
Jun. 2011, pp. 150-156. 
[20] A. Sussman, E. J. Taylor, M. Patel, J. Ward, S. Alva, A. 
Lawrence and R. Ng, "Performance of a glucose meter with a 
built-in automated bolus calculator versus manual bolus 
calculation in insulin-using subjects," J.Diabetes Sci.Technol., 
vol. 6, no. 2, Mar. 1, 2012, pp. 339-344. 
[21] A. Preece and W. Reuschel, "Mobile connected health 
devices: 
The 
future 
of 
health 
technology?," 
AFB 
AccessWorld® Magazine, vol. 15, No. 11, Nov. 2014. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.afb.org/afbpress/pub.asp?DocID=aw151107 
2015.11.30 
[22] S. Weinzimer et al., "Prolonged use of continuous glucose 
monitors in children with type 1 diabetes on continuous 
subcutaneous insulin infusion or intensive multiple-daily 
injection therapy," Pediatr.Diabetes, vol. 10, no. 2, Apr. 2009, 
pp. 91-96. 
[23] R. P. L. M. Hoogma et al., "Comparison of the effects of 
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) and NPH-
based multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) on glycaemic 
control and quality of life: results of the 5ჼnations trial," 
Diabetic Medicine, vol. 23, no. 2, Feb. 2006, pp. 141-147. 
[24] C. Stößel, H. Wandke, and L. Blessing, "Gestural interfaces 
for elderly users: help or hindrance?," In Gesture in Embodied 
Communication and Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 269-
280, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. 
[25] T. Chomutare, L. Fernandez-Luque, E. Arsand and G. 
Hartvigsen, "Features of mobile diabetes applications: Review 
of the literature and analysis of current applications compared 
against evidence-based guidelines," J.Med.Internet Res., vol. 
13, no. 3, Sep. 22, 2011, pp. e65. 
[26] O. El-Gayar, P. Timsina, N. Nawar and W. Eid, "Mobile 
applications for diabetes self-management: Status and 
potential," J.Diabetes Sci.Technol., vol. 7, no. 1, Jan 1, 2013, 
pp. 247-262. 
[27] K. Waki, H. Fujita, Y. Uchimura, K. Omae, E. Aramaki, S. 
Kato, H. Lee, H. Kobayashi, T. Kadowaki and K. Ohe, 
"DialBetics: A novel smartphone-based self-management 
support system for type 2 diabetes patients," J.Diabetes 
Sci.Technol., vol. 8, no. 2, Mar 13, 2014, pp. 209-215. 
[28] T. MELNIK, "There’s an app for that! the FDA offers a 
framework for regulating mobile health," Journal of Health 
Care Compliance, Sep-Oct 2011, pp. 55. 
[29] M. B. Hamel, N. G. Cortez and I. G. Cohen, "FDA regulation 
of mobile health technologies," N.Engl.J.Med., vol. 371, no. 
4, Jul. 2014, pp. 372-379. 
[30] A. Greene, N. K. Choudhry, E. Kilabuk and W. H. Shrank, 
"Online social networking by patients with diabetes: A 
qualitative evaluation of communication with facebook," 
Journal of general internal medicine, vol. 26, no. 3, March 
2011, pp. 287-292. 
[31] K. Grifantini, "Advances in management technology for 
diabetes: From personal reminders to digital doctors." Pulse, 
IEEE, vol. 5, no. 3, May-Jun. 2014, pp. 40-44. 
[32] M. Elawad, "Demonstration of Telcare’s cellular and cloud 
based," iMedicalApps, Mar 4 2014. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.imedicalapps.com/2014/03/telcare-cellular-
glucometer/ 2015.11.30 
[33] B. Brandell and C. Ford, "Diabetes professionals must seize 
the opportunity in mobile health," J.Diabetes Sci.Technol., 
vol. 7, no. 6, Nov 1, 2013, pp. 1616-1620. 
[34] P. Scuffham and L. Carr, "The cost ‐ effectiveness of 
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion compared with 
multiple daily injections for the management of diabetes," 
Diabetic Med., vol. 20, no. 7, Jul. 2003, pp. 586-593. 
[35] B. Eastwood, “Health care Finally Warming to Cloud 
Technology,” CIO, November 18, 2013. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.cio.com/article/2380823/healthcare/healthcare-
finally- warming-to-cloud-technology.html 2015.11.30 
[36] J. J. M. Seddon and W. L. Currie, "Cloud computing and 
trans-border health data: Unpacking US and EU healthcare 
regulation and compliance," Health policy and technology, 
vol. 2, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 229-241. 
[37] N. Pitropakis, E. Darra, N. Vrakas, and C. Lambrinoudakis, 
"It's All in the Cloud: Reviewing Cloud Security," In 
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, 2013 IEEE 10th 

110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
International 
Conference 
on 
and 
10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Autonomic 
and 
Trusted 
Computing 
(UIC/ATC), IEEE, Dec. 2013, pp. 355-362. 
[38] A. M. Kuo, "Opportunities and challenges of cloud computing 
to improve health care services," Journal of medical Internet 
research, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
3, 
Sep. 
2011, 
e67, 
doi:10.2196/jmir.1867. 
[39] M. S. Laffer and S. R. Feldman, "Improving medication 
adherence through technology: Analyzing the managing meds 
video challenge," Skin Research and Technology, vol. 20, no. 
1, Jun. 2014, pp. 62-66. 
[40] S. Patel et al., "Mobilizing your medications: An automated 
medication reminder application for mobile phones and 
hypertension medication adherence in a high-risk urban 
population," J.Diabetes Sci.Technol., vol. 7, no. 3, May 1, 
2013 pp. 630-639. 
[41] M. Vervloet et al., "Short‐and long‐term effects of real‐
time medication monitoring with short message service 
(SMS) reminders for missed doses on the refill adherence of 
people with type 2 diabetes: Evidence from a randomized 
controlled trial," Diabetic Med., vol. 31, no. 7, Apr. 2014, pp. 
821-828. 
[42] R. J. Straka, J. T. Fish, S. R. Benson and J. T. Suh, "Patient 
self‐ reporting of compliance does not correspond with 
electronic monitoring: An evaluation using isosorbide 
dinitrate as a model drug," Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of 
Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, vol. 17, no. 1, Jan-
Feb 1997, pp. 126-132. 
[43] R. De Oliveira, M. Cherubini and N. Oliver, "MoviPill: 
improving medication compliance for elders using a mobile 
persuasive social game," in Proceedings of the 12th ACM 
international conference on Ubiquitous computing, Sep. 2010, 
pp. 251-260. 
[44] J. Li, S. J. Peplinski, S. M. Nia and A. Farajidavar, "An 
interoperable pillbox system for smart medication adherence," 
in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 
2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE, Aug. 
2014, pp. 1386-1389. 
[45] M. Peyrot, A. H. Barnett, L. F. Meneghini, and P. M. 
Schumm-Draeger, "Insulin adherence behaviours and barriers 
in the multinational Global Attitudes of Patients and 
Physicians in Insulin Therapy study," Diabetic Medicine, vol. 
29, no. 5, May 2012, pp. 682-689. 
[46] M. Kalkattawi and T. Nakajima, "Ubiquitous Healthcare 
Systems: Improving the Adherence Level within Diabetic 
Medication Using Cloud-Based Reminder System," in Human 
Interface and the Management of Information. Information 
and Knowledge Design, Anonymous : Springer, Aug. 2015, 
pp. 535-546. 
[47] A. J. B. Brush, "Ubiquitous computing field studies," in 
Ubiquitous Computing Fundamentals, J. Krumm, Eds. CRC 
Press, pp. 161-202, 2009. 
[48] V. Mohan, M. John, M. Baruah and A. Bhansali, "Addressing 
barriers to effective basal insulin therapy," J.Assoc.Physicians 
India, vol. 62, no. 1, Jan. 2014, Suppl, pp. 10-14.
 

