	  An Interactive Web Tool to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in Dementia: 
Design Issues Perceived by Caregivers and Patients 
 
Marijke Span, Carolien Smits, 
Leontine Groen-van de Ven, Jan Jukema 
Research group Innovation of Care of Older Adults 
and Social Work, 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl, chm.smits@windesheim.nl, 
lm.groen-vande.ven@windesheim.nl, 
js.jukema@windesheim.nl 
 
Marike Hettinga, Ruud Janssen 
Research group IT Innovation in Health Care, 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.hettinga@windesheim.nl, tjwm.janssen@windesheim.nl 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen 
Department of Primary Care, IQ HealthCare, 
Radboud University Nijmegen; 
Kalorama Foundation, Radboud Alzheimer Centre 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
myrra.vernooij-dassen@radboudumc.nl  
 
Jan Eefsting 
Department of Nursing Home Medicine and 
EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, 
VU University Medical Centre 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
j.eefsting@zgijv.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this study is to identify design issues 
(both weaknesses and strengths) that should be considered for 
designing a user-friendly design of an interactive web tool that 
facilitates shares decision making in care networks of people 
with dementia. Our research questions are: 1) What design 
issues can be identified? and 2) What is the unique 
contribution of people with dementia to the design? This study, 
with its iterative participatory design based on the CeHRes 
roadmap included six separate focus group sessions with 
people with dementia, informal caregivers, and case managers; 
a cognitive walkthrough with researchers; and usability tests 
with case managers, older adults, informal caregivers, and 
people with dementia. The design issues were: a screen design 
based on pleasant and harmonious colors, the use of clear and 
uniform buttons throughout the interface, the use of multiple-
choice questions with smileys as answering options, a foldable 
menu bar that is closed (for people with dementia) or open (for 
caregivers) by default, and the incorporation of a chat function 
that specifically keeps all end users involved in a conversation. 
The specific and detailed contribution of the participants with 
dementia dealt with their focus on the present, accuracy of 
language, 
and 
the 
graphical 
layout. 
However, 
other 
participants doubted whether the tool would be useful and 
usable for people with dementia. Designing a user-friendly, 
interactive web tool for people with different capacities, 
interests, and perspectives is challenging. People with dementia 
contributed uniquely to the design of the web tool. A pilot 
study will show whether the doubts of some of the participants 
are valid. 
Keywords-	   dementia, shared decision making, participatory 
design, assistive technology, interactive web tool. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Designing an interactive web tool to facilitate shared 
decision making (SDM) in care networks of people with 
dementia is complex because of the progressive character of 
dementia and the multitude of people involved in the 
decision making process namely, the person with dementia, 
informal caregivers, and case managers [1][2]. In a prior 
study we identified user requirements for such a tool: 
decision-making topics that the tool should address and 
additional needs and preferences of all concerned [3][4]. In 
the present study, we focus on the design of such an 
interactive web tool – a design that aims to do justice to 
people with dementia in decision making.  
Dementia is characterized by progressive cognitive 
decline. Decreasing abilities address memory loss, route 
planning, behavior change, and orientation problems. 
Dementia is a disease that is affecting increasingly more 
people worldwide: the prediction is from 66 million in 2030 
to 115 million in 2050 [5][6]. The life expectancy of people 
with dementia after diagnosis is 6 to 8 years. During this 
period, people with dementia and their loved ones are faced 
with many decisions related to care and well-being, e.g., can 
or should the patient drive a car, walk alone outdoors, start 
day care, or be admitted to a nursing home [7][8]. These 
decisions, often overloaded with emotions, change the 
situation of people with dementia continuously. Dementia is 
not a linear process, and the change in capacities of people 
with dementia influences their position in decision making 
[9][10]. 
The decision making of many people challenges the 
traditional view of shared decision-making. Shared decision 
making (SDM) has its origin in the clinical encounter 
between the clinician and the mentally able patient who 
decide about one medical question. The decision is mainly 
based on analytical thinking [11]. Shared decision making is 
an approach that involves patients in making medical 
decisions to the extent that they want to and that emphasizes 
the collaboration between professionals and patients 
[11][12]. Shared decision making increases patient autonomy 
and empowers the patient [13]. This could also benefit 
people with dementia who are capable of expressing their 
107
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

needs [13] and preferences [14]. Unfortunately, their 
participation in decision-making processes [13][15], research 
[16] and IT development trajectories [17] is not common.  
In designing an interactive web tool to facilitate SDM in 
care networks of patients with dementia, we have to take into 
account the two-fold complexity just described, i.e., the 
progressive character of dementia and the multitude of 
people involved, all of whom have different capacities and 
interests in decision making. Because of this, we included all 
the groups in the designing to create a shared perspective; 
not only the groups of informal caregivers and case 
managers, but also the group of people with dementia [18]. 
The last group is the most vulnerable group in this context. 
The views of people with dementia are in danger of being 
overlooked. Caregivers tend to shield them or speak for them 
rather than with them [19]. Spending time with people with 
dementia and confirming that their contribution is 
worthwhile helps to include them in research [16]. This is 
necessary to better understand their needs and preferences 
[13]. 
An additional reason for involving them in the design is 
the progressive character of dementia that sets them apart 
from average web users. They have problems using a “one 
size fits all” computer design [20]. Several researchers have 
provided evidence-based design criteria for designing for 
people with dementia: creating easy orientation [21][22]; 
using familiar cues; making everything legible and 
distinctive  [23]; choosing touch screens, large-format 
screens, and large font sizes; keeping text to a minimum; 
assuring a hypermedia structure with limited options for 
selection and an attractive design [24]; and using tablets [25]. 
These criteria ensure a dementia-friendly design of IT tools 
in general.  
Thus, the current body of knowledge includes knowledge 
of design criteria that the final product must meet. It does 
not, however, provide knowledge of how to design an 
interactive SDM web tool or what the challenges will be. 
This design process has to deal with the two-fold complexity 
as well. Therefore, we aim to identify design issues 
(strengths and weaknesses) that have to be taken into account 
in a design for a user-friendly interactive web tool for SDM 
in care networks for people with dementia. The research 
questions read:  
1) What design issues can be identified for a user-friendly 
interactive web tool that helps people with dementia with 
shared decision making?  
2) What is the unique contribution of people with dementia 
to the design?  
 
II. 
METHODS 
In our study with its iterative, participatory design, we 
consider the involvement of all types of end users, but 
particularly people with dementia [17], as one of the key 
factors for developing a user-friendly and usable interactive 
web tool. We used the Center for eHealth Research and 
Disease Management (CeHRes) roadmap for the tool 
because this approach connects a human centered design 
with eHealth business modeling and emphasizes the 
importance of involving all those concerned to develop 
sustainable innovations [26]. The roadmap helps developers 
structurally integrate interactive web tools in health care and 
involves the participants in all phases of the development. 
The CeHRes roadmap offers a holistic framework consisting 
of five phases:  
1) Contextual inquiry: gathering information from the 
environment where the technology will be implemented  
2) Value specification: defining requirements based on 
participants’ values  
3) Design: translating these values and requirements into 
technical specifications and requirements for communicative 
and lucid prototypes in order to enable the participants to 
give feedback  
4) Operationalization: implementing the technology in 
practice  
5) Summative evaluation: determining the effects of the 
technology on behavior, health and organization.  
This paper describes how the third phase of the CeHRes 
roadmap was applied to the design of an interactive web tool 
facilitating SDM in care networks of people with dementia: 
the DecideGuide. We used focus group sessions, a cognitive 
walkthrough, and usability tests to address both research 
questions. 
A. DecideGuide 
The DecideGuide is an interactive tool for people with 
dementia, informal caregivers and case managers to 
communicate with each other in making shared decisions. 
The design principles of the DecideGuide are transparency, 
open communication and information, and giving voice to 
people with dementia.  The DecideGuide incorporates three 
perspectives: those of people with dementia, informal 
caregivers, and case managers. The case manager deliberates 
with the person with dementia and the informal caregivers 
whether to use the DecideGuide. All participants have an 
individual login and use the tool on their own or after they 
are alerted by the case manager. The DecideGuide has three 
pillars. The first pillar, Messages is a chat function that 
enables users (at a distance) to communicate with each other. 
The second pillar, Deciding together supports decision 
making step by step. The third pillar, Individual opinion 
enables users to give their individual opinions about 
dementia-related 
topics 
and 
their 
circumstances. 
It 
particularly supports giving voice to the person with 
dementia (Fig. 1). The DecideGuide, a safe and shielded web 
tool, is available for tablets, laptops, and computers. 
The DecideGuide was developed in a process consisting 
of four iterations (Fig. 2). Fig. 3 illustrates the iterative 
development with the changes made in the chat function. 
These included using buttons (forward and back) instead of 
arrows, simplifying the menu bar, changing the position of 
menu bar, using colors, adding notifications, and providing 
an option to fold or expand the menu bar. All these changes 
were made in accordance with the feedback from users. 
B. Focus group sessions with mock-ups (first iteration) 
Firstly, separate focus group sessions were organized 
with intended end users, including people with dementia,  
108
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1. Final layout of three pillars of the DecideGuide (screen view for the person with dementia). Clockwise starting top left: chat function 
(belonging to the first pillar), deciding together (second pillar), individual opinion “How are you right now?” and individual opinion in 
questionnaire with examples (both belonging to the third pillar).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Timeline of designing the DecideGuide. 
	  
	  
 
	  
	  
 
 
109
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

informal caregivers, and case managers. The goal of these 
focus group sessions was to receive comments and feedback 
about the first mock-ups, that is sketches on paper of the user 
interface of the DecideGuide. 
People with mild to moderate dementia were recruited 
from two daycare centers. Informal caregivers were recruited 
from 
residential 
homes 
and 
the 
Dutch 
Alzheimer 
Association. Case managers were recruited from regional 
case managers’ networks. All participants gave their written 
informed consent. We paid special attention to the informed 
consent of people with dementia because of their 
vulnerability. To be sure of their voluntary participation we 
invested in an ongoing consent [16]. We invested in time for 
social talk and getting to know each other, checked the 
consent of people with dementia during their participation 
after their initial consent, and emphasized the importance of 
their participation. The investigators watched over any signs, 
non-verbal or otherwise, of discomfort or restlessness of 
people with dementia. In such a case, the participant was 
given ample opportunity to quit.  
Twenty-seven end users participated in the six focus 
group sessions (Table I). The two separate focus group 
sessions with people with dementia and informal caregivers 
took place in two rounds. They consisted of six and four 
participants, respectively, with different participants in each 
round. The participants of the second-round focus groups 
commented both on the mock-ups and the feedback of the 
first round of focus groups. Two focus group sessions with 
case managers took place with the same group of seven 
participants. The principal researcher, assisted by another 
researcher or designer, moderated the focus groups.  
The mock-ups of the DecideGuide included 11 sketches 
on paper. The mock-ups, based on user requirements [3][4], 
were presented in the focus groups [26]. End users were 
asked to comment on the different sketches in general (What 
is your first impression?) content (Do you think what this 
tool offers is relevant? or Could this tool be helpful in 
making decisions?), user-friendliness (What do you think of 
the usability of the tool?) and the attractiveness of the design 
(What do you think of the look and feel of the tool?).    
The focus group sessions lasted 1 to 2 h and were audio 
taped and transcribed verbatim, except for one focus group 
with people with dementia in round 1. Although the 
participants agreed to recording the interview before the 
meeting, they refused when the meeting was about to begin. 
They felt they could speak more freely without the session 
being recorded. Field notes of this interview were taken.  
The five steps of framework analysis were used to 
analyze the focus group interview transcriptions: becoming 
familiar with the data, identifying a thematic framework 
(identified themes showed similarities to an existing 
framework), indexing (coding with thematic framework), 
charting (rearranging thematic framework if necessary), and 
mapping and interpretation (explanation of the findings) 
[27].  We used the CeHRes assessment of design quality 
which was adapted from the CeHRes roadmap. It consisted 
of three levels for assessing the quality of design: system 
quality (user-friendly, safe technology), content quality 
(understandable and meaningful content) and service quality 
(adequately provided service) [28]. We used the CeHRes 
assessment of design quality because it addresses various 
aspects of eHealth design quality that are based on several 
studies. 
C. Cognitive walkthrough (second iteration) 
Secondly, the first interactive prototype was built on the 
basis of the feedback for the mock-ups: the DecideGuide. 
This prototype was tested in a cognitive walkthrough session 
with the researchers to identify possible user problems and 
evaluate the usability of the DecideGuide [18][28][29].  
Three of the research team tested the DecideGuide on a 
tablet in a 2-h role-playing session in a usability lab. First the 
participants tried the tool on their own, without any 
instruction. Then they performed tasks in a think-aloud 
session [29]. The session was video and audiotaped, and 
field notes were taken. The principal researcher and 
developer supervised the session. The analysis focused on 
the three levels of the CeHRes assessment of design quality: 
system, content, and service quality. 
D. Usability tests (third iteration) 
Thirdly, on the basis of the results of the focus group 
interviews and the cognitive walkthrough, we tested the 
usability with the adapted interactive prototype of the 
DecideGuide on a tablet [28][29]. The goal of these usability 
tests was to further refine the DecideGuide into a prototype 
that was robust enough to be used in a pilot study [29]. Three 
to five usability tests are required to identify most of the 
bugs [30][31]. The total number of usability tests was 12: 
three for the case managers, three for the informal 
caregivers, and three extra usability tests with older adults 
before the three usability tests with people with dementia 
were done. The participants were asked to perform tasks 
(e.g., log in with their user names and passwords, send a 
message, respond to a message, and fill in a questionnaire). 
The think-aloud method was used to identify their thoughts 
and feelings while they used the prototype [32]. The usability 
tests were video and audiotaped, and field notes were taken. 
The principal researcher moderated the usability tests with 
the assistance of another researcher.  
Firstly, three case managers who participated in the 
development tested the DecideGuide together in a session 
that lasted 2 h. They tried out the DecideGuide on their own 
and then tried some tasks. Secondly, after adjusting the 
DecideGuide on the basis of the usability tests with case 
managers, three older adults recruited from a sounding board 
of the department Care innovation for older adults at a 
university of applied sciences tested the DecideGuide 
individually. They tested the DecideGuide with the login of 
people with dementia in a 1-h session in a usability lab.  We 
chose this approach to find out whether the DecideGuide was 
“bug free”, user friendly, and suitable for people with 
dementia to test. Thirdly, three informal caregivers recruited 
by participating case managers tested the DecideGuide. 
These individual sessions also took place in a usability lab 
and lasted about 1 h. Fourthly, three community-dwelling 
people with dementia (Reisberg score: 2-4) recruited by 
participating case managers tested the DecideGuide on a  
110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3. Iterative development of the chat function of the DecideGuide. 
Clockwise starting top left: mock-ups, 1st prototype, 2nd prototype, 3rd prototype. 
 
TABLE I. CHARACTERISTICS OF FOCUS GROUP SESSIONS 
Focus group session 
Round 1 
Round 2 
PWDa) 
6 people commented on 11 sketches (screen views 
of PWD). 
 
PWD 
 
6 people commented on 6 sketches and gave 
feedback about the first focus group 
ICs 
4 people commented on 11 sketches (screen views 
of ICs) 
 
ICs 
 
4 people commented on 11 sketches and gave 
feedback about the first focus group 
CMs (same people in both rounds) 
7 people commented on 4 sketches (screen views 
of CMs) 
7 people commented on 15 sketches (screen views 
of CMs, PWD, and ICs) 
a)PWD= people with dementia, CMs= case managers, ICs= informal caregivers 
 
 
	  
tablet at home. These sessions lasted between 30 and 60 min. 
Based on the feedback from those who participated in the 
usability tests, a fourth and final prototype was developed 
that will be evaluated in a pilot study. Analysis focused on 
the three levels of the CeHRes assessment of the design 
quality of system, content, and service. The principal 
 
	  
	  
 
	  
	  
 
111
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

researcher analyzed the transcripts to identify design issues 
that could be added to the CeHRes assessment. The 
researcher who assisted with the usability tests verified the 
analysis. 
III. 
RESULTS 
All 39 respondents who agreed to participate completed 
their participation (Table II). There were no dropouts. The 
respondents were motivated and enjoyed their participation. 
 
A. Research question 1: design issues  
1) Focus group sessions 
The focus group sessions resulted in feedback that 
addressed mainly the system quality, particularly the user-
friendliness (e.g., too many screens, with too much 
information per screen) and design style (e.g., presentation of 
information and use of icons; Table III). Regarding the 
quality of the content, unclearness, and difficulty of the 
terms were reported, particularly in the “deciding together” 
part. Textual refinements were made: wording of decision-
making themes and questions, as well as spelling and 
accuracy of the date. Only case managers commented on the 
quality of service. They described the tool as very useful in 
facilitating SDM in in care networks of people with 
dementia, but they doubted whether the tool would be useful 
for people with dementia. They thought that using the tool 
was too difficult for them to be able to participate 
adequately. 
2) Cognitive walkthrough 
The cognitive walkthrough with three researchers 
resulted in feedback mainly about system quality. Many bugs 
were found (buttons that did not react or were missing and 
partly black screens). Moreover, navigation issues and user-
friendliness issues came up. Feedback about the content 
quality focused on the presentation of content (unclear icons 
and questions). The researchers emphasized the usefulness of 
the tool for informal caregivers and case managers but they 
doubted whether the tool would be useful for people with 
dementia. Moreover, the researchers doubted whether people 
with dementia would benefit from the open communication 
in the chat function. They felt that communication in the chat 
mode was too intrusive for people with dementia. The 
cognitive walkthrough focused mainly on the interaction 
between users.  
3) Usability tests 
Design issues arising from the usability tests were mainly 
about system quality: user-friendliness (e.g., operating a 
touch screen, unclear interface, navigation within a screen 
and between screens, purpose of buttons, and software bugs) 
and design style (e.g. smileys too small, questionnaires too 
long, and way of addressing people). The design issues 
concerning the content quality were: accuracy (e.g., unclear 
use of language, missing words), relevance (e.g., the content 
of the tool was too difficult for people with dementia and 
phases of decision making were irrelevant in some user 
interface 
elements), 
and 
comprehensibility 
(e.g., 
questionnaires were too difficult and confrontational for 
people with dementia). The design issues identified in 
service quality addressed mainly the usefulness of the tool. 
The only way the tool can be useful for people with dementia 
in the informal caregivers’ and case managers’ view, is by 
starting to use the tool early in dementia. 
The strengths were the possibility of future extensions 
(“nice to haves” e.g., a skype function, a personal calendar, 
and alerts), the monitoring of informal caregivers’ well-
being, colored smileys as answer options, the use of the 
green for the main interface color, and the examples that are 
given (Table III).  
4) Differences in participants’ opinions about design 
issues 
The participants agreed about many design issues (Table 
III). Nevertheless, there were some differences of opinion. 
Firstly, in the focus group sessions, informal caregivers and 
case managers were of the opinion that the tool should 
consist of fewer screens and fewer examples with smileys. 
The people with dementia agreed about the screens but not 
about the examples – they liked them and wanted even more 
examples to choose from.  We reduced the number of the 
screens and expanded the examples (that is, we added more 
examples per theme and also examples for possible 
solutions). 
Secondly, in the focus group sessions, some informal 
caregivers and people with dementia called into question the 
use of smileys. They were afraid the smileys would be too 
childish. Others liked them; they found them as easy, clear, 
and appealing.  We decided to continue the use of smileys 
because of their simplicity and clarity. Moreover, we wanted 
to design the screens as similarly as possible for both 
informal caregivers and people with dementia in order to rule 
out causing possible feelings of inferiority among people 
with dementia when designing two different views. The 
usability tests later showed that all participants indeed liked 
the use of examples and smileys.  
Thirdly, from the beginning, informal caregivers and case 
managers said that they needed a separate communication 
channel without the person with dementia where they could 
speak freely about the situation. The people with dementia 
did not mention such a need. We decided not to create such a 
channel and adhere to the design rationale of the 
DecideGuide 
based 
on 
principles 
of 
SDM: 
open 
communication and transparency. The results of the 
upcoming pilot study will show whether or not this 
transparency can be maintained.  
Fourthly, informal caregivers and case managers said that 
the DecideGuide was too difficult and the chat function too 
intrusive for people with dementia. They questioned 
transparency as design rationale for the tool. They were 
convinced that the design rationale was very nice and 
desirable, but also very confrontational for people with 
dementia. They said that transparency tends to decrease the 
distrust of people with dementia, but may increase their 
restlessness. In the role playing during the cognitive 
walkthrough, researchers had similar considerations. The 
researcher who played the role of the “person with dementia” 
disliked what others said via the chat function, took this as a 
personal attack, and even wanted to stop using the tool. The 
112
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. CHARACTERISTICS OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
Total number of participants of focus groups and usability tests (n = 39) 
 
Characteristics of focus group participants (n = 27) 
 
People with dementia (n = 12) 
Informal caregivers (n = 8)  
Case managers (n = 7)   
Gender 
8 Male 
4 Female 
1 Male 
7 Female 
6 Female 
1 Male 
Age in years 
69-85 (M = 80.0) 
6 Unknown 
53-83 (M = 67.6) 
38-60 (M = 48.8) 
Educational level 
0 Low 
4 Medium 
2 High 
6 Unknown 
0 Low 
2 Medium 
6 High 
6 High 
Type of dementia 
3 Alzheimer’s disease 
1 Front temporal dementia 
2 Mild cognitive 
impairment/dementia 
6 Unknown 
 
 
Reisberg scale 
2-4 
 
 
Marital status 
4 Married 
2 Widowed 
6 Unknown 
 
 
Relation to person with dementia 
 
6 Spouse 
1 Daughter 
1 Friend 
 
Caregiving was experienced as 
 
3 Heavy 
4 Medium 
 
Experience as case manager 
 
 
1   <1 year 
3  1-5 years 
2   >5 years 
aLow  = primary or secondary school graduate, medium = high school graduate, high =  college graduate 
 
 
Characteristics of usability test participants (n = 12) 
 
Case managers 
(n = 3) 
Informal caregivers 
(n = 3) 
Older adults 
(n = 3) 
People with dementia 
(n = 3) 
Gender 
3 Female 
2 Female 
1 Male 
2 Female 
1 Male 
1 Female 
2 Male 
Age 
 42, 50, and 62 years 
61, 65, and 74 years 
62, 63, and 67 years 
72, 79, and 82 years 
Type of dementia 
 
 
 
3 Alzheimer’s disease 
Reisberg scale 
 
 
 
3–4 
Educational levela 
3 High 
2 Medium 
1 High 
1 Medium 
2 High 
1 Medium 
2 High 
Electronic equipment 
(computer, laptop, tablet, 
smartphone) 
3 Computer 
1 Tablet 
3 Smartphone  
2 Computer 
3 Laptop 
2 Tablet 
3 Computer 
1 Tablet 
2 Computer 
1 Tablet 
1 nothing 
Experience with computers 
(years) 
10–15 years 
7–15 years 
5–25 years 
1–5 years 
Software and networks used 
(Word, Excel, Power Point, 
Email, Internet, Social media) 
3 Email 
3 Internet 
3 Word 
3 Power Point 
3 Excel 
2 Social media 
3 Email 
2 Internet 
2 Word 
 
2 Email 
2 Internet 
3 Word 
1 Excel 
1 Power Point 
2 Email 
1 Internet 
1 Word 
1 Nothing 
Assessment of one’s own IT 
capacities 
(excellent, good, moderate, or 
poor) 
2 Good 
1 Excellent 
2 Moderate 
1 Good 
3 Moderate 
1 Moderate 
2 Poor 
a Low = primary or secondary school graduate, medium =  high school graduate, high = college graduate 
 
 
informal caregivers believed that the only chance for 
successfully using the tool was starting to use it in the early 
stages of dementia. The people with dementia did not 
comment on how other participants would view the tool, 
except for one remark. When the person filled in the 
questionnaire about one of the eight dementia related themes, 
“daily activities”, he wondered how his answers could be 
relevant for the case manager. The pilot study will show 
whether the participants’ concerns are justifiable. 
5) CeHRes assessment of design quality  
113
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Data analysis showed that most of our design issues fit into 
the structure of the CeHRes assessment of design quality 
(Table IV). These design issues did not cover all the items of 
the CeHRes assessment. The items that did not seem 
applicable to our interactive web tool included efficient 
search functionality (A1e), and design persuasiveness 
(A3c,d) 
addressing 
system 
quality; 
evidence-based 
information (B2), language and ethnicity (B6), and 
disclosure 
(B7) 
addressing 
content 
quality; 
and 
responsiveness (C2), reliability (C5), and credibility (C6) 
addressing service quality. Other items were simply not 
mentioned by the participants: technical support (A1h), and 
safety and technical security (A2b-d). Moreover, some 
design items that were mentioned did not fit into the CeHRes 
framework: items lacking in the system such as “absence of 
extra answer option button” and benefits (usefulness) of 
using an interactive web tool such as “learning from the 
tool”, and “pleasure in using the tool”. We added them as 1j 
Completeness (system quality) and 7 Perception: 7a 
Learning and 7b Pleasure (service quality) respectively 
(Table IV). 
B. Research question 2: the unique contribution from 
people with dementia to the design of the interactive web 
tool  
All end users contributed to one or more items of the 
system, content, and service quality of the design (Tables III 
and IV). Informal caregivers contributed to most items; the 
case managers and people with dementia, to fewer items.  
The people with dementia were very well able to give their 
opinions in the focus group sessions and the usability tests. 
Their feedback given for the two focus group sessions 
addressed mainly the system and content quality (Table III). 
We honored their feedback in the design in as far as it did 
not conflict with the design rationale of the interactive web 
tool. The people with dementia liked participating: it gave 
them pleasure and they liked learning new things such as 
using an iPad and the DecideGuide. Without their feedback, 
we would have missed their focus on the present (i.e., the 
“here and now” of their perspective) and their preferences 
about careful use of language and a pleasant graphical 
layout. We discuss each of these unique contributions below. 
1) Focus on the  present  
The feedback of the people with dementia addressed 
concrete items in the present. They did not reflect on 
possible future items, or on the web tool in a more abstract 
way, or on the perspective of other participants the way 
informal caregivers and case managers did. They just 
focused on the assignments researchers asked them to do and 
to comment on. This focus on the “here and now” is 
reflected in their specific feedback. 
When answering the first question of the web tool,   
“How are you today?” in the focus group, someone 
commented: “Do you know how long today is? I cannot tell 
you how I feel today. Today has so many moments. I only 
can tell you how I feel right now. But that can be totally 
different in a few hours. So please ask me: How are you 
right now?” We changed the formulation of this question 
according to their proposal. 
A fictive case was used in the sketches of the mock-ups 
for the focus group sessions because we thought that a fictive 
case would be less confrontational for people with dementia. 
This was a misjudgment: it was apparently difficult for 
people with dementia to answer the questions: “I cannot 
answer this question because I do not know this person. He 
is not familiar to me. I can only answer for myself”.  All 
other participants in the focus group sessions also had 
difficulties with the mock-ups. They found it difficult to 
imagine what the interactive web tool could look like. 
The people with dementia were relaxed and very well 
able to accomplish the tasks in the usability tests and to give 
their opinions. Moreover, for the tasks of “send a message to 
the network members” and “respond to the message of the 
case manager” in the chat, they were the only participants 
who accomplished these tasks without assistance. 
2) Careful use of language 
The people with dementia gave very specific and detailed 
feedback about the tool’s user-friendliness and presentation 
of content of the tool. Fine-tuning and accuracy of text were 
important to them. They gave feedback about the wrong date 
on the screen shots and proposed synonyms for some themes 
(e.g., “family and friends” rather than “social contacts”). 
They did not like the name of the theme “future”: “future…. 
future?....there is no future….”. We therefore changed this 
theme to “important now and later”. Sometimes, the people 
with dementia prevented researchers from oversimplifying 
wording. When we were searching for a simple synonym for 
the theme “mobility” only the people with dementia did not 
agree. “Mobility” was fine and clear, but should be 
augmented with “transport”.  This resulted in the theme 
“mobility and transport”. 
The people with dementia were the only people who 
commented on form of addressing them in the tool. It was 
important to them that they were called by their first names 
rather than their surnames: “I am not a sir/madam…just call 
me by my first name. That’s who I am”.   
They wanted to answer questions very precisely. Several 
times they discussed the three answering options with 
smileys: “good”, “don’t know or neutral”, and “not so 
good”. Although they liked the limited options available, the 
meaning of these options did not reflect their answers.  They 
preferred an extra button with “moderate”. Their reactions 
included: “I don’t know what to answer; no smiley reflects 
my opinion well enough. I would like another button”.  
3) Pleasant graphical layout  
The informal caregivers, case managers and older adults 
argued that the screens had to be as simple as possible for 
people with dementia. They liked the green menu bar at the 
left side of the screen rather than the white buttons on the 
homepage. However, in their opinion, the homepage without 
the menu bar was enough for people with dementia. They 
liked the green color of the design, but emphasized their 
wish for more contrast. Buttons should be distinctive 
enough. They liked green buttons with white letters rather
114
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. CEHRES ASSESSMENT OF DESIGN QUALITY: WEAKNESSES AND STRENGTHS  
Mock-ups of the focus group sessions 
CeHRes assessment of design 
quality 
Weaknesses 
Strengths 
System 
quality 
User-friendliness 
Navigation structure and ease of use 
Too much screens for people with dementia. CM and PWD 
Too much information on screens. IC) 
Screens are too lively for people with dementia. PWD and IC 
Letters too small (not all PWD agreed) 
Messages in timeline with chat become a big mess. CM 
Nice to haves 
Adding things such as a personal calendar 
(personalized part in tool for case managers, linking 
with home technology, skype function). CM and IC 
Alerts for daily activities (taking medication, eating, 
etc). IC and CM 
Design 
persuasiveness 
 
Lens for design 
All network members view all messages because the tool is 
based on transparency and open communication.  This is not 
always advisable for people with dementia. CM  
Too many examples with too many colors. IC 
Use of smileys is a bit childlike. IC  
Presentation of content 
Use of smileys is clear but not really nice. PWD   
Attention to use of red in tool. Red smiley is similar to feeling 
unwell. Using red for a theme can also suggest danger. IC  
Use of colors in messages is not distinct enough. CM and IC 
Monitoring well-being is important. IC 
Use of red, orange, and green for smileys is nice. IC 
Content 
quality 
Accuracy 
 
Date and year are incorrect. PWD  
The terms are not specific enough: How are you today? PWD 
 
Comprehensibility 
Use of some terms is not clear enough and too difficult e.g., 
options and pros and cons of options. PWD  
 
Relevance 
Open questions are less attractive than questions that also offer 
examples.  
Tool is too directive. PWD 
 
Service 
quality 
Perceived 
usefulness 
 
The tool is very useful for facilitating SDM in care networks of 
people with dementia, but how useful will it be for people with 
dementia? CM 
Tool is directive: easy to use because you do not have 
to invent answers by yourself. IC 
 
Cognitive Walkthrough with researchers 
CeHRes assessment of design 
quality 
Weaknesses 
Strengths 
 
System 
quality 
User-friendliness 
Navigation structure/ease of use 
Unclear login 
Use of smileys in chat function is unclear 
Adding a smiley is impossible 
Unclear whether message or smiley has been sent 
Unclear navigation structure 
Questionnaires are incomplete and unclear 
“Deciding together” is unclear 
Giving one’s individual opinion is unclear to PWD 
Too difficult for PWD 
Notification for new messages is lacking  
‘Nice to haves’ 
Notifications for new activities in tool 
Separate communication possibility for IC and CM? 
Design 
persuasiveness 
Lens for design 
All network members view all messages because the tool is 
based on transparency and open communication.  This is not 
always advisable for PWD 
Presentation of content 
Use of gray in “Deciding together” does not contrast enough 
Use of icons is unclear 
Content of questionnaires differs a lot 
Monitoring well-being is important for IC 
Overall color (green): nice and restful 
Use of red, orange and green for smileys is nice 
 
Content 
quality 
Accuracy 
Questionnaires are incomplete 
 
Comprehensibility 
Use of some terms is not clear enough and too difficult, e.g., 
options and pros and cons of options  
Use of decision phases is too difficult for PWD  
 
Relevance 
Use of decision phases is too difficult for PWD 
 
 
Service 
quality 
Rerceived 
usefulness 
Tool is very useful in facilitating SDM in care networks of 
PWD but how useful will it be for PWD? 
 
PWD = People with dementia; IC = informal caregiver; CM = case manager 
 
115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III (CONTINUED)  
Individual usability tests 
CeHRes assessment of design 
quality 
Weaknesses 
Strengths 
System 
quality 
User friendliness 
Navigation structure and ease of use 
Call into question: tool user friendly for PWD? CM, IC, OA 
Operating the touch screen (tapping; scrolling; keyboard). 
PWD, IC, OA 
Log in difficulties for PWD and OA 
Interface is not clear enough (buttons too small; too close 
together, use of color not distinctive enough, font size too 
small, not enough answer options. PWD, IC, OA 
Meaning of some buttons and UI elements is unclear (text on 
buttons, length of questionnaires, automated messages, adding 
smileys to messages. PWD, IC, OA 
Software bugs (buttons do not react, black surface). PWD, IC, 
CM, OA 
Navigating within the screen (meaning of buttons; where to 
start? PWD, A 
Navigating between screens (partly absence of “back” button 
and “go on”, going back in tool is unclear. PWD, IC, CM, OA 
Absence of extra answer option button A1j. PWD, IC 
Combination of icons and buttons is nice  
Notifications for new messages 
Design 
persuasiveness 
Lens for design 
Call into question: design tool suitable for PWD? (use of color 
[less white, more green; more contrast]; too much text; drop 
down menu). CM, IC 
Presentation of content 
Smileys in chat too small; mismatch icon and text? PWD, IC 
Presentation of information (dosed offering of questionnaires; 
type of questions does not suit every user). IC, CM, OA 
Addressing users (PWD: I am not Sir, but just John. Just call 
me by my first name). PWD 
Green color: restful and nice. All 
Predominantly quiet screens: nice. All 
Use of smileys is good (all): it says more than a number 
of sentences. PWD 
Monitor question for IC as start question is appreciated a 
lot by IC. IC 
Content 
quality 
Accuracy 
Use of language is unclear: sentences are incorrect; words are 
missing. IC 
 
Relevance 
Called into question the relevance and difficulty of content for 
PWD. CM, IC 
Doubts about relevance of UI elements (mentioning phase of 
decision-making for PWD and IC? CM 
Appreciation of monitor question for IC. IC 
Questionnaires are relevant: both open and closed 
questions as well as examples with smileys. IC, CM, 
OA 
Examples are nice. PWD, IC, OA 
Comprehensibility 
Questionnaires are too difficult and too confrontational for 
PWD? IC, CM 
Unclear UI elements (“Deciding together”; drop down menu). 
IC, OA 
Questionnaires and smileys are clear. IC, OA 
Completeness 
UI element (“Messages” screen too complicated. IC 
 
Service 
quality 
Usefulness 
Called into question: the usefulness of tool for PWD (starting 
early in dementia process). CM, IC 
Called into question: personal contact versus digital contact. IC 
Called into question: transparency in tool versus confrontation 
for PWD. CM 
Tool is fun. IC 
Examples in tool are supporting. PWD, IC, OA 
Tool helps thinking about things; offers handles for 
discussing things. IC, OA 
Reducing difference in information of IC nearby and at 
distance. IC 
Tool contributes to appreciating IC. 
Social dynamics 
Unclear what happens with information in tool. IC 
 
Psychological 
influence 
Tool is too confronting for PWD. CM 
Careful way of writing is necessary. IC, OA, CM 
 
Perception 
 
Learning from tool (and iPad). PWD 
Pleasure. PWD, IC, CM, OA 
PWD = people with dementia; IC = informal caregiver; CM = case manager; OA = older adults; UI = user interface 
 
 
 
 
than the opposite that other participants liked. Moreover, 
some people with dementia liked the menu bar. We honored 
the preferences of the people with dementia in coloring all 
buttons into green and giving them the choice of viewing the 
menu bar folded or expanded (Fig. 4). 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we have identified design issues 
(weaknesses and strengths) for an interactive web tool 
facilitating shared decision making in care networks of 
people with dementia and its twofold complexity: the 
progressive character of dementia and the multitude of 
people involved. 
 The weaknesses were mainly in the quality of system: user 
friendliness (too many screens and too much information), 
unclear navigation (in screens and between screens), and 
design style (use of colors, smileys, and graphical layout).  
The weaknesses in the content of the design were the 
relevance of the content and the accuracy. The strengths
116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV. PARTICIPANTS’ CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE DESIGN OF THE INTERACTIVE WEB TOOL, THE DECIDEGUIDE 
CeHRes assessment of design quality 
  
Focus group sessions 
and usability tests 
Cognitive 
walkthrough 
Case managers 
Older adults 
Informal 
caregivers 
People with 
dementia 
Researchers 
A. System quality 
1. User friendiness 
a.Ease of acces 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
b.Ease of use 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
c.Absence of technical errors 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
d.Clear navigation structures 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
e.Efficient search functionality 
 
 
 
 
 
f.Efficient feedback channels 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
g.Push factors 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
h.Technical support 
 
 
 
 
 
i.Readability of text 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
j.Completeness 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
2.Safety 
& 
technical 
security 
a.Privacy& confidentiality 
 
 
 
 
x 
b.Encryption 
 
 
 
 
 
c.Authentification 
 
 
 
 
 
d.Interoperability 
 
 
 
 
 
3.Design persuasiveness 
a.Lens for design 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
b.Presentation of content 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
c.Observation 
 
 
 
 
 
d.Conditioning 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Content quality 
1. Accuracy 
  
 
x 
x 
 
 
2. Evidence based 
  
 
 
 
 
 
3. Relevance 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
4. Comprehensibility 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
5. Completeness 
  
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
6. Language and ethnicity 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7. Disclosure 
  
 
 
 
 
 
C. Service quality 
1. Usefulness 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
2. Responsiveness 
  
 
 
x 
 
x 
3. Social dynamics 
  
 
 
x 
 
x 
4. Psychological influence 
  
x 
 
x 
 
x 
5. Reliability 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6. Credibility 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Perception 
a. Learning 
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
b. Pleasure 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
An X means that the target group commented on this item; an empty cell means that the target group made no comment
117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

included possible future extensions, monitoring informal 
caregivers’ well-being, the use of smileys, and the green 
interface color. The participants’ disagreements about the 
designing issues of the DecideGuide included the numbers of 
screens and examples, the use of smileys, the design 
rationale 
of 
the 
SDM-based 
DecideGuide 
open 
communication, transparency, and giving voice to people 
with dementia. The people with dementia gave detailed and 
unique feedback that focused on the present, careful use of 
language, and a pleasant graphical layout.  
A. Design process 
We used an iterative participatory approach to develop 
the DecideGuide. In a prior study user requirements were 
identified for the interactive web tool [3][4][33]. These user 
requirements all have been given a place in the final 
interactive prototype.  
We conducted usability tests with older adults to check 
whether the prototype was robust enough for people with 
dementia to do the test. We did not want them to drop out 
because of an unreliable prototype. The older adults’ 
feedback was relevant, but the feedback of the people with 
dementia was the most important for the DecideGuide. This 
is in line with Riley and colleagues’ [35] conclusion. In 
contrast to Riley and colleagues [35], we used paper 
prototyping for all end users; they did not because it was less 
effective for older adults and therefore not useful for people 
with dementia. In our study, paper prototyping seemed to be 
difficult for all the participants. Nevertheless, it led to useful 
feedback in the design process. Nygård and Starkhammar 
[36] identified difficulties in the use of every day technology 
for people with dementia (e.g., in handling the technology 
and limitations of knowledge and personal condition). In our 
study, 
we 
recognized 
the 
knowledge 
limitations; 
nevertheless, this difficulty was not a problem thus far.  
The CeHRes assessment of design quality was helpful. 
We used it as a checklist afterwards and for categorizing the 
issues. Nevertheless, some categories seem to show an 
overlap (e.g., ease of use/A1b and clear navigation 
structure/A1d) and/or are difficult to distinguish from each 
other (e.g., relevance/B3 and usefulness/C1).  Since no 
descriptions were offered, we had to interpret the 
subcategories of the framework ourselves. Furthermore, not 
all subcategories were relevant to an interactive web tool like 
the DecideGuide (e.g., efficient search functionality and 
interoperability). Some categories and subcategories could 
not be filled because the participants did not give feedback 
about them. These empty cells in Table IV suggest that such 
items were irrelevant, but items such as “technical support” 
and “safety and technical security” are certainly important 
for a web tool like the DecideGuide. Did we have a blind 
spot for these empty cells? Were the questions we asked 
good enough? We used the CeHRes assessment of design 
quality evaluative, after all iterations were finished.  Using 
this assessment in advance and as a formative checklist 
during the development might have been helpful in the 
timely identification of a blind spot and the meaning of the 
empty cells. It enables researchers to reflect on the result of 
an iteration and add leading questions for the next iteration to 
be sure all items are discussed. Further, there are no items 
about the perception of end users in the current version of the 
CeHRes assessment of design quality. More and more 
helpful IT applications for vulnerable older adults are being 
developed due to the growth of this target group [37][38]. In 
order to ensure that the perspective of vulnerable people has 
been taken into account, a criterion could be added to the 
CeHRes assessment: perception. 
B. Participation of people with dementia 
In a prior review, Span and colleagues [17] concluded that 
participation of people with dementia in developing assistive 
technologies is not self-evident. The involvement of all end 
users, and particularly people with dementia themselves, is 
important in developing a useful and user-friendly tool for 
people with dementia. A recent study about the European 
Rosetta project (designing assistive technology for people 
with mild to severe dementia) confirms this [34]. In our 
study, the caregivers were positive about including people 
with dementia, but most caregivers had a biased view of the 
ability of people with dementia to use an interactive web tool 
and to participate in research. Nevertheless, the caregivers’ 
assumptions that the usability tests would be too difficult for 
people with dementia proved to be wrong. Moreover, most 
caregivers said that web tools would be more appropriate for 
the coming generation of people with dementia than the 
current one. Only a few participants had no opinion and said, 
“first ask people with dementia”. Deciding for people with 
dementia instead of asking them to participate excludes 
people with dementia. This approach seems to be in line with 
studies that exclude people with dementia – whether 
deliberately or not – on the basis of “shielding” (caregivers 
tend to shield people with dementia from participating 
because they are afraid of exposing them to possible stressful 
situations) [39][40] or “difficulty” (caregivers think that 
people with dementia cannot participate because it is too 
difficult for them) [41][42]. In both cases, caregivers decide 
for people with dementia rather than with them. 
We included people with dementia in the design process 
just as we did the other participants. The people with 
dementia were asked to participate and give feedback in the 
same way as the informal and formal caregivers. This 
resulted in a tool that takes account of the wishes of people 
with dementia: use of the first name, asking how they feel 
“right now”, use of examples to hit upon an idea, and the use 
of smileys that are not childish at all, but nice and handy.  
Awareness of the importance of involving people with 
dementia in the design is crucial in order to develop a useful 
and user-friendly web tool. This is in line with Hanson and 
colleagues [43] and Robinson and colleagues [44], who 
emphasize the importance of collaborating with people with 
dementia in the development of an IT application from the 
beginning. 
In our study, the people with dementia were very well 
able to give detailed comments about the interactive web 
tool. In verbalizing their comments they related them directly 
to their personal views, not to those of the other participants.  
Our people with dementia seemed to live and comment more 
in the “here and now”, unlike the other participants, who 
118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

took the future into account. This is illustrated by the 
question “How are you today?” that we changed to “How are 
you right now?” on the basis of their comments. The other 
participants seemed to think more abstractly about and for 
people with dementia. Replacing people with dementia with 
others 
to 
represent 
their 
perspective 
is 
therefore 
unsatisfactory. None of the other participants made 
comments that were identical or similar to those of the 
people with dementia. The “here and now” comments of the 
people with dementia therefore have added value. Their 
contribution is unique and requires careful inclusion of them 
in designing a web tool for them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Folded and expanded menu bar 
 
C. Limitations and strengths 
This study has some methodological limitations. The first 
limitation concerns the participating people with dementia. 
Most of them had a high level of education. Further, the case 
managers recruited most of them; in other words, although 
they could have registered on their own, they did not. These 
two facts may have influenced the findings in this study 
positively. 
The second limitation lies in the location of the usability 
tests. Older adults, informal caregivers, and case managers 
took the usability test in a skills lab at the university. 
Particularly the older adults and informal caregivers showed 
some stress and hasty behavior at the beginning of the test. 
They overlooked things on the screens. The people with 
dementia took the usability tests at home. They all were 
relaxed and showed no signs of stress. This discrepancy 
between the people with dementia and the others was 
unexpected, but may have been caused by the differing 
environments. 
The strength of this study lies in its iterative, 
participatory approach. The interactive web tool was 
developed step by step with maximum participation of all 
end users. Different methods at the individual and group 
levels were used to enable end users to speak for themselves 
and also to challenge them in encounters with others. We 
explored the end users’ views thoroughly, and we listened 
carefully to the people with dementia.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Designing an interactive web tool that facilitates SDM in 
care networks of people with dementia, for participants who 
have different capacities and interests, is challenging. Design 
issues included a screen design based on pleasant and 
harmonious colors, the use of clear and uniform buttons 
throughout the interface, the use of multiple-choice questions 
with smileys as answering options, a foldable menu bar that 
is closed (for people with dementia) or open (for caregivers) 
by default, and the incorporation of a chat function that 
specifically keeps all end users involved in a conversation. 
All viewpoints were included in the design process, with 
special attention to the most vulnerable participants – the 
people 
with 
dementia. 
Their 
specific 
and 
detailed 
contribution was their focus on the present, the accuracy of 
language, and the graphical layout. Their feedback about the 
design was therefore unique and very valuable. However, 
other participants doubted whether the tool would be useful 
and usable for people with dementia. A pilot study will show 
whether these doubts about the value of the tool for people 
with dementia are valid. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all participants of the 
individual interviews and focus group interviews for their 
contribution. 
This work was supported by The Dutch Foundation 
Innovation Alliance (SIA RAAK [Regional Attention and 
Knowledge Circulation] PRO), Zorgpalet Hoogeveen 
(Residential care organization for older adults) and 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences. 
 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Span, M. Hettinga, C. Smits., L.M. Groen-van de Ven, J. 
Jukema, M. Vernooij-Dassen, et al., "Developing a 
Supportive Tool to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in 
 
	  
	  
	  
	  
 
119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Dementia, Involvement of End Users in the Design Phase,"  
The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2014) IARIA, March 
2014, pp. 253-256, ISBN: 978-1-61208-327-8 
[2] C. A. G. Wolfs, M. E. de Vugt, M. Verkaaik, M. Haufe, P. J. 
Verkade, F. R. J. Verhey, et al., "Rational decision-making 
about treatment and care in dementia: A contradiction in 
terms?," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 87, pp. 43-
48, 2012. 
[3] M. Span, C. Smits, L. M. Groen-van de Ven, A. Cremers, J. 
S. Jukema, M. J. F. Vernooij-Dassen, et al., "Developing 
eHealth technology for people with dementia: towards a 
supportive decision tool facilitating shared decision making in 
dementia," The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2013) 
IARIA, Feb 2013, pp. 69-72, ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3 
[4] M. Span, C. Smits, L. M. Groen-van de Ven, A. Cremers, J. 
Jukema, M. Vernooij-Dassen, et al., "Towards an Interactive 
Web Tool that Supports Shared Decision Making in 
Dementia: Identifying User Requirements," International 
Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 6, no 3&4 2014a, 
in press. 
[5] M. Prince, R. Bryce, and C. Ferri, "World Alzheimer Report 
2011," 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2011.p
df. Last access date 20-10-2014. 
[6] C. Ferri, M. Prince, C. Brayne, H. Brodaty, L. Fratiglioni, M. 
Ganguli, et al., "Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi 
consensus study," Lancet, vol. 366, pp. 2112-2117, 2005. 
[7] G. Livingston, G. Leavet, M. Manela, D. Livingston, G. Rait, 
E. Sampson, et al., "Making decisions for people with 
dementia who lack capacity: qualitative study of family carers 
in UK," BMJ, vol. 341, 2010. 
[8] H. G. van der Roest, F. J. M. Meiland, H. C. Comijs, E. 
Derksen, A. P. D. Jansen, H. P. J. van Hout, et al., "What do 
community-dwelling people with dementia need? A survey of 
those who are known to care and welfare services," 
International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 21, pp. 949-965, 2009. 
[9] C. G. Lyketsos, O. Lopez, B. Jones, A. L. Fitzpatrick, J. 
Breitner, and S. DeKosky, "Prevalence of neuropsychiatric 
symptoms in dementia and mild cognitive impairment: 
Results from the cardiovascular health study," JAMA, vol. 
288, pp. 1475-1483, 2002. 
[10] M. Pinquart and S. Sörensen, "Correlates of Physical Health 
of Informal Caregivers: A Meta-Analysis," The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences, vol. 62, pp. P126-P137, March 1, 2007. 
[11] G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, and P. Kinnersley, "Shared decision-
making in primary care: the neglected second half of the 
consultation.," British Journal of General Practice, vol. 49, pp. 
477-482, 1999. 
[12] G. Elwyn, A. O’Connor, D. Stacey, R. Volk, A. Edwards, A. 
Coulter, et al., "Developing a quality criteria framework for 
patient decision aids: online international Delphi consensus 
process," BMJ, 2006. 
[13] M. von Kutzleben, W. Schmid, M. Halek, B. Holle, and S. 
Bartholomeyczik, 
"Community-dwelling 
persons 
with 
dementia: What do they need? What do they demand? What 
do they do? A systematic review on the subjective 
experiences of persons with dementia," Aging & Mental 
Health, vol. 16, pp. 378-390, April 2012. 
[14] J. Whitlatch, Menne, H, "Don’t forget about me. Decision 
making y people with dementia," Journal of teh American 
Society on Aging, vol. 33, pp. 66-71, 2009. 
[15] S. L. Dupuis, J. Gillies, J. Carson, and C. Whyte, "Moving 
beyond patient and client approaches: Mobilizing ‘authentic 
partnerships’ in dementia care, support and services," 
Dementia, vol. 11, pp. 427-452, 2011. 
[16] K. Murphy, F. Jordan, A. Hunter, A. Cooney, and D. Casey, 
"Articulating the strategies for maximising the inclusion of 
people with dementia in qualitative research studies," 
Dementia, January 8, 2014. 
[17] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. J. F. J. Vernooij-Dassen, J. 
Eefsting, and C. Smits, "Involving People with Dementia in 
the Development of Supportive IT Applications: a Systematic 
Review," Ageing Research Reviews  vol. 12, pp. 535-551, 
2013. 
[18] H. Beyer and K. Holzblatt, Contextual Design. Defining 
Customer-Centered Systems. : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
2010. 
[19] L. Nygärd, "How can we get access to the experiences of 
people with dementia? Suggestions and reflections.," 
Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol. 13, pp. 
101-112, 2006. 
[20] P. Zaphiris, M. Ghiawadwala, and S. Mughal, "Age-centered 
Research-Based Web Design Guidelines," in Proceedings of 
CHI 2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, Portland, USA, 2005. 
[21] K. Day, D. Carreon, and C. Stump, "The therapeutic design of 
environments for people with dementia: a review of the 
empirical research," The Gerontologist, vol. 40, pp. 397-416, 
2000. 
[22] L. Mitchell, E. Burton, S. Raman, T. Blackman, M. Jenks, and 
K. Williams, "Making the outside world dementia friendly: 
design issues and considerations," Environment and Planning 
B: Planning and Design, vol. 30, pp. 605-632, 2003. 
[23] E. Burton and L. Mitchell, "Urban design for longevity," 
Urban Design Quarterly, vol. 87, pp. 32-35, 2003. 
[24] N. Alm, R. Dye, A. Astell, M. Ellis, G. Gowans, and J. 
Campbell, "Making software accessible for users with 
dementia. In J. U. Lazar (Ed.), Niversal usability: Designing 
computer interfaces for diverse users ", ed New York: Wiley, 
2007, pp. 299-316. 
[25] F. S. Lim, T. Wallace, M. A. Luszcz, and K. J. Reynolds, 
"Usability of tablet computers by people wih early-stage 
dementia," Gerontology, vol. 59, pp. 174-182, 2013. 
[26] J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. A. H. Van 
Limburg, S. M. Kelders, B. J. Brandenburg, H. C. Ossebaard, 
et al., "Introducing a holistic framework for eHealth 
technologies," Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 13 
(4):e111, 2011. 
[27] J. Ritchie and L. Spencer, Eds., ‘Qualitative data analysis for 
applied policy research’, in Bryman and Burgess, eds., 
Analysing Qualitative Data. London: Routledge 1994, pp. 
173-194. 
[28] N. Nijland, "Grounding eHealth: towards a holistic 
framework for sustainable eHealth technologies," University 
of Twente, Enschede, 2011. ISBN: 9789036531337  
[29] J. Brender, Handbook of Evaluation Methods for Health 
Informatics: Elsevier, 2006. 
[30] J. Nielsen and T. K. Landauer, "A mathematical model of the 
finding of usability," in Proceedings of the INTERACT '93 
and CHI '93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems:  24–29 April 1993, Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Association for Computing Machinery pp. 206-213, 1993. 
[31] R. A. Virzi, "Refining the test phase of usability evaluation: 
How many subjects is enough?," Human Factors, vol. 13, pp. 
457-468, 1992. 
[32] M. W. M. Jaspers, T. Steen, C. v. d. Bos, and M. Geenen, 
"The think aloud method: a guide to user interface design," 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 73, pp. 781-
795,  2004. 
[33] M. Span, C. Smits, L. M. Groen-van de Ven, A. Cremers, J. 
Jukema, M. Vernooij-Dassen, et al., "Towards an Interactive 
Web Tool that Supports Shared Decision Making in 
120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Dementia: Identifying User Requirements," International 
Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, submission nr 31054, 
vol. 6, 2014. 
[34] F. J. M. Meiland, B. J. J. Hattink, T. Overmars-Marx, M. E. 
de Boer, A. Jedlitschka, P. W. G. Ebben, et al., "Participation 
of end users in the design of assistive technology for people 
with mild to severe cognitive problems; the European Rosetta 
project," International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 26, pp. 769-779, 
2014. 
[35] P. Riley, N. Alm, and A. Newell, "An interactive tool to 
promote musical creativity in people with dementia," 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 25, pp. 599-608, May 
2009. 
[36] L. Nygård and S. Starkhammar, "The use of everyday 
technology by people with dementia living alone: Mapping 
out the difficulties," Aging & Mental Health, vol. 11, pp. 144-
155, 2007. 
[37] L. Magnusson, E. Hanson, and M. Borg, "A literature review 
study of information and communication technology as a 
support for frail older people living at home and their family 
carers," Technology and Disability, vol. 16, pp. 223-235, 
2004. 
[38] S. Lauriks, A. Reinersmann, H. v. d. Roest, F. J. M. Meiland, 
R. J. Davies, F. Moelaert, et al., "Review of ICT-based 
services for identified unmet needs in people with dementia," 
Aging Research  Reviews, vol. 6, pp. 223-246, 2007. 
[39] R. Orpwood, A. Sixsmith, J. Torrington, J. Chadd, and G. 
Chalfont, "Designing technology to support quality of life of 
people with dementia," Technology and Disability, vol. 19, 
pp. 103-112, 2007. 
[40] P. Topo, O. Maki, K. Saarikalle, N. Clarke, E. Begley, S. 
Cahill, et al., "Assessment of a music-based multimedia 
program for people with dementia," Dementia (14713012), 
vol. 3, pp. 331-350, 2004. 
[41] H. G. van der Roest, F. J. Meiland, T. Haaker, E. Reitsma, H. 
Wils, C. Jonker, et al., "Finding the service you need: human 
centered design of a Digital Interactive Social Chart in 
DEMentia care (DEM-DISC)," Studies in health technology 
and informatics, vol. 137, pp. 210-224, 2008. 
[42] J. Boger, J. Hoey, K. Fenton, T. Craig, and A. Mihailidis, 
"Using actors to develop technologies for older adults with 
dementia: A pilot study," Gerontechnology, vol. 9, pp. 450-
463, 2010. 
[43] E. Hanson, L. Magnusson, H. Arvidsson, A. Claesson, J. 
Keady, and M. Nolan, "Working together with persons with 
early stage dementia and their family members to design a 
user-friendly technology-based support service," Dementia: 
The International Journal of Social Research and Practice, 
vol. 6, pp. 411-434,  2007. 
[44] L. Robinson, K. Brittain, S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, and P. 
Olivier, "Keeping In Touch Everyday (KITE) project: 
developing assistive technologies with people with dementia 
and their carers to promote independence," International 
Psychogeriatrics, 
vol. 
21, 
pp. 
494-502, 
2009.
 
121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

