Reflections on UK Local Government Challenges in the use of Twitter as a 
Communications Channel 
Darren Mundy and Qasim Umer 
University of Hull 
Scarborough, GB 
d.mundy@hull.ac.uk; qasimumer667@hotmail.com
 
Abstract — Over the previous five years local government 
agencies have begun to use social media networks (such as 
Twitter) as mechanisms to promote engagement with local 
citizens. However, as identified in previous research there can 
be substantial challenges in relation to the use of these spaces 
to encourage bi-directional conversation and engagement. This 
paper provides a critical perspective on the challenges 
presented in the results of a focused research project on 
governmental communication through Twitter over a three 
month period from October to December 2011 and a one 
month period in August 2013. The research presented in this 
paper, contributes to the growing number of research papers 
related to the effective use of social media platforms in 
governmental, organisational and other community spaces. It 
is clear that as service provision develops, a growing maturity 
of usage is enabling councils to further develop their 
understanding of what is good practice in communicating 
through social media channels. 
Keywords - social media networks; social network analysis; 
eGovernment; communication channels. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper provides an extension of work presented at the 
Second International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics 
in Venice in October 2012 [1]. The work centres on an 
analysis of local government communication using the social 
media platform of Twitter. This extended work uses further 
analysis of communication over the month of August in 2013 
to reflect on the initial findings and posit further challenges 
to social media communication for local government 
organisations.  
In March 2012, Facebook reported a worldwide audience 
of almost 836 million users [2]. In the same month, Twitter 
reported 140 million active users with 340 million tweets per 
day [3]. These statistics demonstrate the global presence of 
networks that have only been in existence for less than ten 
years. These global audiences may be dispersed, and not 
always balanced across local communities. With such large 
user bases companies are exploring how they can best 
engage users on these platforms, and leverage a return on 
investment, from time committed to social media spaces. 
Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Pinterest, YouTube, Google+ etc. provide opportunities for 
individuals to collectively discuss, share, participate, 
produce, and respond to specific materials dependant on 
platform (e.g., videos on YouTube and short text messages 
on Twitter). Many of the social media platforms provide an 
opportunity for individuals to provide a picture of themselves 
(often through a profile), and opportunities to obtain and 
engage with information, often in real time. In addition, such 
platforms provide opportunities for individuals to discover 
new mechanisms to engage with existing organisations or to 
discuss organisations in a public setting. 
One such organisation that individuals around the world 
are using social media platforms to engage in discussing is 
their national and local government. This paper focuses 
specifically on engagement by the public with local 
government services. UK government is managed through a 
mixture of national government departments and local 
government authorities. A primary requirement of the UK 
democratic system is a need to engage with, and listen to, 
constituents through a multitude of different access channels. 
Over the past three years with the austerity measures 
imposed across the whole of Europe, and other parts of the 
world, the UK has had to look again at the delivery of public 
services. These austerity measures have impacted on local 
government funding, meaning in places, cuts in front line 
services and reductions in service provision. 
Organisations (including local government authorities) 
recognise the benefits that shifting customer enquiries from 
physical face to face customer contact centres, to online 
provision, can bring. These benefits include: reductions in 
the cost per transaction of customer enquiries; and where 
front end services are directly connected to back end services 
the potential for disintermediation. Social media platforms 
have been identified as platforms through, which to engage 
in providing front end service information, and in answering 
customer enquiries in cost effective processes. UK 
government recognises how multi-channel solutions can be 
developed, however, more recently there is concentration on 
matching the most effective channel with the most 
appropriate service. It is also recognized that this service 
may not necessarily be the lowest cost of contact, as this may 
not necessarily translate through to the lowest cost of 
transaction, e.g., because of error percentages or the need for 
multiple contacts. 
Local government agencies in the UK consist of county, 
district, borough, city, and unitary authorities. These 
agencies provide a mixture of local management functions 
including those focused on education, transport, the 
environment, recycling and waste. Such councils are present 
across a range of social media spaces with many individual 
councils engaging across multiple spaces. Structures of staff 
engagement vary with some councils creating cross 
departmental 
structures 
to 
facilitate 
wider 
council 
engagement, whilst others limiting engagement to singular 
115
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

teams. In addition to staff within local authorities engaging 
within social media spaces, many other publically funded 
organisations are also using these networks as mechanisms 
to engage the local taxpaying public. This network of public 
sector engagement provides the citizen with direct access to 
queries about public sector services, and mechanisms for 
obtaining current localised information. 
This paper builds on the research results presented in 
[1][4]. The initial paper of this study presented the findings 
from research focused on the engagement of ten local UK 
councils within the Twitter network. It also outlined a range 
of quantitative statistics regarding the study and indicated a 
number of issues discovered within the textual analysis of 
the tweets. This was followed by a paper [1] exploring the 
deeper challenges presented from the data, determined from 
detailed textual analysis of the tweets collected for the study. 
This study extends [1] and [4] providing updated quantitative 
results for 2013 and a reflection of the meaning of these 
results on the deeper challenges. In addition, a further couple 
of challenges are presented coming out of the 2013 data. 
Whilst the study has focused on Twitter throughout each 
of the delivered papers, many of the challenges presented 
within this paper, can be easily applied to other social media 
networks. The paper contributes to a growing number of 
research papers related to the effective use of social media 
platforms in governmental, organisational, and other 
community spaces.  
This introduction has provided an overview of the 
importance of social media networks, and the potential for 
social media networks to impact on the government: citizen 
relationship. Section II gives an overview of literature in the 
area 
of 
social 
media 
communication, 
particularly 
highlighting the effective use of social media in government 
spaces. This is followed by a detailed review of the 
methodology 
used 
to 
analyse 
local 
government 
conversations in the ‘ Twitterverse’. These conversations are 
then used to identify clear challenges in the use of Twitter, 
and other social media platforms to engage the citizen. 
Finally, a series of recommendations linked to the challenges 
are provided and the paper closes with a conclusion and the 
identification of further work.  
II. 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND UK GOVERNMENT 
The growth of social media is impacting the ways in 
which communities work, communicate, and socialize. 
According to [5] social media platforms can help to fulfill 
the needs of rapid communication, to engage individuals 
with multimedia artefacts and problematically to blur what is 
private and what is public. Similar to the demands imposed 
by users of the short messaging service (SMS) on mobile 
phones, social media networks demand prompt response, 
knowledge of and continued engagement with the platform. 
Twitter, Facebook and YouTube are examples of three 
multilingual social networking websites launched since 2004 
that respectfully provide forums for social networking, micro 
blogging, and multimedia content sharing (text, video and 
photos). They give users the opportunity of being real time in 
a virtual world [6], and enable users to create their own 
accounts, content channels and interest group sites. Different 
governments, channels and groups also have their own 
individual pages and accounts on social media networking 
sites.  
This paper focuses on the use of and challenges in the use 
of social media, in particular, Twitter by local government in 
the UK. Research into the use of social media networking 
sites by national governments, and organisations across the 
world continues to grow, as we continue to look for how 
transformative communication can be provided through such 
channels. Recently Stephen Goldsmith used the term 
‘government by network’ [7] to describe how online 
communication channels were being used at different levels 
of government, to engender a greater sense of participative 
relationship with citizens. In addition, there is evidence that 
social media networks when employed effectively have the 
power to create change in relation to political discourse, 
encouraging individuals to re-engage with democratic 
systems [8] and create a greater sense of the citizen voice [9]. 
Research in the area of government use of social media 
networks, can be broken down into two primary areas of 
interest:  
 
Analysis at national level of how parties and 
political leaders utilise these communication 
channels to engage citizens with national and 
international political issues.  
 
Engagement 
with 
how 
local 
government 
organisations are using such platforms to engage 
citizens with local services and issues. 
Research related to local government usage of Twitter is 
not as well established as national level research, as the 
national issues often generate more substantial interest. In 
this national space, the most interesting study to date has 
focused on how Barack Obama (current president of the 
USA), utilised the web and social media networks in his 
historic election victory in 2008 [8]. Other researchers have 
focused on an analysis of the use of social media networks in 
relation to encouraging political dialogue [10], the use of 
social media for political public relations [11] and analysis of 
social media channels as political communication channels 
[12]. Researchers have found from a national perspective 
that broadcast information over these channels is broadly 
favoured, and that individual channels are not in themselves 
‘game changers’, but merely an additional communications 
channels for contact with citizen groups [10]. From a 
national perspective it is useful to note [12], which suggests 
that these network channels can be used to provide a 
prediction on the results of national elections. This in itself is 
not unique (given perhaps we could also use analysis of party 
prevalence in other forms of media or surveys), it does 
suggest that political discourse at the national level is 
frequent, and the size of it is nationally relevant on social 
media channels. 
Whilst national issues are of interest this paper focuses 
primarily on investigating local government discourse. One 
of the key issues for local government is engendering citizen 
interaction in positive, and progressive ways. Social media 
platforms can offer opportunities for individuals within local 
communities to provide their view on a local issue, report a 
broken street light, or to simply interact with a local 
116
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

councillor. Researchers such as [13][14][7] have indicated 
that these channels can enable a transformation in the way in 
which local government, and citizens communicate leading 
to transformative relationships developing. In particular, [14] 
argues that these networks can enable “an atmosphere of co-
operation” as citizens work with local government in 
developing better physical communities. 
A barrier to the co-operative atmosphere highlighted in 
the above paragraph, arises in the ways in which local 
government utilise social media spaces. Reference [15] 
suggests that the ways in which many local government 
organizations, 
manage 
their 
information 
technology 
infrastructure, and the ways in which local government 
service structures are established, can limit the ways that 
such organisations are able to utilise social media systems. 
They state within these circumstances the use of social media 
channels “can only practically be used to broadcast 
announcements rather than to interact with people”. As a 
practical example one could posit the traditional ways in 
which customer service interaction, and public relations are 
managed in local government organizations, can often lead 
to uncertainty with regards to the translation of such services 
on to social media platforms.  
Noting the growth in usage by local government of social 
media, recently research has been published to try to provide 
such organisations with a framework of good practice [16]. 
However, this area continues to evolve and further work is 
needed to understand where local government is now with its 
engagement in social media spaces, what the challenges are 
with regards to this engagement, and how such engagement 
can continue to evolve. This paper represents work towards 
establishing a response to the above, highlighting in 
particular, the challenges to local authorities effective use of 
social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and 
YouTube.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Over the periods October – December 2011 and August 
2013 tweets related to ten local councils in the UK were 
analysed. The results of this analysis for 2011 have been 
provided in [4]. The research presented below updates the 
earlier analysis looking at how councils have changed their 
practice over the past two years and focuses on a critical 
analysis of the challenges presented.  
The councils selected for analysis were drawn from a 
group of UK councils with active accounts within Twitter. 
Therefore, the analysis focused only on those councils who 
were experimenting with this social media network in 2011, 
and were already engaging in some way, with their local 
populace in the ‘ Twitterverse’. It is notable that all the 
analysed who were using Twitter in 2011 have continued to 
use Twitter and continued to grow their communities in the 
updated research in 2013. 
Tweets were collected from within defined council 
spaces and from outside of defined council spaces in 2011. 
For the updated research in 2013, the focus stayed within 
defined council spaces. This effectively translates through to 
collection of tweets that each council had made (2011, 
2013), collection of citizen tweets to the council (2011, 
2013), and tweets made, which made reference to the council 
or the local community (2011). It should also be noted that 
no collection was possible for those communications 
happening within Twitter through private communication 
channels (e.g., through Twitter’s direct messaging system). 
The aggregated data collected provided quantitative 
metrics covering aspects such as: 
 
the number of tweets; 
 
the number of followers; 
 
the number of re-tweets etc.  
In addition, the text within each tweet was analysed in 
relation to:  
 
categorising the focus of the content;  
 
understanding 
the 
direction 
of 
the 
communication (e.g., whether it was just 
broadcast or a response to another Twitter user); 
 
a detailed content analysis of the messages 
contained in the tweet content. 
In relation to the detailed analysis of the messages in the 
tweet content, each tweet was read, and broader issues were 
identified within the tweet content from 2011 and 2013 tweet 
samples. This paper provides an updated critical analysis of 
these broader issues from earlier papers [1], and identifies 
the challenges presented by these.  
There were a number of limitations presented in the 
research data gathered within this project. The main issues 
were linked to the choice of councils, the time of year 
studied, and the maturity of various councils’ use of Twitter 
as a communication channel. However, these limitations 
have limited impact on the broader challenges presented 
through this analysis work. 
In addition, to this direct identification of challenges 
from analysis of the research data a reverse approach has 
also been used. Conversation with individuals responsible 
for social media management in local authority spaces has 
helped to inform and identify other challenges present within 
the research dataset.  
In total 1,565 tweets for 2011 and 1,264 tweets for 2013, 
were analysed from within council defined spaces in Twitter. 
As an addition to this a total number of 593 re-tweets from 
other organisations included in the council communication 
channels were also analysed. Finally, a substantial number of 
tweets were also reviewed in spaces outside of council 
control. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
Table I provides detail about council activity in Twitter 
(measured by the number of Tweets) and the number of 
individuals who have signed up to follow each channel 
within Twitter (measured by the number of followers). This 
detail is provided for October – December 2011 and 
September 2013. The data demonstrates that over the past 
two years all the analysed government organisations have 
continued to Tweet and expanded the number of individuals 
following their service, with all councils registering greater 
than 50% increases in their network followers. 
The number of followers as a percentage of the 
population was also calculated in 2011 based on census data. 
117
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Whilst the percentage has substantially grown it still 
represents across all councils a small proportion of the total 
population. Over this time whilst the community has grown 
in number of followers it is likely that the number of 
followers from outside of council areas has also continued to 
grow. 
TABLE I.  
GENERAL DATA ABOUT SELECTED COUNCIL SPACES  
Council 
No of Followers (Jan 12) 
Total No of Tweets (Jan 
12) 
No of Followers (Sep 13) 
Total No of Tweets (Sep 
13) 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne 
City Council 
8637 
4533 
19875 
8021 
City Of Lincoln Council 
3215 
2740 
6617 
4181 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
3357 
2242 
8131 
7492 
Salford City Council 
4797 
3585 
10857 
7237 
Leeds City Council 
6803 
1631 
14798 
6407 
Oxford City Council 
4541 
546 
8970 
1721 
Southend-On-Sea Borough 
Council 
2115 
1241 
6280 
5213 
Camden London Borough 
Council 
4034 
2665 
8516 
5984 
Kirklees Council  
4089 
3685 
9672 
6903 
Wakefield Council 
3024 
2090 
8450 
6593 
TABLE II.  
INFORMATION ABOUT TWITTER DATA SET 
Council 
Total No of Sampled 
Tweets (Jan 12) 
Total No of Re-Tweets 
(Jan 12) 
Total No of Sampled 
Tweets (Sep 13) 
Total No of Re-Tweets 
(Sep 13) 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne 
City Council 
170 
48 
48 
19 
City Of Lincoln Council 
151 
29 
89 
2 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
71 
12 
382 
98 
Salford City Council 
317 
48 
129 
18 
Leeds City Council 
112 
21 
84 
81 
Oxford City Council 
49 
23 
38 
11 
Southend-On-Sea Borough 
Council 
83 
0 
25 
9 
Camden London Borough 
Council 
162 
0 
185 
35 
Kirklees Council  
266 
7 
102 
17 
Wakefield Council 
184 
3 
182 
112 
 
Table II includes information about the sample set of 
tweets collected in 2011 in relation to the initial study and 
the set of tweets collected in 2013 expanding the study and 
capturing changes in use. For 2011, the table states the 
number of tweets captured for analysis between October and 
December 2011. For 2013, the table states the number of 
tweets captured over August 2013. This number is in essence 
the number of tweets made by the council over the specific 
periods of time. In addition, the number of re-tweets by the 
council is also captured. Re-tweets are those tweets that are 
the tweets of other users that the council has chosen to re-
broadcast within their network. 
Over the initial period of analysis, Salford City Council 
was the most active tweeting council with 317 tweets, whilst 
Oxford City Council was the least active. In the updated 
2013 analysis Tameside Council was the most active 
tweeting council, with Southend-on-Sea Borough Council  
being the least active. From a re-tweet perspective Newcastle 
upon Tyne City Council and Salford City Council were most 
prolific in re-tweeting community messages in 2011, whilst 
Southend on Sea Borough Council and Camden London 
Borough Council made no re-tweets. For the updated 
analysis Wakefield Council were most prolific in re-tweeting 
community messages, with Lincoln City Council being the 
least prolific. In the 2013 analysis all councils were engaged 
in re-tweeting content. Significant increases in the amount of 
re-tweeted content have occurred in Tameside Metropolitan 
Borough Council, Leeds City Council and Wakefield 
Council. This suggests that these councils have adapted their 
practice over time and are now gaining a better 
understanding of how re-tweeted content can improve their 
service.  
Table III contains information about the categorisation of 
the tweets sampled in relation to whether they are simple 
announcements from the council to the community, or 
whether the tweets are responses to community members. A 
response in Twitter generally (but not always) begins with 
the username of the Twitter user that one is responding to. 
This table demonstrates the level of engagement between 
council and citizen through Twitter. In the main this shows 
that the majority of councils are now clearly engaging in 
citizen conversation through Twitter. Leeds City Council 
118
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

have moved their citizen communication into a different 
Twitter feed, so the numbers shown in this particular table do 
not show the full picture. The sample set in 2011 showed a 
number of councils were not really using Twitter in the way 
it was designed as a social communication channel which 
encourages two-way conversation. This is clearly not the 
case in 2013. 
Tables IV, V and VI contain information about the 
textual content of each tweet categorised in relation to a 
range of council services.  
TABLE III.  
DIRECTION OF COMMUNICATION 
Council 
Announcement 2011 
Response 2011 
Announcement 2013 
Response 2013 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne 
City Council 
115 
10 
47 
1 
City Of Lincoln Council 
42 
77 
58 
29 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
49 
10 
193 
189 
Salford City Council 
184 
85 
53 
76 
Leeds City Council 
56 
35 
76 
8 
Oxford City Council 
16 
10 
33 
5 
Southend-On-Sea Borough 
Council 
83 
0 
18 
7 
Camden London Borough 
Council 
63 
99 
85 
100 
Kirklees Council  
235 
24 
71 
31 
Wakefield Council 
164 
17 
137 
45 
TABLE IV.  
FIVE MOST POPULAR CATEGORIES FOR ANNOUNCEMENT TWEETS 
Council 
Sport, Leisure & 
Entertainment 
Business 
Housing 
Jobs & Careers 
Parking, Roads, 
Travel & 
Transportation 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne City Council 
13 
3 
1 
1 
5 
City 
Of 
Lincoln 
Council 
13 
1 
7 
7 
8 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
98 
11 
17 
2 
18 
Salford City Council 
15 
4 
2 
13 
3 
Leeds City Council 
28 
8 
5 
6 
1 
Oxford City Council 
8 
3 
11 
3 
2 
Southend-On-Sea 
Borough Council 
5 
0 
3 
0 
1 
Camden 
London 
Borough Council 
26 
10 
3 
13 
0 
Kirklees Council  
40 
6 
0 
1 
2 
Wakefield Council 
97 
4 
0 
1 
2 
TABLE V.  
FIVE MOST POPULAR CATEGORIES FOR RE-TWEETS 
Council 
Sport, Leisure & 
Entertainment 
Business 
Jobs & Careers 
Bins & Recycling 
Education 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne City Council 
5 
4 
0 
0 
0 
City 
Of 
Lincoln 
Council 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
38 
3 
6 
11 
3 
Salford City Council 
10 
0 
1 
2 
1 
Leeds City Council 
33 
3 
6 
6 
10 
Oxford City Council 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Southend-On-Sea 
Borough Council 
6 
0 
0 
2 
0 
Camden 
London 
Borough Council 
7 
17 
6 
1 
1 
Kirklees Council  
9 
2 
1 
0 
2 
Wakefield Council 
88 
6 
2 
0 
0 
 
119
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VI.  
FIVE MOST POPULAR CATEGORIES FOR RESPONSIVE TWEETS 
Council 
Bins & Recycling 
Reporting 
Parking, Roads, 
Travel & 
Transportation 
Sport, Leisure & 
Entertainment 
Business 
Newcastle 
Upon 
Tyne City Council 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
City 
Of 
Lincoln 
Council 
3 
7 
5 
1 
0 
Tameside 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council 
78 
27 
23 
17 
10 
Salford City Council 
26 
19 
10 
7 
2 
Leeds City Council 
2 
0 
1 
1 
2 
Oxford City Council 
0 
3 
0 
0 
0 
Southend-On-Sea 
Borough Council 
0 
2 
0 
2 
0 
Camden 
London 
Borough Council 
20 
29 
24 
1 
10 
Kirklees Council  
5 
6 
4 
5 
3 
Wakefield Council 
1 
7 
5 
17 
4 
 
In 2011, in terms of announcements via Twitter the most 
popular reason for tweeting was to publicise entertainment, 
sport or leisure activities occurring in the local area. There 
was no change to this in the 2013 sample set. The only event 
which all councils engaged in tweeting content about during 
the August 2013 period was the release of educational 
results, with all councils commenting on the performance of 
their local students. The rest of the announcements varied by 
council, with for example, City of Lincoln council 
advertising conversations with their local council leader, 
Camden London Borough Council announcing government 
results of the development of a high speed rail network 
(HS2), and Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council making 
a range of announcements relating to temporary recycling 
arrangements (because of a fire in the local neighbourhood). 
In relation to responsive tweets from the council to local 
citizens these primarily centred around transportation, 
entertainment, waste and housing services in 2011. In 2013, 
the primary areas of interest focused on waste management, 
reporting and transportation services. In general very few 
conversations within Twitter in 2013 lasted for any 
significant length of time. In general conversations resolved 
issues, or in the case of a number of councils moved more 
significant issues out into direct messages or email. Outside 
of the most popular categories of conversation, responsive 
tweets in other categories related to a single or couple of 
conversational instances about particular issues.  
Finally, councils in 2011 were fairly inconsistent with 
regards to re-tweeting content across categories, with re-
tweeted content seeming to centre primarily on local council 
priorities. This inconsistency also translated into the 2013 
sample, however, all councils continued to provide some re-
tweeted content related to sports, entertainment and leisure 
activities. Local priorities changed between 2011 and 2013 
primarily relating to specific concerns of the period of time 
sampled. One example of this is Tameside Metropolitan 
Borough Council who during the course of August 2013 re-
tweeted content (categorised as ‘other’) from the local fire 
service related to a substantial fire at a recycling plant in the 
local area. 
V. 
LOCAL AUTHORITY CHALLENGES 
The next few sections will take an in-depth look at 
challenges identified from the analysis of the tweets sampled 
in 2011. This material is extended and updated to reflect on 
the meaning of the 2013 research in relation to what has 
changed and whether the challenge continues to be valid. 
Sections J and K deal with recently identified challenges 
taking into account analysis of the 2011 and 2013 datasets.  
A. Transforming Broadcast Communication 
As noted by Rooksby and Sommerville [15] there are 
significant challenges in transforming different elements of 
local government services, away from broadcast only models 
of communication. Social media communication platforms 
provide direct public channels of communication between 
citizens and local government. This can lead to citizens 
directly criticising decisions made in local communities, and 
the transparency of local government [4]. It can also lead to 
citizens raising issues about local service provision or issues 
related to local areas. This is certainly apparent across the 
datasets from 2011 and 2013.  
The challenge therefore is how to construct these social 
media channels such that appropriate individuals receive the 
messages related to their particular services, and how to 
manage this communication within these channels. In other 
circumstances, often the conversation is less public and more 
easily controlled – this leads to local government 
organisations (similar to other commercial organisations) 
approaching two way conversation in social media spaces, 
with some trepidation.  
It is clear between 2011 and 2013 local government has 
significantly matured in relation to how this communication 
process is handled. In 2011, there was a feeling from the 
dataset that often the channel was used as the direct 
mechanism to achieving resolution, foregoing existing 
channels for resolution. In 2013, there are two specific 
mechanisms highlighted to demonstrate how councils are 
gaining an understanding of how to handle the channel. The 
first is the direction of individuals to recognised mechanisms 
120
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for reporting, e.g., email addresses for waste services or web 
based report forms. The second is the establishment of 
specific Twitter feeds for issue resolution, e.g., feeds for 
particular services recycling and or feeds for direct help, for 
example Leeds_Help.  
Over both sample sets there was an indication that where 
local government is engaging directly in conversation with 
the local citizen base and helping to resolve issues, there is 
ample evidence that citizens are appreciating this service. In 
2011, there was evidence of individuals commenting that 
social media platforms were the most effective ways in 
which they have communicated with government services. In 
2013, there was no indication of this. Indeed, where the 
approach had matured into a direction of issue to either a 
web form or email service there was an indication that some 
individuals were resenting a multi-channel approach, e.g., 
asking questions as to why issues could not be raised and 
resolved directly through Twitter. 
B. Frontend to Backend Integration 
Local government must take clear steps to manage the 
social media channels they are using from the perspective of 
understanding information flow. Tweets show evidence that 
for some councils citizens see their Twitter spaces as the 
most effective way to gain answers to questions posed. 
However, in 2011 there were a number of cases of citizens 
not obtaining the information they required. One solution 
may see customer service staff taking responsibility for the 
engagement in answering citizen questions within social 
spaces, and other specific staff (e.g., marketing) taking 
responsibility for highlighting council achievements. In 
addition, customer requests coming in through social media 
spaces must be tracked, to help to facilitate knowledge of 
return on investment, as highlighted in Section C. 
As noted in Section A as services have matured since 
2011, the way in which the service is provided via Twitter is 
changing. Councils are adopting different approaches in 
realising good practice through this communication 
mechanism. Approaches such as encouragement of services, 
councilors and other council operatives to develop their own 
Twitter presence, demonstrate mechanisms for encouraging 
community communication. This also enables community 
members to sign up to information purely about the singular 
or groups of elements of service most interesting to them, 
enabling better information management from a citizen 
perspective. In addition, it is clear that councils are 
understanding the need to control integration between front 
and backend services with messages passed quickly to other 
services, either directly by the Twitter feed operators or 
through re-direction of the client. 
For the most part the problems experienced of issues 
raised in relation to a lack of reply through the Twitter 
channel have disappeared between 2011 and 2013. However, 
it is clear that users are not slow in letting the feed know of a 
lack of response by the specific service providers, e.g., if 
bins continue not to be collected or if issues reported 
continue not to be resolved. It is positive to see that where 
issues are resolved in a multitude of different cases users are 
also using the Twitter channel to broadcast their thanks.  
C. Leveraging Return on Investment 
With government austerity measures in force, and a 
reduction in funding to local government in the UK, local 
councils are busy reducing inefficiencies. Austerity measures 
have continued over the 2011-2013 period with many 
councils experiencing substantial reductions in funding and 
asking members of the public to respond in terms of which 
local services require protection through public consultation. 
In some cases over 2011 and 2013 this public consultation 
extends to or is advertised through the local governments 
Twitter channel.  
In the light of the above, for social media channels to be 
embraced they must make clear demonstrable impacts on 
local citizen engagement. One way in which this can occur, 
is by moving transactions from more expensive channels 
(e.g., face to face services) to online information provision. 
This is where it is important to ensure that the social network 
spaces are joined up to local government services – 
otherwise the cost of a transaction and speed of reply may be 
similar to other channels particularly if answers are not clear 
or incorrect. The most effective councils using these 
platforms make use of the private messaging spaces within 
social media platforms to provide targeted complete answers 
to citizen questions.  
Over the previous two years this particular challenge 
seems to be becoming more problematic. One of the reasons 
for this is Twitter itself, which encourages short message 
communication. This means that often members of the public 
need to engage in multiple tweets to inform the council 
regarding a particular issue. It also involves the council in 
the first instance trying to diagnose the issue, in order to be 
able to respond. In addition, as an asynchronous 
communication channel there can be delays between tweet 
responses from the citizen to the council and vice versa – this 
creates challenges in itself. With the above this all leads to 
questions over the cost of service, especially in comparison 
to other channels, it could be determined that the cost of a 
phone call would be less than the cost of multiple tweet 
communications, demonstrated by some councils pushing 
citizens directly through their Twitter channel to the phone 
service to engage the council with their issue.  
D. Engaging the Citizen 
Engaging the citizen will be helped by a transformation 
of broadcast communication, but this is not the only 
challenge to providing an engaging service. Social media 
platforms are often at their best when the channel providers 
are utilising the channel effectively by posting new 
interesting content. Often individuals will post content that is 
delivered across multiple social media channels this can 
cause problems when users are signed up for multiple 
services, each service needs to be distinctive, and different to 
engender different user communities. Whilst platforms can 
be transformative in providing a greater relationship between 
citizen, and government, they can also be transformative in a 
negative way, if the use of the channel does not meet with 
citizen expectations, for example if the channel is used to 
broadcast less meaningful information.  
121
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Over the past two years across Twitter channels this 
particular challenge has continued to become of real interest 
with councils finding creative ways to positively engage with 
the local populace. Some of the more interesting and 
engaging content has come in the use of different media 
types and different social media channels, with Twitter being 
used as a navigation tool to other items. For example, viral 
videos about particular challenges in the local area (e.g., a 
dog waste production by Wakefield Council) creating 
positive citizen response and the way in which they engage 
in re-tweeting positive local citizen messages. 
E. Privacy Challenges 
Social media platforms are not private and often citizens 
within these spaces are not completely anonymous. This 
presents a clear challenge in ensuring details of customer 
cases are kept out of the public domain. In one particular 
poor example of this in 2011, a council engaged across 
multiple tweets in detailing reasons for action, in a specific 
individual’s case related to their housing situation. This 
could be deemed to infringe on data protection when specific 
details are discussed. 
The counter concern is where customers are willing to 
discuss their individual personal circumstances across public 
spaces. Councils must learn when to move conversation into 
more private spaces, and to find ways of educating local 
citizens about problems related to providing too much 
personal information within public social media spaces. 
In the 2013 dataset there was certainly substantially more 
maturity demonstrated in the use of service with Councils 
channeling 
personal 
information 
through 
the 
direct 
messaging tool or through email communication. In addition, 
the growing use of privacy functions in Twitter limiting and 
providing protected services for individual tweets is helping 
to improve this particular issue. 
F. Engaging with the Conventions 
Social media spaces are not the same, all have particular 
nuances, and the community within different spaces behaves 
often in particular ways. Understanding the nuances of the 
platform will lead to greater success in platform use. For 
example Twitter encourages users to follow other users and 
build networks through interconnections of individuals, the 
community also has established conventions like #FF, which 
is short for #FollowFriday (Twitter users use this at the end 
of a week to suggest other individuals to follow). 
Recognising, understanding and using the structures 
available can help councils to fit into the community and be 
seen as an interesting component part. It is evident that now 
with mature services council are gaining a much better 
understanding of the platforms they are using and are 
understanding how to generate and promote community 
building. Re-tweets, modified tweets (MT), #FF and other 
conventions are now regularly forming part of council 
communications.  
G. Small Numbers 
In 2011 and 2013, council social media spaces can be 
deemed to be attracting relatively small numbers, in terms of 
percentages of citizens within local communities engaging 
with the service offered by and through them. However, as 
councils gain a better understanding of how to use and 
market their presence on social media networks effectively 
then these numbers should continue to grow. It may well be 
for certain community groups engagement through social 
media spaces is the only way to engage these groups in 
conversations about local council spaces, and services. 
Whilst over the past two years numbers have grown, this 
challenge is still of direct relevance. If numbers of followers 
continue to grow then this will demonstrate community 
growth, but the question is how many active members of 
community are obtaining information about the service, and 
how many accounts linked as followers are not actively 
viewed on a regular basis? The number of followers is not a 
strong enough performance indicator of community size.  
More mature use of social media within council spaces 
will continue to look directly at how networks are forming in 
social media spaces around the council. Understanding the 
community in terms of the different types of user present, 
and engaging in the space, is extremely important. Equally 
using the community as a network to advertise the strength 
of the service should be one thing councils continue to look 
to do. 
H. Endorsement or Community Building 
It is evident from the research that the practice that 
councils are using in building communities within social 
media spaces, differs. Decisions such as whether the council 
should ‘follow’ other users or ‘join’ other groups are not 
always that simple. However, social media networks are 
often formed from practices of engaging in community 
building. For example, presence as a friend may highlight 
your presence to other users who are interested in you. 
Similarly engaging in the process of #FF, or re-tweeting 
content, also provides a sense of social media community 
engagement, and may influence others in passing on your 
content. Another example is the highlighting of other videos 
for consumption within your YouTube channel. However, 
these community ideals come at a risk, the risk that the 
content you highlight, are associated with, or pass on is 
inappropriate or legally problematic. There is a question over 
whether associating local councils with other information or 
users provides a form of endorsement of them or their 
services, and therefore, whether such endorsement is 
appropriate given the linkage to public services. 
The data set in 2013 demonstrates changes in relation to 
council behavior regarding re-tweets, with differences in the 
number of re-tweets by councils, and in the types of 
organizational content re-tweeted. There are some good 
examples of re-tweet engagement by councils in engaging in 
re-tweeting positive local community communications. 
Twitter also requires users to follow one another to engage in 
direct messaging and other services, this means that 
community growth occurs through necessity in some 
circumstances.  
122
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

I. 
Answering the Difficult Questions 
Social 
media 
spaces 
provide 
direct 
lines 
of 
communication to the general public, which are open 24/7 
and easily communicable. These spaces are used by 
individuals for a variety of purposes from communication 
about particular things happening within local communities, 
through to information discovery about other places before 
travel. This creates complications regarding the types of 
issues raised within these spaces. In many ways, they are the 
most transparent places for citizens to find out more about 
what is happening within local communities direct from 
other citizens. This obviously means that some of the 
positives will be highlighted, but it also means that many of 
the issues often kept outside of general knowledge may also 
be highlighted, and associated with the spaces. For example, 
conversations about local drug use, anti-social behavior, 
areas of violence, and other criminal activity.  
More recently some councils are using the creation of 
multiple Twitter channels to direct individuals to the most 
appropriate information. For example, providing information 
particularly focused on tourism services, to navigate 
individuals away from issues related to local fly tipping, or 
graffiti, and or issues in local neighbourhoods. It is however 
particularly evident that issues raised in relation to local 
areas have continued over the past two years with concerns 
raised that councils may wish to remain out of public 
channels. There is a fair amount of evidence in the 2013 
sample set of citizens visually capturing their concerns using 
photographs further emphasizing issues in local areas.  
J. 
Social Media Policy and Channel Closure 
In 2011 it was noted that there was a limited amount of 
information regarding specific policy for how councils were 
going to use Twitter and other platforms as a service, 
generally categorised by a lack of clear social media policy. 
In 2013 whilst a social media policy could not be found for 
all councils, the more prolific councils with a range of social 
media services had developed clear policy to control this.  
Councils are also through their Twitter page adequately 
communicating a brief description of the channel itself and 
information such as when the service is monitored. This is a 
good demonstration of how councils are adapting to ensure 
that individuals are aware that whilst the web operates 24/7, 
council services cannot be delivered in the same way. 
As identified in [4] councils need to plan for closure of 
social media channels as much as they need to specify how 
they are using these in relation to their local community. For 
those councils pushing conversation directly out of Twitter 
through other service mechanisms there is a clear question 
regarding Twitter service lifetime. 
K. Sentiment about a place 
With the increase in engagement demonstrated by some 
councils with issues raised by the local population comes a 
significant challenge for councils, that of demonstrations of 
community sentiment. Recent developments by Sykora et al. 
(2013) [17] targeted at developing systems to measure the 
level of positive and negative feelings for the nation 
highlight one of the issues with social media. It is clear from 
reading through sample sets for the various councils 
involved that an appreciation for the feelings of the local 
population towards the council can be developed from such 
materials.  
 Twitter feeds for councils such as Salford City Council 
and Camden London Borough Council felt fairly negative in 
relation to the content exposed, whilst the Wakefield Council 
feed felt very positive. From a public relations perspective 
councils need to develop mechanisms for providing 
positive/negative 
balances 
within 
these 
community 
conversational spaces to ensure that the community engages 
in positive ways with the service, rather than in some 
circumstances fairly negative attitudes. 
One of the concerns related to the above is how councils 
deal with community issues. One of the problems with 
moving individuals straight to direct messaging or straight to 
another mechanism of engagement is that the issue is not 
closed off within the Twitter space, generating a feeling of a 
number of community issues. Although Twitter only has a 
limited number of words, councils need to find a mechanism 
to positively close off issues, even when moved into other 
spaces. For example, closing text of “and your issue will be 
resolved”, or something similar, would provide a positive 
end. 
L. What is the difference? 
Many of the above points raised as challenges for local 
authorities in these spaces, can also be linked directly to 
challenges for large organisations. However, the interesting 
question is whether there is anything that distinguishes the 
challenge for e-government. In this area, there are thought to 
be two major differences.  
The first is the increased transparency and profile of the 
service, money to fund engagement of councils within social 
media spaces comes directly from the UK public purse. The 
service needs to have a clear demonstrable impact for 
citizens within the local community to deem this as 
successful. The UK press are quick to highlight customer 
service faillings in online spaces, take for example Tameside 
Council’s experimentation with a virtual customer helpdesk 
in Second Life, this was described as “absolutely barmy” 
[18]. Although the value has to be demonstrated in large 
private organisations, they are not forced to be as 
transparent, for example with detail regarding cost of service. 
It is interesting to see citizens commenting on the state of 
local government transparency through social media spaces, 
e.g., “#organisation is in breach of international law, but 
wants 
the 
£4.7bn 
contract 
for 
N 
London 
waste. 
Tell #Camden council 'No' #Palestine #Gaza@” and “People 
getting turned away... does not feel like an 'open council' 
tonight. #newcastle” These suggest that UK citizen’s are 
willing to use the service directly to let councils know when 
they seem to be doing things thought not to be in the public 
interest. 
The second percieved significant difference is that 
councils could be deemed to have a requirement to engage 
the citizen, whether this is in citizen democracy, or in 
conversation 
regarding 
quality 
of 
services. 
Other 
organisations may choose to engage customers but local 
123
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

councils need to engage citizens. Therefore, understanding 
where particular customer groups are conversing, and using 
up to date mechanisms for engaging citizen groups should be 
a clear part of the strategic engagement for all local councils.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The challenges outlined above in response to 2011 and 
2013 datasets demonstrate that councils need to think 
carefully about the ways that they use social media channels 
to engage the citizen. Arising from the analysis, 
recommendations can be formed as to what councils should 
consider in having a presence within these spaces. The 
recommendations themselves are not new but it is evident 
from the research that councils are not completely engaging 
in understanding, and applying, the recommendations in 
practice. 
Understand the channel – Each channel has particular 
nuances, those councils who understand how these operate 
seem from the data analysis to be perceived more preferably 
within the social media community. In addition, those 
demonstrating an understanding of the channel seem to 
obtain the greater amount of participation and the greater 
amount of two way communication. It is clear that as service 
matures understanding of channel operation also matures. It 
would seem engaging other councils or organisations with 
maturity in using social media spaces can be a good first step 
to channel development. In addition, watching as other 
councils change practice can help to identify positive 
mechanisms for transforming conversation through Twitter 
channels. 
Engage the citizen – From the research in 2011 there was 
evidence that some councils were not engaging in any form 
of two way dialogue within social media spaces. Those 
councils who were engaging in a conversational manner with 
constituents, seemed to have been generating a positive 
response to their social media engagement. In 2013 all 
councils were engaging in some way with their local 
populace through the channel. One reason for this will be 
local citizens gaining knowledge of channel existence, and 
another reason will be the growing maturity of service.  
Develop policy – It was evident in 2011 within the 
research that few councils had developed a charter for their 
and their citizens engagement within social media spaces. 
Developing clarity over what is and what is not acceptable in 
the spaces, may form a barrier to conversation but would 
provide a clearer sense of the general rules of engagement 
within the space. One argument may be that the spaces 
themselves often have guidance over what should and should 
not occur within the social media channel, however, in some 
cases, this may not be restrictive enough. In 2013 some 
councils still need to develop and clearly broadcast their 
policy regarding social media service usage. 
Advertise the channel – The best form of advertising in 
social media spaces is the citizen. However, many 
organisations are finding innovative ways to highlight their 
involvement within the spaces. For example, Marseille FC 
offered their fans the opportunity to design a shirt if they 
gained a set number of Facebook followers. The best advert 
for any social media channel is the value added to customer 
experiences. If the channel is perceived as useful then it is 
likely that individual users will pass on that information, 
whilst if the channel provides in the main useless 
information, then it is likely to be ignored. 
Integration – As outlined as a channel above, integration 
is extremely important for local councils. Managing the ways 
in which information flows into (in the form of physical 
posts), and out of the social media space is crucial (in the 
form of citizen driven requests or data). Social media use 
should not be in the hands of a singular person tagged with 
the responsibility of a social media producer, or equivalent. 
However, the ways in which councils are represented within 
the space, is extremely important. There is a clear balancing 
act between bring overly prescriptive and transparent (e.g., 
tagging each post with a service representatives name) 
through to allowing for total freedom of employee 
engagement within the space. In addition, there are 
significant questions, which arise linked to whether 
engagement within social media spaces should be part of the 
role of senior figures such as chief executives of local 
councils.  
Withdrawal – It is evident over the past twelve years that 
developed spaces will fall in, and out of popularity. Early 
providers of social media platforms are finding reduced 
network engagement over time whilst newer platforms have 
come in, and filled their spaces. Therefore, councils need to 
manage their portfolio understanding how decisions are 
made to engage within particular spaces and when decisions 
should be made to withdraw from engagement within the 
space. This is a particularly complicated problem if there are 
constituent groups who maintain loyalty to particular social 
media spaces. In this space, councils should also consider 
audit and control mechanisms. If particular networks were to 
be forced to close it would be problematic if materials stored 
within those spaces were not stored in one form, or another. 
In addition, ensuring that any information that would 
generally be stored for legal purposes in the physical space, 
can be retrieved when engaging in virtual spaces. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Tweets analysed over the past two years within this study 
offer a snapshot of council engagement with the public 
through the social media network platform of Twitter.  This 
snapshot provides information of a specific time for a 
specific subset of councils. It is clear from this sample that 
over the past two years an initial indication in 2011 of a lack 
of true citizen engagement through a social media platform 
such as Twitter has been transformed with all councils 
demonstrating clear engagement. Councils are understanding 
how these services fit within their customer service portfolio 
and developing mechanisms to help resolve local problems 
brought forward through conversation in these spaces. Over 
the next few years these communication channels will 
continue to mature, as councils continue to re-think the ways 
in which they encourage individuals to interact with their 
service provision and as councils continue to review how 
their services operate.  
Future work will continue to focus on usage of social 
media services by local government organisations. In 
124
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

particular it may be useful to analyse particular groups of 
users and their engagement with such services. This type of 
analysis would provide an understanding of how such 
services can be used to positively benefit citizen experience. 
Utilising approaches for greater automated analysis of 
tweets may bring greater understanding of the types of 
tweets provided and the ways in which councils are engaging 
with the population. In addition, content analysis provided 
through opinion analysis algorithms being developed at the 
University of Hull and other institutions will also offer 
greater dimensions on engagement. 
The findings presented within this paper should be of use 
and be relevant to national and international managers of e-
Government web services, government legal teams and 
senior managers in eGovernment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Mundy and Q. Umer, “United Kingdom local authority 
challenges in the use of Twitter and other social media,” Proc. 
Second 
International 
Conference 
on 
Social Eco-Informatics (SOTICS 2012), Oct 2012, Venice, 
Italy. 
[2] Internet 
World 
Stats, 
“Facebook 
growth 
stats,” 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/facebook.htm 12.12.2013. 
[3] Twitter 
Blog, 
“Twitter 
turns 
six,” 
https://blog.twitter.com/2012/twitter-turns-six 12.12.2013. 
[4] D. Mundy and Q. Umer, “An analysis of UK council use of 
the social network – Twitter,” Proc. 12th European 
Conference on E-Government, Barcelona, 2012 pp. 502-511. 
[5] D. Landsbergen, “Government as part of the revolution: using 
social media to achieve public goals,” Electronic Journal of e-
Government, Volume 8, Issue 2, pp135-147, 2010. 
[6] J. J. Zhao and S. Y. Zhao, “The impact of e-government use 
of social networking media on government transparency and 
public participation,” Télescope, Vol. 18, 1-2, 2012, pp. 44-
61. 
[7] R. Cole, “Social media: what does it mean for public 
managers?,” PM Magazine, Volume 91, Number 9, 2009. 
[8] J. Hendricks and R. Denton, Communicator in Chief, 
Lexington Books, 2010, ISBN-13: 978-0739141052. 
[9] J. Skinner, “Social media and revolution: the arab spring and 
the occupy movement as seen through three information 
studies paradigms,” Sprouts: Working Papers on Information 
Systems, 11(169), 2012. 
[10] G. Gulati and C. Williams, “Communicating with constituents 
in 140 characters or less: Twitter and the diffusion of 
technology innovation in the United States Congress,” 
Presented at the Midwest Political Science Association, 
Chicago, Illinois. 
[11] R. Waters and J. Williams, “Squawking, tweeting, cooing, 
and hooting: analyzing the communication patterns of 
government agencies on Twitter,” Journal of Public Affairs, 
Volume 11, Issue 4, pp. 353–363, 2011. 
[12] A. Tumasjan, T. Sprenger, P. Sandner, and I. Welpe, 
“Predicting elections with Twitter: what 140 characters reveal 
about political sentiment,” Proc. Fourth International AAAI 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Washington, D.C., 
2010, pp. 178-185. 
[13] R. Romsdahl, “Political deliberation and e-participation in 
policy-making,” CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and 
Culture, Purdue University Press 7(2), 1-1, 2005, pp. 1-11. 
[14] C. Danis, M. Bailey, J. Christensen, J.Ellis, T. Erickson, R. 
Farrell, and W. Kellogg, “Mobile applications for the next 
billions: a social computing application and a perspective on 
sustainability,” Proc. 2nd Workshop on Innovative Mobile 
Technology and Services for Developing Countries (IMTS-
DC 09), 30-31 July, 2009, Kampala, Uganda. 
[15] J. Rooksby and I. Sommerville, “The management and use of 
social networks in a government department,” Journal of 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), October 
2012, Volume 21, Issue 4-5, pp 397-415. 
[16] N. Williams, “Template Twitter strategy for government 
departments,” 
http://neilojwilliams.net/missioncreep/wp-
content/uploads/2009/07/17313280-Template-Twitter-
Strategy-for-Government-Departments.pdf  12.12.2013. 
[17] M. 
Sykora, 
T. 
W. 
Jackson, 
A. 
O’Brien, 
and 
S. 
Elayan, “EMOTIVE 
ontology: 
extracting 
fine-grained 
emotions from terse, informal messages,” IADIS Intelligent 
Systems and Agents Conference, Prague. 
[18] The Telegraph, “Council scraps £36,000 virtual town hall in 
Second 
Life”, 
21 
July 
2010, 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/internet/7901312/Cou
ncil-scraps-36000-virtual-town-hall-in-Second-Life.html 
12.12.2013
 
125
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

