Monitoring Chronic Diseases Using Soft Computing Techniques and Rule-based
Systems: The CHRONIOUS Case
Piero Giacomelli
Tesan S.p.A.,
email:giacomelli@tesan.it
Giulia Munaro
Tesan S.p.A.,
email:munaro@tesan.it
Roberto Rosso
Tesan S.p.A.,
email:rosso@tesan.it
Abstract—CHRONIOUS is an Open, Ubiquitous and Adap-
tive Chronic Disease Management Platform for Chronic Ob-
structive Pulmonary Disease(COPD) Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKD) and Renal Insufﬁciency. It consists of several modules:
an ontology based literature search engine, a rule based deci-
sion support system, remote sensors interacting with lifestyle
interfaces (PDA, monitor touch screen) and a machine learning
module. All these modules interact each other to allow the
monitoring of two types of chronic diseases and to help clinician
in taking decision for cure purpose. This paper illustrates how
some machine learning algorithms and a rule based decision
support system are used in the CHRONIOUS project, to
monitor chronic patient. We will analyse how a set of machine
learning algorithms can be used in smart devices to alert the
clinician in case of a patient health condition worsening trend.
Keywords-Telemedicine; chronic disease management; ma-
chine learning; soft computing techniques.
I. INTRODUCTION
This notes extend the paper [1] that was presented at
ETELEMED2011 [2]. Scientiﬁc advances over the past 150
years, particularly in the medical ﬁeld, allowed the extension
of life expectancy in western countries and this trend seems
to increase in future years. Conservative estimates suggest
that by 2030 in EU countries the proportion of people over
60 years regard the entire population will be around 50%;
this means that we will see a gradual increase in the number
of those subjects with chronic diseases (i.e., diseases not
involving healing), that will therefore increase the cost and
effort over health care facilities [3].
Such chronic diseases are slowing but constantly replacing
malnutrition and infection as primary causes of mortality in
the population [4]. The World Health Organization (WHO)
has recently emphasized that chronic diseases are a global
priority [5].It was calculated that, if governments where able
to put in place public health policies that produce a 2%
yearly reduction in mortality rates for chronic diseases, 36
million deaths could be prevented worldwide between 2005
and 2015 [6].
Reducing mortality rates caused by chronic diseases is
also an economic priority, because it could save about 10%
of the loss in income due to death and disability, which
amounts to $8 billion in the developing countries only [7].
Chronic diseases are difﬁcult to treat and, apart from
deaths, have collateral social impact that are becoming an
economic emergency both in western and developing coun-
tries. Considering the mean age growing in western countries
population, chronic diseases will be a growing emergency in
next years. As the number of patient with chronic diseases
is rising there will be an increasing cost for hospitalization
structure both public and private. Some speciﬁc diseases like
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), sometimes there is, during
the treatment of the disease, a non-return point from where
the hospitalization is continuous as for dialysed people.
The traditional approach that consists in periodic check-
ups and periodic lab exams seems a model that won’t
be sustainable as the population gets older and the total
number of patients with chronic diseases rises. At present,
the physician deals with an increasing number of chronic
patients that are lowering the periodic check-ups and so the
reduced frequency is lowering the ability to prevent, if not
death, worsening in patient’s quality of life.
In the latest years, we have seen a tremendous growth in
IT infrastructure, both from the hardware and communica-
tion capacity. Nowadays a common mobile phone is much
more powerful in terms of hardware and software capacity
than the ﬁrst calculating machine that allowed the man to
land on the moon forty years ago. The continuously growth
of the World Wide Web (WWW) and, linked to this, the
continuous growth in bandwidth capacity for data trans-
mission allows to have cheaper and more widely available
bandwidth, for larger portions of the population.
As a consequence of the exponential growth of hardware
and software infrastructure, it is possible to rethink the
whole approach to the treatment of complex chronic disease
[8] [9] by limiting the hospitalization only to situation of
severe worsening of patient condition. This was the original
idea behind the EU funded CHRONIOUS project [10] [11]:
constructing a generic platform to monitor, in an unobtrusive
way, patient with chronic disease in two goals [12]:
• Improve the patients quality of life, by reducing as
much as possible the hospitalizations.
• Allow the clinician a continuous monitoring the pa-
tients, both in standard and potential risk situations.
11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

To gain this two goals, the CHRONIOUS platform has to
integrate different technologies both hardware and software
modules that need to interact among themselves. This paper
is organized as follows: in the ﬁrst section, the general struc-
ture of CHRONIOUS hardware and software modules are
described. A deep analysis of the preprocessing algorithms
covers the entire second section. Section three is dedicated
to illustrate the machine learning algorithms. In last section,
we will evaluate possible improvements to the Chronious
intelligence system.
II. THE CHRONIOUS SYSTEM: AN OVERVIEW
CHRONIOUS system deals with (Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease) COPD and (Chronic Kidney Disease)
CKD. The two diseases were choosen mainly because they
are ones the most difﬁcult to treat. There is lot of literature
that explain in detail why, but we can summarize in a brutal
way by saying that this two diseases are greatly inﬂuenced
by comorbidities. For example, a patient suffering from
CKD tends to have also diabetes [13] and have an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease. On the other side the con-
nection between COPD and lung cancer is so deep that
some author consider them two manifestation of the same
pathology [14]. Even if it is true that not every COPD patient
suffers of lung cancer or pulmonary neoplasia, respiratory
diseases naturally lead to a fatigue of the cardiorespiratory
system with obvious consequences on the health of the heart
muscle, that clearly affect all the patient status.
Different comorbidities can lead to different treatments
for the patients, and for sure a continuous monitoring of the
patient conditions both in terms of measure taken from the
patient himself (as, for example, glucose level for diabetic
patients) and in terms monitoring general status could surely
take advantage over traditional therapies. So the general
ideas beside Chronious was to collect different physiological
data for different diseases, in a way to allow a better
evaluation on well agree indicators for the clinicians. Beside
this data collection that is not a novel approach in remote
patient monitoring a great attention was dedicated to create
a system that is able to mimic the clinician period visits
to alert the clinician in a case of a worsening trend. This
means that Chronious is not a life saving system but one of
the main focus was to create a system that is able to alert the
clinician in a way to prevent an emergency hospitalization.
The thing we were trying to avoid is to have as in traditional
therapies a patient that is controlled 4/5 times a year directly
by the doctor, and between two check-up, an emergency
hospitalization is required because for example the patient
change his diet without telling his clinician. For these
different types of chronic diseases, according to the medical
guidelines, it is important to monitor different data in a
way to check patient health status and to activate suitable
emergency alarms for the clinician (for the COPD: ECG,
SPO2 and respiratory rate; for CKD: glucose level, body
weight and blood pressure) in case of critical event.
The CHRONIUOS platform consists of many modules
that act together
Figure 1.
Chronious modules
We can organize them in three main frameworks
• Patient Sensor Framework
• Communication Framework.
• Monitor Framework.
The Patient Sensor Framework consists of hardware devices
used to grab data from the patients. The hardware equip-
ments, installed at patient’s home, are
• Wearable and external devices.
• Touch screen Home Patient Monitor(HPM).
• Personal Digital Assistant (PDA).
The Wearable Device (WD) is a research project t-shirt
equipped with the following sensors:
• a 3-lead Electrocardiogram (ECG).
• A microphone as a context-audio sensor.
• Two respiration bands (thorax and abdominal).
• An accelerometer.
• A sensor for measuring humidity as well as body and
ambient temperature.
The external devices are a set of medical certiﬁed devices
coupled with an Ambient Sensor (AS). The medical certiﬁed
devices are:
• A weight scale.
• A blood pressure intake device.
• Two respiration bands (thorax and abdominal).
• A glucometer.
• A spirometer.
For the CKD patient, the devices provided are: weight
scale, blood pressure device and glucometer. Every patient
also interacts with a Touch screen medical PC for directly
entering data for questionnaires about diet, psychological
status and some question regarding the general patient status
that mimic in a reduced way medical question posed by the
clinician in a schedule examination(see Fig.2 and Fig.3 ).
All the data collected can be grouped in two types:
• Silent, when the data recording is automated and it
does not involve the patient interaction, as respiratory
frequency measurement for COPD patients from the
wearable device
12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2.
Diet questionnaire
Figure 3.
Doctor questionnaire
• no-silent, when it is requested a direct patient or
caregiver interaction with the device, as for the blood
pressure and questionnaires that are inserted on the
HPM: for diet, activity and food intake monitoring. The
no-silent data acquisition is particularly important for
monitoring CDK patient lifestyle.
During the day there are several measurements, with differ-
ent time intervals and different frequencies; only one data
transmission is done, if there is no worsening in patient
parameters. For COPD patient all the data are collected in a
silent mode from the wearable t-shirt and transmitted to the
PDA via Bluetooth; for CDK patient all the measurements,
including a lifestyle questionnaire are stored in the HPM and
transmitted in silent mode to the PDA. PDA is in charge of
doing the following action
• Collect all the data from the devices.
• Use a set of machine learning algorithms to determinate
if it is needed to force a non scheduled transmission to
the Monitoring Framework.
• Transmit the collected and analysed information to the
Monitoring Framework and receive back the changes,
that will affect the interaction between the patient and
the other devices.
The Communication Framework is in charge of transmitting
data among
devices and from PDA to Central DB. This
transmission is done using messages in a predeﬁned xml
format. The device that is in charge of doing the trans-
mission to the Monitoring Framework of the xmls is the
PDA. Apart from the WD for which an ad-hoc proprietary
binary transmission protocol has been developed, all other
devices use a proprietary communication protocol. So the
Communication Framework is also in charge to arrange all
these difference in a uniform way. For example, for the
weight scale, a proprietary software installed on the HPM
is in charge of reading the measures from the weight scale.
Once read the measure, the software stores it in a xml format
that is different from the one used by the Communication
Framework for data transmission to the Central System.
Before communicating this measure, an xml transformation
phase is necessary for standardizing the data an to tag it
with a
device unique identiﬁer that will be used by the Central
System to associate measure to patient.
The Communication Framework is not only in charge of
sending standardized xml to the central system but also once
a day it connects to the Monitoring Framework to receive
data from the central system. The data received are of two
types:
• Frequency of measurements.
• Changes on drug intake for the patient.
Once the system is installed at patient’s home, a standard
set of measurements have been assigned to the patient (table
I shows the frequency for CKD patient).
Table I
BASES FREQUENCY OF MEASUREMENTS FOR CKD PATIENT
Type
Day / Times per day
Glucometer
Monday once (8:00 am)
Blood pressure
Monday, Wednesday, Friday (8:00 am,5:00 pm)
Weight scale
Monday, Thursday (8:00 am)
Diet questionnaire
Monday (8:00 pm)
Clinical questionnaire
Monday (8:00 pm)
This schedule has been decided by the clinicians based
on their experience in monitoring the chronic patient. But
the clinician is free to change this schedule based on his
experience and according to the suggestions provided by
the Monitoring Framework. So, in case a patient needs to
have an higher frequency of monitoring in some parameters,
the clinician can decide to monitor them daily instead of the
based three times per week. This allows a better monitoring
of worsening trends in patient conditions. While the alerting
system can transmit data from to the Central System without
a schedule frequency, the data receiving phase is done once
a day. As we underline above, Apart from measures the data
13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

received cover also the drug intake. Being that the Central
system store also the patient drug therapy, it is possible to
change it to the patient. From the patient point of view all
the data transfer is silent, the only interface is a software
running on the patient HPM that every day display all the
measurements that need to be done during the day and a
drug reminder that display which pills need to be taken (see
Fig.4).
Figure 4.
HPM reminders
Move from the Communication Framework to the Moni-
toring framework consists we have four main parts
• Clinician interface.
• Decision Support System.
• Alerting system.
• Ontology Search Engine.
• Rule based editor.
• Interoperability engine.
Even if it this not possible in this paper to deeply describe
every part we will give a brief description of each one, to
allow to the reader to grab the complexity of the interaction
involved in the Monitoring Framework.
Starting from the simple one, the clinician interface we
can describe it as the main web interface for the clinician
with the patient. Every clinician has a group of patient,
determinated by the disease involved. For every patient, a
detail health record is visualized. The clinician can see every
alert the system have made for that patient, its history and
how it was treated. Every measure that the central system
received is visualized and the trend are plotted. Coupled
with these information the clinician have the possibility as
stated above to change frequency in measurements and drug
intake. We can see the main screen in Figure 5.
The Decision Support System is a rule based engine that
is able to receive as input nearly 100 different parameters
about COPD/CDK patient condition and trends, parse every
information and outcome a suggestion based on a set of
if-then rules. The Decision Support System is coded as a
web-service with different methods that is called by new
Figure 5.
Clinician Interface
data insert into the Chronious Central DB. The web service
use a set of JENA rules to infer a suggestion that will be
displayed on the Clinician Interface. The mechanism is done
using SPARQL [15] query language, on a set of xml based
clinical treatment rules. As a basic example, one simple rule
is the following one: if the body temperature of the patient
is above 38 Celsius degrees the ﬁrst aid department should
be alerted for an hospitalization of the patient for monitoring
purpose. The predeﬁned set of rules codiﬁes the clinician’s
expertise and the guidelines for the medical treatments of
the COPD/CDK patients.
It is important to notice that even if the ﬁrst triggering
of an alert is done on the PDA, by the set of trained
machine algorithm that will be described later, every alert
is double checked by this engine that contains a larger
set of rules. This because a new measure that comes to
the Central System sent by the PDA could be somehow
the ﬁrst signal of a worsening trend in patient status. So
if the PDA does the predeﬁned one day transmission to
the Monitoring Framework, even in this case the Decision
Support System is called. This double check mechanism
is particularly important for chronic patient because such
patients can have a long period of stable conditions without
any worsening but only with some ﬂuctuations above the
limits for an alert. In this situation the PDA will not reveal
any worsening trend but in Decision Support System could
output a suggestion on intensiﬁcation of periodical check-
up.
As we already pointed out, Chronious was not developed
as a life saving system. However, the project faced the
problem of a potential life risk situation. The alerting system
is the answer to such problem. Every suggestion outputted
from the Decision Support System is tagged with a level
of severity. This level mimic the level used in ﬁrst aid
department of an hospital in case a chronic COPD / CKD
request help.
These levels go from white to red, where red means that
a patient is in danger of life. If the Decision Support System
tags a suggestion as red the Alerting System sends an sms
14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to a number that fast reacts and eventually go to the patient
home to see what is happening. Also, technical problems
are arranged by the Alerting System, being that PDA use
GPRS network to send data, we can have network problem
so even if the data are already stored in the PDA the Central
System cannot receive them. In this case, an email is sent
to the technical team. This is possible because the Central
Database contains the schedules of the measurements, so it
is able to understand if a measure was missed. The Alerting
System is based on a queue of alerts that are continuously
monitored by a windows service and every new alerts is
treated according to its severity and based on a set of
conﬁgurable predeﬁned rule.
Nowadays, the World Wide Web is the primary resource
for medical knowledge. Nearly every clinician use it as
a source for being up to date with the latest research
information on how to treat diseases. Pubmed [16] is prob-
ably the ﬁrst search engine used for such purpose. Lots of
information are also stored in documentation that is present
only in the medical structure, so we equipped Chronious
with a an ontology search engine [17] that starting from raw
document uses an personalized ontology to grab meanings
for the two diseases covered by Chronious [18] [19] [19].
This with the goal of having a fast way for clinician, to ﬁnd
information related to COPD/CKD.
The ontology was created and fed with the standard
guidelines for the treatment of COPD/CDK patient. Using
an upload tool it is possible to enrich the original set
of documents with new ones, to make more meaningful
relationships between the various symptoms (see Fig. 6). It
is interesting to notice that, at the time of writing, the ﬁrst
comparison between simple words search in Pubmed and
Chronious Search Tool seems to indicate that the ontology
search gives better result according to the clinician subjective
feeling. This fact is in accordance with previous studies on
the subject [20].
Figure 6.
Ontology search
As we told the Decision Support System is a rule base
engine based on a large set of if-then rules [21] [22] [23]
[24]. The rules are codiﬁed using a JENA format [15]
but the system gives the possibility to changes these rules
according to the clinician intents. The interface that manages
the rules, is the Rule Based editor that allow CRUD (Create,
Read, Update, Delete) operations on the set of rules in
a human readable format. The rule base editor is also
equipped with a logical checker that controls if a new rule
is in conﬂict with an existing one.
Finally the Monitoring
Framework is equipped with an interface written using HL7
messaging ANSI [25], to interface Chronious database with
other medical structures. This was done because the medical
structure use, in most cases, an RDBMS to store patient
information and drug prescriptions. So this interface was
needed to avoid duplicate entry by the doctor reducing the
chance of errors. In the next section, we will analyse the
preprocessing phase needed to activate the intelligence in
the PDA that is the ﬁrst decision system that activates the
communication to the Monitoring Framework.
III. THE PDA CHRONIOUS PREPROCESSING PHASE
As we pointed out above, the Personal Digital Assistant
is a smart phone equipped with WINDOWS MOBILE
6.5 Operating system, a SQL SERVER 2005 COMPACT
database and a .NET FRAMEWORK 3.5. The PDA uses
Bluetooth connection to send and receive data to and from
HPM and Wearable t-shirt. It is equipped with a sim card
for being able to do data transmission over GPRS network
to the Central System. The data registered by the PDA are
the following
• Data from the wearable jacket.
• Answers to questionnaires concerning dietary habits,
drug intake and lifestyle of the patient.
• Data from the home patient monitor like blood pressure,
glucometer measurements and body weight.
Once these data are collected, they are saved to the PDA
database and a set of algorithms are triggered to analyse
these data. Since the PDA analyses data for two different
diseases, two sets of different algorithms are used. The
fundamental data needed by COPD treatment are ECG
signals and Respiration data, so in case of a COPD patient
we have a ﬁrst processing Electrocardiogram Pre-processing.
After this, a Feature extraction phase is needed and at
the end an Evaluation phase of the extracted features is
done to determinate if an alert must be triggered to the
Central System. For external devices used in particular by
CDK patients, there is no need of a preprocessing phase
because fundamental measures are the ones provided by the
glucometer, the weight scale and the blood pressure measure;
so, they are discrete time and directly used by the set of
machine learning. Combined with these data, the answers to
a set of queries concerning food intake, drug intake, lifestyle
and mental status are passed to a set of machine learning
algorithms to evaluate the whole patient condition. In the
15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

next subsections, we will analyse ﬁrst the COPD set of
algorithms used.
A. Preprocessing of COPD signals
The aim of Preprocessing Phase is to improve the general
quality of the ECG, for more accurate analysis and measure-
ment, because there’s the possibility to have some noises on
the signals. Possible noises in the signal include
• Low frequency Base Line Wandering (BW) caused by
respiration and body movements.
• High frequency random noises caused by mains inter-
ference (50 or 60Hz).
• Muscular activity and random shifts of the ECG signal
amplitude caused by poor electrode contact and body
movements.
The preprocessing comprises:
• Removal of base line wandering.
• Removal of high frequency noise.
• QRS detection.
The BW which is is an extrogenous low-frequency activity
which may interfere with the signal analysis, rendering its
clinical interpretation inaccurate and misleading. Two major
techniques are employed for BW removal:
• Linear ﬁltering [26]: involves the design of a LTI
high pass ﬁlter with cut off in way that the clinical
information in the ECG is preserved and the BW is
removed as much as possible.
• Polynomial ﬁtting [27]: includes the ﬁtting of polyno-
mials to representative points (knots) in the ECG, with
one knot for each beat. Knots are selected from a silent
segment, e.g., the PQ interval. A polynomial is ﬁtted so
that it passes through every knot in a smooth fashion.
The High Frequency Noise can be caused by the high
frequency as well as power supply interference from the
ECG signal. Its removal is done using:
• The Daubechies (DB4) wavelet employed on the basis
of the resemblance and similar frequency response
characteristics of the db4 basis function with the ECG
waveform.
• Using wavelets to remove noise from a signal requires
identifying which components contain the noise, using
optimal methods to threshold them, and then recon-
structing the signal using the thresholded coefﬁcients.
The prepocessing phase ﬁnally deals with the QRS detec-
tion. The main features that should be calculated: the Inter-
beat (RR) interval and the Heart Rate Variability (variation
in the beat-to-beat interval). For the Inter-beat (RR) interval,
two methods have been explored
• Filtering the ECG signal with continuous (CWT) and
fast wavelet [28] transforms (FWT)1.
• Following Pan-Tompkins [29], wavelets are used to
remove noise from a signal requires identifying which
component or components contain the noise, using opti-
mal methods to threshold them, and then reconstructing
the signal using the thresholded coefﬁcients2.
All the previous features are extracted from ECG signals.
For COPD patient also the Respiratory Rate is a fundamental
parameter that need to be analysed. In order to calculate
the respiration rate using the reference respiration signal, a
dominant frequency detection algorithm, based on short-time
Fourier transform (STFT) [30], is applied.
The STFT is a localized Fourier transform, utilizing a
Hamming window:
STFT(f(t)) = STFT(ω, τ) =
Z ∞
∞
f(t)w(t − τ)e−jωtdt
(1)
were w(t) is the window function, commonly a Hann
window or Gaussian hill centered around zero, and f(t) is
the signal to be transformed. Because frequency components
of the respiration signal are very low (2Hz), a window
size of 60 seconds is selected. Every 60s, the hamming
window is multiplied to the respiration signal, and the
result is transformed to the frequency domain using Fourier
transform. The dominant frequency is then detected by
ﬁnding the maximum amplitude of the spectrums. When the
dominant frequency components are found, inverse numbers
are calculated in order to obtain the respiration rate. After
this ﬁrst preprocessing phase for COPD patients we wil now
analyse the which kind of Features are extracted.
B. Features Extraction for COPD patients
From the Inter-beat (RR) interval and the Heart Rate
Variability, several features can be extracted, either in time
or in frequency domain.
Dealing with Time domain the values extracted are
1) SDNN(msec): Standard deviation of all normal RR in-
tervals in the entire ECG recording using the following
sdnn =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(NNi − m)2
(2)
1The reconstructed ECG signal after denoising contains only spikes with
non-zero values at the location of QRS complexes. From this signal, the
PQ junction and J point can be located as the boundaries of the spike. If
the length of the spike is more or less than a predeﬁned QRS length range
it is annotated as noise and if the voltage is below a certain threshold, it
is annotated as an artifact. The next stage is the detection of the T wave,
and the P wave in the PQ interval. The peaks of Q, R and S waves are
identiﬁed in the annotated part of the ECG signal from the PQ junction to
J point.
2The algorithm includes a series of ﬁlters and methods that perform
lowpass, high-pass, derivative, squaring, integration, adaptive thresholding
and search procedures.
16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

where NNi is the duration of the i-th NN interval
in the analysed ECG, n is the number of all NN
intervals, and m is their mean duration.
2) SDANM(msec): Standard deviation of the mean of the
normal RR intervals for each 5 minutes period of the
ECG recording.
3) SDNNIDX (msec): Mean of the standard deviations
of all normal RR intervals for all 5 minutes segments
of the ECG recording.
4) pNN50 (intervals that are greater than 50 msec, com-
puted over the entire ECG recording.
5) r-MSSD (msec): Square root of the mean of the sum of
the squares of differences between adjacent normal RR
intervals over the entire ECG recording the formula is
rMSSD =
v
u
u
t
1
n − 1
n
X
i=1
(NNi+1 − NNi)2
(3)
where NNi is the duration of the i-th NN interval in
the analysed ECG and n is the number of all NN
intervals.
If we now move to the frequency domain the Feature
Extraction on the PDA studies two bands:
1) The Low Frequency band (LF), which includes fre-
quencies in the area [0.030.15] Hz.
2) The High
Frequency band (HF), which includes
frequencies in the area [0.150.40] Hz.
If we now move to the Respiration signal several features
can be extracted either directly or indirectly we focused on:
1) Respiration Rate: The number of breaths per minute.
2) Tidal Volume (VT): The normal volume of the air
inhaled after an exhalation.
3) Vital capacity (VC): The volume of a full expiration.
This metric depends on the size of the lungs, elasticity,
integrity of the airways and other parameters, therefore
it is highly variable between subjects.
4) Residual volume (VR): The volume that remains in
the lungs following maximum exhalation.
After all the preprocessing phase of the data gathered by
the wearable devices, all these information are passed to a
Classiﬁcation System. The classiﬁcation system is responsi-
ble for the analysis of the outcome from the preprocessing
phase for the COPD patients and of the data gathered by the
external devices and questionnaires entered by the patient
himself. Below, we will see how the software is used to
transform all these rich set of data in an information to be,
in case, transmitted real-time or scheduled to the Monitoring
Framework.
IV. THE CHRONIOUS CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
After the collected data have been preprocessed for COPD
patient and all the CKD patient input have been acquired,
a set of machine learning algorithms are ﬁred up to decide
if a potentially risky situation is present. The aim of these
tools is alerting the Central System that contains a rule
based decision support system, for a better evaluation of
the message triggered by the PDA. In case the message
containing an alarm for life risk danger, the Central Decision
Support System is able to alert the emergency staff or to
suggest the clinician to modify the therapy approach. Most
of these tools need a preprocessing phase for identifying the
correct parameters that need to be validated by the clinicians.
This means that in the ﬁrst validation of the CHRONIOUS
project a large amount of efforts has been dedicated to gather
feedback from the clinicians about the correctness of the
rules / parameters that have been inferred by the algorithms.
In thise phase, another important effort has been dedicated
by the technicians to evaluate some probability index for
fuzzy data measures.
The CHRONIOUS Classiﬁcation System is composed of
the following part:
• A light rule based expert system.
• A supervised classiﬁcation system.
The light rule based expert system is an xml parser that is
able to extract from an xml a set of ”‘if then”’ rules created
an validated by the clinician. With these rules combined with
the data collected, the rule base system is able to decide if
a patient is in a potentially life-risk situation. For example
the following rules will generate an immediate alarm to the
central system:
• The Hearth Rate is above 120 bpm for both COPD and
CKD patient.
• If the weight increase by 2% in the last 24 hour for
CDK patient .
These rules are most for alarm triggering. It means that they
aren’t use for light monitor alerting. In the CHRONIOUS
PDA system the Supervised Classiﬁcation System is com-
posed of the following machine algorithms:
• Support Vector Machines [31]
• Random Forest [32]
• Multi-Layer Perceptron [33]
• Decision Tree [34]
• Na¨ıve Bayes [35]
• Partial decision Trees [36]
• Bayesian Network [37]
Apart from Bayesian Network, the other algorithms have
been trained with a dataset to generate a set of rule that
have been validated by clinician. The Bayesian Network
have been used to identiﬁed possible rules about the mental
and stress evaluator of the patient. This means that once
trained, the rules generate can be used to identify is some
stressful condition can alter some parameter and leading to
a worsening of the general state of the patient. The use of
these algorithms was needed because for the CKD patient
the diet covers the most part of the medical treatment, so
any factor that can inﬂuence a change on the diet intake,
17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

would potentially and indirectly lead to a worsening of the
patient condition. For example, if a female CKD patient
feeld sad, these condition could lead her to eat a bigger
piece of pie for satisfaction purpose. In general a bad feeling
could lead chronic patients to be uncompliance with the
medical treatment. However the kind of rules aren’t liked
the vital signs so their fuzzyness could be identiﬁed by
these type of algorithms. Clearly while diet is important to
avoid worsening on CDK patient conditions, on the other
side the lifestyle could be and indirect cause of COKD
worsening condition. Nevertheless for both of them we need
static rules to have alarms sending, because for both for
example having a body temperature above 38 could be a
risky situation were an hospitalization is needed for both
COPD and CKD patients. Considering the training dataset a
set of 41 attributes have been identiﬁed. These data comes
from the 2 sets of 2 hours health recordings (11 attributes),
food input module (12 attributes), drug intake module (1
attribute), activity input module (2 attributes), questionnaire
(13 attributes) and external device (2 attributes). The results
of some classiﬁer are shown in table II.
Table II
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM: MAE: MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR, RMSE:
ROOT MEAN SQUARED ERROR, RAE : RELATIVE ABSOLUTE ERROR, CI:
CORRECTLY/INSTANCES
Method
MAE
RMSE
RAE
CI
PART
0.1336
0.312
57.81 %
2.67
J48
0.1336
0.321
57.81 %
2.67
Forest
0.2
0.341
86.52 %
1.75
Na¨ıve
0.127
0.343
54.95 %
2.67
Again we point out that even if there are some errors
due to false positive matches, the PDA system in these
case would only generate a rule that will send a message
to the clinician that most of the times would only say that a
light worsening is present. The core intelligence that deals
with the central system would be the real suggestion system
that would indicate to clinician a suggestion on how to act
to possibly revert the trend. The Bayesian Network is the
fundamental algorithm for the Mental support tool. It uses
a set of attributes that affect a stress index and they weight
based on the clinician’s feedback as shown in table of Figure
2. When the total stress indicator is above a certain value
a light alarm is triggered to the Central Database to inform
clinician of a potentially worsening of patient conditions.
In the same way a module in the PDA is in charge of the
rules concerning the lifestyle od the patient: the lifestyle
tool. It collects data entered by the patient or caregiver in
a validation phase and using a Bayesian Network is able to
compute an index of good or poor lifestyle of the patient
also in this case if the poor lifestyle is ﬁnd a light alarm is
sent to the clinician for monitoring purpose.
During the ﬁrst validation phase the training phase as
been reprocessed several times as new data for the patient
Figure 7.
Attributes
were collected. In fact, the knowledge that can be extracted
using machine learning algorithms can be increased as new
patients use the Chronious System.
V. CONCLUSIONS AN IMPROVEMENTS
In this paper, we presented a set of machine learning
algorithms store in a smart phone that, combined with some
external devices and patient speciﬁc data, can be used for
a ﬁrst monitor/alert system for treatment of patient affected
by chronic diseases. Dealing with telemedicine application,
these kinds of software, could help to improve patient quality
of life and could be also a valid help for clinician to allow
a more precise monitoring of patient conditions without
need of the physical presence of the clinician. Apart these
potentially advantages a PDA that equipped with these kinds
of applications could suffer of some limitations. During
developing phase we faced these problems:
• Heavy resource consumption of preprocessing algo-
rithms.
• Updating a trained supervised algorithm.
The preprocessing algorithm for COPD parameter denoising
is the most memory/CPU consumption. This can became a
potentially problem when we deal with life risk situations,
because while the algorithm denoise the ECG signal, the
patient can loose consciousness and so precious time can be
lost in these phase. Other time is lost due to the huge amount
of signals transmitted from the wearable, this because we
deal with an ECG signal that is composed of a mean of ten
measurements per second so this means that 5 minute of
ECG signal became nearly 3000 sql commands to a SQL
SERVER 2005 COMPACT that is not so performing in this
18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

case. Increasing hardware requirements of the PDA can be a
ﬁrst solution however it would be interesting to understand
if a relational database is the best solution for storing these
types of data or other structure would be more conformable
for storing purpose.
PDA algorithms were developed using a Microsoft tech-
nology that at the time of writing have been exceeded by
the cloud computing paradigm. For future purpose, having
a compact RDBMS installed on the PDA, could became
be an unnecessary requirement. The data collected could be
transmitted directly to a Cloud storage and all the training
algorithms could be moved on the cloud.
The other important issue is that once the supervised
learning algorithms are trained any little change in some
parameter will need to retrain the algorithms and most
important, it would need a new validation of the outputs by
the clinicians. This retrain can lead to difﬁculties when after
this phase, the new trained algorithms need to be updated
on the pda. The Chronious Communication Framework is
only able to transmit values from the PDA to Monitor
Framework and back, but cannot transmit back the trained
conﬁguration for the machine learning algorithms. In this
case an interesting solution could be also to allow remote
updating of the structure validated. For example a trained
neural network could read the weights matrix from a struc-
ture upgradable by the Communication Framework. Apart
from these improvements, and many others that could lead
to a software system closer as much as possible to the
clinician and patient needs, it is our opinion that with the
smart devices that are closer to a normal PC, the algorithms
presented in this paper could become an important part of
the telemedicine platforms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A reduced version of this paper was presented during
[2] in the wonderful scenario of Le Gosier, Guadeloupe in
the French Caribbean. The author that had the privilege to
present his ﬁrst research paper in such this, out of common
world country, wishes to thank the IARIA organization for
the unforgettable experience.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Giacomelli, G. Munaro, and R. Rosso, “Using soft com-
puter techniques on smart devices for monitoring chronic
diseases: the chronious case,” February 23-28,2011, The
Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine,
and Social Medicine, eTELEMED2011, Gosier, Guadeloupe,
France, pp. 77-82, IARIA XPS Press, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
119-9.
[2] “ETELEMED2011 web site,” http://goo.gl/4HoLj, [retrieved:
Dec, 2011].
[3] C. Zoccali, A. Kramer, and K. Jager, “Chronic kidney disease
and end-stage renal disease a review produced to contribute to
the report the status of health in the european union: towards
a healthier europe,” NDT Plus, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 213–224,
2010.
[4] A. R. Omran, “The epidemiologic transition: A theory of
the epidemiology of population change,” Milbank Quarterly,
vol. 83, pp. 731–757, 2005.
[5] W. H. Organization, “Preventing chronic diseases: a vital
investment,” http://goo.gl/umxCk, [retrieved: May, 2012].
[6] K. Strong, C. Mathers, S. Leeder, and R. Beaglehole, “Pre-
venting chronic diseases: how many lives can we save?”
Lancet, vol. 366, pp. 1578–1582, 2005.
[7] D. O. Abegunde, C. D. Mathers, T. Adam, M. Ortegon, and
K. Strong, “The burden and costs of chronic diseases in low-
income and middle-income countries,” The Lancet, vol. 370,
no. 9603, pp. 1929–1938.
[8] L. Bartoli, P. Zanaboni, C. Masella, and N. Ursini, “Sys-
tematic Review of Telemedicine Services for Patients Af-
fected by Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD),”
Telemedicine and e-Health, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 877–883, Nov.
2009.
[9] B. McKinstry, H. Pinnock, and A. Sheikh, “Telemedicine for
management of patients with copd?” Lancet, vol. 374, no.
9691, pp. 672–673, 2009.
[10] “Chronious ofﬁcial web site,” http://www.chronious.eu, [re-
trieved: Oct, 2011].
[11] M. van der Heijden, B. Lijnse, P. Lucas, Y. Heijdra,
and
T.
Schermer,
“Managing
copd
exacerbations
with
telemedicine,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine. Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6747, pp. 169–178.
[12] M. Vitacca, L. Bianchi, A. Guerra, C. Fracchia, A. Span-
evello, B. Balbi, and S. Scalvini, “Tele-assistance in chronic
respiratory failure patients: a randomised clinical trial,” Euro-
pean Respiratory Journal, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 411–418, 2009.
[13] A. J. Collins, J. A. Vassalotti, C. Wang, S. Li, D. T. Gilbert-
son, J. Liu, R. N. Foley, S.-C. Chen, and T. J. Arneson, “Who
Should Be Targeted for CKD Screening? Impact of Diabetes,
Hypertension, and Cardiovascular Disease,” American Jour-
nal of Kidney Diseases, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. S71–S77, Mar.
2009.
[14] T. L. Petty, “Are copd and lung cancer two manifestations of
the same disease?*,” Chest, vol. 128, no. 4, pp. 1895–1897,
2005.
[15] “w3c sparql reference,” http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-
query/, [retrieved: Aug, 2011].
[16] “Pubmed ofﬁcial site,” http://www.pubmed.org, [retrieved:
Sep, 2011].
19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] S. Kiefer, J. Rauch, R. Albertoni, M. Attene, F. Giannini,
S. Marini, L. Schneider, C. Mesquita, and X. Xing, “An
ontology-driven search module for accessing chronic pathol-
ogy literature,” in On the Move to Meaningful Internet Sys-
tems: OTM 2011 Workshops, P. H. R. Meersman, T. Dillon,
Ed.
Hersonissos, Crete, Greece: Springer Verlag, 2011, pp.
382–391.
[18] S. Kiefer, J. Rauch, R. Albertoni, M. Attene, F. Giannini,
S. Marini, L. Schneider, C. Mesquita, X. Xing, and M. Lawo,
“The chronious ontology-driven search tool: enabling access
to focused and up-to-date healthcare literature,” in eChal-
lenges e-2011 Conference, M. C. P. Cunningham, Ed.
IIMC
International Information Management Corporation, 2011, pp.
1–8.
[19] P. Giacomelli, G. Munaro, and R. Rosso, “Can an ad-hoc
ontology beat a medical search engine? the chronious search
engine case.” January 30- February 04,2012, The Fourth In-
ternational Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social
Medicine, eTELEMED2012, Valencia, Spain, pp. 215-220,
IARIA XPS Press, ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3.
[20] J. Z. Wang and F. Ali, “An efﬁcient ontology comparison
tool for semantic web applications,” Web Intelligence, IEEE /
WIC / ACM International Conference on, vol. 0, pp. 372–378,
2005.
[21] E. Seto, K. J. Leonard, J. A. Cafazzo, J. Barnsley, C. Masino,
and H. J. Ross, “Developing healthcare rule-based expert
systems: Case study of a heart failure telemonitoring system,”
International Journal of Medical Informatics.
[22] G. Kong, D.-L. Xu, R. Body, J.-B. Yang, K. Mackway-Jones,
and S. Carley, “A belief rule-based decision support system
for clinical risk assessment of cardiac chest pain,” European
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 219, no. 3, pp. 564–
573, 2012.
[23] S. M. Maviglia, R. D. Zielstorff, M. Paterno, J. M. Teich,
D. W. Bates, and G. J. Kuperman, “Automating complex
guidelines for chronic disease: Lessons learned,” vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 154–165, 2003.
[24] J. Chang, C. Ronco, and M. H. Rosner, “Computerized
decision support systems: improving patient safety in nephrol-
ogy.” Nature reviews. Nephrology, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 348–355,
Jun. 2011.
[25] “HL7 ofﬁcial site,” http://www.hl7.org, [retrieved: Jan, 2012].
[26] A. Kachenoura, F. Poree, G. Carrault, and A. I. Hernandez,
“Comparison of four estimators of the 3d cardiac electrical ac-
tivity for surface ecg synthesis from intracardiac recordings,”
in Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ser. ICASSP ’09,
2009, pp. 485–488.
[27] M. Kaur, B. Singh, and Seema, “Comparison of different ap-
proaches for removal of baseline wander from ecg signal,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference &#38; Workshop
on Emerging Trends in Technology, ser. ICWET ’11.
ACM,
2011, pp. 1290–1294.
[28] Y. Chesnokov, D. Nerukh, and R. Glen, “Individually adapt-
able automatic qt detector,” Computers in Cardiology, no. 2,
pp. 337–340, 2006.
[29] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection
algorithm.” IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 32, pp. 230–236,
1985.
[30] P. S. Addison, “Wavelet transforms and the ecg: a review,”
Physiological Measurement, vol. 26, no. 5, p. R155, 2005.
[31] N. Cristianini and J. Shawe-Taylor, An introduction to support
vector machines and other kernel based learning methods.
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[32] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, vol. 45,
pp. 5–32, 2001.
[33] S. Haykin, Neural Networks and Learning Machines (3rd
Edition).
Prentice Hall, 2008.
[34] J. R. Quinlan, “Learning decision tree classiﬁers,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 28, pp. 71–72, 1996.
[35] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt, “Bayesian
network classiﬁers,” Machine Learning, vol. 29, pp. 131–163,
1997.
[36] E. Frank and I. H. Witten, “Generating accurate rule sets
without global optimization,” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, 1998, pp.
144–151.
[37] D. Holmes and L. C. Jain, Innovations in Bayesian Networks
Theory and Applications.
Springer Netherlands, 2008.
20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

