Realistic Large Scale ad hoc Animal Monitoring
Bartosz Wietrzyk, Milena Radenkovic
School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, NG8 1BB, UK
e-mail: bartosz@wietrzyk.name, mvr@cs.nott.ac.uk
Abstract— Automated cattle monitoring with wireless devices
installed on animals is important for profitability of animal
production as well as welfare of animals and farmers. In this
paper we define requirements for such monitoring on the basis
of questionnaires distributed to potential users and processing
data from long term animal monitoring. Then we discuss a
practical store and forward architecture that allows data
retention, issuing notifications and answering remote as well as
in situ queries. The core of this architecture - disruption
tolerant mobile ad hoc routing protocols allows minimizing
and balancing energy utilization, which is crucial for labor
intensity of animal monitoring. We achieved that by dynamic
adaptation to the behavior of monitored animals, in particular
utilization of heterogeneity of nodes’ mobility. We evaluate the
proposed protocol to show how it satisfies our requirements
and then discuss precautions against security threats, which
are essential for feasibility of the deployment of the proposed
architecture.
Keywords- Animal Monitoring, DTN, Energy Conservation,
Wireless Routing, Security
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a proliferation of interest in using wireless ad
hoc technologies to monitor health and behavior parameters
of wild
as well as domestic animals [2-8] and the
environment as a whole [9]. This paper focuses on cattle
monitoring
because
timely
detection
of
cattle
health
problems can prevent spread of diseases such as mastitis and
other infection diseases, metabolic diseases and lameness,
which can lead to decreased productivity and death of
valuable stock [3], as well as endanger health of the humans.
The productivity of a farming enterprise can be also
extended by timely detection of the oestrus in order to
efficiently perform insemination of cows. Currently most of
the farms practice manual observation, whereas the most
advanced enterprises utilize milk monitoring by stationary
sensors, or animal mounted sensors read over a single hop
communication having very short [10] to medium range [11]
leading to disconnections. These solutions are simple and
easy to implement but require expensive infrastructure to
provide full coverage or they offer only limited reliability.
Current state of the art research for monitoring cattle
behavior and metabolism in the Wireless Sensor Networking
(WSN) research community are largely pragmatic proofs of
concepts [12]. More precisely they utilize single hop [5, 6]
or GSM communication [3]. The latter is expensive and not
reliable in agricultural areas, where GSM operators have
limited incentives to provide complete coverage.
In this paper, we discuss practical feasibility of the
deployment of the delay store and forward architecture
introduced in [8, 13], that provides data retention, detecting
custom events, notification issuing, remote and in-situ
queries answering.
The core of this architecture, a novel
energy efficient, disruption tolerant Mobile Ad Hoc Network
(MANET) routing protocol provides offloading data for long
term storage by sending data to farm servers via sinks that
are a part of a MANET and handles in-situ queries issued by
users collocated with the animals. The advantages of this
protocol are following: (1) we significantly optimize energy
efficiency of control traffic by identification and utilization
of animal movement patterns as well as graceful degradation
of data traffic energy efficiency, (2) the protocol can
dynamically adapt to the current behavior of the animals
carrying the mobile devices by utilizing heterogeneity of
nodes’ mobility, (3) it can work with any type of bovine
animals. Reducing and balancing energy utilization of the
mobile nodes is essential from the perspective of farming
industry because it allows decreasing labor necessary for
changing the batteries installed in the animal mounted
devices.
In this paper, we demonstrate practical feasibility of this
algorithm by extended monitoring of behavior of 5 animals
over 1 year. Our results are based on significantly larger data
set than normally used for this kind of application domain.
The usual data size would sometimes include a somewhat
bigger number of nodes but would in turn have much shorter
time span of the data capture (weeks rather than months or
years). Finally we address the challenges of the practical
deployment
of
the
proposed
algorithm
by
proposing
mechanism for dealing with disconnections and discussing
the security issues. We argue that security issues are at the
core of allowing deployment of the cattle monitoring in the
commercial environment. Competitors are likely to disrupt
functioning of the target farming enterprise or put it into a
less favorable position. Buyers of the animal products (e.g.,
supermarkets) may want to lower the price of the products
they buy or gather intelligence about the sellers to better
evaluate their offer. The impact of the utilized security
precautions on the energy efficiency of the animal mounted
devices should be minimized.
1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This paper is an extended version of [1]. More precisely,
it gives more information about the proposed algorithm and
also provides its detailed evaluation. The paper is organized
as follows. Section II discusses and categorizes related work.
Section III presents the proposed architecture. Section IV
reports on the setup and results of our field experiments we
performed to collect realistic data sets and requirements
necessary to evaluate the proposed architecture and the
MANET routing protocol. The cattle movement data from
these experiments was uploaded [14] to the Community
Resource
for
Archiving
Wireless
Data
At
Dartmouth
(CRAWDAD). Section V presents our practical protocol that
provides data off-load and in-situ queries extending the
discussion about combating disconnections. Section VI
reports on our evaluation of the proposed protocol. Section
VII identifies potential security threats, proposes feasible
precautions against them and discusses impact of these
precautions on the proposed protocol. Finally, Section VIII
identifies future challenges.
II.
RELATED WORK
This Section reports and classifies the existing work
related to cattle monitoring.
A.
Criteria
We begin with defining and motivating the set of criteria
used for reviewing existing work. They can be divided into
satisfying user requirements and addressing environmental
constrains.
Satisfying
user
requirements
includes:
(1)
increasing reliability, (2) managing delays, (3) increasing
scalability, (4) lowering costs. Addressing environmental
constrains means handling high mobility of nodes. Further
within this section we discus each of these criteria in a
greater detail.
a) Increasing
Reliability.
This
is
an
important
requirement that affects the usability of the monitoring
system and should not be limited to the best effort level due
to the nature of ad hoc type of communication. We target to
increase
the
reliability
by
applying
the
appropriate
techniques such as extending range of transmitters with
multi-hop communication, utilizing redundant data storage
and feedback. Due to lower time constraints it is easier to
increase reliability of sending data for retention and
delivering
notifications
about
detected
events
than
answering in-situ queries.
b) Managing Delays. Different types of traffic have
different
time
constrains.
According
to
the
users’
requirements the acceptable delays for sending data from
animal mounted devices to farm servers via sinks depend on
the type of data. The urgent data includes for example
information about the detected oestrus or an animal disease.
Such events should be reported as quickly as possible. Non-
urgent data is for example a periodic update necessary for
detecting the reduced efficiency of pastures. Reduced
efficiency of pastures should be reported within 24 hours.
Delays for answering in-situ queries should allow the users
to work interactively.
c) Increasing Scalability. The target system should
comprise multiple MANETs where each MANET can
comprise from several up to approximately hundred of
animal mounted devices. We consider scalability in terms of
the number of MANETs in the overall topology, the number
of animal mounted nodes within each of the MANETs and
of the density of the topology of a single MANET. The
system should maintain the required parameters such as
delays and energy efficiency within the dynamic range of
topology size and density. In the case of lower densities of
the topologies the major challenge are disconnections
because the topology can split into separated islands of
connectivity, e.g., this may happen when an animal becomes
ill or injured or the herd splits into separate groups. Such
disconnections
are
challenging
for
the
wireless
communications because the multi-hop path between a pair
of nodes does not necessarily always exist. Handling
disconnections means thus detecting the existence of the
multi-hop path and when it appears, performing necessary
data exchanges or routing the data in the store and forward
manner or caching data and answering queries within the
network partition.
In the case of higher densities of
topologies or higher numbers of nodes the major challenge
is combating network congestion that is usually caused by
broadcasts. Therefore the most promising approach to
combating congestion is optimizing the broadcasts by
differentiating the roles of nodes in rebroadcasting packets.
d) Lowering
Costs.
This
refers
to
lowering
the
financial and labor costs of installation and maintenance of
the target cattle monitoring system. More specifically, we
focus on lowering the costs of utilizing the third party
communication services such as GSM, satellite telephony or
human labor. The major constituent of maintenance costs of
the target system is replacing batteries of the animal
mounted nodes and we aim to minimize and balance energy
utilized for wireless communication by animal mounted
nodes.
e) Handling High Mobility. Animal mounted nodes
have movement patterns that are difficult to predict and this
results in frequent changes of topology. Handling high
mobility thus means using soft state topology data, which is
collected in the demand driven way, i.e., when there is data
to be routed and the topologies change in the self organized
fashion.
B.
Existing Approaches to Animal Monitoring
This section discusses existing Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) for animal monitoring. The WSNs [15] consist of
hundreds to thousands of inexpensive wireless nodes, each
with some computational power and sensing capability,
operating in an unattended mode. The hardware technology
for these networks are low cost processors, miniature sensing
and radio modules. Sensor data includes continuous sensor
readings of physical phenomena, audio and video streams.
2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a) Stationary Wireless Sensor Networks. The initial
WSNs were purely stationary. The sensor data was archived
in a powerful server geographically collocated with the
sensors (usually referred to as a base station) that was
usually fully replicated on the pre-determined powerful
servers in the labs. Users could query the databases to get
information about sensor data. An example stationary WSN
was the WSN deployed on the Great Duck Island [16] to
monitor the ecology of Leach’s Storm Petrel. It used single-
hop communication and had a multi-layer architecture. The
fist layer consisted of multiple sensor networks that were
deployed in dense patches that were widely separated and
measured various physical phenomena and had cameras and
microphones. Each sensor patch had sensor motes that were
capable of various forms of filtering, sharing and combining
sensor measurements. Sensor motes transmitted sensor data
to the second layer that is referred to as a gateway. A
gateway was then responsible for transmitting the packets to
the third level referred to as the base station and some
further data processing. The base station in the third level
provided full database services and connectivity to the
database replicas across the Internet. Fourth layer usually
refers to services that provide multi-user access to sensor
data including services for supporting analysis, visualization
and web content. Once deployed, most base stations are
intended to remain stationary and in a densely packed
configuration. WSN deployed on the Great Duck Island
comprised 43 sensor nodes and its maintenance was
characterized by low labor intensity. Its stationary character
allowed simplification of the routing and avoiding problems
with mobility and disconnections. The simple routing and
lack of disconnections helped in avoiding problems with
energy saving. Lack of disconnections and problems with
energy saving allowed short delays. This approach because
of its stationary character does not apply to our scenario.
b) Animal Mounted. In a typical animal mounted WSN
mobile nodes send measurements to a centralized server
over
a
GSM
or
satellite
network.
Alternatively
the
measurements are collected by a mobile base station carried
by a human or mounted on a vehicle and then manually
processed [2]. The oldest form of animal mounted wireless
sensors are radio tags, which send VHF beacons [17]. Their
measurements are retrieved by a base station, which can be
fixed, carried by a human or mounted on a vehicle. This
approach is not optimal for our scenario because using fixed
base stations is expensive in the case of covering larger
areas. Using base stations carried by humans or mounted on
vehicles is very labor intensive. In both cases potentially
data from only a subset of tagged animals can be retrieved.
The more recent variant of this method [17] is using satellite
telephony instead of VHF beacons. This is much less labor
intensive and more reliable but also very expensive and
energy inefficient. One of the first examples of animal
mounted WSNs was ZebraNet [2] that consisted of animal
mounted collars collecting and exchanging GPS locations,
which were retrieved by a mobile base station. The collars,
were opportunistically exchanging all stored measurements
with all encountered nodes. This addressed disconnection
but had low scalability – the maximal envisaged number of
the deployed animal mounted nodes was 30 and involved
human labor. The authors of [3] mounted various sensors on
a single steer to monitor temperature inside its rumen,
location, acceleration, as well as external temperature,
humidity and pressure. The measurements from the sensors
were transmitted to the gateway mounted on the animal,
which forwarded them on via GPRS. The presented
approach was expensive and not energy efficient because of
extensive utilization of GPRS. Low energy efficiency
increased the labor intensity of its maintenance. The GSM
telephony can have limited coverage in rural areas where the
cattle is kept [3]. This approach does not address our
requirements because due to heavy utilization of GSM it has
high costs and low energy efficiency. Butler et al. [4]
proposed using animal mounted devices to force bovine
animals to move or stay within virtual fences but did not
address
the
energy
efficiency
of
the
wireless
communication. Researchers at CSIRO [5, 6] fitted 13 cows
with collars containing accelerometers, GPS receivers and
wireless
networking
interfaces
in
order
to
examine
reliability of the communication and usability of the data
collected by GPS receivers and accelerometers. The authors
did not give the details about the utilized routing protocol
and did not consider the energy efficiency. The later work of
these researchers [7] concerns using animal mounted
devices to prevent bulls from fighting with each other. The
animal mounted collars have GPS receivers, wireless
network interfaces and are capable to apply electric shocks
to
the
animals
wearing
them.
The
utilized
wireless
communication
is
a
simple
single-hop
one
without
considering energy efficiency. Small et al. [18-20] proposed
using whale mounted sensors to collect data about whales
and their habitat. They utilized a combination of the
Infostation [21, 22] paradigm and a DTN approach similar
to Gossiping [23]. This work is similar the ZebraNet [2] but
limits the probability of forwarding data to other nodes. In
our scenario animal mounted devices form a much denser
topology than in the case of whale monitoring. Therefore,
gossiping would increase the network overhead and thus
affect energy efficiency.
c) DTN networks for rural areas. There is intensive
ongoing research in DTN networks for rural developing
areas [24-27]. However, this research typically concerns
providing
connectivity
between
villagers
or
between
villagers and local authorities rather than monitoring farm
animals and does not consider energy efficiency.
III.
ARCHITECTURE OF THE CATTLE MONITORING
SYSTEM
This section describes the architecture of the target cattle
monitoring system, more fully described in [13, 28]. The
scope of the monitoring system is a farming enterprise,
3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

which comprises several pastures and barns where animals
are kept. The cattle can be kept all the year continuously in
the pastures or all the year in the barns but the most common
practice is to keep them in the pastures during the warmer
half of the year and indoors during the other [29]. The
proposed system can be used to monitor animals regardless if
they are kept continuously in the pastures or in the barn and
regardless if they currently yield milk or not.
Oestrus, animal diseases, reduced efficiency of pastures
can be detected by measuring, collecting, and analyzing
walking and feed intake intensity [10, 30]. Relying on both
factors can decrease the number of false positive errors [30,
31]. In the proposed system, animal mounted device has the
form of a collar with a built-in accelerometer measuring the
intensity of feed intake. Walking intensity is measured by a
pedometer mounted on the animal’s leg. Measurements from
the pedometer are acquired by the collar over wireless
communication. Measurements from the pedometer and
accelerometer are stored and processed by the collar. Both
the collar and the leg mounted pedometer are battery
powered. Data processing performed by animal mounted
devices aims to detect oestrus, pregnancy, animal diseases
etc. They have wireless network interfaces and regularly
transmit raw and processed data to the farm servers over the
sinks. Sinks are members of the MANET, which forward the
data collected and processed by animal mounted devices to
farm servers. Animals wear the same devices regardless if
they are kept in pastures or barns.
Figure 1.
Example deployment
The typical amount of data for each update sent from
animal mounted devices to sinks is 32B. As shown in Figure
1, sinks can be connected to farm servers over a wired
network connection or GSM telephony. In the latter case, the
sink can be stationary or animal mounted. The farm servers
store the real time and historic data, detect the user defined
events and issue notifications about these events.
Figure 2.
Functional overview of the cattle monitoring system
As shown in Figure 2, the users can query the data stored
on the servers, including raw and processed data, either
locally at the farm or remotely over the Internet. Users
located in a pasture, stall or in its close proximity may want
to query data about the animals located there. This can be
achieved by querying the data from a PDA or a smart phone
connecting directly to the animal mounted devices, or via the
sinks over the wireless communication.
IV.
FIELD EXPERIMENTS
In
this section we
describe
field experiments
we
performed at the University of Nottingham’s Dairy Centre in
collaboration with School of Biosciences. The purpose of
these field experiments was collection of realistic data sets
and requirements necessary to design, develop and evaluate
the delay tolerant architecture and the energy efficient
MANET routing protocol for the cattle monitoring system.
The cattle movement data from these experiments was
submitted [14] to the Community Resource for Archiving
Wireless Data At Dartmouth (CRAWDAD). CROWDAD is
an international repository of real wireless data for wireless
network research community.
A.
Quantitative Experiments
Quantitative experiments comprised cattle movement and
behavior
monitoring
in
order
to
gather
the
realistic
environmental constrains.
1)
Experiment Setup
We received one year long walking intensity data from 5
pedometers mounted on the cows located in the division of a
modern dairy housing 100 animals, shown in Figure 3. One
year length of the pedometer data allows for enough
variability of continuing patterns that could be used by our
algorithm to enhance its performance. Cows could move
freely in the area with feeder, water tank, resting bays and
milking robots available 24 hours a day. Their measurements
were automatically collected by milking robots whenever a
cow was milked.
We also monitored behavior of the animals using animal
mounted GPS receivers and cameras. In particular we
4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

mounted
on
the
monitored
cows
five
collars,
each
comprising a neck strap and an aluminum instrument
enclosure containing a Bluetooth GPS and a Bluetooth
enabled mobile phone. Mobile phones were logging data
from the GPS receivers including positions and timestamps.
Monitoring started at 11:10. The collars were removed at
18:10. GPS receivers worked until 18:24 (manually turned
off), 12:23 (probably jammed), 18:51 (manually turned off),
15:09 (exhausted battery), 15:33 (exhausted battery). Later
we submitted [14] the collected GPS and pedometer data to
the Community Resource for Archiving Wireless Data At
Dartmouth (CRAWDAD). Concurrently we were filming the
part of the dairy where the monitored cows were kept. We
placed the camera on two ramps above this area. These
locations offered the most complete view. We received the
plan of the dairy and then captured the coordinates of the
characteristic locations on the plan using a handheld GPS
receiver. GPS receivers and filming were utilized only for
the purpose of our field experiments. Their utilization is not
intended for the target monitoring system.
2)
Results
Our field experiments show that cows typically react well
to the animal mounted collars weighting 1075g. This is very
promising for the practical feasibility of the target cattle
monitoring system. Figure 4 shows the average daily
walking intensity of five cows, calculated from the one year
long pedometer data as arithmetic weighted mean of walking
intensities per each cow and each day. We can see that the
animals’ mobility can differ significantly among different
animals and for each animal among different days. However,
from this picture we cannot judge how the walking intensity
is
reflected
in
the
spatial
mobility.
Figure
5
shows
probability distribution of speeds for a subset of cows
wearing GPS receivers. They were calculated by dividing the
time a cow used the given speed range by the length of time
the GPS receiver was enabled. We can see that not only
walking intensity but also the preferred spatial movement
speed
can
significantly
differ
among
animals.
These
considerable differences in the animals’ walking speed can
be utilized in the routing protocol. Figure 5 also shows that
the animals rarely move faster than 0.8 m/s, which is
important for the wireless communication.
Figure 6 shows average walking intensity over the day
for five different animals, each average walking intensity
was calculated as a weighted arithmetic mean for each
animal and for each hour of the day (i.e., one hour time
frame) throughout all the days for which we had pedometer
data (one year). Figure 7 shows the probabilities of milking
happening at a given hour, calculated as a ratio of milkings
number at given hour of the day to the number of all
recorded milkings. We can see that cows are active all the
day and night including walking and milking but they show
similar 24 hours patterns. In particular, walking and milking
activities tend to be less intensive between 0 and 6 a.m.
These periods can be utilized for scheduled data exchanges.
Figure 3.
Layout of the dairy division
The quantitative experiments were performed in the dairy
but this is only an example deployment scenario of the target
monitoring system. The target monitoring system is also
intended to monitor beef cattle animals kept continuously on
the pastures even all the year. Such cattle may never be taken
to the farm buildings.
Figure 4.
Walking intensity (pedometers)
Figure 5.
Probability distribution of animal speed (GPS receivers)
5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6.
Activity over the day (pedometers)
Figure 7.
Milking probability (pedometers)
B.
Qualitative Experiments
The
objective
of
the
qualitative
experiments
was
gathering of the realistic user requirements.
1)
Experiment Setup
Our qualitative experiments comprised distributing an
anonymous
questionnaire
to
the
farm
personnel
and
researchers working on the farm. We received four filled
questionnaires. One of them was filled by a regular
herdsman, one by the head herdsman (farm manager) and
two by researchers working on the farm.
2)
Results
From the performed questionnaire we learnt that the most
required functionality of the system is detection of oestrus,
pregnancy and animal diseases. Users have to be informed
about oestrus and a newly detected disease as quickly as
possible. The pregnancy should be reported within 48 hours
from detection. Detection of reduced efficiency of pastures is
less essential but more urgent – it should be reported to users
within 24 hours from detection.
In order to inform users about the detected oestrus and
animal diseases as quickly as possible, animal mounted
nodes should be able to detect oestrus and animal diseases on
their own and send this information over the sink as soon as
it is detected. When no particular event is detected, data from
collars should be transmitted via sink at least every 24 hours
to allow server its aggregation and detection of reduced
performance of pastures.
The users recognize sending notifications to their mobile
phones as very useful and have to receive them any time, not
only when they are collocated with the animals. This requires
sending the notifications using the GSM network as, e.g.,
SMS messages. The users need to perform in-situ queries up
to several times a day. This means that energy saving is
relevant not only for sending data to sinks but also in-situ
queries.
The head herdsman recognized also as useful measuring
body temperature of the animals. This however requires
using
sensors
mounted
inside
animal
body
because
externally
mounted
sensors
do
not
provide
reliable
measurements [3]. The regular herdsman recognized as
useful detection of calving but feasibility of this requires
further research in animal physiology.
V.
ENERGY EFFICIENT ROUTE DISCOVERY
This section describes realistic, energy efficient MANET
routing protocol, Energy Efficient Route Discovery (EERD),
for the cattle monitoring system we introduced in [8, 13] and
proposes energy efficient mechanism for dealing with
disconnections. EERD concerns sending data from animal
mounted nodes to sinks and performing in-situ queries. It
significantly optimizes energy efficiency of control traffic by
identification and utilization of animal movement patterns as
well as graceful degradation of data traffic energy efficiency.
We
concentrate
on
energy
utilized
for
wireless
communication because the progress in the energy efficient
microcontrollers with high computation power made the
energy utilized for data processing negligible [32] in relation
to energy spent on wireless communication. Simulation
based analysis of delays, latency and package loss are
presented in Section VI. They show that EERD not only
decreases energy utilization but also improves success ratio
of packet delivery in relation to DSR [33] and a generic
routing protocol ESDSR [34]. This is achieved by decreasing
packet loss caused by congestion.
A.
Design Space
In order to allow extending coverage while preserving
energy efficiency (i.e., low transmission power) and to allow
circumventing of obstacles in radio propagation we need the
multi-hop ad hoc connectivity between mobile nodes. This
can be achieved by a MANET routing protocol. Due to
characteristics of our scenario such protocol should be
optimized for energy efficiency and handling disconnections.
The design space for the energy efficiency of the routing
protocol is shown in Figure 8. The Broadcast Optimization
axis represent saving energy on broadcasting queries and
route discovery control packets. The relevant approaches
here include Passive Clustering with Delayed Intelligence
[35] and utilization of heterogeneity of nodes’ mobility we
propose. The Route Selection Axis represents proposed
selecting
routes,
which
potentially
have
the
maximal
lifetime. The vertical axis, Transmitter Power Control
represents saving energy by minimizing transmitter power.
The relevant approach here is similar to the transmitter
power control utilized in Energy Saving Dynamic Source
Routing (ESDSR) [34] or Distributed Power Control (DPC)
6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[36]. The proposed routing protocol is a combination of
these techniques.
Figure 8.
Energy efficiency design space
B.
Overview
Energy Efficient Route Discovery (EERD), for cattle
monitoring
system
minimizes
and
balances
energy
consumption in the face of low data traffic and high mobility
of nodes. It decreases energy spent on route discovery and
in-situ
queries
by
utilization
of
the
tailored
PCDI
broadcasting. The number of necessary route discoveries is
decreased by utilization of heterogeneity of nodes’ mobility,
selecting routes with longest lifetime and opportunistic route
discovery. This protocol also deals with disconnections by
cooperative detection of route availability. It is based on the
established MANET routing protocol, DSR [33]. DSR was
selected instead of Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector
Routing (AODV) [37] because due to the application of
PCDI the duration of the route discovery is difficult to
estimate, which collides with expiry times of AODV
dynamic routing table entries. Too long expiry time of these
entries would highly increase the amount of soft state
maintained by the nodes. In contrast too short expiry time
would prevent routes with higher number of hops from
working. The only advantage of AODV over DSR are
shorter control packages in the case of routes with higher
number of hops [37], which were not experienced in the
evaluation reported in Section VI.
Figure 9.
Input and output of the Energy Efficient Route Discovery
Figure 9 shows that EERD balances and saves energy on
routing data by monitoring average speed of the nodes,
remaining battery capacity of the local node, energy
attenuation of the received and overheard packets, as well as
acquiring routes from overheard and forwarded packets.
C.
Energy Saving and Route Discovery Techniques
This subsection describes energy saving and route
discovery techniques utilized in EERD.
1)
Decreasing and Balancing Energy Spent on Route
Discovery
As in ESDSR [34] nodes put the utilized transmitter
power in the packets so that each node can track power
necessary to contact its single-hop neighbors using the
following formula:
margin
threshold
recv
tx
min
P
P
P - P
P





where Pmin is the minimal required power for the sender to
use, Ptx is the current transmit power, Precv is the current
received power, Pthreshold is the threshold power level for the
application, and Pmargin is the margin to safeguard against
changes such as channel fluctuation and mobility. All the
values are in dBm. Note that only route requests and other
broadcasted packets are sent using the maximal power of the
transmitters.
The proposed protocol minimizes and balances energy
spent on route discovery control traffic at the cost of the
energy efficiency of data traffic. This is promising because
the amount of exchanged data is low and power spent on
sending data packets is minimized by limiting the transmitter
power. The latter is possible because the power necessary to
send data over each hop is known from monitoring power
attenuation between neighbors. The power of route discovery
broadcasts cannot be similarly decreased because it would
decrease the probability of finding any route.
Energy spent on route discovery is minimized and
balanced by applying Passive Clustering with Delayed
Intelligence (PCDI) [35] to route request broadcasts. Note
that broadcasted packets are sent using maximal transmitter
power so power of the received broadcasts can still be
utilized to calculate PCDI waiting time. In PCDI nodes with
higher battery capacity are more likely to route broadcasted
packets so discovered routes lead through these nodes. This
results in more fair energy utilization of data traffic.
2)
Decreasing Number of Route Discoveries
Energy spent on route discovery is further minimized by
decreasing
number
of
route
discoveries
achieved
by
utilization of the following techniques.
a) Utilizing Heterogeneity of Node’s Mobility. The
field experiments reported in Section IV show that there are
considerable differences between typical movement speeds
and typical walking intensities of animals carrying wireless
nodes. The proposed protocol decreases chances that faster
wireless nodes become members of the route by delaying
their rebroadcasting of PCDI broadcasts. In this way the
lifetime of the discovered routes is extended so repeated
sending of data, route failure packets and route discovery
broadcasts can be minimized.
7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Each mobile node stores the 24 hour time series of its
momentary speed received from the pedometer – expressed
as number of steps per time unit. An average speed is
calculated over this time series discarding time when an
animal did not move. The 24 hour time period is motivated
by limited resources of the nodes and the 24 hour movement
pattern cycle of the animals indicated by the pedometer data
(see Figure 6). Each transmitted packet has a piggybacked
maximal and minimal average speed of a node. These values
are updated and stored by the forwarding nodes. Each node
resets these stored values after a timeout to account for the
changing conditions. This data allows nodes to asses their
mobility in relation to other nodes. In EERD the PCDI
formula calculating waiting time is extended by taking into
account the average speed of the node in relation to average
speeds of other nodes:
MIN
MAX
MIN
L
V
V
V
V
y
localEnerg
receivedPower
W










where δ and ε are constants adjusted for the particular
hardware, VL is the average speed of the local node, VMIN and
VMAX are minimal and maximal average speeds of the
neighborhood nodes. In this way, relatively faster nodes wait
longer to rebroadcast PCDI broadcasts so their probability of
becoming
PCDI
clusterheads
or
gateways
and
later
forwarding data traffic is smaller.
b) Selecting Routes with Longest Lifetime. The number
of route discoveries is further minimized by selecting routes
with potentially longest lifetime. Because of the high
mobility of the nodes the life of a route is typically
terminated not by the exhausted battery capacity but by the
change of the topology.
Utilizing received, forwarded and overheard packets a
node monitors how the energy attenuation changes between
the one hop neighbors. In this way a node can count how
many links within the multi-hop route are increasing their
energy
attenuation
(deteriorating).
In
particular
each
forwarded
route
request
and
acknowledgement
packet
contains a counter of deteriorating hops.
Finally, as shown in Figure 10, a node selects routes,
which have (1) the least number of hops. For routes with the
same number of hops, a node chooses these with (2) the least
number of deteriorating links. If this is equal one with (3) the
minimal total power (i.e., sum of the transmitter power
necessary to send data over each hop) is selected. The
rationale behind (1) is that on average the fewer nodes are
required to take part in routing the longer it takes before one
of them moves out of the wireless range of its neighbors. (2)
is used to avoid routes comprising hops between nodes
moving away from each other. (3) is motivated by assuming
that the power attenuation between two nodes is in most
cases
proportional
to
square
distance
between
them.
Therefore, selecting routes with minimal total power tends to
select the routes leading through nodes, which are closer
together. Such nodes are likely to need more time to leave
each other’s range.
Note that selecting a more optimal route does not involve
exchanging additional packets. The selection of a route is
performed in two cases. The first case is when a node wants
to send data and finds multiple routes to the target node –
one of them can have been acquired from a route discovery
and the rest from forwarding or overhearing packets. The
second case is when a node, which is due to rebroadcast a
route
request,
finishes
waiting
enforced
by
Delayed
Intelligence [35].
Figure 10. Route selection algorithm
Overall power of a route is calculated incrementally by
adding the power necessary for sending data over subsequent
hops. The partial result is carried by packets such as route
requests, route replies and acknowledgements. In the case of
route requests this is necessary for selecting the optimal
route for further forwarding. In the case of route replies and
acknowledgements this is necessary for opportunistic route
acquisition from forwarded and overheard packets. A node
rebroadcasts more than one route reply for a single route
discovery attempt only if subsequent replies contain better
routes.
c) Opportunistic Route Acquisition. An important way
of limiting the number of route discoveries is collecting
routes from overheard and forwarded packets such as route
replies and data traffic. The gain from overhearing depends
on the utilized wireless networking interface, in particular
how much the power consumed by transmitting is greater
than the power consumed by receiving and what is the
difference in power consumption between promiscuous and
non-promiscuous mode.
The sink always acknowledges receiving data. In order to
account for possible disconnections, if no acknowledgement
is received delivery is repeated after a timeout. In this way it
is possible to opportunistically collect routes not only from
forwarded
or
overheard
route
replies
but
also
acknowledgements. For that purpose acknowledgements
similarly to route replies carry aggregated power of the route
and the counter of deteriorating links.
3)
Saving Energy on Broadcasts in In-situ Queries
A mobile user collocated with the animals can issue both
regular queries and directed queries. The answer to a regular
query is a group of animal ids (or their custom nicknames)
that fulfill a given logical condition (e.g., all animals, which
are sick). The user broadcasts the query using PCDI with the
proposed optimizations. All the nodes that know any partial
answer to the query send the answer back to the user,
together with the timestamp of the data based on which the
answer was generated. The answer is sent back along the
8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

route traversed by the query. Nodes that forward the queries
assemble
and
filter
these
answers
according
to
their
timestamps in order to reduce redundant traffic. The final
assembly is performed by the user’s device.
Directed queries concern data about a particular animal
(e.g., predicted date of the next oestrus). To receive the
answer to such a query a user’s device sends a broadcast
using PCDI with the proposed optimizations to retrieve the
route and the hardware address of the node that has the most
recent data about the animal of interest if the user’s device
does not already have this information in its cache. This node
could be a device that produced or caches the required data,
or a sink, which can retrieve this data from a server. Then the
user’s device sends the query along the discovered route
selected according to the cost metric proposed above.
Finally, the queried device sends the answer back along the
same route.
D.
Handling Disconnections
We
propose
extending
EERD
with
the
following
mechanism for handling disconnections, which within this
paper mean splitting of the network topology into separated
islands of connectivity. The proposed protocol is intended to
adapt to different environments, where the cattle is kept,
dairy, pasture, etc. Therefore, it is not possible to present
fixed boundaries of disconnection time.
In the case of sending data to sinks the data is sent only
when the multi-hop path between an animal mounted node
and any of the sinks exists. It is detected using the proposed
cooperative detection of route availability, shown in Figure
11. More precisely, if the route discovery is unsuccessful it is
repeated after a certain timeout with a small random delay.
The purpose of the random delay is preventing the broadcast
storm caused by multiple nodes initiating route discovery at
the same time. In order to save energy on the repeated
unsuccessful route discoveries if the route discovery is
unsuccessful the node that initiated it broadcasts a negative
acknowledgement. In this way all the nodes within its island
of connectivity know that the route to the sink is not
available and the route discovery should be repeated no
sooner than after the predefined timeout. Otherwise if a node
receives
a
route
request
packet
but
no
negative
acknowledgement, this means that a route to a sink exists so
the
node
can
try
to
discover
it.
The
negative
acknowledgements are preferred here over positive ones to
save energy in circumstances when no disconnections take
place – e.g., animals are located in a barn.
When a sink receives data from an animal mounted node
it sends an acknowledgement. If no acknowledgement is
received the animal mounted node resends the data over a
different path and if it does not know any alternative path it
initiates route discovery.
In order to answer the in-situ queries in the face of
disconnections the animal mounted nodes should be able to
answer the query within the island of connectivity (network
partition). To achieve that, nodes cache data sent to sinks,
which they forward or overhear. This caching is performed
according to their available storage space. The proactive
caching, i.e., the proactive exchange of the data for the
purpose of caching, is not advisable here due to the energy
constrains [38]. If the sink is connected to the farm server
over an expensive third party connection such as GPRS, it
may also cache the data forwarded to farm servers. In this
way the sink can support answering in-situ queries without
the need to query the farm server.
Figure 11. Cooperative detection of route availability
Nodes receiving an in-situ query answer it whenever they
have at least a partial answer to this query. This answer can
come from locally produced or cached data. If the in-situ
query is received by the sinks, the sink may answer it after
fetching appropriate data from the farm server or its local
cache. In the case of direct queries nodes forward the
answers to the queries only when the answer was based on
the data, which is newer than in the case of answers already
forwarded.
E.
Sending Data from Farm Servers to Animal Mounted
Nodes
Sporadically the farm servers may need to send data to
the selected or all animal mounted nodes. This data can be
for example a firmware or configuration update. Such
communication is similar to sending data from animal
mounted nodes to farm servers. In particular the farm servers
keep track of associations between the animals and pastures
or barns where they are kept so they know to which sinks
data should be forwarded. After receiving this data a sink
performs route discovery (similarly as an animal mounted
node) and sends the data to the given animal mounted nodes.
If a route does not exist it retries after a timeout.
9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

If there is more than one sink collocated with the target
animal mounted node, the first sink, which manages to
successfully deliver data to the target node can inform about
this other collocated sinks so that the target node does not
receive duplicates. To prevent duplicates being delivered at
the same time each sink can wait a random delay before
sending the data. If the instant communication between sinks
is not possible, e.g., they are connected to farm servers by
data couriers or GSM then the animal mounted nodes may
receive duplicates but this type of communication is sporadic
so these duplicates do not make a considerable difference for
energy efficiency.
VI.
EVALUATION
This section reports on the evaluation of the proposed
architecture for the cattle monitoring system, and its core,
MANET routing protocol - EERD. As the method of
evaluation we selected emulation, i.e., simulation utilizing
data from the real experiments. This approach offers a
satisfactory
compromise
between
realism,
variety
of
examined conditions, number of observed parameters and
utilization of resources. In particular it offers higher realism
than
the
purely
stochastic
simulation.
Whereas
in
comparison to purely experimental evaluation emulation
offers higher variety of examined conditions and more
observed parameters for the same constraints (i.e., time and
funds). We compared the proposed routing protocol with
DSR [33] – a classical MANET routing protocol and ESDSR
[34] – an example energy efficient routing protocol. We
emulated the communication scenarios, which are realistic
for
the
proposed
cattle
monitoring
system
but
also
sufficiently challenging
for the emulated
protocols to
demonstrate benefits of the proposed protocol. In order to
increase realism of the simulation the movement patterns of
mobile nodes are emulated utilizing data from the field
experiments instead of utilization of generic stochastic
models such as Random Waypoint Model [33] or Reference
Point Group Mobility Model [39]. These models were
devised to simulate mobility of people and it is very difficult
to adjust their parameters to make them reflect mobility of
bovine animals.
A.
Bovine Movement Emulator
In order to make a realistic packet level emulation
involving up to 100 nodes we implemented an emulator of
bovine movements. This emulator is informed by field
experiments described in Section IV and utilizes animal
movement data from these experiments.
The emulation area is similar to the dairy where the field
experiments were performed (see Figure 3). Each of the
emulated cows is for most of the time in one of three states:
(1) resting in a bay, (2) eating/drinking, (3) being milked.
These states are associated with groups of locations within
the division of the dairy and transitions between the states
are connected with moving between locations. Selecting the
next state is restricted in the following way. There is a
minimal period allowed between milkings and a cow goes to
a milking robot only when any of them has a queue shorter
than three animals. If after reaching the robot the queue is
longer than two animals, the cow changes the target state.
Speeds, which the emulated cows randomly select, were
acquired from the GPS data. This makes the emulated cows
move with similar distribution of speeds as the real animals.
Speeds higher than 1.5 m/s were filtered out under the
assumption that they were unavailable to the bovine animals
[40] and were recorded because of GPS drift. Two different
speed profiles utilizing real speeds from cows 375 and 403
were utilized (see Figure 5). These profiles are distributed
evenly between the emulated cows.
The times a cow stays at any of the locations were
acquired from the video footage. These are randomly
selected for the cows during the emulation to achieve the
distribution close to reality. GPS data is only utilized for
acquiring resting times because in other cases the accuracy
of GPS data is too low in relation to the distances between
different types of locations such as feeder, water tanks,
milking robots and bays. The patterns of eating and drinking
and the times the cows spent performing these activities were
also determined from the video footage. These patterns are
also randomly selected during the emulation. The minimal
period between milkings for a cow we calculated from the
timestamps of the pedometer readings taken during the
milkings.
B.
Comparison with Existing Approaches
The proposed MANET routing protocol was compared
with the existing approaches including DSR [33] and
ESDSR [34]. DSR was selected as a classical MANET
routing protocol and ESDSR as an example energy efficient
MANET routing protocol.
1)
Emulation Setup
The proposed protocol was evaluated using the ns-2 [41]
network simulator, best suited for the MANET character of
our scenario. The protocol was implemented in C++ as a
wireless routing agent [42]. In order to allow processing of
the packets overheard by nodes the tap function was enabled.
As shown in Figure 12, Bovine Movement Emulator
(BME) described earlier was utilized to generate mobility
traces for ns-2. Ns-2 generated wireless traces, which were
then processed using Python scripts to measure the observed
parameters. Then in the case of one of the emulated
scenarios, which were emulated in several iterations to
average the results, statistics from all the iterations were
aggregated.
Figure 12. Emulation environment
We emulated two scenarios, which reflect realistic
communication
patterns
within
the
proposed
cattle
monitoring system and are sufficiently challenging for the
simulated routing protocols to demonstrate differences in
10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

their performance: (1) animal mounted nodes sending data to
a sink, (2) one stationary user querying animal mounted
nodes. In both cases data traffic starts after 1 hour to let the
emulated animals leave their initial positions. At the
beginning of simulation the animal mounted nodes already
know their average speed in relation to the maximal and
minimal average speed of the other nodes.
In the first scenario animal mounted devices try to send
once 32B of data to the stationary sink, which models the
regular daily update sent to the farm servers (see Section III).
32B reflects the amount of data from animal mounted
pedometer, accelerometer and results of processing made by
animal mounted nodes such as detected animal diseases, date
of last oestrus etc. They start after 1 hour, randomly
distributed over 5s to take advantage of passive acquisition
of routes. They perform the route discovery if they do not
already have a route to the sink in their cache (from
overheard or forwarded packets). The whole emulation lasts
for 3 emulated hours. In this scenario for each set of
parameters we repeat the emulation 5 times with different
random values for BME and ns-2 and then average the
results. In the second case the user broadcasts 20 queries.
Each node replies to the query with probability 0.25 with
32B of data. This emulates range queries. Each subsequent
query is submitted 10s after receiving the last answer to the
previous query.
To evaluate the scalability of the evaluated routing
protocols the number of animals was altered. The observed
parameters include: minimal, average and maximal energy
usage per node over the course of the emulation and its
standard deviation (we consider only the animal mounted
nodes); number of nodes with exhausted battery capacity at
the end of emulation; minimal, maximal and average delays
and their standard deviation; success ratio.
Delays mean here in the case of sending data to sinks the
time from the moment when data is sent until successful
receiving of the acknowledgement by an animal mounted
node. In the case of in-situ queries delays mean time from
sending the query to receiving the answer. Success ratio
means in the case of sending data to a sink the fraction of
nodes that successfully delivered data to sinks. In the case of
in-situ queries we measured two different success ratios.
Success ratio for queries is calculated using the following
formula:
A
Q
RQ
N
N
N
SR





where NRQ is the number of receptions of a query by an
animal mounted node, NQ is a number of issued queries and
NA is a number of animal mounted nodes. If the animal
mounted node receives the same query more than once only
the first case is considered. Success ratio of responses is the
fraction of responses that were successfully returned to the
user. The standard deviation was calculated using the
following formula:
2
1
1
x )
( x
N
N
i
i



 



where N is the number of samples, xi is the sample value and
x is the value of the arithmetic average.
The maximal power of the transmitter is 0.85872mW
(i.e., power consumed by the transmitter and power of the
transmitted signal), which gives the maximum transmission
range of 40m. According to [43] this gives parameters closer
to those found in sensor radios. Since the receiving power is
constant and a fixed amount of energy is dissipated when a
node receives a packet, receiving power is ignored (modeled
as zero). The authors of ESDSR made a similar assumption
[34]. At the beginning of emulation the sink and the user
have 1000J each (effectively infinite energy) and animal
mounted nodes have 1J each. Pmargin in Formula 1 is 1. We
use the following EERD parameters: α=1, β=1, δ=10000s,
ε=0.5s (see Formula 2), reverting to the initial state and
discarding received states of neighbors after 60s. The route
validity period is 60s and waiting for route replies lasts 1s.
We used Two Ray Ground propagation model, IEEE 802.11
MAC layer and standard ns-2’s implementation of priority
queue and omni-directional antenna.
2)
Emulation Results
Emulation results are shown in Figure 13 and 14. Points
and lines show average values per node or standard
deviation. Error bars show minimal and maximal values. In
each examined case no node exhausted its battery capacity.
Figure 13a shows energy utilized by animal mounted
nodes for sending data to the sink. EERD considerably
decreases average energy usage in comparison to DSR and
ESDSR (48%-75%). The proposed protocol considerably
balances energy utilization compared to DSR and ESDSR.
Figure 13b shows that EERD has standard deviation of
energy utilization by 76%-91% smaller than DSR and
ESDSR. These improvements can be attributed to PCDI with
proposed optimizations and proposed metrics for selecting
routes.
Figure 13c shows delays for sending data to the sink. We
can see that in the case of DSR and ESDSR the delays grow
with the number of nodes, whereas in the case of EERD the
delays are almost constant. Figure 13d shows the average
deviation of delays. In the case of DSR and ESDSR it grows
much faster with the increasing number of nodes than in the
case of EERD. This means better scalability of the EERD in
comparison to DSR and ESDSR, which can be attributed to
reduced network overhead achieved by utilization of PCDI.
Figure 13e shows the success ratio (SR) for delivering
data to sinks. We can see that in all examined cases the SR is
very high. Nodes do not repeat failed attempts otherwise the
SR would be even higher. In the case of DSR and ESDSR
SR drops slightly for the higher numbers of nodes (to 0.94
and 0.95 respectively for 100 nodes). It is not the case with
EERD. This can be attributed to avoiding congestion
achieved by utilization of PCDI.
11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 13. Comparison with existing approaches – statistics for sending
data to sinks
Figure 14a shows the energy utilized by animal mounted
nodes for answering in-situ queries. The amount of utilized
energy is comparable to the case of communication with the
sink,
which
justifies
optimization
of
this
type
of
communication. The amount of utilized energy is almost
constant for each of the protocols regardless of the number of
nodes. The considerable decrease of average energy utilized
by the proposed protocol in relation to the existing routing
protocols (by 77-82%) is achieved by optimization of
broadcasting queries. Figure 14b shows that the standard
deviation of utilized energy is much higher for EERD than
for other compared protocols for the very sparse topology
(10 nodes). Then the EERD’s standard deviation drops
sharply for 25 nodes and stays almost constant. In contrast
the standard deviation of DSR and ESDSR grows with the
number of nodes. This demonstrates better scalability of
EERD in terms of energy usage achieved by optimized
broadcasting.
Figure 14c shows delays in answering in-situ queries.
The delays grow linearly with the number of animals. In the
case of the proposed routing protocol this increase is lower,
which means better scalability. This can be attributed to the
decreased network congestion caused by the proposed
optimization of broadcasting. For 100 mobile nodes EERD
achieves up to 57% of decrease in average delays and up to
29% in maximal delays. The decrease of delays in answering
in-situ queries is very important as this improves usability of
the system. Figure 14d shows the average deviation of
delays. It grows linearly with the number of nodes but this
growth is much higher in the case of DSR and ESDSR than
in the case of EERD. This gain is achieved by utilization of
Passive Clustering and is very important for scalability.
Figure 14. Comparison with existing approaches – statistics for in-situ
queries
For all examined number of nodes and routing protocols
the in-situ queries were delivered to all mobile nodes. The
success ratio of delivering answers to the user’s device is
shown in Figure 14e. We can see that this success ratio
decreases almost linearly with the increasing number of
animals, which can be attributed to the network congestion.
The proposed protocol offers however a higher success ratio
for higher numbers of animal mounted nodes. This is due to
the decrease in network traffic achieved by utilization of
Passive Clustering. For 100 nodes the proposed protocol has
success ratio higher than DSR by 22% and higher than
ESDSR by 19%.
To summarize, the proposed MANET routing protocol
has lower and more balanced utilization of energy than the
other compared routing protocols. In the case of in-situ
queries it also offers better scalability in terms of delays and
success ratio.
C.
Evaluation of the Specific Techniques Utilized in EERD
In order to better understand the influence of the specific
techniques utilized in the proposed MANET routing protocol
12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

on its performance, the protocol was emulated with certain
its features disabled.
1)
Emulation Setup
The simulation setup was similar to the one described in
Section VI.B.1. Instead of comparing the proposed protocol
with the existing approaches, the performance of the fully
functional protocol was compared with the performance of
the
same
protocol
with
certain
its
features
disabled,
including:

Power control – all packets are sent with the
maximal power

PCDI [35] – the flooding similar as in DSR [33] is
utilized instead

Utilization of heterogeneity of the nodes’ mobility –
the original PCDI formula [35] for calculating delays
is utilized instead of the one we propose (Formula 2)
2)
Emulation Results
Emulation results are shown Figure 15 and Figure 16.
Points and lines show average values per node or standard
deviation. Error bars show minimal and maximal values. In
each examined case no node exhausted its battery capacity.
Figure 15a shows energy utilized by animal mounted
nodes for sending data to the sink. We can see that without
PCDI the utilized energy grows with the number of nodes.
Utilization of PCDI makes the energy consumption almost
independent of the number of nodes. This can be attributed
to the energy saved on route discovery broadcasting.
Utilization of transmitter power control gives the constant
advantage in average utilized energy of 22% to 31%.
Heterogeneity management extension to PCDI does not
make any considerable difference here. Figure 15b show
standard deviation of the average utilized energy. Utilization
of PCDI and transmitter power control increases standard
deviation. This is the cost of achieving lower average energy
usage.
Figure 15c shows delays for sending data to sinks.
Without utilization of PCDI delays grow slightly with the
number of nodes otherwise their average is almost constant.
Figure 15d shows standard deviation of delays. We can see
that utilization of PCDI make it grow slower with the
number of nodes.
Figure 15e shows the Success Ratio (SR) for delivering
data to sinks. The SR is very high. The nodes do not repeat
failed attempts otherwise the SR would be even higher. We
can see that utilization of PCDI slightly improves SR.
Figure 16a shows the energy utilized by animal mounted
nodes for in-situ queries. For all the examined cases the
amount of utilized energy hardly depends on the number of
mobile nodes. We can see that the most important decrease
of energy utilization results from using PCDI and transmitter
power control. PCDI decreases average energy utilization by
57-64% and transmitter power control by 33-40%. Figure
16b shows the standard deviation of the energy utilised for
answering in-situ queries. We can see that PCDI highly
increases this deviation for small topologies (10 nodes) but
decreases it for topologies of medium size (25-75 nodes).
The reason of high influence of PCDI on limiting utilized
energy
is
decreasing
network
overhead
caused
by
broadcasting of queries.
Figure 15. Evaluation of the utilized techniques – statistics for sending data
to sinks
Figure 16c shows the delays of answering in-situ queries.
We can see that they grow linearly with the increasing
number of nodes but utilization of PCDI makes this growth
smaller. Figure 16d shows that PCDI also decreases the
standard deviation of the delays. These gains can be
attributed to the decreased network congestion resulting from
optimization of broadcasting.
For all examined cases the in-situ queries were delivered
to all mobile nodes. The success ratio of delivering answers
to the user’s device is shown in Figure 16e. We can see that
this success ratio decreases with the increasing number of
animals, which can be attributed to the network congestion.
Utilization of PCDI decreases the network congestion and
thus improves the success ratio.
To summarize, the proposed MANET routing protocol
EERD provides lower and more balanced energy usage than
the classic, non-energy aware DSR and the more generic
existing energy aware routing protocol ESDSR. In the case
of in-situ queries EERD makes success ratio and delays
deteriorate slower with the increasing number of nodes thus
improving the scalability in comparison to DSR and ESDSR.
13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 16. Evaluation of the utilized techniques – statistics for in-situ
queries
The most important impact on saving and balancing
energy has utilization of PCDI to optimize broadcasting of
route discovery packets and in-situ queries. In the case of in-
situ queries PCDI provides shorter and more stable delays as
well as higher success ratio.
VII.
SECURITY
This section discusses possible security threats to the
target cattle monitoring system including unauthorized
retrieval, modification and generation of data as well as
denial of service attacks (DoS). We propose ways how the
security of the system can be improved and describe how the
improved security affects the energy efficiency of animal
mounted devices.
Due to the nature of cattle monitoring these solutions
employ wireless sensor and mobile ad-hoc networks. They
are therefore open to the all types of attacks typical for
wireless networks and mobile ad-hoc networks as shown in
Table 1.
Farmers who are owners of the system are likely to
modify or fabricate data to put their products ahead of
competition. They are also likely to suppress the data
collection and event detection process, i.e., perform denial of
service (DOS) attacks, in order to hide information such as
spread of animal diseases.
They are most likely to target data collection process as
they have unrestricted and unmonitored access to their
animals and sensing equipment. Methods can involve taking
animals out of range, temporary or permanently, so that their
sensors can not send data to farm servers, refraining from
changing batteries or changing data directly on farm servers.
They can also perform DOS attacks that would globally
disable the functionality of the system during the spread of
animal disease. This involves physical layer attacks such as
radio jamming.
Protecting the system against its potential owners may be
risky because they may assume that introducing the system is
against their business and thus they can be reluctant to that.
Therefore, we do not consider this in a greater detail within
this paper. The possible approach for creating incentives of
such security against the owners’ tampering would be
granting quality certificates to the farmers who decide to
adopt it. Potentially a greater awareness of security issues
from farmers, retailers and consumers would be required for
this model to be realistic.
Farm workers may want to tamper with the collected data
to hide from management their misconduct - e.g., leaving
animals on a pasture for too long or not providing them with
water. This tampering will involve changing the collected
data already stored on the farm servers. This form of attack
can be avoided by appropriate securing the access to the
databases storing this data, which is outside the scope of this
paper.
Competitors are likely to disrupt functioning of the target
farming enterprise or put it into a less favorable position.
They are likely to modify or fabricate the data as well as
perform various DOS attacks. They will perform attacks on
physical layer (e.g., radio jamming) or network layer. The
latter involves deploying hostile nodes or modifying existing
nodes in order to make them send incorrect route request or
route reply messages in order to disrupt data delivery to
sinks, answering in-situ queries or cause faster battery
depletion. The hostile nodes can also send fabricated data or
modify forwarded data to disrupt working of the farm. The
precautions against these attacks are easier to introduce
because owners of the system have strong incentives to
support it. These attacks can be prevented by utilization of
cryptographic primitives to encrypt and authenticate the
exchanged
data
[44],
which
can
increase
energy
consumption due to higher computational complexity and
increased data traffic. Using cryptography in many cases
requires public key infrastructure (PKI), which bares the
infrastructureless mode that is otherwise feasible to our
system. In the infrastructureless mode the sinks and farm
servers are not deployed and users can only access the
measurements via in-situ queries.
The deployment of hostile nodes can be detected using
intrusion detection methods [45, 46]. Such nodes can be
excluded from the system and reported to the personnel.
Intrusion detection potentially requires no configuration
during the deployment or maintenance, so its utilization
would not increase management costs. There are well
researched methods of detecting routing attacks within
MANETs [46]. They usually rely on continuous analyzing of
14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

network traffic by mobile nodes and looking for known types
of attacks. It is considerably more challenging to use
intrusion detection methods against application layer attacks
such as intercepting or fabricating data. Detecting such
attacks would require detecting changes in the typical
communication patterns, which can be caused by legitimate
events that the monitoring system is meant to detect such as
an occurrence of an animal disease.
Excluding hostile nodes from the system can be done in
completely decentralized manner as proposed in [45]. In
particular a node can only communicate with others if it
possesses a token granted and periodically renewed by its
neighbors. The disadvantage of this approach is that its
performance may be affected by disconnections.
Another stakeholder, who may want to attack the cattle
monitoring system are buyers of the animal products (e.g.,
supermarkets), who may want to lower the price of the
products they buy or gather intelligence about the sellers to
better evaluate their offer. Similarly as competitors they can
perform DOS attacks, as well as modification or fabrication
of data. They can also get unauthorized access to data by
deploying passive nodes that would perform overhearing or
active nodes that would forward the data and collect it.
Passive overhearing can be only addressed by encryption of
the exchanged data. Deployment of active spying nodes can
be prevented by encrypting data or cooperative appraisal
[45].
To summarize, there are numerous security threats
against the proposed cattle monitoring system. Main feasible
precautions include encryption, cryptographic authentication
and intrusion detection – all of them are expensive in terms
of processing and network traffic. Moreover, cryptographic
methods typically require infrastructure, which increases
management costs.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we proposed the novel practical MANET
approach for scalable cattle monitoring system. Ease of use,
cheap deployment and maintenance allow its pervasiveness.
More precisely, it utilizes the available infrastructure but also
works in the fully ad hoc infrastructureless conditions by
supporting
in-situ
queries.
The
labor
intensity
of
its
maintenance is reduced by minimizing and balancing energy
consumption in the face of low data traffic and high mobility
of the nodes. The proposed routing protocol satisfies the
requirements we define basing on literature and our field
experiments. In particular we proposed a novel approach of
minimizing and balancing energy spent on route discovery at
the cost of energy efficiency of data traffic. We significantly
optimize energy efficiency of control traffic by identification
and utilization of animal movement patterns as well as
graceful degradation of data traffic energy efficiency. We
also deal with the disconnections in the energy efficient
manner.
We evaluate the proposed protocol over an extensive
emulation utilizing movement patterns collected during our
field experiments. We demonstrate that this protocol offers
lower and more balanced energy consumption than the other
evaluated protocols. We show that our approach is suitable
for
high
and
low densities
of
topologies.
Our
field
experiments, which produced data for the emulation of the
proposed protocol, were performed in a dairy. The proposed
protocol however is intended also for monitoring animals
kept continuously in the pastures.
Although in this paper we concentrate on the cattle
monitoring, the approach presented here can be also utilized
for designing other application specific monitoring systems
and MANET/DTN protocols. The proposed protocol with
some customizations can be used for other applications with
high mobility, limited speed of wireless nodes, low data
traffic and disconnections including monitoring welfare and
behavior of other animals as well as health of people [47,
48].
The results from the experiments presented in this paper
are encouraging, validating the efficiency of the proposed
routing protocol in terms of energy utilization, delays and
success ratio. However there are still issues that have not
been fully addressed. They are identified below.
The movement patterns used for simulation were based
on real data and observations and thus are close to reality.
We tested the correctness of the protocol implementation by
analyzing the simulation traces. The potential weak point of
our
simulation
is
the
validity
of
the
utilized
radio
propagation model (i.e., two-ray ground reflection model
from ns-2 [49]) for the dairy environment. In particular all
simulation models make simplifying assumptions about
radio propagation, which do not have to apply for all types of
environment [50]. The typical method of validating these
assumptions and simulation models in general for the given
type of environment is comparing the parameters of radio
propagation form the model with the measurements from the
real environment [50, 51]. Such measurements have to be
performed to validate our simulation.
The efficiency of the proposed MANET routing protocol
can be further validated by the real world large scale
deployment of the devices utilizing this protocol. This will
allow considering some parameters that were not considered
during emulation such as absorption of radio frequency
waves by animal and human bodies [4, 5] or propagation of
radio waves in relation to position of the animal and its
collar. This will require design of the hardware appropriate
for installing on the animals. Such hardware will have to be
sufficiently robust not to be destroyed by the animals and
will have to provide adequate radio connectivity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the members of the
School of Biosciences for their help and support in
performing field experiments presented in Section IV.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Wietrzyk and M. Radenkovic, "Enabling Large Scale Ad hoc
Animal Welfare Monitoring", in The Fifth International Conference
on Wireless and Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2009), Cannes/La
Bocca, French Riviera, France: IEEE Computer Society, 2009,
Available.
15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2]
P. Zhang, C. M. Sadler, S. A. Lyon, and M. Martonosi, "Hardware
Design Experiences in ZebraNet", In Proc. of
SenSys, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA, 2004.
[3]
K. Mayer, K. Ellis, and K. Taylor, "Cattle Health Monitoring Using
Wireless
Sensor
Networks",
In
Proc.
of
CCN,
Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA, 2004.
[4]
Z. Butler, P. Corke, R. Peterson, and D. Rus, "Dynamic Virtual
fences for Controlling Cows", In Proc. of ISER, Marina Mandarin
Hotel, Singapore, 2004.
[5]
T. Wark, et al., "Transforming Agriculture through Pervasive
Wireless Sensor Networks", Pervasive Computing, IEEE, April-June
2007, 6 (2), pp. 50-57.
[6]
P. Corke and P. Sikka, "Results from the Farm", In Proc. of EmNets,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2006.
[7]
T.
Wark,
et
al.,
"The
design
and
evaluation
of
a
mobile
sensor/actuator network for autonomous animal control", In Proc. of
International Conference on Information Processing In Sensor
Networks (IPSN), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 2007, pp. 206-
215.
[8]
B. Wietrzyk, M. Radenkovic, and I. Kostadinov, "Practical MANETs
for
Pervasive Cattle Monitoring",
In
Proc. of
the Seventh
International Conference on Networking, Cancun, Mexico, 2008.
[9]
M. Radenkovic and T. Lodge, "Engaging the public through mass-
scale multimedia networks", IEEE Multimedia, 2006, 13 (3), pp. 12-
15.
[10] K. Maatje, R. M. d. Mol, and W. Rossing, "Cow status monitoring
(health and oestrus) using detection sensors", Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, 1997, 16 (3), pp. 245-254(10).
[11] "HeatWatch®
Estrus
Detection
System",
CowChips,
LLC,
Available: http://www.cowchips.net/. [June 27, 2010]
[12] A. Chaintreau, et al., "Pocket Switched Networks: Real-world
mobility
and
its
consequences
for
opportunistic
forwarding",
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK,
Technical Report 617, 2005.
[13] B. Wietrzyk and M. Radenkovic, "Energy Efficiency in the Mobile
Ad Hoc Networking Approach to Monitoring Farm Animals", In
Proc. of the Sixth International Conference on Networking, Sainte-
Luce, Martinique, 2007.
[14] B.
Wietrzyk
and
M.
Radenkovic,
"CRAWDAD
data
set
nottingham/cattle",
Available:
http://www.crawdad.org/nottingham/cattle. [June 27, 2010]
[15] B. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker, "The impact of data
aggregation in wireless sensor networks", In Proc. of ICDCS, 2002,
pp. 575-578.
[16] R. Szewczyk, J. Polastre, A. Mainwaring, and D. Culler, "Lessons
from a Sensor Network Expedition", In Proc. of EWSN, 2004.
[17] R. E. Kenward, A Manual for Wildlife Radio Tagging, Academic
Press, 2001.
[18] T. Small and Z. J. Haas, "The shared wireless infostation model: a
new ad hoc networking paradigm (or where there is a whale, there is
a way)", In Proc. of MobiHoc, Annapolis, Maryland, USA, 2003.
[19] T. Small, Z. J. Haas, A. Purgue, and K. Fristrup, "A Sensor Network
for Biological Data Acquisition", Handbook on Sensor Networks,
2004.
[20] Z. J. Hass and T. Small, "A New Networking Model for Biological
Applications of Ad Hoc Sensor Networks".
[21] A. L. Iacono and C. Rose, "Infostations: New Perspectives on
Wireless Data Network", in Next Generation Wireless Networks, vol.
598: Springer Netherlands, 2002, pp. 3-63.
[22] D. J. Goodman, J. Borras, N. B. Mandayam, and R. D. Yates,
"INFOSTATIONS: a new system model for data and messaging
services", In Proc. of
Vehicular Technology Conference, Phoenix,
AZ, USA, 1997, pp. 969-973.
[23] Z. J. Haas, J. Y. Halpern, and L. Li, "Gossip-based ad hoc routing",
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 2006, 14 (3), pp. 479-491.
[24] M. Demmer and K. Fall, "DTLSR: delay tolerant routing for
developing regions", In Proc. of
Applications, Technologies,
Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication, Kyoto,
Japan, 2007.
[25] A. Lindgren, A. Doria, J. Lindblom, and M. Ek, "Networking in the
land of northern lights: two years of experiences from DTN system
deployments", In Proc. of
International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, San Francisco, California, USA 2008.
[26] A. Seth, D. Kroeker, M. Zaharia, S. Guo, and S. Keshav, "Low-cost
communication for rural internet kiosks using mechanical backhaul",
In Proc. of
International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2006, pp. 334 - 345.
[27] X. Zhang, J. Kurose, B. N. Levine, D. Towsley, and H. Zhang,
"Study of a bus-based disruption-tolerant network: mobility modeling
and impact on routing", In Proc. of
International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Networking, Montréal, Québec, Canada,
2007, pp. 195 - 206.
[28] M. Radenkovic and B. Wietrzyk, "Mobile Ad Hoc Networking
Approach to Detecting and Querying Events Related to Farm
Animals", In Proc. of ICNS, Santa Clara, California, USA, 2006, pp.
109-115.
[29] C. J. C. Phillips, Principles of cattle production, CABI Publishing,
Oxon, UK, 2001.
[30] R. M. d. Mol, A. Keen, G. H. Kroeze, and J. M. F. H. Achten,
"Description of a detection model for oestrus and diseases in dairy
cattle based on time series analysis combined with a Kalman filter",
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, April 1999, 22 (2), pp.
171-185(15).
[31] R. Firk, E. Stamer, W. Junge, and J. Krieter, "Automation of oestrus
detection in dairy cows: a review", Livestock Production Science,
July 2002, 75 (3), pp. 219-232(14).
[32] E. J. Riedy and R. Szewczyk, "Power and Control in Networked
Sensors", 2000.
[33] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, "Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks": Kluwer Academic, 1996.
[34] M. Tarique, K. E. Tepe, and M. Naserian, "Energy Saving Dynamic
Source Routing for Ad HocWireless Networks", In Proc. of WIOPT,
2005.
[35] M. R. Gosnell, R. Albarelli, M. X. Cheng, and B. McMillin, "Energy
Balanced Broadcasting Through Delayed Intelligence", In Proc. of
ITCC, 2005, pp. 627-632.
[36] P. Bergamo, et al., "Distributed Power Control for Energy Efficient
Routing in Ad Hoc Networks", Wireless Networks, 2004, 10 (1), pp.
1572-8196.
[37] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, "Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector
routing", In Proc. of WMCSA, 1999.
[38] M. Radenkovic and B. Wietrzyk, "Wireless mobile ad-hoc sensor
networks for very large scale cattle monitoring", In Proc. of ASWN,
Berlin, Germany, 2006, pp. 47-58.
[39] X. Hong, M. Gerla, G. Pei, and C.-C. Chiang, "A group mobility
model for ad hoc wireless networks", In Proc. of
2nd ACM
International Workshop on Modeling Analysis and Simulation of
Wireless and Mobile Systems, Seattle, Washington, United States,
1999, pp. 53-60.
[40] C. J. C. Phillips, Cattle behaviour, Farming Press, Ipswich, UK,
1993.
[41] L.
Breslau,
et al.,
"Advances in network
simulation",
IEEE
Computer, 2000, 33 (5), pp. 59-67.
[42] F. J. Ros and P. M. Ruiz, "Implementing a New Manet Unicast
Routing Protocol in NS2", Dept. of Information and Communications
Engineering University of Murcia, 2004.
[43] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, "Directed Diffusion:
A Scalable and Robust Communication Paradigm for Sensor
Networks", In Proc. of MOBICOM, Boston, MA, USA, 2000, pp.
56-67.
[44] M. G. Zapata and N. Asokan, "Securing Ad hoc Routing Protocols",
In Proc. of WiSe, Atlanta, Giorgia, USA, 2002.
[45] H. Yang, J. Shu, X. Meng, and S. Lu, "SCAN: self-organized
network-layer security in mobile ad hoc networks", IEEE Jurnal on
Selected Areas in Communications, 2006, 24 (2), pp. 261-273.
[46] Y.-a. Huang and W. Lee, "A cooperative intrusion detection system
for ad hoc networks", In Proc. of 1st ACM workshop on Security of
ad hoc and sensor networks, Fairfax, Virginia, 2003, pp. 135-147.
16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[47] I. Mohomed, A. Misra, M. Ebling, and W. Jerome, "HARMONI:
Context-aware Filtering of Sensor Data for Continuous Remote
Health Monitoring", in Sixth Annual IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications, Hong Kong: IEEE,
2008, pp. 248-251, Available.
[48] W. D. Jones, "Taking Body Temperature, Inside Out", IEEE
Spectrum, 2006, 1, pp. 11-13.
[49] K. Fall and K. Varadhan, The ns Manual, 2008.
[50] D. Kotz, et al., "Experimental Evaluation of Wireless Simulation
Assumptions", In Proc. of MSWiM, Venezia, Italy, 2004.
[51] J. Liu, et al., "Simulation Validation Using Direct Execution
ofWireless Ad-Hoc Routing Protocols", In Proc. of 18th Workshop o
Parallel and Distributed Simulation (PADS'04), 2004.
TABLE I.
POTENTIAL ATTACKERS
Location\Attacker
Owners
Competitors, buyers
Individual animal
being
monitored,
monitoring hardware
Tampering
with
monitoring
hardware, removing or disabling
sensors to change sensed data
Radio
waves
communication
(physical layers)
Signal
jamming,
moving
devices or animals out of network
coverage.
Signal jamming, modification and fabrication of data by
deploying malicious devices or modifying existing devices
Link Layer
Illegitimate access and fabricating or modifying data
Network Layer
Illegitimate access and fabricating or modifying data,
routing attacks
17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

