Teleconsultation/Telediagnosis using Teledentistry Technology: a Pilot Feasibility 
Study
Rodrigo Mariño 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rmarino@unimelb.edu.au 
Utsana Tonmukayakul 
Dental Health Services Victoria 
Melbourne, Australia 
utsana.tonmukayakul@deakin.edu.au 
Parul Marwaha 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
pmarwaha@unimelb.edu.au 
Richard Collmann 
Victorian eResearch Strategic Initiative 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rcollmann@unimelb.edu.au 
Matthew Hopcraft 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
m.hopcraft@unimelb.edu.au 
David Manton 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
djmanton@unimelb.edu.au 
Andrew Stranieri 
Centre for Informatics and Applied Optimisation, 
Federation University 
Ballarat, Australia 
a.stranieri@federation.edu.au 
Ken Clarke 
Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
clak@unimelb.edu.au
 
Abstract—This 
study 
assessed 
the 
feasibility 
of 
a 
teledentistry model for teleconsultation and telediagnosis in 
Residential Aged Care Facilities. Study feasibility was defined 
by the ability to develop remote treatment plans. Reliability of 
the remote assessments was assessed by comparing with those 
performed by traditional face-to-face oral examinations. An 
intraoral camera was operated by trained teledentistry 
assistants with the aim of screening residents for oral diseases 
and pathological conditions. The model was supported by 
traning and an instructional kit for the introral camera 
operators. The structure, content and delivery of the program, 
was evaluated. Residents’ views about the structure, content 
and delivery of the program were also evaluated. A total of 50 
residents participated in this assessment. Results indicated that 
the proposed teledentistry approach for oral health screening 
is feasible and reliable as an alternative to traditional oral 
health examination. Residents expressed high levels of 
satisfaction with the teledentistry service. This study provides 
an innovative solution towards closing the service delivery gap 
in the provision of sustainable oral health care services to 
underserviced populations (e.g., nursing homes, rural areas). 
Keywords - oral health, teledentistry, intraoral camera, 
nursing homes 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Improvements in oral health in Australia over the past 50 
years have translated into a greater proportion of older 
individuals retaining more of their natural teeth, increasing 
the prevalence of caries and periodontal disease. Older 
people living in Residential Aged Care Facilities (RACFs) 
have been identified as a significant risk group for oral 
diseases in Australia. In addition, the changing demography 
and oral health needs of older Australians will present many 
challenges for the dental profession over coming decades. 
As an initial stage to address these challenges, a project was 
organized to test whether improvements in accessibility and 
appropriateness of oral health services can be achieved by 
utilizing advanced ICT techniques to screen for oral disease 
in older people living in RACFs [1]. 
 In 2005 more than 41,000 residents in the state of 
Victoria, Australia lived in high or low-care residential 
facilities on a permanent basis; with just over half being 
dentate and having high dental treatment needs [2][3]. 
Significant barriers to accessing dental services exist. 
Residents are often physically and cognitively impaired, 
medically compromised and dependent on others to 
maintain their oral hygiene.  
Face-to-face patient examinations are regarded as the 
291
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

most accurate method for correct oral health diagnosis. 
However in Victoria only 11% of aged care facility 
residents have seen a dentist in the past 12 months, as there 
are few dentists available to provide dental care for residents 
[4][5]. In fact, only half of Victorian dentists reported 
providing care to residents of RACFs, and those dentists 
spent on average only one hour per month providing care in 
this setting [5]. 
As the capability of information and communication 
technology (ICT) has risen, the use of ICT for data 
collection has increased. Expanded use of ICT has provided 
clinicians with alternatives to the traditional face-to-face 
oral examinations. This shift in focus has resulted in a vast 
increase in the number of published articles that include 
some 
form 
of 
either 
synchronous 
(real-time) 
or 
asynchronous 
(delayed 
image 
examination), 
teleconsultation/ telediagnosis [6]. 
Teledentistry can be successfully implemented in 
different oral health settings to deliver improved health 
outcomes 
and 
positive 
health 
professional-patient 
experiences [1][6]. Teledentistry has the potential to reduce 
the number of inappropriate referrals by screening patients 
to ensure that only those who need to see a specialist go on 
waiting lists. This ensures efficient use of scarce health 
resources, increasing access to specialist care, improving 
specialist productivity and supporting enhanced oral health 
across society.  
Potentially, teledentistry could benefit an expanding 
segment of the population in relative and absolute terms; 
namely, older people living in RACFs and rural areas. 
According to the 2006 Australian Census, 55-64 year-olds 
made up 11.8% and those 65 years and over 13.7% of the 
total Victorian population [7].  
Older people are proportionately over-represented in 
rural and regional Australian communities and these 
communities 
are 
ageing 
more 
rapidly 
than 
their 
metropolitan 
counterparts. 
Therefore, 
a 
teledentistry 
approach could potentially target a rapidly expanding 
segment of the population with special oral health needs. 
Other parts of the world have similar demographic and 
geographical problems making this study equally relevant to 
them. 
A three-stage study was designed to address priorities 
established by Australia's National Oral Health Plan 2004-
2013 for ‘Older People’ targeting older people living in 
RACFs, (an underserviced, high-risk population and one 
with major oral health needs) [8]. This project was 
conceived in an effort to promote affordable, timely oral 
health care and to test an oral health care model in which 
ICT is used with the aim of extending clinical care to 
residents who are physically separated from the examining 
oral health professional. This study was also a response to 
serious dental workforce shortages in caring for this group 
and provides opportunities to supplement traditional 
methods of oral diagnosis, care delivery and health 
promotion. 
The study builds on a University of Melbourne Institute 
for a Broadband Enhanced Society (IBES), Project Seed 
Grant, which tested the technology under laboratory 
conditions 
(proof-of-concept) 
and 
developed 
the 
instructional material for non-oral health professional 
operators [9]. That study demonstrated that the proposed 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening using an 
intraoral camera was feasible and reliable as an alternative 
to traditional oral health examination. The long-term goal of 
the project is to test whether improvements in accessibility 
and appropriateness of oral health services can be achieved 
by utilizing advanced ICT techniques to screen for oral 
disease in older people living in RACFs. Stage 2 of this 
three-stage study involved the field testing of this 
teledentistry technology and is the subject of this article.  
In the last few years, economic evaluations (EE) have 
acquired greater importance in decision-making in health. 
Health service managers, programmers and planners are 
required to select the interventions with the highest impact, 
based on evidence and prioritizing of high-risk groups. 
Analyses of this type assist decision-makers in determining 
which intervention (or combination of interventions) 
maximizes outcomes, given the available resources. Despite 
this, apart from one example of economic evaluations in 
teleorthodontics [10], the use and application of economic 
evaluations in teledentistry remains limited [5].  
This paper is organised in six sections. The first Section 
provides the foundation for understanding the need for 
teledentistry in this particular population. Section II is 
concerned with the aims and objectives of the paper. Section 
III describes the methodology used in this field trial of 
teledentistry. Section IV presents the results of the trial, 
including interviews with personnel and patients involved in 
the program. Sections V and VI discuss the results of the 
trial and conclude on its findings, respectively. Further steps 
are also discussed in last section. 
II. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
This paper outlines the results of the second stage of this 
project, which aimed to assess, on a small scale, but under 
real conditions, the safety of the procedures, their feasibility, 
as well as patients’ and health practitioners’ experiences 
with the technology. A comparison was conducted between 
face-to-face-examinations and remote examinations using 
an intraoral camera. 
The specific objectives of this study were to:  
1) assess the feasibility of using teledentistry to screen for 
oral diseases and conditions and to develop treatment 
plans for older people living in RACFs; 
2) identify barriers to the adoption of a teledental 
approach. These included: a) general staff workload; b) 
professional culture and acceptance (e.g., morale, 
motivation, resistance to change, etc.); and c) 
availability of appropriate equipment, 
3) test the utility of an instructional training kit,  
4) assess the residents’ views of their experiences during 
delivery of the program, as well as feedback and 
information 
provided 
during 
the 
teledentistry 
consultation. 
However, in order to assist in the development of a 
consensus statement about the costs of oral health 
interventions, and the need for economic data which can be 
292
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

used as a reference for national programs, this study aims 
to determine the costs of implementing a teledentistry 
program to develop treatment plans for rural RACF 
residents in Victoria, Australia.   
III. 
METHODS 
Three 
RACFs 
within 
Victoria, 
Australia, 
were 
successfully approached to participate in this stage; two in 
metropolitan Melbourne (suburbs of Brunswick and South 
Morang) and one in rural Victoria (Stawell). These clinics 
worked in partnership with the University of Melbourne’s 
Melbourne Dental School, which acted as the central co-
ordination and examination site.  
Five non-oral health professional teledental assistants 
(e.g., registered nurses - RN) in these facilities were trained 
to manipulate an intraoral camera and use existing and 
introduced ICT infrastructure to transmit video images for 
remote examination and diagnosis. Video was streamed 
over the open Internet to enable the service in the first 
instance, as it would otherwise be necessary to overcome 
firewall issues at the RACF's where it can be difficult to 
enlist the aid of local IT support to change port settings for 
such short-term trials. If ongoing services were established 
in the future then VPN's (Virtual private Networks) could be 
used to ensure the security of patients' data. An oral health 
professional at the Melbourne Dental School performed a 
‘virtual dental examination’, recorded findings and 
developed a treatment plan for a group of selected residents 
Purposive sampling was used to recruit participants. To 
participate in this teledentistry study, the resident was 
required to have the ability to understand and to provide 
independent informed consent, the ability to communicate 
with the health professional and to undergo a 15-20 minute 
oral examination. They could be dentate or edentate. 
However, because of the nature of this trial, special care was 
taken to select residents who had some of their natural 
dentition. 
Although sample size calculations are not strictly 
necessary for a pilot study [11], a sample size of 50 
residents was considered to be adequate to meet the general 
aims of this study. A 20% attrition rate was expected over 
the six month duration of the field component of this study 
therefore 62 residents were recruited initially.  
Patients were introduced to the study by the local RN. 
When the patients, or their primary carers, expressed interest 
in participating, each received a Plain Language Statement 
describing the study and a Consent Form. Once informed 
consent was obtained, patients underwent an oral health 
assessment.  
A SOPROLIFE® intra-oral camera was used to capture 
video via a custom video streaming software platform 
designed for the project [12]. Simulations were conducted in 
the IBES test-bed facility [13]. The intra-oral camera was 
connected via a USB cable to a laptop or mobile tablet used 
for bed side evaluations, containing the software that 
compressed and encoded the 25 frame-per-second video into 
an mpeg4 video stream of at least 3Mbit/sec bandwidth, and 
preferably a 5Mbit/s stream if network conditions allowed. 
This bandwidth was found to give the clinician sufficient 
quality to interpret the images received and removed 
blurring due to the motion of the camera [8].  
The clinician viewed the incoming video via a PC 
connected to a large monitor. A large screen facilitated 
simultaneous viewing of both the intra-oral camera video as 
well as that from a second web-cam, a high definition 
Logitech model C920 model, capturing the overall 
interaction between patient and the intra-oral camera 
operator. This was also streamed as an mpeg4 video of 
minimum 3Mbit/sec bandwidth. Mpeg4 audio was also 
transmitted at 128kbit/s along with the images via the use of 
Clear One Chat 50 model microphone/speaker units also 
connected via USB cables. This allowed excellent quality 
audio communications between patient and clinician ends. 
For test sites that could not accommodate a 3Mbits/s stream 
reliably a Store and Forward version was developed that 
enabled the Mpeg4 file to be stored on a central server for 
asynchronous download by the dentists. Each examination 
lasted approximately 15 minutes and each minute of video 
created a file of approximately 1GB. Thus, the video files 
were large (i.e., 15 minutes produces a 15 GB file).   
Using a teledentistry installation each participant 
received a ‘virtual’ oral examination, including dental and 
oral mucosal assessments conducted with the assistance of a 
trained RN at the RACF using an intraoral camera operated 
in communication with a remotely located oral health 
professional.  
Intraoral camera operators should be trained in the use of 
the hardware. In the present study, this training took a 
variety of formats including seminars, simulation activities, 
demonstration modules, and self-training. A sixty-six page 
training manual including diagrams, with content organized 
in five modules was also prepared for these purposes. 
Intraoral camera operators training consisted of six hours 
delivered by a dentist from the Melbourne Dental School, 
University of Melbourne. The first three-hour session was 
an introduction to teledentistry, and on oral and dental 
anatomy. The second three hours was a demonstration of 
how to operate and manipulate the intraoral camera and 
send files over the Internet. After these sessions, the trainees 
were asked to have 10 hours of self-practice with an 
intraoral camera in their own time 
The remote oral health professional was able to 
communicate in real-time with both the resident and the 
intraoral camera operator (i.e., the RN) via a video link to 
assist in taking a history, and to direct the RN where 
necessary in the use of the intraoral camera. To have 
communication in real time we used Skype® and Vidyo®. 
However, there were several problems with Vidyo due to 
firewall settings.  
The information obtained from this examination was 
recorded and transmitted to a server for review of the 
‘virtual dental examination’ to be performed remotely at a 
later time. Information was registered on a conventional 
Dental Health Services Victoria chart for the generation of 
treatment plans by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne 
Dental School, University of Melbourne.  
On completing the virtual oral examination the residents 
were asked to complete a seven-item teledentistry 
293
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

assessment questionnaire to assess his/her views on the 
approach. As a further verification of the approach, the 
ability to understand communications between the oral 
health professional and the resident was determined both for 
the conventional face-to-face and remote communications. 
The 
evaluation 
form 
consisted 
of 
statements 
that 
participants rated on a five 5-points Likert scale, depicting 
their level of agreement with the statement (1 ’Strongly 
agree’; 3 ‘Neutral’; 5 ‘Strongly disagree’). The summary 
evaluation 
also 
contained 
four 
open-questions, 
so 
participants could include their thoughts about their 
experience and critiques. 
Ten residents received a second oral examination by a 
different oral health clinician. This was a traditional face-to-
face examination (the clinician present in front of the 
patient) with findings recorded on a conventional dental 
chart.  
Furthermore, we wanted to explore how the introduction 
of teledentistry was experienced by those in charge of 
teledentistry on site. RNs who collected the information for 
this project completed a questionnaire to assess their initial 
attitude to, and acceptance of the practice, and their overall 
experience with the teledentistry approach. The utility of the 
instructional training kit and any other issues associated 
with the project were also assessed. 
Due to the small sample size, only descriptive analysis 
was used to illustrate the participants’ views about the 
format, content and delivery of the teledentistry program. In 
some cases, categorical and ordinal data were analyzed 
utilizing Chi square analysis (2) to compare results between 
different oral conditions and the distribution of socio-
demographic and outcome variables were performed. The 
level of inter-examination reliability for the degree of 
consistency of the two sets of examinations was assessed 
using the kappa statistic. 
To complement this analysis, and to obtain a better 
understanding of the usefulness of teledentistry approach, an 
economic evaluation was conducted. The form of economic 
evaluation used in this study was cost description. A cost 
description is the most basic type of economic evaluation, 
which is a partial form of economic appraisal because it 
looks only at the costs of a program and provides no 
information on the health outcome of interest [14]. It 
answers the most commonly asked question when 
considering introducing a new program: “how much will it 
cost?”, and provides decision makers with important 
information on the resources needed to introduce or expand 
a service. It also allows program managers to determine a 
unit cost or cost per unit of service (i.e., for a treatment 
plan). 
Teledentistry, as in any telehealth model, can work 
according to two consultation methods: real-time and store 
and forward. Both methods require the same basic 
infrastructure connected to telecommunications networks 
with sufficient bandwidth. However, as low-speed, high-
latency connections are more typically found in rural and 
remote regions, this may impact the ability to perform real-
time 
consultations. 
Therefore, 
practitioners 
without 
adequate bandwidth would have to rely upon the store and 
forward modality to send data to the specialist for later 
review. Store and forward provision can be just as effective 
at presenting cases as the real-time modality.  
Thus, this analysis calculated the cost per unit of a 
treatment plan under Australian conditions. The program or 
intervention under evaluation in this study involved: 
1) Oral examination data recorded at the RACF using an 
intraoral camera operated by a trained RN who 
transmitted the files to a remotely located dentist for 
asynchronous 
review 
and 
treatment 
planning 
(asynchronous model). 
2) Remote real-time oral examination and treatment 
planning with the assistance of a trained RN at the 
RACF using an intraoral camera operated in 
communication with a remotely located oral health 
professional (real-time model).  
The question being examined was: “what would be the 
cost of implementing an asynchronous and a real-time 
teledentistry model per resident if we provide a treatment 
plan for a cohort of 100 residents?”This figure was based on 
capacity of the largest RACF in Stawell.  
The costs of running the program were based on this 
study, expert opinion, together with other relevant sources. 
A micro-costing approach, or direct cost measurement from 
a healthcare perspective, was applied to quantify and value 
all resources in this program, except where costs are small 
and unlikely to make any difference to the study results. 
Costs were grouped under three main categories:   
1) Training. Calculations under this heading were done 
under the following assumptions. It was assumed that 
the asynchronous and the real-time models require a 
trained RN to manipulate the intraoral camera. 
Training of the intraoral camera operator involved six 
hours of direct contact and ten hours of practice 
examinations. 
Transportation. The Australian Tax Office travel 
reimbursement schedule for a 2.2 litre engine was used 
to quantify travel cost [15]. Average distance between 
the aged care facilities located in Stawell and the 
Melbourne Dental School, Univeristy of Melbourne 
was applied to determine the travel costs of the dental 
clinician to train the RNs.  
2) Salaries. The salary of oral health personnel involved 
in the oral examination was based on the Dental Health 
Services Victoria scales [16]. The RNs’ salary was 
based on Australian Department of Health and Aging 
recommendations [17]. 
Each examination in the asynchronous model (store 
and forward) was calculated as lasting 15 minutes, 
whereas examination time in the real-time model was 
20 minutes. It was assumed that in the real-time model 
there would be more commmunication with the remote 
examiner to prepare and finalise the treatment plan. 
3) Teledental device. The investments necessary to 
conduct the teleconsultations were the intraoral camera 
with an integrated USB dock to connect to a computer. 
Camera costs were computed at market value [18]. 
Digital images obtained by the camera can be used to 
294
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

support real-time or store-and-forward teledentistry 
consultations. 
The life span of the intaroal camera and its direct USB 
Camera dock was estimated at 10,000 hours (about 5 
years) of normal use as per its handbook [19]. 
All costs were computed in Australian dollars (AUD) 
(1.00 AUD =0.70 EUR) at 2014 price levels. No cost 
discounting applied to this short-term study. 
Data collection extended between October 2012 and 
June 2013. Ethical approvals to conduct this study were 
sought and obtained from the University of Melbourne. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
At the end of data collection, 50 residents from three 
RACFs participated in the trial from the 62 initially 
recruited; with 58% being female. Three RNs conducted the 
examinations. Twenty-two examinations were conducted in 
Stawell, twenty-one in Brunswick and another seven in 
South Morang. The majority of participants (70%) had, at 
least part of their natural dentition, while fifteen residents 
(30%) had no natural teeth. By location, nine edentulous 
residents were from Stawell, and six were from Brunswick 
(See Table I).  
A teledentistry installation enabled five trained intra-oral 
camera operators (registered nurses) to record, use and 
transmit video images for the generation of treatment plans 
by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne Dental School, 
University of Melbourne. Information from the remote 
examination was compared with a real-life dental 
examination. The intra-examiner agreements for dental 
examination parameters determined by the Kappa index 
reflected an ‘Excellent’ agreement (Kappa=0.83) [20]. 
When residents were asked to rate their satisfaction with 
the examination, the majority of the residents were either 
very satisfied: (46%) or slightly satisfied (38%) with the 
format of the remote dental examination.  
 
TABLE I.  
RESIDENTIAL AGED CARE FACILITIES RESIDENTS’ 
SOCIODEMOGRAFIC CHARACTERISTICS 
 
Residential aged care facilities 
Brunswick 
n (%) 
South Morang 
n (%) 
Stawell 
n (%) 
Sex 
Male 
Female 
 
10 (47.6) 
11 (52.4) 
 
3 (42.9) 
4 (57.1) 
  
8 (35.4) 
14 (63.6) 
Dentate Status 
Dentate 
Edentulousa 
 
15 (72.4) 
6 (28.6) 
 
7 (100.0) 
- (0.0) 
 
13 (60.0) 
9 (40.0) 
Total 
21 
7 
22 
a. 
total absence of natural dentition 
 
The majority would also recommend (strongly: 46%; or 
slightly: 46%) a remote dental examination to other people 
of their age and background. When asked about the reason 
for not recommending this assessment, the comments were 
related to the lack of provision of oral health services, in 
particular preventive care (See Table II). 
 
TABLE II.  RESIDENTS’ RESPONSES TO TELEDENTISTRY ASSESSMENT 
QUESTIONNAIRE (%) 
1. How satisfied were you with the remote dental examination?a 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
38.0 
14.0 
2.0 
- 
2. If remote examinations were available for patients, would you 
recommend them to other people? 
Strongly 
recommend 
Slightly 
recommend 
Neutral 
Slightly not 
Recommen
d 
Strongly not 
recommend 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
3. How appropriate was the format of the remote dental examinations? 
Very 
appropriate 
Slightly 
appropriate 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Inappropriate 
Strongly 
inappropriate 
46.0 
46.0 
6.0 
2.0 
- 
4. How satisfied were you with the review of your dental needs by the 
remote dentist? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
32.0 
6.0 
16.0 
- 
5. Were instructions from the examiner in the face-to-face exam clear 
and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
86.0 
12.0 
2.0 
- 
- 
6. Were instructions from the examiner in the remote examination 
clear and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
a. 
n= 50 
 
When asked about how satisfied they were with the 
review of oral health needs, although the majority was either 
satisfied (46%) or slightly satisfied (32%), three residents 
(6%) were neutral and, more importantly, 16% were slightly 
dissatisfied. Asked about the reason for this dissatisfaction, 
most residents’ comments were related to the lack of 
immediate feedback on the examination.  
On comparing residents’ opinions on the clarity of the 
communications received with the face-to-face examiner 
(i.e., the RN), 86% of the respondents found it “Very easy”, 
and another 12% “Easy” to understand. Residents also found 
it generally easy to understand remote communications (46% 
“Very easy” and 46% “Easy”), and another 4% were neutral 
about it. Nonetheless, the remainder 4% found it “Difficult” 
or “Very difficult” to understand remote communications, 
but comments were related to the foreign accent of the oral 
health 
professional 
that 
provided 
feedback 
on 
the 
examination, rather than the technology used. 
Over one quarter of the residents (28%) commented that 
the most valuable element of the remote dental examination 
was its convenience. For example, by taking video images in 
295
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the RACF, residents could avoid the disruption, difficulty 
and cost of arranging travel to visit a dentist.  
Three of the five RNs that had been recruited and trained 
conducted intraoral examinations with the RACF’s residents. 
Despite having written instructions and being able to 
successfully transmit files during the training sessions, most 
of the intraoral examinations (n = 28) required an oral health 
professional to manipulate the intraoral camera. In another 
eight examinations the RNs were assisted, either remotely or 
at the RACF, by an oral health professional on how to 
properly manipulate the intraoral camera and transmit the 
video images. The RN’s performed the examination and 
transmitted the videos unsupported in only 14 examinations 
(See Table III). 
 
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF TELEDENTAL EXAMINATIONS COMPLETED BY 
INTRAORAL CAMERA OPERATOR 
 
Residential aged care facilities 
Brunswick South Morang 
Stawell 
Nurse no supervision 
Nurse under supervision 
Oral health professional 
6 
4 
11 
4 
0 
3 
4 
4 
14 
Total 
21 
7 
22 
a. 
Residential aged care facility 
 
The three participating nurses provided feedback on the 
training material presented (i.e., a hard-copy, on-line manual 
and demonstrations). There was general agreement that the 
material presented was clear and relevant to the purposes of 
this project. RNs also agreed that the length of the material 
was right. Nonetheless, they considered that the information 
about oral health in older adults was too long and less 
relevant to their work.  
Estimated unit costs of the proposed oral examination 
and treatment planning for a RACF’s resident population, 
including current training costs, instrument cost and staff 
time are presented in Table IV. The cost of training is 
common between the two options while costs related to 
intervention delivery were different. The average cost of a 16 
hour training session was AUD 8.88 per resident (ranged 
from AUD 8.59 to AUD 9.18 per resident). The intervention 
delivery cost of the Storage and Forward model was AUD 
54.93 per resident with the estimated range of AUD 44.88 - 
AUD 66.11. The total cost per resident of the real-time oral 
model was AUD 54.42 (ranged from AUD 44.01 to AUD 
63.86). 
Staff time costs accounted for 80% of the total 
intervention delivery cost in both options. The staff time cost 
of Storage and Forward option is slightly higher than the 
real-time mode because of a small increase in time a nurse 
spent on recording the video. The average oral examination 
time in the Storage and Forward model was 20 minutes, 
whereas the nurse took 15 minutes for the real-time oral 
examination.  
 
 
TABLE IV.  
COST DESCRIPTION OF TELEDENTISTRY 
 
Average 
AUDb 
Minimum 
AUD 
Maximum 
AUD 
TRAINING COST 
3-hour introduction at RACFa 
a) trainer 
training preparation & delivery 
travel cost 
b) trainee time cost 
 
4.99  
0.22  
0.37  
 
4.99 
 0.22 
0.31 
 
 4.99  
0.23  
0.42  
3-hour demonstration 
a) trainer 
training preparation & delivery 
travel cost 
b) trainee time cost 
 
1.50 
0.22  
0.37  
 
1.50 
0.22 
0.31 
 
1.50 
0.23  
0.42  
10-hour self-practice  
Trainee time cost 
1.22  
1.04 
1.40  
Total 
8.88  
8.59 
9.18  
Option 1 Storage and forward 
Intraoral camera and USB dock 
0.34 
0.31 
0.38 
STAFF TIME COST 
Nurse time 
Dentist time 
27.45 
18.25  
21.03  
14.96  
34.70  
21.85 
Total 
45.70  
35.99  
56.55 
Grand total 
54.93  
44.88  
66.11  
Option 2 Real-time 
Intraoral camera and USB dock 
0.26 
0.23 
0.28 
STAFF TIME COST 
Nurse time 
Dentist time 
26.03 
18.25  
20.23  
14.96  
34.70  
21.85 
Total 
44.28  
35.19  
54.39 
Grand total 
54.42  
44.01  
63.86  
b. 
Residential aged care facility 
c. 
Australian dollars (1.00 AUD =0.70 EUR) 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study both tested and proved the technical 
feasibilty and acceptance, by both users and residents, of an 
alternative model to the traditional face-to-face oral health 
examination using a teledentistry installation. The observed 
concordance of remote and face-to-face exams was high and 
residents expressed acceptable levels of satisfaction with the 
teledentistry model.  
The ‘virtual dental examination’ can provide general and 
specialist oral health care support to local aged care facilities. 
It can assist in providing regular and timely oral health 
checks using trained non-oral health professional assistants 
in the first instance.  
Additionally, there is anecdotal evidence from RACF 
staff that the stress imposed by travel to a dental surgery can 
lead to complete non-compliance with the dental examiner, 
to the point where attempts at oral examination are 
abandoned. This leads to further travel and dentist re-
296
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

booking costs and often reluctance on the part of resident and 
practitioner to repeat the process. By using the teledentistry 
approach, the RACF avoids the disruption and difficulty of 
arranging travel for the patients for dental treatment.  
A successful translation of this technology into clinical 
practice would extend the provision of health care/oral health 
care to remote and difficult-to-serve locations, and improve 
access for care to additional patient populations at reasonable 
cost. The ability to view examination results at their desk 
will enable oral health professionals to see and screen more 
residents per time unit in their catchment area. Further 
development of the procedures is warranted to allow for 
high-care resident assessment. Specialist dental services can 
subsequently be provided when the required treatment is 
identified. 
Oral health professionals will also be able to triage and 
prioritize appointments, rather than travelling to each home 
without knowing beforehand what treatment each resident 
will require. Visiting domiciliary oral health professionals 
will be aware of the exact nature of the oral problem before 
they arrive. The oral health professional will also be able to 
plan a visit to treat other residents in the area, improving 
efficiency and meaning that more residents can be treated 
over the course of the year. The oral health professional can 
better identify older adults who require a diagnostic 
examination by a dental specialist.  
Furthermore, by performing an in-RACF examination, 
the confidence that both the residents and their families have 
in the RACF will increase. From the health care system and 
societal perspective, a key impact will be in the satisfaction 
of knowing that residents have been well looked after, and 
that scarce resources are being well utilized. Additionally, 
the case for extension of funding would be bolstered. It will 
improve oral health for underserviced communities through 
education, diagnosis, treatment, health promotion and 
disease prevention.  
Data collected from this project could also be useful as a 
starting point for a large oral health record repository, which 
would combine a digital record with 2-D and 3-D stills and 
video images, as well as radiographs.  
Additional research should explore and address some 
technical and training aspects of this study, as a means to 
further verify this approach. Firstly, when the interaction 
during the conventional face-to-face exam and remote 
communications was examined, residents indicated levels of 
dissatisfaction. The face-to-face seems to provide a more 
effective mean to achieve clarity and easy to understand 
communication between the oral health professional and the 
resident. King and his collaborators [21] reported diminished 
quality of communication with videoconferencing. However, 
in the present study it appears that this was due to language 
and not technical aspects, but this was not explored. 
Secondly, it was expected that after a while the RNs would 
be able to operate the intraoral camera and send the files. 
However, 
despite 
having 
adequate training, 
written 
instructions, and receiving material compensation, some 
RN’s still failed to fully engage with the study. This is 
despite the successful use of RNs in other areas of dentistry 
[22][23].  
The main aim of implementing teledentistry would be 
the improvement of the clinical outcome as well as achieving 
the satisfaction of residents and of those in charge of the 
program. The latter is important, as problems and even 
failures of the telehealth initiative may result from 
discrepancies in the expectations of health care stakeholders, 
as well as any limitations of the health care technology [24]. 
Possible changes due to introduction of new technology also 
need to be assessed [24].  
In the present study, although RNs understood the 
capabilities of this technology, they questioned its 
effectiveness in the context of a RACF. They felt that the 
approach did not recognize the realities of the RACF. They 
did not acknowledge its use as an alternative to face-to-face 
examinations when used on high care residents. The 
perception that this technology is of limited use in RACFs 
could explain, at least in part, the unwillingness to take up 
this new technology [25]. In any case, it seems that barriers 
to implementation are largely due to human factors. Further 
training and analyses of how different types of constraints 
operate to support or undermine the adoption of a 
teledentistry model need to be explored and addressed. 
Nonetheless, while these are important concerns, this study 
was not designed to explore in depth the experience of RNs 
and patients with teledentistry, but to give some preliminary 
insights on its technical feasibilty,acceptance and cost. A 
longitudinal study would allow assessment of users 
experience over time. 
Estimating the costs of teledentistry programs is crucial 
for efficiently allocating resources to provide oral health care 
services for underserved communities, such as RACF 
residents. While the economic analysis has inherent 
limitations as a result of its reliance on a range of 
assumptions, the results provide important information for 
further economic evaluation, and help local program 
managers to determine the average cost per examination 
under the conditions prevailing in Victoria, Australia. 
Findings suggest that, the cost of the teleconsultation / 
telediagnosis has an overall cost per resident ranging from 
AUD 44.01 to AUD 63.86, with no significant differences 
between real-time and the Store and Forward model.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Findings for this field trial indicate that using a 
teledentistry installation is an appropriate alternative to 
traditional oral health consultation, and could provide 
benefits to an expanding segment of the population in 
relative and absolute terms. This population comprises older 
people living in RACFs and older people living in regional, 
rural, and even outer-metropolitan areas. 
An increasing proportion of older people are living in 
rural and regional Australia and these communities are 
demographically ageing more rapidly than their metropolitan 
counterparts. Teleconsultation / telediagnosis projects such 
as the present one have the potential to target this rapidly 
expanding aged segment of the population with special oral 
health needs. There is also potential for wider scale 
application for the provision of sustainable oral health care in 
rural areas. Nonetheless, involvement of a wider range of 
297
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

stakeholders will be necessary, as they all influence 
adoption. A recent review of factors influencing the 
implementation of telehealth highlighted some challenges at 
different levels [24]. These challenges need to be specifically 
targeted. 
This study will lead to third Stage of this project, which 
would involve a multi-State, community-based trial of the 
technology which could be extended as an integrated part of 
the general adoption of telemedicine / telediagnosis. The 
long-term goals of such a project will be to test whether 
improvements in accessibility and appropriateness of oral 
health services can be achieved by utilizing ICT techniques 
to screen for oral disease and delivering oral healthcare 
services for older people. The project would deliver 
specifications and toolkits for new products and services, and 
develop markets for teledentistry in the public and private 
health sector. However, this will require further research into 
the acceptability of teledentistry by participants, including 
the format, content and delivery of the program, as well as 
the relevance and appropriateness of the information 
provided. It will also need to explore the sustainability of 
oral health care services in underserved areas and provide 
evidence for a first cut business plan for national and state 
programs in oral health.  
People living in rural or underserved areas are amongst 
the most in need of oral healthcare. Teledentistry may be 
especially useful in remote rural areas or in other areas where 
there are few dental practitioners. Teledentistry may enhance 
the quality of services provided and reduce costs. It can 
benefit oral health care by enhancing early diagnosis, 
facilitating timely treatment of oral diseases. It can provide 
patient health education and health promotion and early 
detection of disease [25].  Eventually, face-to-face 
examinations could be replaced by the collection of patient 
information and data remotely and integrating dentistry into 
other health care services provided locally.  
Despite this, there is currently no active teledentistry 
service in operation delivering private or public clinical care. 
The aim would be that all the fragmentary trials occurring 
across the world will provide the basis for fully funded 
service provision. The impact of such a model needs to be 
assessed further. Further research will also be required to 
undertake economic analysis and modeling to determine the 
intervention’s productivity compared to the traditional model 
of oral health examination. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was funded by a grant from Dental Health 
Services Victoria’s Research and Innovation Scheme and 
the Victorian Department of Business and Innovation BEIP 
program. We would also like to acknowledge the RACFs, 
residents and nurses involved in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Mariño et al., “Field testing of remote teledentistry 
technology,” The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine  (eTELEMED 2014) 
IARIA, March. 2014, pp. 23-28, ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-327-8. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
etelemed_2014_2_10_40017/ 2014.11.25. 
[2] Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. National survey of 
adult oral health 2004-2006. AIHW cat.no.DEN 165, 
Canberra, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2007. 
[3] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur and F.A.C. Wright, 
“Edentulism and dental caries in Victorian residential aged 
care facilities,” Gerodont, vol. 29, pp. E512-519, 2012. 
[4] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, F.A.C. Wright and I. 
Darby, “Oral hygiene and periodontal disease in Victorian 
residential aged care facilities,” Gerodont, vol. 29, pp. 220-
228, 2012.  
[5] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur and F.A.C. Wright, “Dental 
service provision in Victorian residential aged care facilities,” 
Aust Dent J vol. 53, pp. 239-245, 2008. 
[6] R. Mariño and A. Ghanim, “Teledentistry: a systematic 
review of the literature,” J Telemed Telecare, vol. 19, pp. 
189-194, 2013. 
[7] Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2006 Census QuickStats: 
Victoria. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.multiculturalaustralia.edu.au/doc/2006census-
quickstats-victoria.pdf / 2014.07.31. 
[8] Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council, Healthy 
mouths healthy lives. Australia’s national oral health plan 
2004-2013. South Australian Department of Health, 2004.  
[9] P.A. Scuffham and M. Steed, “An economic evaluation of the 
Highlands 
and 
Islands 
teledentistry 
project,” 
J 
Telemed Telecare,  vol. 8, pp. 165-177, 2002. 
[10] R. Mariño et al., “A teledentistry approach for oral health 
screening in nursing homes,” [Online].  Available from: 
http://www.slideshare.net/ifa2012/3-mariooral-health-if-
apresentation29may2012/ 2014.07.31. 
[11] L. Thabane et al., “A tutorial on pilot studies: the what, why 
and how,” BMC Med Res Methodol, vol. 10, pp. 1, Jan. 2010, 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-10-1. 
[12] SOPROLIFE: Light induced fluorescence evaluator. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.soprolife.com/ 2014.07.31 
[13] Institute for Broadband Enabled Society (IBES). Available 
from: http://broadband.unimelb.edu.au/ 2014.07.31 
[14] M.F. Drummond, M.J. Sculpher, G.W. Torrance, B.J. O'Brien 
and G.L. Stoddart, Methods for the economic evaluation of 
health care programmes, 3rd edn. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2005. 
[15] Australian Taxation Office. Deduction for business. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/Deductions-
for-business/Motor-vehicle-expenses/ 2014.07.31. 
[16] Dental Health Services Victoria, “Human resources at Dental 
Health Services Victoria,” unpublished. 
[17] Department of Health and Aging, Caring for older 
Australians. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/109293/resi
dential-care-trends.pdf/ 2014.07.31. 
[18] Pegasus Dental Services, Celebrating 10 years servicing the 
dental 
industry. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.pegasusdentalservices.com.au/images/april14spec
ials.pdf/ 2014.07.31. 
[19] ACTEON North America, SOPRO Intraoral cameras. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://us.a-
dec.com/en/~/media/Adec/Document%20Library/Product%20
Information/Sales%20Information/Brochures/85551300.pdf. 
/2014.08.30. 
[20] World Health Organization, Calibration of examiners for oral 
health 
epidemiological 
survey, 
Publication 
ORH/EIS/EPID.93.1, Geneve, WHO, 1993. 
[21] G. King, H. Richards and D. Godden, “Adoption of 
telemedicine in Scottish remote and rural general practices: a 
298
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

qualitative study,” J Telemed Telecare, vol. 13, pp. 382-386, 
2007. 
[22] J.M. Chalmers and A. Pearson, “A systematic review of oral 
health assessment by nurses and carers for residents with 
dementia in residential care facilities,” Special Care in 
Dentistry, vol. 25, pp. 227-233, 2005. 
[23] L.J. Walsh, G. Hill, G. Seymour, and A. Roberts, “A scoring 
system for the quantitative evaluation of oral mucositis during 
bone marrow transplantation,” vol. 10:190-195, 1990. 
[24] U. Sharma and M. Clarke, “Nurses’ and community support 
workers’ experience of telehealth: a longitudinal case study,” 
BMC Health Services Research, vol. 14, pp. 164, 2014, 
doi:10.1186/1472-6963-14-164. 
[25] R.N. Patel and R.N. Antonarakis, “Factors influencing the 
adoption and implementation of teledentistry in the UK, with 
a focus on orthodontics,” Community Dent Oral Epidemiol, 
vol. 41, pp. 424-431, 2013, doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12029. 
[26] R. Mariño, P.Marwaha, S. Barrow and H. Baghaie, “Web-
based oral health promotion program for older adults,” 10th 
World Congress on Preventative Dentistry, October 2013. 
Available 
from: 
https://iadr.confex.com/iadr/wcpd13/webprogram/Paper18250
9.html/ 2014.07.18. 
 
299
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

