1
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Mental Health Engagement Network (MHEN) 
 
Dr. Cheryl Forchuk, Professor and Associate Director 
Nursing Research 
Western University 
cforchuk@uwo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Abraham Rudnick, Associate Professor 
Department of Psychiatry  
abraham.rudnick@viha.ca 
University of British Columbia 
London, Ontario 
 
Dr. Jeffrey Hoch, Health Economist and  
Research Scientist, 
 St. Michael’s Hospital 
jeffrey.hoch@utoronto.ca 
Toronto, Canada 
 
Mike Godin, Team Leader 
Housing Program 
Canadian Mental Health Association 
mike@london.cmha.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Lorie Donelle, Assistant Professor 
Faculty of Health Sciences 
Western University 
ldonelle@uwo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Diane Rasmussen, Assistant Professor 
Faculty of Information & Media Studies 
Western University 
dneal2@uwo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Robbie Campbell, Associate Professor 
Department of Psychiatry and Physician Lead 
Regional Mental Health Care 
robbie.campbell@sjhc.london.on.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Walter Osoka, Peer Specialist 
Can-Voice 
woetime9@yahoo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
 
 
 
Betty Edwards, Community Reach Coordinator 
Can-Voice 
bae.canvoice@yahoo.ca 
London, Canada 
  
Dr. Elizabeth Osuch, Associate Professor 
Department of Psychiatry 
Western University  
elizabeth.osuch@lhsc.on.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Ross Norman, Professor 
Department of Psychiatry 
Western University 
rnorman@uwo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Evelyn Vingillis, Professor 
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry 
Western University 
evingili@uwo.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Beth Mitchell, Director 
Mental Health Program 
London Health Sciences Centre 
beth.mitchell@lhsc.on.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Jeffrey Reiss, Professor & Vice Chair 
Department of Psychiatry, Western University, Site Chief, 
Mental Health Program, LHSC 
jeffrey.reiss@lhsc.on.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Mike Petrenko, Executive Director 
Canadian Mental Health Association 
mpetrenko@london.cmha.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Dr. Deb Corring, Administrative Psychiatric Lead 
Mental Health Transformation 
Regional Mental Health Care 
deb.corring@sjhc.london.on.ca 
London, Canada 
 
Meaghan McKillop, MA 
Lawson Health Research Institute 
meaghan.mckillop@lawsonresearch.com 
London, Canada
 
 

2
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Abstract— This research study introduces, delivers, and 
evaluates the benefits of using web and mobile technology to 
provide consistent supportive health care to individuals living 
within London, Ontario and the surrounding area who have 
been diagnosed with a mental illness. This longitudinal, mixed 
method study consists of 400 (245 men and 155 women) 
individuals who have been diagnosed with either a mood or a 
psychotic disorder who are currently working with mental 
health care professionals (54 mental health care providers 
across 4 agencies). The participants will have access to the 
Lawson SMART record, a web-based application that provides 
individuals with a personal health record, and tools to help 
them manage their health. Participants will access the Lawson 
SMART record using an iPhone 4S. Based on preliminary 
findings, client participants are generally comfortable with the 
use of technology.  Most indicated that they were either 
extremely comfortable (26.3%) or slightly comfortable (20.3%) 
with technology generally, while only a minority said that they 
were either slightly uncomfortable (4.0%) or extremely 
uncomfortable (5.8%). It is hypothesized that the use of smart 
technologies in the treatment of mood and psychotic disorders 
will improve quality of life while reducing health care costs 
through a decrease in hospitalizations and hospital room visits. 
The Mental Health Engagement Network: Connecting Clients 
with their Health Team project was presented at IARIA-Smart 
2012 Conference by Dr. Cheryl Forchuk in May 2012 [1]. As a 
result of the presentation, this paper was developed. 
 
Keywords- SMART Technology; Mental Health Care; 
Personal Health Records; Quality of Life; Health Care Costs; 
Mood Monitor; Mobile Technology; Web-based Technology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The economic cost of mental illness to Canada was 
recently estimated at $51 billion annually, and still the 
current “system” of care is fragmented and without sufficient 
resources (financial, human, and technological), per “The 
Healthcare Interview” Canadian 
Healthcare Network, 
December 2009 [2].  The 2009 cost estimates showed a 
dramatic increase from 2003, when it was estimated that the 
Canadian economic burden due to mental illness was ~ $34 
billion ($1,056 per capita), which was a 3-fold increase from 
1998 estimations of $12.3 billion.  Twenty percent of 
Canadians will experience a mental illness in their lifetime 
and most others will experience mental illness indirectly 
through a family member, friend, or colleague.  Mental 
illness affects people of all ages, regardless of education, 
income level, or culture [3]. With mental health services at a 
crisis point, even though billions of dollars are being 
invested to help, most people in need of care will not receive 
the care they require [4].   
Commonly, mental health care is prioritized for 
individuals with the most severe symptoms, due to the lack 
of available services.  This runs counter to the general health 
care system where prevention and intervention at less serious 
levels is the norm. The current way of treating psychiatric 
illness is unsustainable and only through developing new 
service models that provide support and early intervention, 
will the mental health care system be sustainable. A new and 
potentially more sustainable method of providing mental 
health care would be that of employing smart technologies to 
enhance the treatment of mental health clients.   
The Mental Health Engagement Network (MHEN) is 
focused on putting technology in the hands of mental health 
clients and their mental health care providers to demonstrate 
a more effective and efficient mental health care service 
delivery model. In partnership with TELUS Health 
Solutions, this project will deploy TELUS health space™ 
consumer health platform along with a customized personal 
health record application, the Lawson SMART record, and 
interactive tools that support a novel way to provide clients 
with standardized health services, ongoing monitoring and 
regular communication with their mental health care 
providers.  This innovative solution will help coordinate care 
across the continuum; ensuring that services are more 
accessible, patient-centered, and promote the empowerment 
of individuals so they can better manage their own health. 
From a population perspective, this proposed system re-
design will have the capability to reduce or prevent acute 
episodes of mental illness and reduce the severe pressures on 
an already over burden health care system.  
This document proceeds as follows. Section II provides 
an overview of existing literature and applications. Section 
III describes the methods employed by the MHEN project. 
The expected outcomes are outlined in Section IV and the 
conclusion is presented in Section V. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Existing Studies 
In recent years there has been a growing body of research 
evaluating the benefits of using mobile and web based 
technology to help individuals better manage their health.  
Studies evaluating the use of web-based interventions, 
including online learning programs, Personal Health Records 
(PHR), e-therapy, and online databases with access to mental 
health resources, have shown that these types of 
interventions have positive outcomes for mental health 
clients. For example, a study employing, Anxiety Online, an 
educational website which provides information about 
anxiety disorders, links to useful resources, psychological 
assessments and a referral system found e-mental health 
treatment increases accessibility to mental health care in a 
cost effective and efficient way. The authors also indicate 
that this type of technology may encourage individuals to 
access mental health treatment who would not otherwise 
access traditional forms of treatment due to stigma [5]. 
Another study, evaluated the use of an online cognitive 
behavioural therapy based treatment for depression, with a 
sample of 141 individuals diagnosed with major depressive 
disorder. The authors found that participants in the 
intervention group experienced a reduction in symptoms of 
depression and better clinical outcomes than the control 
group [6]. 
Other studies evaluating the use of mobile-based 
interventions, 
including 
text-messaging 
and 
mobile 
applications, have also shown that this type of intervention 
has positive outcomes for individuals with mental health 

3
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
issues. For example, one study in which 55 clients with 
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder received a cell 
phone and a text messaging based intervention found that 
medication adherence and social interactions increased 
significantly [7]. 
Another study with a similar population, of 154 
participants diagnosed with schizophrenia, employing a text 
messaging based intervention found improvement in 
medication adherence among participants after 3 months, 
and improvement among negative, cognitive and global 
symptoms [8]. 
The MHEN project will contribute to the existing 
literature by providing an analysis to the effectiveness of a 
combination of web and mobile-based technologies in 
mental health care.  
B. Applications 
Several applications, both mobile and web based, have 
been developed employing smart technology to support 
health care. Examples include: My Mood Monitor [9] and 
MedHelp’s Mood Tracker [10], which are both applications 
designed to monitor a user’s mood; medication adherence 
assistance applications such as RxReminder [11]; the Mobile 
Assessment and Treatment for Schizophrenia (MATS) [7] 
which is an interactive text-messaging intervention; and the 
use of Personal Health Records/Electronic Health Records 
[12].   
The MHEN project will contribute to the existing 
applications in that this web-based solution will employ all 
of these applications in one complete platform. Participants 
will have access to an electronic Personal Health Record, and 
to tools that will assist in the management of their health. 
Additionally, the MHEN project will contribute to the 
existing literature in that the effectiveness of these 
applications has not been extensively researched, particularly 
in mental health care. 
III. 
METHODS 
The following subsections describe the methods 
employed in the MHEN project. 
A. Study Design 
This research study began in September, 2011 and will 
conclude in November, 2013.  It includes 54 community 
mental health providers and 400 clients who have been 
diagnosed with a mood disorder or a psychotic disorder.  
Client participants were randomized into Group 1 (early 
intervention) or Group 2 (later intervention) by care provider 
caseload, so that participating mental health care providers 
would have roughly 4 participants in Group 1 and Group 2.  
Group 1 (200 participants) received an iPhone 4S, a 
TELUS health space™ account, and version 1.0 of the 
Lawson SMART record during Phase I (August 2012). The 
remaining 200 clients, Group 2, will initially act as a control 
group, and at Phase II (6 months later) will receive an iPhone 
4S,  a TELUS health space™ account, and version 2.0 of the 
Lawson SMART record. The participating mental health 
care providers will receive a Lawson SMART record 
account and an iPad during Phase I.  
In addition to the tools deployed through the MHEN 
project, 12 month voice and data plans will be provided to 
client participants.  Similarly, 18 month data plans will be 
provided to the mental health care provider participants.  
B. Sample 
The 400 client participants and 54 community mental 
health care provider participants were recruited from 
January, 2012 to August, 2012. Participants were recruited 
through community programs at London Health Sciences 
Centre and St. Joseph’s Health Care, as well as through the 
Canadian Mental Health Association (London-Middlesex 
Branch) and WOTCH Community Mental Health Services.  
London Health Sciences Centre Adult Mental Health 
Care Program offers a wide range of programs, including 
Prevention and Early Intervention Program for Psychoses, 
the First Episode Mood and Anxiety Program, and Geriatric 
Mental Health Program to support adults living in the 
community with mental illness. St. Joseph’s Health Care 
governs Regional Mental Health Care- London and St. 
Thomas and both of these sites are participating in the 
MHEN project. Services offered include, Mood and Anxiety 
Programs, Transition to Primary Care Program, Forensic 
Outreach, 
a 
Schizophrenia 
Program, 
and 
Assertive 
Community Treatment teams.   WOTCH Community Mental 
Health Services provides adults over 16 years of age who are 
managing serious mental illness many services including: 
one-on-one counseling, housing support, employment 
support, family support, and access to health services.  The 
Canadian Mental Health Association (London-Middlesex) 
provides individuals living in the community with many 
services including, Court Support and Diversion programs, 
Housing Advocacy programs, the Justice-Community 
Support Program, Crisis Services, and peer support groups.  
Mental health care provider participants were recruited 
through presentations at regularly held staff meetings at the 
participating agencies. Mental health care providers were 
eligible to participate if they had at least 8 clients on their 
caseload with mood or psychotic disorders, and if they were 
willing to employ the health information technology in 
addition to the regular care they provide.  Of the 54 mental 
health care providers, 28 were recruited from St. Joseph’s 
Health Care (12 community mental health care teams), 12 
from London Health Sciences Centre (2 community mental 
health care teams), 7 from the Canadian Mental Health 
Association (London-Middlesex), and 7 from WOTCH 
Community Mental Health Services. The participating 
mental health care workers consists of 12 Registered Nurses, 
12 Registered Social Workers, 7 Occupational Therapists, 7 
Mental Health Care Managers, 4 Social Service Workers, 3 
Rehabilitation Counselors, 2 Recreational Therapists, 2 
Registered Practical Nurses, 2 Psychiatrists and 3 other (See 
Tables I and II). 
 
 
 
 
 

4
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTION OF COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CARE 
PROVIDERS – AGENCY  
Variable 
Description of Community Mental Health Care 
Providers (N = 54) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Agency 
 
 
 
 
St. Joseph’s Health Care 
London 
29 
53.7 
 
London Health Sciences 
Centre 
11 
20.4 
 
Canadian Mental Health 
Association 
7 
12.9 
 
WOTCH 
Community 
Mental Health Services 
7 
12.9 
 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTION OF COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CARE 
PROVIDERS – OCCUPATION  
Variable 
Description of Community Mental health Care 
Providers  (N = 54) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Occupation 
 
 
 
 
Social Service Worker 
12 
22.2 
 
Registered Nurse 
12 
22.2 
 
Mental 
Health 
Case 
Manager 
7 
13 
 
Occupational Therapist 
7 
13 
 
Registered 
Social 
Worker 
3 
5.6 
 
Rehabilition Counselor 
3 
5.6 
 
Recreational Therapist 
2 
3.7 
 
Registered 
Practical 
Nurse 
2 
3.7 
 
Psychiatrist 
2 
3.7 
 
Other 
4 
7.4 
 
Client participants were recruited from the caseloads of 
participating care providers. Eligible client participants had 
either a mood or a psychotic disorder and were between the 
ages of 18 and 80.  Of the 400 client participants, 192 were 
recruited from St. Joseph’s Health Care, 96 from London 
Health Sciences Centre, 48 from the Canadian Mental Health 
Association (London-Middlesex), and 62 from WOTCH 
Community Mental Health Services (See Table III).  
TABLE III.  
CLIENTS PARTICIPANTS BY AGNECY 
Variable 
Client Participants (N = 410) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Agency 
 
 
 
 
St. Joseph’s Health Care 
London 
192 
48 
 
London Health Sciences 
Centre 
96 
24 
 
Canadian Mental Health 
Association 
48 
12 
 
WOTCH 
Community 
Mental Health Services 
62 
15.5 
 
C. The Lawson SMART record 
The Lawson SMART record was developed in 
partnership with TELUS Health Solutions and an advisory 
group with community, clinical, consumer and technical 
representation. The solution employs TELUS health space™, 
a consumer platform powered by Microsoft® Health 
Vault™. TELUS health space™ is an electronic health care 
system, that allows individuals to store and manage health 
information and to share this information with their care 
providers. The Lawson SMART record is an application 
provided through TELUS health space™ to participants of 
the MHEN project.  
The Lawson SMART record is a web-based application 
that provides individuals with an electronic personal health 
record. Through this record, individuals can store, maintain, 
and manage their personal health information (i.e. list of 
medications, family history, immunization records, allergies, 
care provider contact information, care plans and crisis 
plans). The Lawson SMART record also provides 
individuals with tools to help them in the management of 
their health. For example, as part of the MHEN project, a 
mood monitor was developed. This tool allows individuals to 
determine their mood at any given time and track it 
electronically. Through the Lawson SMART record client 
participants also have the ability to set prompts and 
reminders for themselves, where they can be reminded about 
upcoming appointments, when to take medications or when 
to exercise.  Individuals can also electronically track 
physiological measures such as weight, blood glucose, blood 
pressure and cholesterol.  
Through the MHEN project, the participating mental 
health care providers have electronic access to their 
participating client’s Lawson SMART record. This access 
will allow the mental health care providers to view the 
information within their client’s record, and to communicate 
directly with their clients through the Lawson SMART 
record’s messaging tool. 
D. Training  
As a requirement of the MHEN project, participating 
clients and mental health care providers must complete one 
half-day training session to learn about the Lawson SMART 
record and their handheld device. A training committee with 
representation from the consumer, clinical, community and 
technical perspectives was created to guide the development 
of training content and materials. Each training session was 
structured to include Lawson SMART record and TELUS 
health space™ account creation, a live demonstration of the 
Lawson SMART record, during which the participants 
followed along using their handheld devices, instruction on 
the basic features of their respective handheld devices, and 
delivery of the guidelines associated with the use of their 
handheld devices and the Lawson SMART record. 
Participants also received a training manual which described 
the features and functions of the Lawson SMART record, 
outlined the guidelines for use of the Lawson SMART record 
and their handheld devices, and described the project support 
model.  

5
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Mental health care provider training sessions were held 
in June, 2012. Participants were trained in groups of up to 15 
individuals. Each training session was approximately 3 hours 
in length and was facilitated by a member of the research 
team. Additional training sessions were held in September, 
2012 to provide ongoing support as the Lawson SMART 
record and iPhones were deployed to their clients. The 
research team also developed a support model to manage 
hardware, software and application inquiries from the 
participating mental health care providers.  After client 
training began and mental health care providers began to use 
the application and iPad, the research team did receive 
inquiries ranging from simple password resets to in depth 
support on the Lawson SMART record.   
Client participant training began in July, 2012 and was 
completed in September, 2012.  Clients from Group 1 were 
trained in groups of up to 15 participants per session. Each 
training session was approximately 3 hours in length and was 
facilitated by a member of the research team. Drop in 
sessions were held twice a week throughout the month of 
August and September, 2012 to provide additional support to 
client participants. Initial inquiries to the research team 
ranged from basic iPhone support, email support, phone 
calling support, text messaging support, and downloading of 
applications and music to inquiries about the specific 
features and functions of the Lawson SMART record.  
 Client participant training for Group 2 is scheduled to 
begin in February 2013. Findings obtained through Group 1 
client feedback on training evaluations will be applied to the 
structure and content of Group 2 training sessions, as well as 
to the mental health technology. 
 
E. Data Collection 
Individual interviews with client participants were held 
during the baseline period and then every 6 months for 18 
months (See Fig. 1).   
The quantitative data collected during interviews will 
involve the following eight questionnaires: Demographic 
Form; Quality of Life – Brief Version (QoL-BV); Health, 
Social, Justice Service Use; Medical Outcomes Study 36-
item 
Short 
Form 
Health 
Survey 
(SF-36); 
EQ-5D; 
Community Integration Questionnaire; Adult Consumer 
Empowerment Scale; and a Perception of Smart Technology 
Form. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Interview Timeline 
Focus group sessions will take place at multiple points 
during the study. Group 1 will have the option to participate 
in three focus group sessions: (1) approximately one month 
after receiving the handheld device and a TELUS health 
space™ account to discuss usability and adoption; (2) follow 
up focus group sessions will be held two months thereafter to 
discuss the benefits and pitfalls associated with the 
technology and to form base recommendations for the next 
phase of study (Group 2); and (3) 6 months later to discuss 
future recommendations. Group 2 will also have the 
opportunity to participate in 3 focus group sessions.  They 
will meet in a similar timeframe: (1) approximately one 
month after receiving the handheld device and a TELUS 
health space™ account to discuss usability and adoption; (2) 
follow up focus group sessions will be held two months 
thereafter to discuss the benefits and pitfalls associated with 
the technology; and (3) 6 months later to discuss future 
recommendations. Focus group sessions with mental health 
care providers will also be held at similar time points so that 
issues can be identified and addressed quickly (See Fig. 2). 
The knowledge learned through Group 1, over the initial 
6 months will provide baseline and comparative data to 
understand the client’s perceptions for designs and outcome 
purposes of the technology intervention. Improvements in 
the technology approaches made during the initial 6 month 
period will enhance the tools for Group 2. We are expecting 
different feedback from focus group sessions, one to guide 
development and one to improve what is developed. 
 

6
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 2.  Focus Group Timeline 
IV. 
BASELINE RESULTS 
A. Baseline Interviews 
Preliminary quantitative data analysis of 400 client 
participants (245 men and 155 women) indicates that the 
mean age of the population is 38.48 (SD = 13.792).  A large 
population of client participants reported to be single and 
never married (69.5%), and to be living alone (41.5%).   A 
majority of client participants completed high school 
(44.5%), or just grade school (31%). The most common 
psychiatric diagnoses in this sample population are mood 
disorders (59.25%), psychotic disorders (58.25%), anxiety 
disorders (32%), substance-related disorders (13.75%), 
personality 
disorders 
(6.25%), 
disorders 
of 
childhood/adolescence (5%) and developmental handicaps 
(0.75%).  Most client participants indicated that they have 
been admitted to the psychiatric hospital at least once 
(85.75%) and of those individuals, most have been admitted 
a mean of 7.7 times (SD = 10.815) (See Table IV, V, and 
VI). 
TABLE IV.  
DESCRIPTION OF CLIENT PARTICIPANTS – AGE 
Variable 
Description of Client Participants (N=410) 
Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 
Range 
Age 
38.5 years 
13.8 
18-78 
Age at first contact 
with mental health 
system 
22 years 
9 
3-61 
Estimated 
total 
number 
of 
hospitalization 
7.7 
10.8 
1-100 
 
 
TABLE V.  
DESCRIPTION OF CLIENT PARTICIPANTS – SEX, MARITAL 
STATUS, FAMILY, LIVING ARRANGEMENTS, EDUCATION LEVEL AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
Variable 
 Description of Client Participants (N=410) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Sex 
 
 
 
 
Male 
245 
61.3 
 
Female 
155 
38.8 
Marital Status 
 
 
 
 
Married 
or  
Common Law 
36 
9 
 
Seperated 
Divorce 
83 
20.8 
 
Single-Never 
Married 
278 
69.5 
 
Widowed 
3 
0.8 
Having Children 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
125 
31.3 
 
No 
275 
68.8 
Current 
Living 
Arrangement 
 
 
 
 
Inpatients 
11 
2.8 
 
Lives alone 
166 
41.5 
 
Lives with other 
relative 
20 
5 
 
Lives 
with 
parent(s) 
71 
17.8 
 
Lives 
with 
spouse/partner 
42 
10.5 
 
Lives 
with 
unrelated 
person 
88 
22 
 
Other 
2 
0.5 
Level 
of 
Education 
 
 
 
 
Community 
College/ 
University 
95 
23.9 
 
High School 
178 
44.5 
 
Grade School 
124 
31 
 
Don’t Know 
1 
0.3 
 
Other 
2 
0.5 
Currently 
Employed 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
102 
22.5 
 
No 
298 
74.5 
 
 
 

7
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE VI.  
DESCRIPTION OF CLIENT PARTICIPANTS – PSYCHIATRIC 
DIAGNOSIS AND HOSPITALIZATIONS 
Variable 
Description of Client Participants (N=410) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Pscyhiatric 
Diagnosis 
 
 
 
 
Developmental 
Handicap 
3 
0.75 
 
Anxiety Disorder 
128 
32 
 
Disorder of 
Childhood and 
Adolescence 
20 
5 
 
Organic Disorder 
3 
0.75 
 
Susbtance-related 
Disorder 
55 
13.75 
 
Personality 
Disorder 
25 
6.25 
 
Psychotic Disorder 
233 
58.25 
 
Mood Disorder 
237 
59.25 
 
Other 
10 
2.5 
 
Unknown 
2 
0.5 
Ever had a 
psychiatric 
hospitalization 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
343 
85.75 
 
No 
56 
14 
 
Initial quantitative analysis shows that most client 
participants are generally comfortable with the use of 
technology.  Most indicated that they were either extremely 
comfortable (26.3%) or slightly comfortable (20.3%) with 
technology generally, while only a minority said that they 
were either slightly uncomfortable (4.0%) or extremely 
uncomfortable (5.8%) with technology generally (See Fig. 
3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  How comfortable are you with technology in general? 
A number of individuals owned a phone (90.3%) 
however, less than half of the population (43.3%) owned a 
cell phone (See Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). Most participants 
indicated that they used a phone frequently (73.1%), (See 
Fig. 6). 
Participants also indicated that they had regular access to 
a computer (77%) with a large percentage of the population 
(60.5%) reporting regular access at home (See Fig. 7 and 8). 
Additionally, 
participants 
indicated 
frequent 
use 
of 
computers (43.8%) (Fig. 9) and  most stated that they were 
extremely comfortable (31.2%) or slightly comfortable 
(14.6%) with using a computer, while only a smaller 
percentage of the population indicated that they were either 
slightly uncomfortable (4.5%) or extremely uncomfortable 
(9.8%) with using a computer (See Fig. 10). 
This indicates that since most client participants are 
familiar and comfortable with technology and suggests that 
they will be receptive to the interventions smart technology 
training. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Do you own a phone? 
       
 
Figure 5.  Type of phone owned?     

8
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                
 
Figure 6.  Use of phone? 
 
Figure 7.  Do you currently hace access to a computer on a regular basis? 
 
Figure 8.  Location of access to a computer? 
 
Figure 9.  Use of computer? 
 
Figure 10.  Comfort with computers? 
B. Initial Focus Group Sessions  
Focus group sessions have been completed for the early 
intervention group with both client participants and mental 
health care provider participants. In total there were 5 client 
focus group sessions with 21 participants, and 3 mental 
health care provider focus group sessions with 21 
participants (See Table VII and VIII).  
Overall the feedback was positive and participants gave 
many examples of how the technology improved health care 
and health status. For example, one mental health care 
provider stated that a client he had been seeing for 2 years 
made more progress in the meeting after receiving the 
technology than the 2 years prior. The mental health care 
provider indicated that this was because the client had a 
focus for discussion and was able to use the device to 
organize himself. Client participants gave examples of 
having a better understanding of the patterns of their moods, 
which provided them more sense of control. One client 

9
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
visited an emergency ward for a medical situation and was 
able to access his Lawson SMART record using his iPhone 
and show the emergency staff his list of medications.  
During focus group sessions both clients and providers 
also identified ways the strategy could be further improved. 
Client participants focused on very pragmatic issues such as 
faster log-in, a calendar available on the homepage, and 
pictures of pills. Similarly mental health care providers 
wanted a notification mechanism for messages received from 
their clients and confirmation that clients had received 
messages they had sent. Follow up focus group sessions for 
both clients and mental health care provider participants will 
be held early 2013.   
Phase II development of the Lawson SMART record 
began in December 2012. The project team has based this 
development on feedback from the initial focus group 
sessions. Enhancements to the Lawson SMART record are to 
be delivered early 2013.  Once Phase II developments are 
complete client participants in Group 2, will receive the 
intervention.  
TABLE VII.  
FOCUS GROUP SESSIONS: MENTAL HEALTH CARE 
PROVIDER PARTICIPANTS 
Variable 
Focus Group Sessions:  Mental Health Care Provider 
Participants (N=21) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Agency 
 
 
 
 
St. Joseph’s Health Care 
London 
5 
23.81 
 
London Health Sciences 
Centre 
7 
33.33 
 
Canadian Mental Health 
Association 
4 
19.05 
 
WOTCH 
Community 
Mental Health Services 
5 
23.81 
TABLE VIII.  FOCUS GROUP SESSIONS: CLIENT PARTICIPANTS 
Variable 
Focus Group Sessions: Client Participants (N=21) 
Sub Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Agency 
 
 
 
 
St. Joseph’s Health Care 
London 
9 
42.86 
 
London Health Sciences 
Centre 
7 
33.33 
 
Canadian Mental Health 
Association 
2 
9.52 
 
WOTCH 
Community 
Mental Health Services 
3 
14.29 
V. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
Baseline data was complete in August, 2012. Training 
and implementation of the first 200 participants began on 
July 30, 2012 and was completed September 2012. 
Additional data, including use of technology, will be 
available in January, 2013.  
The overall hypothesis is that smart health information 
technology will improve quality of life and reduce health 
care system costs. To test this hypothesis we will use an 
evaluation framework that includes four levels of analysis: 
effectiveness, economic, ethical and policy. Development 
and testing of a more cost-effective means of addressing 
mental health issues will increase the ability to provide the 
best practice at an affordable cost which benefits consumers 
and taxpayers. 
With the introduction of the Lawson SMART record 
several outcomes are expected. For example, with the 
introduction of medication prompts, scheduling, ongoing 
monitoring and regular communication, it is expected that 
clients will experience an improvement in mental health. 
Additionally, with the introduction of medication prompts, 
monitoring, and prescription renewal reminders, it is 
expected that there will be a resulting improvement in 
overall medication adherence. 
The availability of personal health information to a client 
is foundational to empowerment and to the effective 
management of an individual’s own health and wellness. The 
ability to store, maintain and manage one’s personal health 
information as provided through the Lawson SMART record 
and is expected to increase individual empowerment.  
The Lawson SMART record also provides a forum for 
communication between client participants and their mental 
health care providers. It is expected that with this increased 
communication, individuals will have greater access to the 
mental health care system. With this greater access, it is 
expected that mental health care providers will be able to 
intervene when clients are experiencing earlier stages of 
crisis.  It is also expected that with greater access to 
community mental health care resources, there will be a 
decrease in the use of expensive emergency mental health 
care services.   
Overall, it is expected that with the introduction of the 
Lawson SMART record, client participants will experience 
an improvement in their mental health and obtain greater 
access to the mental health care system.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The MHEN project is focused on putting technology in 
the hands of clients of the mental health system and their 
mental health care providers to demonstrate how to more 
effectively and efficiently deliver mental health care 
services. Employing the Lawson SMART record, the MHEN 
project will evaluate the use of Smart technologies in mental 
health care on four levels: effectiveness, economic, ethical 
and policy.   Smart technologies, have the potential to 
improve the quality of care for people who access mental 
health services.  Continued evaluation of personalized health 
records and specific mental health applications will provide 
important information for mental health system re-design. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Forchuk, C. Mental health engagement network: Connecting 
clients with their health team. IARIA-Smart 2012. May 27-
June 1, 2012. Stuttgart, Germany. 
[2] McAllister, J. “The healthcare interview: Micheal Kirby 
breaks down barriers to better mental health care”.  Canadian 
Health Care Network. 2009 
[3] Canadian Mental Health Association. Understanding mental 
illness. 
Retrieved 
December 
16, 
2011, 
from 
http://www.cmha.ca/bins/content_page.asp ?cid =3&lang=1 

10
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[4] StatsCanada.Canadian community health survey mental 
health and well-being. Retrieved December 15, 2011, from 
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-617-x/index.html 
[5] Klein, B., Meyer, D., Austin, D.W., Kyrios, M. “Anxiety 
online – a virtual clinic: Preliminary outcome following 
completion of five fully automated treatment programs for 
anxiety disorders and symptoms.” Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 13(4), 2011. 
[6] Titov N, Andrews G, Davies M, McIntyre K, Robinson E, 
Solley, K. Internet treatment for depression: A randomized 
controlled trial comparing clinician vs. technician assistance. 
PLoS ONE 5(6): e10939. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010939 
[7] Granholm, E., Ben-Zeev, D., Link, P., Bradshaw, K., and 
Holden, 
J. 
“Mobile 
assessment 
and 
treatment 
for 
schizophrenia (MATS).” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2011.   
[8] Montes, J.M., et al., A short message service (SMS)-based 
strategy for enhancing adherence to antipsychotic medication 
in 
schizophrenia. 
Psychiatry 
Research, 
2012, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2012.07.034 
[9] M3 Information. My mood monitor – Monitor my mood.  
Retrieved 
December 
20, 
2011 
from 
http://www.mymoodmonitor.com/ 
[10] MedHelp.). Track your mood: Get your own personal mood 
tracker.Retrieved 
December 
21, 
2011 
from 
http://www.medhelp.org/land/mood-tracker 
[11] Sterns, A. and Collins, S.  Transforming the personal digital 
assistant into a useful health-enhancing technology for adults 
and older adults. Generations, 28(4), 2007. 
[12] Healthcare Technology Today. Google discontinuing google 
health. PT in Motion, 3(8), 25. Retrieved Novmeber 2011 
from http://www.apta.org/PTinMotion/ 
 
 
 
 
 

