Health Information Exchange and Care Integration
Kari Harnoa, Pekka Ruotsalainenb, Pirkko Nykänenc , Kyösti Koprad
a Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of  Medicine, Helsinki, Finland
b National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
c University of Tampere, Department of Computer Sciences , Finland
d Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, ICT and Medical Engineering, Finland
Abstract
The Finnish health care system is a mixture of public and
private services. Its governance and funding is highly
decentralized. Contrary to governmental policies and
expectations, autonomous decisions by local authorities
and service providers associated with lack of information
models and common technical standards have led to a
broad spectrum of one-off ICT –systems with little tech-
nical and semantic interoperability.
National strategies to overcome these challenges have
prompted initiatives to create sharable electronic health
records (EHR) by supporting a collection of federated
interoperable repositories with regional middleware ser-
vices.  In the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa
an established regional eHealth network (RHIN) connects
24 public hospitals, 29 municipal health centers (primary
care) and two private health care clinics.  There are 7.500
end-users, information from 1,4 million citizens and 40
million links to EPRs.
Migration to a national eHealth network (NHIN) provid-
ing a platform for delivery of a longitudinal view on pa-
tient’s relevant health records (summary care record) will
assist care integration between providers and improve the
safety and quality of healthcare.
Keywords:
Electronic patient records, interoperability, health infor-
mation exchange, shared EHR, regional and national
information networks, core data set, summary care record
Introduction
Parts of this paper have been presented at the Second
International Conference on the Digital Society and pub-
lished in the proceedings of this conference [1]. In this
paper policies and decisions aiming to improve coordina-
tion of care and healthcare information exchange (HIE)
are first described, followed by evidence of benefits from
two controlled studies.
Despite the adoption of appropriate and timely sharing of
patient data within the same care settings across legally
distinct organizations (RHIN) policies were newly re-
vised upgrading regional HIE to a national infrastructure
and this migration process and context are described.
Policies for coordinating care and improving health
information exchange
Finland’s progress in the realm of information society
thus far and its opportunities for future success could be
rated as mediocre or good.  Finland has managed to re-
main in the running, but has not achieved a significant
competitive advantage.  The ingredients for success are
there, and our capacity to exploit them will be determined
over the course of the next ten to fifteen years.
A number of recommendations by the OECD for incre-
mental changes to certain structural features of the Fin-
nish health system underline the transition phase of the
system and the continuing need for building on the
strengths of the system in the future [2].
In the healthcare domain 96 % of primary care health
centres, 95 % of hospital districts and 89 % of private
service providers use an electronic patient record (EPR).
So far, the uptake of ICT in the field of social welfare and
health care has not yielded sufficient gains at the national
level [3].  The level of investment in ICT has been rela-
tively low in this sector – approximately two per cent of
all annual health care expenditure.
The government led project to restructure municipalities
and services aims to diminish the waste of decentralised
governance and merge municipalities to form health care
areas with populations 20.000 – 30.000.  These mergers
are supported by a national development plan, Kaste
Programme, that defines the development objectives for
social and healthcare services in the next few years and
the main measures for achieving them. By the end of
2008, the number of municipalities has decreased by 16
% since the legislation was approved in 2007,  but it is
too early to distinguish effects on healthcare services or
organizational developments.
Local experimentation and reform in the Finnish health
system have so far involved one or more of three types of
46
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

organisational development: regional cooperation among
municipalities; integration of primary and secondary care
and outsourcing of services to alternative providers.
Regional cooperation has attracted most interest, because
The Act on Experiments with Seamless Service Chains in
2000 has provided the legislative foundation for regional
health information organizations. Initial investment fund-
ing for regional eHealth networks was made available by
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.
The previous National Coordinator for Health Informa-
tion Technology in the USA, David Brailer argued that
the acid test for regional health information organizations
(RHIO) would be a governance model that brings in all
stakeholders [4]. The Act on Experiments with Seamless
Service Chains did not include directives, nor did the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health issue formal guid-
ance for building the RHIO governing body responsible
for its accountability, authority and oversight.
A formal application to the Ministry by joint authorities
of hospital districts or municipalities was the prerequisite
for acceptance of stakeholders to join. After preliminary
consideration of applications three hospital districts
(Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa, Hospital
District of Satakunta and Hospital District of Pirkanmaa)
were approved in 2001 for the primary phase of the na-
tional experiment on regional cooperation through ICT.
No strategies existed previously for regional information
management and from the year 2000 The Act on the Ex-
periments on Seamless Service Chains opened a window
of opportunity for improvement, a new paradigm for
cooperation between organizations and transformation of
healthcare. Similar solutions for cross-organizational
healthcare information exchange (HIE) were pursued at
the same time in other countries or regions [5-7].
A few small rural regions have advanced even further in
cooperation since 2001 and integrated specialized and
primary health care services into a regional service sys-
tem, which applies one electronic patient record system.
This integrated model removes administrative boundaries
and incorporates seamless processes between the provid-
ers.  These regional health service districts cover basic
secondary care.
Clinically integrated systems have been indicated to be
the next step in health reform [8]. The increasing preva-
lence of chronic disease, and the need to improve the
quality of specialist services like diabetes care, will re-
quire not only closer collaboration between providers but
also clinical integration between primary and secondary
care and the development of clinical networks.
Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa
The Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa (HUS)
comprises 24 hospitals in the province of Uusimaa, which
includes the Finish capital of Helsinki, in Southern
Finland. In order to organise the provision of specialised
medical care, Finland is subdivided into 20 hospital dis-
tricts. The HUS district is the largest of these. As a joint
authority it was founded in 2000 to provide health ser-
vices for the 1,434,513 residents in its 30 member mu-
nicipalities.
Among the HUS hospitals Helsinki University Central
Hospital is nationally responsible for treating special,
severe and rare illnesses. In 2006, more than 430,000
different people were treated in the HUS, roughly
310,000 of them outpatients.
The record locator service is a central reference database
(register) containing links to patient data stored in their
legacy systems [9]. The upgrading of the legacy systems
is made possible by application integration across the
extended regional infrastructure. Provider access is possi-
ble by web browsers and patient information includes
(primary care/hospital outpatient) visits, critical data,
images and reports, laboratory results, referrals and dis-
charge letters. All data is sorted according to social secu-
rity coding, which is standard procedure in Finland.
Standard API connections between primary care informa-
tion systems and the reference data have been installed.
The documents are produced in CDA R1/R2 format and
messages transferred in a standard pattern (HL 7/XML).
The service was launched in 2003 and presently most
(29/30) municipalities, as well as all hospitals (24), are
connected to the RHIN and apply the record locator ser-
vice for regional exchange of information. Currently
7.500 professional end-users view over 200.000 docu-
ments (x-rays and documents) monthly.
The process of  information sharing and archiving of EPR
documents will be enabled in the future by the centralized
eArchive instead of the RHIN. The RHIN locator service
may be transformed to a centralized indexing service and
a shift in the administration of patients’ consents for shar-
ing information within the eHealth Network is to be ex-
pected. The role of the RHIN may be seen in the future as
an enabler in healthcare delivery of services by orches-
trating processes and work flow.
Established and Perceived Benefits of RHIN
In the past, patient information located in different or-
ganizations was inaccessible online for the professional.
The only way to access information was to order the
papers by mail. In addition to the costs and long delivery
time, the difficulty was to know which systems contained
relevant information. The regional RHIN Navitas service
has been designed to overcome these barriers and to en-
able a seamless, cross-organizational access to patient
records in the HUS region.
The interest in interoperability has increased with the
growing number of EPR installations and HIE needs and
as a result of reports on the role of information in relation
to medical errors, patient safety and healthcare quality.
Interoperability has been defined as the ability of two or
more systems or components to exchange information
and to use and understand the information that has been
exchanged [10].
47
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

When different levels of interoperability for healthcare
information system applications are considered, preserv-
ing the content (syntactic) and meaning (semantic) of the
exchanged data must be eluded. The evolution of interop-
erability in the healthcare domain has mostly developed
through information integration across the entire health-
care chain based on standards (e.g. CDA) and messaging
(e.g. HL7) supported often by vendor specific solutions.
Navitas is a regional service designed to overcome the
organizational and interoperability barriers restricting the
use of clinical information between secondary and pri-
mary health care. Navitas is provided as a fully hosted
ASP (application service provision) service to HUS and
the municipalities in the joint authority of the Hospital
District by a consortium of three vendors. The system
was originally developed as part of an EU funded Inter-
Care project together with HUS and the participating
companies. It has been originally in use since 2001, but
the present version was implemented in 2003.
The core of the federated model allowing participants to
view and share patient information is the Navitas record
locator service. It is a service which maintains a regional
directory of links pointing to patient and treatment infor-
mation located in any of the connected health care infor-
mation repository systems in the region: each participat-
ing organization has its own patient information system in
addition to the 11 presently stand-alone patient informa-
tion systems in HUS. HUS has also many other clinical
information systems e.g. the laboratory system and HUS-
pacs, which have all been integrated to the link directory.
The regional health information network architecture for
healthcare information exchange in HUS is described in
figure 1.
At the moment there are 15 different patient information
systems in some 55 organizations connected to the locator
service. Specific adapter software has been installed lo-
cally into each of the systems through which links are fed
into the locator service. Links are HL7 (Health level 7)/
CDA (clinical document architecture) compliant mes-
sages containing the identification of a patient and a short
description of the contents of the particular patient record.
No actual records or documents are stored into the locator
service directory.
Navitas has a regional user database and centralized au-
thentication and authorization services; this enables the
participating organizations to have complete control over
their own users. The health care professionals can access
Navitas from their personal workstations using a web
browser. The data transfer is encrypted and only private,
dedicated networks (VPN) are used to transmit the data.
Viewing of the patient data through the links requires the
patient’s informed consent. When clicking a link, a win-
dow will open up to display the actual clinical informa-
tion. The information is queried by the Navitas locator
service from the patient information system itself. The
view provided by the locator service is a read-only view,
structured in a user-friendly and visual way.
The Navitas locator service is available today for all
health care professionals in the Hospital District. The
directory contains information from 1.4 million citizens.
Currently there are over 40 million links in the database.
The number of links has been minimized in order to make
it easier for the professional to get a holistic view on the
patient’s medical history. In HUS, for example, several
visits are grouped into one care period.
The Regional eHealth Network Navitas is actively used
by 7.500 professionals in different organizations. The
monthly access number to the directory exceeds 200.000
and over 2 million annually. More than half of the quaries
that result in access, stem from the need to view images
and the rest from document retrieval.
Two controlled studies are described in brief to demon-
strate how shared healthcare information has revised the
current practice between primary and secondary care.
They not only facilitate the delivery of improved services,
but create information system benefits by improving the
performance of healthcare processes.
Case 1 Information exchange with eReferrals.
The first case represents healthcare information exchange
with an eReferral system integrating primary and secon-
dary care physicians by allowing interactive eConsulta-
tions between healthcare professionals. The focus is not
only on the 5 - 10 % of patients, who are generally re-
ferred by GPs for specialized care, but also on some 30 %
of primary care patients, who represent actual cases
where eConsultation referrals to the hospital specialist
were deemed necessary by GPs.
We have set up a wide-area referral network between
primary care and three university hospitals [9,11].  This
network was initially launched in 1990. In the university
hospitals all specialties are involved.  In 2002 there were
67,000 e-referrals transferred between the Helsinki Uni-
versity Hospitals and primary care.  The solutions extend
from the initial VPN use (Vantaa) to EDIFACT standard
(Espoo) and HL-7 (Helsinki). A transition to standardized
HL7 messages utilizing C-way message transfer systems
(HUSway) through a single Network Access Point (HUS-
nap) has been implemented. Over 100 000 ereferral mes-
sages (40 % of total) were transferred between health care
providers in 2005 and by the end of 2007 the number of
eReferrals has increased to 200.000 (70 % of total).
The eReferral between primary and secondary care not
only speeds up the transfer of the referral, but also im-
proves the access to service by offering an option for
interaction in the form of eConsultation between general
practitioners and hospital specialists.  By sharing infor-
mation and knowledge remote eConsultations create a
new working environment for integrated delivery of
eServices between the health care providers. Interactive
eConsultations enable supervised care leading to the re-
duction of outpatient first visits (-36 %  for clinical visit
intended referrals and - 50 % for total referrals) in the
outpatient departments for internal  medicine, i.e. more
timely appointments and cost containment.
The implementation of the referral system increased the
number of referrals from primary care. The total number
of referrals to the outpatient clinic was 7,5 vs 2,8 referrals
per 1,000 inhabitants over the age of 15 for ereferrals and
paper referrals. Despite the increase in the number of
48
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

eReferrals, the running costs of the outpatient department
were 20 % lower than with the traditional process. The
direct costs for applying the eReferral were only one
seventh of the costs for traditional outpatient visits (32 €
vs 211 €).   The patients needed fewer repeat visits to the
outpatient clinic after being first consulted through the
eReferral.
From the patient’s viewpoint eConsultations provide just-
in-time expert opinions from hospital outpatient depart-
ment specialists, make the expertise accessible more
quickly than the traditional process and reduce the need
for low value or unnecessary visits to the hospital. Eight
out of ten patients preferred to continue receiving medical
care in this way.
eReferrals and eConsultations particularly had an effect
on the care of less urgent patients in contrast to urgent
eReferrals. Only one out of ten patients with urgent (visit
within one week) eReferrals to the outpatient clinic re-
ceived eConsultations whereas over 50 % of less urgent
patients were managed with consultation alone. This
allows the urgent patients to have access and be examined
at the outpatient clinic within the set target time range.
Case 2 Image exchange with RHIN.
The second case describes HIE benefits from transferring
and viewing digital images remotely with the regional
eHealth network  by primary care physicians and ortho-
paedic surgeons.   This seamless radiological chain, be-
sides creating a tool for remote radiological eConsulta-
tions, also discloses some difficulties in compliance with
care pathway performance and the need for better integra-
tion of processes between primary and secondary care.
The picture archiving and communication system (PACS)
project (HUSpacs) was initiated in the Hospital District of
Helsinki and Uusimaa in 1998 and the first two hospitals
became filmless in 1999. All hospitals in the catchment
area of HUS became filmless by 2004. Installing one of
the largest regional PAC systems in the Hospital District
of Helsinki and Uusimaa produces roughly 1 million
imaging examinations with 20 terabytes of storage capac-
ity.
HUSpacs infrastructure includes local short-term archives
and a centralized long-term or back-up archive, which are
connected with a wide-area network (ATM). Different
modalities are integrated by applying standards (HL7,
Dicom), which allow the radiological information system
(RIS) and hospital information system (HIS) to share
patient information.
These archives also serve the regional eHealth network in
distributing images and sharing radiological reports be-
tween hospitals and primary care, supporting HIE be-
tween healthcare professionals in the care process. The
framework for the assessment of the regional HUSpacs
after re-engineering of hospital and external processes has
been previously described [12].
The assessment was performed in two health centers. The
municipality of Vantaa contracts all its images from the
HUS hospital in Vantaa (Peijas Hospital). Tikkurila,
which is a suburb of Vantaa with 45.000 inhabitants, has
a secure connection (VPN) to the record locator service
and HUSpacs archive, i.e. in the health center GPs may
view the clinical and radiological information docu-
mented in Peijas. The health center of Kerava, a munici-
pality with 30.000 inhabitants and approximately at simi-
lar distance from Peijas Hospital, but without the avail-
ability of digital image transfer, served as control and
received the images from Peijas by mail delivery.
In 2003, the radiological HUSpacs chain between Peijas
Hospital and the health centers was evaluated. Based on
request, previous images of the same anatomical region
were pre-fetched for the reporting radiologist, films were
digitized and stored in the HUSpacs database. These
images are also routed to the web-server in Vantaa. The
radiologist dictates the report to the RIS, which sends an
HL7 message containing the report to Tikkurila.
The primary aim was to assess the effect of the regional
HUSpacs process (production, archiving, viewing of
images, as well as remote consultations) on improved
access to or quality of care. We also inquired about the
satisfaction of personnel in these institutions to the re-
gional HUSpacs application.
The setting of the trial was comparative and included
patients with conservatively treated fractures of the ankle
or wrist. They had to be first diagnosed in Peijas Hospital
and later controlled by their general practitioners in the
Tikkurila or Kerava Health Center. The availability of
images and imaging reports, as well as the impacts of
these were compared in the digital health center (study
center) in Tikkurila with a health center (control center)
in Kerava, where GPs were lacking HIE services.
The study group consisted of 60 patients with conserva-
tively treated ankle or wrist fractures – 41 participants in
the digital and 19 in the traditional follow-up group. The
clinical follow-up information on encounters in the health
centers was collected from electronic patient records after
the patients had given their consent to this. Activity based
costing was applied for personnel cost evaluation and
investments were available from the HUSpacs project.
The performance measures in the process were set to
evaluate how often patients actually received the recom-
mended therapy of care pathways designed by Peijas
Hospital for the two conservatively treated fracture
groups. We also examined  the quality of the control
visits in respect to the availability of image information
and assessed the direct costs for processing images in
both groups of fracture patients.
The quality of processes were superior in the digital
group, since the GPs had available the primary incident
images for all the 41 patients, whereas in the traditional
process none of the GPs could track the primary images
during the first control visit. The whole process included
122 programmed visits to Tikkurila health center and for
only two visits (1,6 %) the GP was unable to apply the
regional eHealth network for sharing images or reports
due to web service problems in their work stations. In-
stead, in these cases they acquired the image information
from their health center radiological unit or booked a later
control call for the patient.
49
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Although the primary images were missing for the first
visit, plain films in Kerava were later available for fol-
low-up, because the control radiological examinations
were performed in the health center. However, the time
for preparing the digital process in Tikkurila by nursing
and administrative staff was only 16 % of the staff time
needed in the traditional work process in Kerava. After
investments were included the costs for applying HUS-
pacs for the regional image transfer, were nevertheless 50
% lower than in the traditional film process. However, no
significant differences existed in activity based costing
for clinical follow-up visits.
The orthopedic and the GP could view the same image in
real-time (figure 2).  These eConsultations were available
once a week for GPs in the digital health center, but GPs
from both municipalities also requested radiological con-
sultations at a similar rate. These consultation reports
were available in the digital process on the same or next
day, whereas it took three days for the reports to reach
Kerava by mail delivery.
Migration process to national health infor-
mation network
The integration of healthcare services has been pursued in
Finland by issuing a bill (The New Health Care Act) in
2007 to be considered as the basis for new healthcare
legislation. There is good fit with the English integrated
health service reform model to the previously described
rural experiments of Finnish health care, to the proposed
new health act and to application of the regional eHealth
network services. Still there would remain competition
between public and private organizations, although out-
sourcing and private-public-partnerships have created
collaboration alongside competition.
The Finnish Parliament passed in 2007 an umbrella legis-
lation mandating the building of a centralized national
eArchive and secure communication network connecting
all health service providers. Another corollary act re-
quires the creation of a National ePrescription service.
The statutory contractor for the national eArchiving and
ePrescription services is the Social Insurance Institute
(SII) [13]. Public and private healthcare providers and
pharmacies, responsible for documenting and managing
health care information in their legacy systems, are re-
quired to use the national services for archiving of docu-
ments and prescriptions. They are also obliged to modify
their ICT applications accordingly [14].
The national migration plan from regional or local EPR -
systems to the NHIN and interoperable EHR have been a
combination of following activities:
-
the development of legal framework for shared
EHRs and ePrescriptions,
-
the defining of responsibilities between the na-
tional actors (e.g. the Ministry of Social Affairs
and  Health, SII, National Institute for Health
and Welfare, National Supervisory Authority for
Welfare and Health and the Association of Fin-
nish Municipal Authorities),
-
the development of a common structured core
data set for EHRs (e.g. common headings, clas-
sifications and terms),
-
selection of  technical standards both for com-
munication and long term archiving of EHRs,
-
the definition of the technical architecture for
NHIN,
-
the development of use-cases both for the ePre-
scription and eArchiving services,
-
selection of vendors for the development and
implementation of national services, and
-
the creation of certification requirements for the
NHIN, regional and local EPR-systems and
ePrescribing services.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health has the author-
ity for coordinating the transition process, creation of
decrees, development of use-cases and guidelines for
system integration. SII is responsible for deploying and
maintaining the eArchive, national ePresciption services
and e-services for citizens.
The Institute for Health and Welfare (previously National
R & D Centre for Welfare and Health) is liable for the
content of terminological services, development and
maintaining national codes and classifications. A code
and terminology server for semantic interoperability has
been in place for RHINs and will be scaled for national
use by the National Institute for Health and Welfare.
The National Supervisory Authority for Welfare and
Health (Valvira) is obliged to create national authoriza-
tion and identification services for both healthcare profes-
sionals (e.g. doctors and nurses) and for service organiza-
tions. These services are based on PKI-system and the use
of health professional cards (HPC). Valvira also offers
on-line attribute services including information on the
engagement roles of healthcare professionals and their
subsequent justification to view patient information.
Health service provider organizations (e.g. hospital dis-
tricts, community-wide enterprises, public and private
health or medical centers and pharmacies) have a major
role in this migration process. Because patient data is sent
to the eArchive as documents including standardized
metafile and body (HL7 CDA standard), present EPR-
systems must incorporate many new features. The most
demanding of them is the extraction of patient data items
from present RDB-files. Extracted data must then be
transformed into the harmonized document form using
nationally defined terms and classifications. ePrescription
applications need to be integrated both functionally and
technically to present EPR software. Finally all service
provider organizations should implement HPCs and PKI-
services to enable trusted communication with ePrescrib-
ing and eArchiving services.
In spring 2007 the vendor (Fujitsu Services Ltd) for the
national eServices was chosen and has initiated the opera-
tion of the project in September 2007. First pilots for
ePrescriptions and eDocuments are planned in 2009.
The process to determine the migratory procedures from a
regional to a national health information network applica-
tion is currently being considered based on specifications
50
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

that were proposed before the summer 2008 by a cluster
of hospital district and RHIN service providers [15].
Roadmap to NHIN
Although some hospital districts adopted a federated
model for regional HIE, a central data repository based on
a single vendor solution was chosen by several smaller
hospital districts due to lack of coordinated efforts to
strive for a common integration and architecture strategy.
A national health information network would be achiev-
able by allowing integration of federated or centralized
regional eHealth networks to share EPR information, but
to circumvent the challenges of interoperability between
hospital districts the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health
had to revisit its information strategy and architecture.
The updated strategy and communication architecture for
health care drawn by the Ministry of Social Affairs and
Health has set the following targets:
o
for semantic interoperability all EPR-systems should
implement a common core data set for EHRs and use
HL7 CDA.
o
communication between EPR-systems and the
eArchive shall be based on a standardized message
system (e.g. HL7CDA-messages. XML-formats and
SOAP envelopes)
o
all patient records will be archived into a logically
single national archive
o
new national architecture, incl. legacy systems,
RHINs and national services, must be trusted. Two
new acts, EU directive 95 and Act on Patient’s
Rights form the basis for privacy protection and se-
curity
The core data set is a compilation of the key information
relating to the health and medical care of the patient [16].
The uniform structured data in an EPR are created
chronologically as a summary of the periods of medical
care and/or consultations. The data are entered by either
the healthcare professionals or persons carrying out the
data inclusion. The purpose of the core data set is to pro-
vide a general picture of the patient’s health and medical
history and the related treatment and instruction.
The core data can be used as a link to the detailed medical
and patient record data. On the other hand, core data can
also be sunk straight into the text. Appropriate document
modification may be applied to produce a view of the
record which shows the core data or part of the core data.
It is also possible to prepare from the structured core data
summary care reports or a care plan. These can be utilized
for continuum of care, quality control, decision support
and research.
In the Finnish NHIN patient records are transferred to the
eArchive in the form of documents. For secure long term
archiving, the data structure must include a metafile with
multi-faced security policy. This metafile should consist
of the following information:
o
used security policy
o
unique identification of data producer, patient
and organization
o
context and  purpose information of the data
o
the nature of data
o
information for purposes data can be disclosed
o
information when patients consent is required
for disclosure of data
This national EHR-archive will disclose records in the
form of HL7CDA document if necessary legal and other
conditions exist. The centralized eArchive forms the basis
of the future collection for citizens’ life-life long health
history. In the future the eArchive will be the point of
record sharing in Finland.
The federated data sharing in hospital districts faced deci-
sions on how to migrate from a regional to a national
HIE. Technically there were three different variations: (a)
regional locator services remain separate from the na-
tional eArchive, (b) regional locator services and national
eArchive functions are coordinated and they share work
loads, and (c) regional locator services remain between
legacy systems and national eArchive [11].
The two latter variations – integration and active partici-
pant – have remained theoretical, because they would not
bring additional advantages, but only costs. They have
therefore been discarded from further consideration and
discussion.
The first option induces a set of regional operations and
processes to be continued after the deployment of the
national eArchive. In radiology this would mean that
images would be stored in the national long term archive
after six months, but other images could be readily ap-
plied regionally for viewing in secondary and primary
care from a regional short-term PACS archive.  This
consideration stems from the need for availability of
information intensive images (f.ex. dynamic magnetic
resonance images) in clinical practice and requirements
for network capacity to transfer these images across dif-
ferent settings.  These demands may not be otherwise
always met.
In case regional locator services would be more suitable
than the national eArchive for information search, con-
sideration for applying regional eHealth networks in these
circumstances might be substantiated. The data-sharing
solution of regional eHealth networks would also enable
access to patient encounter data that is not yet stored in
the national repository, but resides only in the local EPR.
The data is transferred to the national eArchive only after
the approval of the encounter.
Regional booking and eReferral systems which are incor-
porated into regional eHealth networks would be applica-
ble in this option. Both of these systems are presently
under construction in the national architecture and need to
be reconsidered later. Chronic disease and care coordina-
tion strategies are being planned and measuring  perform-
ance indicators will call for data warehouse solutions in
order for outcome evaluation and resource allocation to
be applied regionally. These requirements have now been
partly solved by applying improved mapping procedures
to link effectively disparate patient information that is not
in structured form (core data set).
Health information exchange in RHINs should therefore
be established for those services that need to be preserved
51
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

or partly developed for regional care coordination. These
services are suggested as:
o
regional governance services (e.g. regional resource
planning, booking and accounting, regional man-
agement)
o
regional primary care accident and emergency ser-
vices (f.ex. acute care portal supported by mapping
of data from disparate EPRs)
o
regional registries (f.ex. chronic care disease regis-
tries in diabetes)
o
regional imaging (f.ex. short term archives in radiol-
ogy, fundus and endoscopy image managing)
o
regional consulting services (f.ex. consultation mar-
kets for public and private experts)
o
regional user and use management
These regional services may be acquired and imple-
mented with present regional eHealth networks. The
regional services may support in synergy the national
infrastructure and distribute specific services that are not
provided by NHIN. The road map needs to be discussed
and developed in coordination with hospital districts
operating federated models of HIE.
Certification is an integral part of the migration process to
the NHIN. Its central role is to establish trust in all stake-
holders. This means that the NHIN as a whole and all its
parts fulfill regulatory and other mandatory requirements.
Furthermore, the NHIN should meet functional and tech-
nical requirements. It is also mandatory for all RHIN and
local EHR-systems connected to the national services to
possess the same level of functionality, security and pri-
vacy protection.
In the context of this migration process certification has
been defined as a process confirming that a system or
component complies with its specified requirements and
is acceptable for operational use [17]. Certification has
been divided into two separate processes, the develop-
ment of certification requirements and the practical certi-
fication by an authorized organization using previously
developed certification requirements.
As a part of the migration process to the NHIN, the Min-
istry of Social Affairs and Health initiated a project
(TJSERT-project) to develop basic certification criteria
for ePrescribing and eArchiving processes. Requirements
were developed during the years 2007-2008 by the Na-
tional R&D Center for Welfare and Health and University
of Kuopio. Certification requirements were developed for
three basic areas: security and privacy protection, inter-
operability and functionality.
In the initial phase of the project it was necessary to de-
velop a new method for creating certification criteria for
large ICT-systems such as NHIN (LS-CeRM, Large-scale
Systems Certification Requirements Methodology). This
four-layer graphical method was then used to develop
concrete and practical certification requirements. One
integral part of the LS-CeRM method is that it allows to
validate in practice that requirements are fulfilled [18].
For ePrescribing systems a total of 141 certification tar-
gets were recognized (53 for EPR-systems and 88 for
pharmacies), and 457 separate criteria developed. In
eArchiving 41 targets were established and 109 criteria
prepared. From all targets 20 are compatible for both
ePrescription and eArching systems. Because in ePre-
scribing many use-cases were available, it was possible to
develop a detailed set of requirements. For eArching
systems no use-cases were at our disposal.
Any provider aiming to use the national eArching or
ePrescribing services need to comply and fulfill the certi-
fication criteria developed in the TJSERT-project. Con-
sidering the present state of art of RHIN and EPR systems
this can not be achieved instantly. Therefore every re-
quirement was classified for its urgency and three ur-
gency classes (1, 2 and 3) are applied. Class one forms
the mandatory basic level.  The Ministry of Social Affairs
and Health has in the end of 2008 selected class 1 re-
quirements for ePrescribing, and first ePrescribing sys-
tems will be certified in the spring of 2009. Later this
year level 1 requirements for EPRs to be connected to the
eArchiving system will be selected.
The roadmap should implement a holistic view on health
care information infrastructure in such a way that local,
regional and national services form a comprehensive
system that delivers services at all health system levels
and improve the effectiveness of various subsystems.
Key points in the national eHealth roadmap are  applica-
tion of harmonised architecture approaches and use of
standards in all development efforts. The existing and
working regional systems should form the basis for future
national infrastructure and these current RHINs should be
modified to serve also the national requirements for
health data management.
Discussion
The social model in Finland resembles the Nordic type
based on high taxation and public health care services
provided by autonomic municipalities. This decentraliza-
tion has resulted in investments on one-off electronic
patient records needing networking and integration with
different stakeholders. As a consequence, federated re-
gional health IT models were developed supported by
legislation and funding.
Transformation in healthcare has been slow, nevertheless.
This may depend on the pace of information technology
adoption, since 80 per cent of the technology in use over
the period 1995-2005 is less than ten years old, but 80
percent of the workforce was trained more than ten years
ago [19]. It was therefore somewhat unexpected that
experienced Finnish physicians considered information
technology in healthcare to have led to greater efficiency
and facilitated information retrieval [20].
These results are part of an extensive physician survey in
2003 and represent comments from 480 physicians,
whose age was between 40 and 55 years at the time of the
survey. The physicians who expressed opinions about
changes in their work represented only 18 % of the re-
sponders to the survey, which undermines the general
applicability and reliability of the result.
52
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Achieving reforms of the social model will not be easy
and most of the innovations need to be introduced at the
national level [21]. The role of the Ministry of Social
Affairs and Health warranted the change in healthcare
information technology (HIT) architecture from regional
to a more centralized eHealth network, although inte-
grated care will remain for the most part at regional level.
The information architecture model is not a pure central-
ized form, but rather a hybrid, that is dependent on legacy
systems and deployed on a service oriented architecture
(SOA).
The consequence of this regional cooperation may be
envisioned applying theories and practice of the social
life of information [21].  People with similar practices
and similar resources develop similar identities.  These
common practices allow people to form social networks
along which knowledge about that practice can travel
rapidly and be assimilated readily.
Two types of networks may be created – networks of
practice and communities of practice.  In the first net-
work, professionals may be more loosely connected than
in the second network, where they are working together
on the same or similar tasks.  These new types of collabo-
ration may be used to organize regional health districts
into a cluster matrix organisation.  Horizontal relation-
ships make up communities of practice, whilst vertical
relationships link shared practices as demonstrated by the
eReferral and eConsultation applications.
These two types lend themselves to transformation of
healthcare and coexist in the integration models for pri-
mary and secondary care [8]. Hospitals would be joined
with medical groups or primary care in vertically inte-
grated organizations, that remind the networks of practice
and could be adopted in rural areas. An alternative would
be for hospitals to remain organizationally distinct and to
form long-term alliances with one or more multi-specialty
primary care medical groups in a form of virtual integra-
tion suited for virtual integration in urban areas.
In healthcare interactive dialogue between management
sciences and information systems science has not re-
ceived much contemplation. The use of ICT systems in
health care is not direct evidence of their capacity to gen-
erate actual value. ICT systems are enablers for benefits
to be reaped if working methods are simultaneously re-
vised. This was demonstrated in the eReferral use case.
However, benefits may accrue by just reengineering the
care processes [22]. New surgery arrangements for artifi-
cial joint patients involved relocating the anaesthesia
phase outside the operating theatre The reorganization of
the patient care process for joint replacement surgery
succeeded in achieving a 50 % increase in operations
before the introduction of a new IT system planned as
part of the project.
In Satakunta Hospital District a regional eHealth network
based on a federated model with record locator service
use has been operating since 2004 [23]. Direct costs were
calculated for the district and its four primary care units.
The results showed that net savings were annually on
average 6 % of the total health care costs. Savings were
related to an estimated 20 % reduction in redundant ex-
aminations and repeat visits due to lack of diagnostic
information. Indirect cost savings were achieved by the
delivery of timely care and by avoiding prolongation of
disease, absence from work and unnecessary travel costs.
Virtually all work processes are affected by imaging
results and telemedicine applications in radiology have
been proven to result in savings through avoidance of
unnecessary patient transfer or patient travel [24]. HUS-
pacs may therefore be seen not only as a technical imag-
ing data transferring system, because it brings added
value for regional services and has deep influences on the
way of working as was demonstrated by the second use
case.
The interrelationship between ICT systems and informa-
tion and its significance for evaluation of achieved bene-
fits of ICT system use has been stressed [25]. In the fu-
ture noteworthy ICT system benefits in healthcare should
be more the result of development work on the macro
level. Therefore, the National Health Project has initiated
attempts to improve the quality of patient record systems
during 2007-2011 through the construction of a national
health information network.
To promote better access to patient information in the
legacy repositories of different health care providers, a
national project has produced national specifications on
the requirements for the content and structure of informa-
tion systems concerning open interfaces, data protection,
information security and construction of information
system architecture. The project also concentrates on the
distribution of classifications and codes necessary in ICT.
All large scale ICT-systems (the Finnish NHIN is a typi-
cal example) sharing personal health data require both
careful security and privacy protection planning and im-
plementation of practical security and privacy protection
tools and services. From this perspective the Finnish
NHIN with a centralized eArchive is exceptionally de-
manding because all EPRs are stored and disclosed by the
same “governmental” organisation. Security features of
the Finnish eArchive are based on a new ISO 21457 stan-
dard (Secure archiving of electronic health records) [26].
Remodelling of EPR data structure, present identification
and authorization mechanisms, development of rule and
role based access control services, creation of new audit
records, consent management services and audit services
for citizens are needed to create a trusted environment for
the NHIN. In the long run we need to proceed to the pol-
icy based on data access and disclosure mechanism.
For identification of health professionals the national PKI
infrastructure applying health professional cards is in the
implementation phase. Later a role based access control
service will be implemented. Identification of entities are
based on the same technical infrastructure.
For trustfulness it is necessary to define the level of non-
repudiation of events and which processes or events
should be audited. The previously mentioned TJSERT-
project already highlighted more than 20 processes or
events that should be audited.
53
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

It is also necessary that citizens can check to whom, when
and for what purpose the national eArchive has disclosed
his health information. This is also one service of the
Finnish  eArchive. Patients and citizens can check data
disclose audit-log via the Internet without restrictions.
The National Institute for Health and Welfare has started
a project to build a health information portal for citizens.
The objective is to make online health education and
expert advice available to citizens. It has been also
planned  that patients will get access to view their own
patient records stored in the centralized eArchive and
unlimited right to check who, when and why, has  ac-
cessed his or her data. This checking can be done also
using the Internet.
Finally, this opens the option for a personalized health
record (PHR) to be connected with the EHR. The citizens
will be more informed and this may result in to an in-
creasing demand for personalized health services.
Conclusions
Finnish experiments demonstrate the migration from
regional to national eHealth network to be a multidimen-
sional and complicated process. It is not only a techno-
logical challenge, but also political, organizational, proc-
ess related and human factors must be taken into account.
Typically this kind of change is loaded (sometimes over-
loaded) with many expectations and benefits. The migra-
tion process should be carefully planned and each step
forward should reap benefits to the users. The ICT tech-
nology is not the most demanding and most of the neces-
sary solutions are already available on the market. From
ICT point of view the most demanding tasks are the crea-
tion of common understanding of functionalities and
processes of the NHIN, selection of harmonized stan-
dards, building better semantic interoperability between
EPRs and creating trust in the NHIN.
National development work currently focuses on the
specification of technological structures, the networking
of actors and the construction of a legislative foundation.
In  addition to these an agreed and shared common in-
formation model (care ontology) would enable the seman-
tic interoperability of information systems and  their
clinical integration. The governance model for data and
information exchange is an essential component of a
national IS infrastructure and the current RHINs have
experience and implementations of these that need to be
included as part of the future development. The common
foundation supports the modernisation of operational
processes, the broad application of operative innovations
and the enforcement of the role of the citizen.
54
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

References
 [1] Harno K., Ruotsalainen P., Nykänen, P., Kopra K.
(2008). Migration from Regional to a National eHealth
Network, Second International Conference on the Digital
Society, pp.107-110.
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ICDS.2008.28
[2] OECD Reviews of Health Systems, Finland, (2005).
[3] Towards a Networked Finland. The Information Soci-
ety Council’s Report, 2005;57-65.
[4] Thielst C.B., Jones L.E. Guide to Establishing a Re-
gional Health Information Organization. HIMSS, 2007.
[5] Malmqvist G., Nerander K.G., Larsson M. Sjunet –
the national IT infrastructure for healthcare in Sweden.
In: Iliakovidis I., Wilson P., Healy JC. Current situation
and examples of implemented and beneficial eHealth
application. IOS Press, The Netherlands, 2005, 41-49.
[6] Bjerregaard Jensen H., Duedal Pedersen C. MED-
COM: Danish health care network. In: Iliakovidis I.,
Wilson P., Healy JC. Current situation and examples of
implemented and beneficial eHealth application. IOS
Press, The Netherlands, 2005, 59-65.
[7] Orphanoudakis S. HYGEIAnet: The integrated re-
gional health information network of Crete. In: Ili-
akovidis I., Wilson P., Healy JC. Current situation and
examples of implemented and beneficial eHealth applica-
tion. IOS Press, The Netherlands, 2005, 66-78.
[8] Ham, C. Clinically Integrated Systems: The Next Step
in English Health Reform. The Nuffield Trust Briefing
Paper, (2007).
[9] Harno K. UUMA Regional eHealth Services in the
Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa (HUS). In:
Iliakovidis I., Wilson P., Healy JC. Current situation and
examples of implemented and beneficial eHealth applica-
tion. IOS Press, The Netherlands, 2005, 101-108.
[10] Stegwee R.A, Rukanova B.D. (2003) Identification
of Different Types of Standards for Domain-Specific
Interoperability. MIS Quarterly Special Issue Workshop
on Standard Making: A Critical Research Frontier for
Information Systems, pp 161-170.
[11] Harno, K., Paavola, T., Carlson, C., Viikinkoski, P.
Improvement of health care process between secondary
and primary care with telemedicine – assessment of an
intranet referral system on effectiveness and cost analysis.
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2000; 6,320-329.
[12] Harno K., Roine R., Pohjonen H., Kinnunen J.,
Kauppinen T. Framework for systematic assessment of
the regional HUSpacs after re-engineering of hospital and
external processes. CARS 2002 Computer Assisted Radi-
ology and Surgery, Proceedings of the 16th International
Congress and Exhibition Paris, June 26-29, 2002. Pp 618-
622. Eds Lemke HU, Vannier MW, Inamura K, Farman
AG, Doi K, Reiber JHC. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidel-
berg.
[13] Finnish Legislation, (2007). Law on the processing
of personal data relating to social- and healthcare.
http://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kokoelma/2007/20070023.pdf
[14] Ruotsalainen P., Iivari A-K, Doupi P. Finland’s
strategy and implementation of citizen’s access to health
information. ICMCC Event 2008, London, UK.
[15]Nykänen P., Ohtonen J., Seppälä A. The current role
and perspectives of reference data base Regional eHealth
Networks in the context of the national architecture. Uni-
versity of Tampere, Department of Computer Sciences,
B-2008-1. Juvenes Print, Tampere, (2008)
[16] Häyrinen, K., Porrasmaa, J., Komulainen, J., & Har-
tikainen, K. (2004). Uniform Structured Core Data in an
Electronic Patient Record, Final Report 3.2.2004. Uni-
versity of Kuopio and Association of Finnish Local Au-
thorities.
[17] ISO/IEC 24765, Systems and Software Engineering
Vocabulary, 2006.
[18] Ruotsalainen P. Certification Criteria for the Na-
tional Health Information System. IMIA WG1, WG4 and
JHIFT joint WG, Brisbane, 2007.
[19] Giddens, A. (2007). Europe in the Global Age. Polity
Press, Cambridge, UK.
[20] Haukilahti R-L., Virjo I., Halila H., Hyppölä H.,
Isokoski M., Kujala S., Vänskä J., Mattila K. Information
Technology in Health Care Evaluated by Experienced
Physicians. Journal of the Finnish Medical Association
2008;63:4223-4229.
[21] Brown, J.S., & Duguid, P..(2002) The Social Life of
Information. Harvard Business School Publishing Corpo-
ration, USA.
[22] Paavola T., Exploiting Process Thinking in Health
Care. International Journal of Healthcare Information
Systems and Informatics. 2008;3 (2):12-20.
[23] Maass M., Asikainen P., Mäenpää T., Wanne O.,
Suominen T. Regional Health Care Network efficient and
cost-saving. Journal of the Finnish Medical Association
2007;62:2673-2677.
 [24] Maass M., Kosonen M, Kormano M. Transportation
savings and medical benefits of a teleneurological net-
work. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
2000;6(3):142-6.
[25] Paavola T. Exploring IT System Benefits in Health
Care. (2008). Dissertation. Tampere University of Tech-
nology. Publication 756.
[26] ISO TS 21457, Secure Archiving of Electronic
Health Records, 2008.
Address for correspondence
Kari Harno, M.D. Ph.D.
Chief Physician
Helsinki University Central Hospital
Stenbäckinkatu 9
00029 HUS
Finland
55
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 1. The Regional eHealth Network Architecture in the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa.
LoadBalancer
Backup
DEVELOPMENT
 Environment
PRODUCTION
CLUSTER:
www-Server,
ApplicationServer
DATABASE Servers
CLUSTER
LoadBalancer
Elisa
Navitas
Network
Pegasos-
adapterServer
Tieto:
Effica AdapterServer
HUS Miranda-
AdapterServer
HUS RIS AdapterServer
HUS Laboratory
AdapterServer
Navitas Applications:
- Link Directory
- CDA Storage
- Patient Transfer
- Patient Transportation (Mobile)
- CodeServer
- Regional Appointment
- DesktopIntegration (SingleSignOn)
Elisa
Closed Corporate
Networks
SSL 128 bit
HTTPS
Navitas Endusers
Image Servers,
Applications:
- WEB1000 (Agfa)
- ImageLoader  (Neagen)
SSL 128 bit
HTTPS
Sonera
closed network
Navitas internet
SSL-128 bit +
ServerCertificate
Public Network
Logica
Pegasos-reference
transfer and
CDA-document query
SSL 128-bit HTTPS
MediConsult:
MediatriAdapterServer
Logica: Finstar-
AdapterServer
SSL 128 bit
HTTPS
Navitas Endusers
SSL 128 bit
HTTPS
Navitas Regional Information System – Architecture 2009
DMZ
HUS Oberon
Patient Transfer
TEST Environment:
www-Server,
ApplicationServer
56
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

Figure 2. Regional eHealth network provides an opportunity for GPs and orthopaedics to view the
same image in real-time and exchange information as consultations.
57
International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 1 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/

