A Collective Intelligence Framework for Lifestyle Management pro Mental Health 
Systems 
Sakirulai Olufemi Isiaq 
Department of Computing 
Solent University 
Southampton, United Kingdom 
femi.isiaq@solent.ac.uk 
Drishty D Sobnath 
Research, Innovation and Enterprise 
Solent University 
Southampton, United Kingdom 
drishty.sobnath@solent.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— Health Information Management Systems are 
becoming a central fixture in healthcare settings, but only a 
few frameworks exist to provide guidelines for the 
development of an innovative and sustainable system. This 
study 
employs 
a 
collective 
intelligence 
approach 
by 
corroborating knowledge, skills and contributions of various 
stakeholders 
to 
develop 
a 
Framework 
for 
Lifestyle 
Management pro Mental Health Management Systems 
(FLMMHS). A mixed-methods approach was employed and 
covered in two principal phases namely; document analysis 
(analysis of existing facts about mental health in the body of 
knowledge) and empirical analysis (experts’ validation using 
four core parameters namely; efficacy, effectiveness, simplicity 
and flexibility). FLMMHS’ components are apportioned into 
three core layers namely; Research Design Evaluation (RDE 
wrapper), Guidelines and Requirements (G&R), and Diagnosis 
Prevention Alleviation (DPA). While these components are 
flexibly designed to allow seamless system integration, its 
comprehensive representation serves as an implementation 
platform for the development of mental health systems. 
Although the suitability of FLMMHS for system development 
is based on the premise of lifestyle management for mental 
health, successful evaluation following qualitative and 
quantitative measures by expert judges impresses its aptness 
for the development mental health management systems. 
Keywords- mental health systems; lifestyle management; 
collective intelligence; Diagnosis Prevention and Alleviation; 
framework; standards; Guidelines and Requirements; barriers 
and  facilitators; mental health support; FLMMHS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This work extends our existing research [1], which 
contends that lifestyle management approach as an effectual 
management practice for mental health disorders. A 
subsequent failing of aspects of human health such as 
intelligence, imagination and thought is considered a mental 
health disorder [2]. Globally, this health phenomenon is 
increasingly becoming popular with notable consumption of 
various aspects of human resources. Currently, a significant 
proportion of adult’s population now suffers a form of 
mental health disorder with a record of about 26.2% of US 
adult population suffering a form 'serious' mental illness and 
27% in the EU having mental issues [3]. Contemporary, 
records show that the gap between mental health treatment 
and its accessibility is increasingly becoming wider, 
currently estimated between 35% and 50% [4]. This gap is 
often widened by known factors including; stigma associated 
with mental health candidates, ineffective therapies, lack of 
adequate and awareness of mental health resources among 
other factors. Consequently, a significant proportion of 
mental health disorder candidates are left undiagnosed or 
diagnosed with no adequate attention or treatment.  
Even more prominent is the traditional approach of 
dealing with these disorders (i.e., the process of Diagnosis, 
Prevention and Alleviation - DPA) also contributes to these 
noted shortcomings thus, aiding this increase perhaps, 
exponentially. Effectively,  common DPA practice involves 
consultation with healthcare professionals, such as a General 
Practitioner (GP) or psychiatrist, who utilises standard tools 
such as, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) [5], 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-5) [6] and International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD) criteria [7], Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7) 
[8] among other appropriate tools to examine the candidate’s 
situation. Nonetheless, almost half of the world’s population 
lives in countries with fewer than two psychiatrists per a 
hundred thousand (100,000) people [9], therefore, optimal 
access to these practitioners is becoming highly impossible. 
Arguably, occurrences of prominent mental health disorders 
such as depression, bipolar affective disorder, anxiety, 
schizophrenia and dementia are rather deteriorative of one's 
health rather than instantaneous. Hence, on many occasions, 
appropriate lifestyle management may be better suited to 
avert the occurrence, or/and perhaps, manage these disorders 
effectively. Nevertheless, appropriate lifestyle management 
could be effectively accomplished with utmost acceptance of 
the life owner. 
Mentioned 
earlier 
that 
traditional 
diagnosis 
and 
subsequent treatment of mental disorder conditions require 
the expertise of skilled medical practitioners who often are 
not readily available, recorded advances in technology can 
support bridging this gap. Not only are the advances of 
technology necessitating its prominences in various aspects 
of human lives including education, business and health, but 
the availability, size and power of hardware components and 
sensors are significantly aiding its presence. Besides, the 
existence of concepts such as artificial intelligence (Machine 
Learning, Natural Language Processing and Analytics) 
combined with the power of internet reinforces technology’s 
importance in different areas of life, particularly health.  For 
instance, in health, smartphone technology, which combines 
the communication and computation of a handheld device is 
138
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

used to facilitate point of care services using mobile 
computing [10]. Also, computer-based cognitive behavioural 
therapy (CBT) has proven to be clinically effective similar to 
a face-to-face treatment of various mental disorder [4].  
Although 
technology-based 
approaches 
of 
health 
treatment and management have been characterised by low-
cost and ability to reach a larger audience, the lack of 
traceable standards for many of these tools raises potent 
questions perhaps, in terms of their efficacy, effectiveness 
and acceptability. For instance, an online mental health 
diagnostic tool is prone to contests such as inaccuracies, 
exaggerations or misrepresentations that may influence 
accurate diagnosis thus, constituting false or negative effects. 
This work aims to curtail these aforementioned problems by 
presenting a research-oriented Framework for Lifestyle 
Management pro Mental Health Systems, FLMMHS. The 
framework adopts a collective intelligence approach by 
utilising the knowledge of literature, various stakeholders, 
existing systems and other sourced components among 
others.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section II 
explores some existing mental health systems and the 
importance of a standard framework; Section III discusses 
existing mental health frameworks and Section IV explains 
the methodology comprising of empirical and document 
analysis. Section V discusses the barriers and facilitators of 
implementing mental health systems while Section VI 
describes the components of FLMMHS and its evaluation. 
Finally, conclusions and future work were presented in 
Section VII. 
 
II. 
CURRENT MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEMS AND 
FRAMEWORK IMPORTANCE  
Health information systems are becoming a central 
fixture in the healthcare settings, but only a few standards are 
currently associated with the implementation and adaptation 
of these system solutions. The integration of mental health 
information systems into primary care is increasingly 
growing popularity as an effective means of treating mental 
health conditions and depression has been a good case 
example [11].  While benefits like lower healthcare costs, 
improved medication adherence, early diagnosis, and better 
patient/treatment follow-ups have been associated, healthcare 
system developments rely on suitable infrastructures, 
effective polices and perhaps cutting-edge technologies. 
More so, the acceptance of newer technologies for diagnosis, 
prevention and alleviation by major stakeholders is still very 
feeble for several reasons.  
With technological advancements such as fast internet 
and 5G network, patients are now able to remotely receive 
real-time support/treatment for conditions that do not 
necessarily require the physical presence of physicians. For 
example, in recent times, the delivery of cognitive 
behavioural therapies (CBT) over the internet has been 
proven effective [12] and such internet-based protocols have 
been widely adopted to date [13]. Besides, numerous 
behavioural intervention technologies (BIT) - a technological 
application of behavioural and psychological intervention to 
address behavioural, cognitive and affective targets – are 
currently being adopted to treat or support physical and 
behavioural mental health disorders [14].  More recently, 
further advancements are being recorded in the areas of 
mobile hardware and sensor infrastructure. For instance, the 
traditional method of examining blood alcohol, nicotine and 
vitamin D levels are being substituted with technological 
hardware. Such advancements have been further magnified 
by organisations such as Samsung who recently released a 
smartwatch device for blood pressure measurements [15]. 
Additionally, other advancements that have been recently 
presented include devices such as BACtrack, Digital Health 
Age and others that have been mentioned in different studies 
[16] [17] [18] for carrying out vitamin D and other 
physiological measurements. 
The readiness of smartphones and other handheld devices 
for e-health has severally been explored with no exception to 
its utilisations for the management of mental health 
situations. For example, face-to-face therapy presented in [4] 
adopts this technique for DPA activities. Additionally, 
momentary 
and 
intervention 
triggered 
configurable 
commonly utilised for assisting distressed patients, in remote 
locations further justifies the importance of technology for 
the attainment of urgent treatment particularly, in areas such 
as mental health. In recent times, numerous mobile 
applications have been available for mental health 
management (i.e., diagnosis, prevention and alleviation) 
however, many of these applications are prone to risks 
including mismanagement, misinterpretation, misdiagnosis 
or recommendation of unsuitable alleviation techniques. Not 
only could these risks worsen the situation of vulnerable 
users, but they could lead to potential health relapse.  
Google Play and Apple Store play host platforms for 
numerous mental health apps analysed by Shelton, Psycom 
(top 25 mental health apps in 2018) in 2018 [19]. These 
mental health apps were categorised into general mental 
health, addiction, anxiety, suicide prevention, depression, 
bipolar disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder apps 
among other categories. In these categories are apps such as 
Self-help for Anxiety Management (SAM), CBT Thought 
Record Diary, MoodKit, IMoodJournal and Talkspace 
Online Therapy among others [19]. Although some of these 
apps are accessible to users at a cost, others are available for 
free to improve mood, life-quality and user’s mood among 
other activities. For example, “Depression CBT Self Guide” 
is a pocket guide that helps users to learn about CBT and 
how to cope with depression; it also allows users to measure 
the severity of depression, develop positive thoughts and 
encourages meditation practice. Other highly rated apps in 
Google store [20] include “Positive Thinking” or “Operation 
Reach Out” which provides support via different resources 
such as hotlines, videos to military personnel and veteran 
who suffer depression. Also “Moodkit” in Apple Store 
provides over two hundred mood improvement activities to 
support distressing thoughts.  
Apart from the aforementioned apps, other mental health 
mobile apps that present users-functionalities such as, 
diagnosis and progress tracking include Moodtrack diary 
[21] and depression screening test [22], which tracks activity 
139
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

progression and diagnosis respectively. Pacifica [23] and 
Relieve depression PRO [24] provide prevention and 
alleviation functionalities, although without diagnosis or 
personalisation functionalities. While many of these apps 
support users via a variety of techniques, there is no known 
standards or framework typical to these systems. Moreover, 
more profound information about their implementations or 
policies adopted for deployment are not generally publicised 
to the best of our knowledge. 
 
III. 
EXISTING MENTAL HEALTH FRAMEWORKS 
Several service-oriented frameworks provide guidance 
and coordination supports for mental health care delivery to 
enhance 
patient 
experience 
and 
service 
quality. 
Numerously, different health bodies have developed various 
service-oriented frameworks, which cater for different 
mental health aspects. For example, the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in the 
United Kingdom concentrates on diagnosis and assessment, 
access to mental health services, personal well-being and 
care programmes, and treatment of patients according to 
defined standards [25] [26].  
   Occasionally are these frameworks revised to satisfy the 
ever-evolving stakeholders’ requirements. For instance, a 
recent review of the Department of Health service 
framework for mental health [25] aided the updates, which 
include (i) deepening the health and social care services 
integration; (ii) health and social well-being improvements; 
(iii) 
promote 
evidence-based 
practices 
and 
(iv) 
multidisciplinary and intersectoral workings enhancement 
[25]. Although the framework builds on the 2010 version, it 
offers a more streamlined approach to include service and 
experience indicators. Also, the values and principles of the 
revised framework are based on the recommendation of 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 
which focuses on safe and effective care, patient’s 
experience and recovery principles. 
    Another example of existing frameworks is the 
Community Mental Health Framework for Adults by the 
National Health Service [27]. Its implementation breaks 
down the current barriers as follows: (i) mental health and 
physical health, (ii) health, social care, voluntary, 
community, social enterprise organisations and local 
communities, and (iii) primary and secondary care in order 
to provide an integrated, and personalised service. Other 
positives aimed at this framework is enabling candidates 
with mental health complications: have unhindered access to 
mental health care, manage their conditions, move to 
individualised treatment plans, and contribute to the local 
community. The goal of the framework is similar to the 
Service-based Framework focusing on local communities’ 
needs. 
    Besides, in the United States, mental health services 
follow the Donabedian framework model - a quality 
assurance-based 
framework, 
which 
considers 
the 
organisation and structure of the health care system delivery 
with the aims of providing better health care outcomes [28] 
[29]. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s 
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework is not only 
considered as a diagnostic tool for mental health problems 
but also serves as a basis of understanding the biological, 
social, developmental and environmental factors that may 
affect individual psychological functions. Often, is it used 
alongside other models such as, the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD) [7] or the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) [30]. 
  While many of these frameworks are commonly 
considered to play effective roles in mental health service, 
management and delivery; their deployments for system 
development have not considered or published to the best 
knowledge of the authors. For example, technological 
factors such as interoperability, usability, technology 
acceptance or scalability are not explicitly reflective in most 
of these frameworks. Hence, this study bridges the 
identified gap by combining service and technical oriented 
requirements 
(incorporating 
medical 
and 
technical 
principles) to develop a system deployable framework for 
system developers. Taking a collective intelligence 
approach, the framework proposes to serve as a standard for 
mental health management system development following a 
lifestyle management approach. The following section 
illustrates the adopted methodology and the role of 
collective intelligence in the development and evaluation of 
FLMMHS. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
Different study methods may be adopted at various stage 
of a research life cycle. For this work, a multifaceted mixed-
methods approach was adopted, albeit, classified into two 
main phases namely; 1) documentary analysis and 2) 
empirical analysis. While the phase of documentary-study 
involved the analysis of existing body of facts in the 
knowledgebase, the empirical analysis phase involved 
qualitative and quantitative evaluation of derived facts from 
documentary analysis and the developed framework. 
Therefore, the Framework for Lifestyle Management pro 
Mental Health System is developed following a concept of 
collective intelligence i.e., combining the knowledge, skills 
and 
collaborative 
outputs 
of 
diverse 
sources 
and 
stakeholders. 
 
A. Document Analysis 
Enhanced methodical approach of literature analysis, 
PRISMA [31] was utilised to collect intended relevant 
contents. The principles of PRISMA was adopted in four 
cardinal stages that include identification, screening, 
eligibility and inclusion. As these cardinal stages were 
carried out iteratively, varying keywords were employed at 
different stages to distinctly improve robustness of document 
inclusion. Key terms including collective intelligence, 
barriers, facilitators diagnostic, prevention and alleviation 
140
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

approaches about mental health were utilised for extracting 
facts from reputable platforms. Employed platforms include 
British Library [32], German National Library of Science 
and Technology [33], Google scholar [34] among others. 
Documents such as white papers, journal and conference 
articles were examined to elicit mental health efforts. These 
efforts were further analysed in order to classify key mental 
health concepts and principles. In addition to general mental 
health efforts and concepts, specific common mental health 
disorders such as depression, bipolar-disorder, sleeping-
disorder, and schizophrenia, among other conditions were 
singularly and commonly evaluated. Key concepts including 
definitions, symptoms, impacts, methods of diagnosis, 
prevention and alleviation were also intensely examined. In 
additions, standards and policies of health system 
development, system design methods, guidelines and system 
requirements were appraised and suitably categorised in line 
with mental health system development as framework 
components. Separate from the efforts of the framework 
development was a further scientific appraisal of the 
framework's suitability and reliability as explained in the 
empirical analysis section. 
 
B. Empirical Analysis 
To validate framework rigor, multiple empirical methods 
(qualitative and quantitative) including survey, discussion 
groups and data triangulation were applied. Also, qualitative 
and quantitative validity criteria that include face and content 
validity index were adopted. A thematic survey was utilised 
primarily to gather regular user's perspectives and their 
understanding of technology adoption for managing mental 
health and its disorders. While there are no general exclusion 
criteria for the survey participants, associated limitations of 
online survey limit the survey respondents to technological 
informed candidates with basic knowhow of electronic 
system operation (i.e., basic understanding of mobile or Web 
technologies). The outputs of the survey and documentary 
analysis did not only aid the development process of the 
framework, further were the utilised empirical methods 
(secondary survey, discussion group and data analysis) to 
strengthen its evaluation. Twenty-six expert judges (software 
engineers and developers of varying level of expertise) 
completed a validation survey followed by three discussion 
groups of distinct expert judges (with varying level of 
expertise). Although the outputs of the survey and discussion 
groups were later triangulated to justify the validity of the 
adopted instruments, the reliability of questions was 
subsequently measured using Cronbach’s alpha technique. 
The following section considers collective intelligence and 
its significance as a tool for the framework development. 
 
C. Collective Intelligence 
The concept of Collective Intelligence embraces the 
utilisation of skills, knowledge, sources and collaboration of 
multiple stakeholders to solve a problem. Although the 
concept has existed for decades, the recent conception of its 
combination with machine learning principles has been 
catalytical for the generation of newer and more interesting 
facts. Nowadays, advances recorded in technological 
visions, computing powers and machine learning abilities 
(collecting/analysing data from millions of records over the 
cloud) has opened up new possibilities of finding solutions 
to modern-day problems [35]. Interestingly, the health 
domain has been one of the various domains that benefits 
from technological sophistications particularly, through 
collaborative measures between individuals and companies 
leading to the development of smart algorithms. For 
example, health organisations now uses machine learning 
concepts to predict disease and symptom deterioration, 
hence, 
preventive 
measures 
are 
taken 
to 
reduce 
hospitalisation and mortality rates. Taking to these benefits, 
the use of machine learning techniques on collectively 
gathered facts will not only aid the accumulation of newer 
knowledge yet, exponentially. 
Considerably, this work considers the five factors of 
collective intelligence (Autonomous Commons, Balance, 
Focus, Reflexive and Integrate for action) highlighted 
crucial to solving problems by Mulgan [36] as imperative 
for the development of effective mental health system. 
Accordingly, an intricate collection and analyses of existing 
mental health data was utilised to accomplish a rich 
background for developing a framework, which a robust 
mental health management system can be based. 
Indicative barrier from literature evidenced that mentally 
disordered candidates tend not to seek support when 
experiencing emotional or mental health difficulty. This 
barrier is decidedly prompted by stigma, negative 
perceptions, self-reliance, and lack of awareness as 
triggering factors [37]. Collectively embracing gathered 
facts for the development of health management systems 
notably englobes factors including human resources, 
finance, medicines, technology, service infrastructure. Also 
included are intangible assets of ideas and interests, 
relationships, policies, values and people-centered norms as 
identified by Glenn [38]. This encirclement can further 
unveil the benefits and limitations of electronic health care 
systems, and thus, barriers and facilitators between the users 
and the systems are farther acknowledged. This work 
combines concepts from Glenn and Mulgan’s five factors of 
collective intelligence, to analyse mental health care 
services and system to derive combining factors shown in 
Figure 1. Furthermore, barriers and facilitators of mental 
health and disorder management system development are 
highlighted in the following section. 
 
141
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 1: Englobed Factors of Collective Intelligence 
 
V. 
BARRIERS AND FACILITATORS 
Human’s mental health is considered a vital aspect of 
general health yet, robust measures to cope with the existing 
burden of mental health disorders are not currently possessed 
by health care providers. Since mental health conditions 
range in a spectrum of mild to extremely severe states, 
different conditions require distinct management plans i.e., 
diagnosis and treatment plans, hence, the seamless 
integration of mental health services into primary care to 
bridge treatment gaps is necessitated [39]. For instance, the 
National Health Service (NHS) in the United Kingdom, UK 
provides mental health services (including dealing with 
problems such as drug, alcohol addiction and psychological 
therapies - IAPT) for patients, but accesses to most of these 
services are through local General Practitioner, GP referral 
[40]. Conversely, effective management of contemporary 
mental health burdens necessitates seamless user-treatments 
interface, powered by advanced technology sophistication to 
handle with distinct requirements robustly. While technology 
can facilitate seamless management of mental health 
conditions, some barriers are identified to hinder diagnostic 
and treatment procedures. Normally, these barriers and 
facilitators are identified using the Supporting the Use of 
Research Evidence (SURE) framework. The framework 
aims to support mental health system design through the 
involvement of a wide range of stakeholders [41] and was 
mainly developed for implementing health system changes 
and support policymaking in Africa [39]. Highlights in Table 
1 are various barriers and facilitators for implementing 
mental health care systems. Among these factors are 
segregated care, lack of finance and resources, policymakers, 
privacy and acceptance among other issues are identified 
hindering factors (barriers). However, data access, end-user’s 
motivation, infrastructure sophistications and effective 
collaboration between medical and IT professionals could 
facilitate a successful implementation of a mental health 
management system. Collectively, knowledge accrues from 
document analysis and the evaluation of barriers and 
facilitators are considered for the derivation of the 
components of Framework for Lifestyle Management pro 
Mental Health Systems (FLMMHS) as described in the 
result section. 
 
Table 1: Barriers and Facilitators of Mental Health Systems 
Barriers 
Evaluation from Research Work 
Segregated 
Healthcare 
The perception that mental health is separated 
from mental health systems informs the lack of 
integration of both concepts  [11], [42] 
Financial 
Resources 
The limitation in budget leads to the lack of 
developing integrated mental health care systems. 
[11] 
Bureaucracy 
(Policy 
makers/planners) 
High cost of medical care attributed some policies 
procedures and decision making makes the 
implementation of mental health systems harder 
[43] 
Norms and 
Standards (HL7) 
There are certain norms and standards that need to 
be followed when implementing mental health 
system for system interoperability which can be 
implemented with the right experts’ skills. [39] 
[44] (World Health Organization., 2012) 
Privacy and 
Security 
There are concerns about the privacy and the 
security of the systems that deal with confidential 
and personal information. [46] 
Technology 
Acceptance/ 
Change 
There are usually mixed views about the use of 
new information systems i.e., organisation staff 
very often show unwillingness to adapt to 
changes or lack of time/interests.[46] 
Credibility/Appro
priateness 
The appropriateness of technology needs to be 
assessed in order to solve particular problems 
faced by mental health professionals. There is 
little evidence that supports the efficiency of tools 
used to support patients suffering from mental 
health issues.[46] [47] 
Facilitators 
Evaluation from Research Work 
Technological 
Infrastructure 
Mental health systems can be integrated with 
other sub-systems through the exploitation of 
technology such as IoT, cloud and 4G. [48] 
Knowledge/ Skills 
The knowledge and skills of different experts 
such as Psychologists, Physiotherapist, GPs, 
Nurses, Patients and Software Companies can 
help to design mental health system to suit the 
needs of patients. (World Health Organization, 
2012) 
Motivation 
Current healthcare professionals should be able to 
understand the benefits of using such a system to 
be motivated to use it. [49] 
Data Access 
Integrated mental health care systems may 
facilitate access of patients’ data [48] at any time 
and from anywhere as far as there is an internet 
connection. 
Training 
Training can facilitate the knowledge exchange 
and helps motivate staff to use the new system. 
[50] 
Collaboration 
The collaboration of different stakeholders such 
as pharmacists, psychologist, nutritionists, GPs, 
designers, programmers, can facilitate the 
implementation of a mental care system. 
[45][50][51] [48] 
Resources/ 
Government 
Strategies 
With a time frame and appropriate  resource 
allocation, strategic plan with clear objectives can 
facilitate the implementation of mental health 
system. [52] 
 
142
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI. 
RESULTS 
The outcomes of this work are perceived in two 
perspectives namely; FLMMHS (mental health system 
development framework) and its evaluation. The framework 
section explains the core components of FLMMHS 
including the Research Design Evaluation (RDE) wrapper, 
Guidelines and Requirement (G&R), and the Diagnosis 
Prevention Alleviation (DPA) layers. Subsequently, the 
evaluation section uncovered the rigour of framework 
through analysis of expert judges’ submissions on the 
framework’s suitability. 
 
A. Framework for Lifestyle Management pro Mental 
Health System (FLMMHS) 
An iterative document analysis of mental health 
literature, concepts of system development and the derivation 
of facilitators and barriers in conjunctions with the findings 
of the user survey aided the development of a Framework for 
Lifestyle 
Management 
pro 
Mental 
Health 
Systems 
(FLMMHS). Not only do these factors collectively derived 
the 
framework’s 
composition, 
but 
also 
aided 
the 
components’ classification into layers to improve the robust 
implementation of a mental health management system. 
Although FLMMHS’s components are apportioned into 
three 
layers 
namely; 
RDE 
wrapper, 
Guides 
and 
Requirements (G&R), and DPA layers, the layers are 
flexibly integrated to encourage seamless deployment for 
system development. The following section describes 
FLMMHS’s components (as depicted in Figure 2) according 
to their corresponding layers. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Framework for Lifestyle Management pro 
Mental Health Systems 
 
• 
RDE Wrapper 
The RDE wrapper is the outermost layer shielding 
all components of the framework. The wrapper 
consists of three basic features namely; Research, 
Design and Evaluation. Fundamentally, developers 
are expected to consider the wrapper layer as a 
development navigator of a lifestyle management 
system, irrespective of the type of mental health 
disorder or system. The Research component 
considers the aspect of mental health (i.e., states, 
disorders and types among others), users (patients, 
practitioners and other stakeholders) and the 
systems. Considering the dissimilarity in the types of 
mental health disorders and the heterogeneity of the 
stakeholders (candidates, users, medical practitioners 
etc.), developers are obligated to conduct intense 
research about specifics of mental health i.e., in 
terms of system requirements and the needs of the 
potential 
system 
users. 
Whereas, 
the Design 
component 
guides 
the 
process 
of 
system 
development in aiming that a mental health 
management system is extensively supportive such 
that they are less demanding perhaps, moderately 
automated. For example, the user interface of a 
mental health management system should be 
undoubtedly simple, intuitive and usable to avoid 
any aggravation of the user’ states. Concepts such as 
colour impacts, fonts, navigation, perception and 
overall 
comprehension 
of 
the 
system 
are 
comprehensively thought through, mostly in-line 
with the requirements of the intended users, i.e., 
significant depth of design is considered. Finally, 
the Evaluation 
components 
is 
an 
appraisal 
mechanism for the Research and Design elements, 
which ensures system’s suitability for the intended 
users. The RDE wrapper is considered a kernel for 
developers of mental health management systems, 
irrespective of the disorder or intention. 
 
• 
Guidelines and Requirements (G&R) 
The G&R tier is an intermediate layer that binds the 
RDE and DPA layers of the framework. It considers 
technical and medical requirements of mental health 
management system development by employing 
major components namely; Policies & Standards, 
Experts Advice, Ethics, and Security & Privacy. The 
layer permits seamless integration of support, 
medical and technical requirements as a single 
module for mental health state management.  
Taking that standards and medical guidelines vary 
by country or region [53], medical requirements of 
the intended location (country or region) of 
deployment must be appropriately implemented. For 
example, in the United Kingdom, the National 
Institute for Health Care [54] recommends that 
healthcare professionals provide information, advice, 
diagnosis and treatment for patients, while Mental 
Health in America (MHA) develops guidelines to 
identify mental health measures [55]. Also, the APA 
provides evidence-based recommendations regarding 
psychiatric disorders assessments [56] and the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-5) to diagnose and/or classify 
mental health disorders. Therefore, the G&R sector 
143
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

considers medical tools and contents as stringent 
suited for intending location.  
Similarly, technical requirements of the system are 
considered in terms of generics and specifics. 
Further considered are standards in terms of software 
and hardware requirements, system accessibility, 
scalability, 
interoperability 
and 
technology 
acceptance are to be rigorously considered; and 
similarly, the Security & Privacy of the system users. 
Also, the sensitivity of mental health conditions 
demands robust Ethics and Security architecture for 
FLMMHS based management systems. Therefore, 
the data handling process of the system should aim 
user’s data privacy, encryption algorithms and 
access level functionalities amongst other features. 
Finally, developers need understand that mental 
health systems are not purposed to displace 
practitioners but to play enhanced role in handling 
this health situation, therefore easier communication 
mechanism between stakeholders, i.e., practitioner 
(GP, psychiatrist, career) and patients should be 
stringently facilitated within the system. Other 
support 
features 
include 
automatic 
sleep 
management, diet, exercise and other lifestyle factors 
management. The following section expands the 
DPA layer, its components and roles in supporting 
the framework particularly, in accomplishing 
lifestyle management for mental health conditions. 
 
• 
Diagnosis Prevention Alleviation (DPA) Layer 
Lastly, innermost layer of FLMMHS’, DPA, 
consists 
of 
three 
foremost 
components 
namely; Diagnosis, Prevention & Alleviation. These 
components consist of other sub-components 
including tools for determining the presence of 
mental health disorder, its severity, corresponding 
symptoms, prevention and progress managements. 
Also, these subcomponents embodied the traditional 
process of examining symptoms and severity of 
mental health disorders. Therefore, mental health 
management systems considering diagnosis should 
incorporate a means of deducing mental health 
symptoms and corresponding severity. Furthermore, 
the framework embraces flexible techniques to allow 
developers adopt a preferred standard diagnostic tool 
such as DSM-5 [6], ICD-10 [57], the Beck 
Depression Inventory, BDI [58], PHQ-9 [59] and 
GAD-7 [8], among other tools. To maintain the 
flexibleness of FLMMHS, the Diagnosis component 
connects the prevention and alleviation components. 
Taking that the framework focuses on lifestyle 
management approach of mental health disorders, 
emphases are laid on prevention and alleviation 
methods through lifestyle management, therefore 
factors such as nutrition, exercise and sleep rate 
among other factors are considered core for system 
based on this framework. These core factors are 
associated with several studies and scientific 
findings, hence, are deemed important constituents 
for lifestyle approach of management. For example, 
the study conducted by Jacka et al, reflected 
significant association between diets and mental 
health management [60]. Similarly, Tanaka [61] and 
Freeman [62] found correlations between sleep rate 
and mental health state. Although cues are taken 
from these studies, the framework flexibility allows 
the inclusion of further elements to the DPA 
component. Finally, personalisation and progress 
tracking are considered for all DPA components i.e., 
the process of diagnosis, prevention and alleviation 
are personified, therefore, FLMMHS based system 
mandates progress-track functionality to manage 
associated lifestyle activities, perhaps, in correlation 
with the user’s mental health state. The following 
section discusses FLMMHS’ evaluation to ensure its 
robustness for mental health system development. 
 
B. FLMMHS Evaluation 
To determine the framework’s robustness for system 
development, a holistic face validity evaluation was 
conducted using expert judges’ submissions. The evaluation 
adopts 
mixed 
methods 
(qualitative 
and 
quantitative 
techniques) following four key parameters namely; efficacy, 
effectiveness, simplicity and flexibility. Explicitly, survey 
and focus group instruments were independently employed, 
and the outcomes of both methods were triangulated to 
improve the confidence of the derived results. The survey 
procedure and results were discussed in the survey section as 
follows. 
 
• 
Survey 
Twenty-two expert-judges (software developers 
with varying level of expertise) participated in a 
validation survey comprising of a derived 22 item-
question. A significant proportion of the questions 
are 
multidimensional 
that 
transcend 
multiple 
evaluating 
parameters, 
but 
a 
few 
were 
unidimensional. Table 2 illustrates the item-
questions and corresponding parameters intended to 
evaluate. For example, the ‘knowledge and 
expertise’ dimension aims to identify the level of 
expertise and knowledge of expert judges through 
questions 1, 2, 3 and 5, while question 4 primarily 
focused on measuring participants’ perception of the 
framework 
and 
its 
suitability. 
Twenty-one 
participants completed their evaluation by providing 
answers to all item-question, but one participant did 
not complete the item-question and thus, was 
excluded from the data analysis. Although some 
questions are multidimensional, the questions are 
validated to be internally consistent and reliable as 
Cronbach’s alpha score of 0.95 was recorded. Figure 
3a and 3b depict the overall perception’s rating 
(Question 4 only) and evaluation of parameter rating 
respectively. The average perception rating of 0.61 
was recorded to evidence judges’ satisfaction. Also, 
correlation analysis was conducted to understand the 
144
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

judges' 
bias 
in 
terms 
of 
knowledge 
and 
understanding of mental health and software and 
system development. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3a: Experts’ Perception of FLMMHS 
 
 
 
Figure 3b: Experts’ Rating of Evaluation Factors 
 
The Pearson correlation coefficient of the overall 
perceptions 
and 
combination 
of 
evaluating 
parameters (i.e., rating in flexibility, simplicity, 
effectiveness and efficacy) is 0.79, indicating a high 
positive correlation [63]. Not only does the high 
correlation recorded signifies robust suitability of the 
framework for mental health system development, 
but it also strengthens the success of the evaluating 
parameters. Figure 3c represents the correlation 
between the perceptions and evaluating factors, 
while Figure 3d represents the correlation between 
participant’s knowledge & expertise and their 
perceptions. 
 
 
 
Figure 3c: Correlation Analysis of Perception 
 
A positive correlation coefficient of 0.23 is 
computed for experts’ knowledge/expertise versus 
their perceptions, indicating low or perhaps, a 
negligible correlation between the expert’s rating of 
the framework’s suitability for development and 
their knowledge/expertise.  Also, this represents a 
positive reflection of the suitability of adopting the 
framework for mental health system development, 
irrespective of the level of expertise whether basic, 
intermediate or advanced. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3d: Perception of FLMMHS’ Suitability 
 
Overall, the face validity of the framework is good 
with an acceptability index of 0.61. Besides, 
supplementary focus group sessions were conducted 
to examine the recorded results of the survey on the 
acceptance of the framework as discussed in the 
following section. 
 
• 
Focus group 
Following, the survey analysis, a supplementary 
qualitative analysis was conducted to improve 
evaluation 
confidence 
of 
FLMMHS. 
Three 
discussion-group sessions were carried out with 
expert-judges in groups of five, eight and seven. 
These sessions lasted an average of 11 minutes 46 
seconds and the data was transcribed using a 
professional transcriber. The transcribed data was 
processed using NVivo software [64] for coding and 
thematic analysis. Firstly, the first hundred frequent 
words of the transcript data were deduced by taking 
out the sight or joining words such as the, and, this 
and is among others. (See Figure 4 for a cloud 
representation of contents) to enhance content 
analysis. 
 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2
FACTORS RATING
EXPERT PARTICIPANTS
PARTICIPANT'S RATING VERSUS FACTORS OF EVALUATION 
Simplicity
Flexibility
Effectiveness
Efficacy
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Evaluations factors  
Expert's perception of FLMMS suitability for MH systems
Expert's perception Vs Evaluation factors of FLMMS
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Knowledge & Expertise
Perception level of FLMMS suitability
Expert's knowledge/expertise vs perception of framework suitability
145
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 4: Cloud Representation of Content Analysis 
 
Subsequently, a thematic analysis was conducted by 
coding the data in themes similar to the survey's key 
themes i.e., knowledge & expertise, flexibility, 
simplicity, effectiveness and efficacy. Additionally, 
two newly themes were derived namely; expert’s 
perceptions and other factors, which were classified 
by related texts, accordingly. For example, key texts 
such as; think, ideal, quality and suitability relate to 
the 
perception’s 
context 
thus, 
corresponding 
references were clustered appropriately for the 
perception of each participant group. Appendix I, 
Table 3 indicates the number of coding terms per 
participant group for each theme. 
 
Table 2: Thematic representation of codes for each focus group 
Evaluating Criteria 
Group 
One 
Group 
Two 
Group 
Three 
Flexibility 
8 
7 
4 
Simplicity 
7 
8 
5 
Efficacy 
11 
7 
12 
Effectiveness 
19 
10 
21 
Expert_MH_Knowledge 
8 
6 
1 
Expert_Expertise 
21 
19 
22 
Expert_Perception 
14 
21 
15 
Other_Factors 
8 
8 
6 
 
 
Another meaningful observation is the derived 
correlation between the key themes. While efficacy 
of the framework is regarded the most important 
theme based on experts’ submissions. Although all 
themes are intertwined through shared key terms, the 
efficacy term appeared connected with all themes as 
noted with tree representation of the content in 
Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Tree Representation of Content Analysis 
 
 
Finally, a matrix representation of the coded data shown 
in Appendix I, Table 4 indicates a high relationship 
between effectiveness and efficacy, simplicity, expertise 
and level of perception. There is quite low association 
between expertise and mental health knowledge, which 
further justifies easier deployment of the framework, 
irrespective of mental health practicing knowledge.  
 
Overall, the results from both qualitative and quantitative 
evaluations indicate the suitability of the framework for 
mental health system deployment pro lifestyle management. 
The framework’s robustness is further evidenced through 
expert judges’ review on fundamental features of system 
development (i.e., simplicity, usability, flexibility, efficacy 
and effectiveness) with no preference to their level of 
expertise. Following is an insight on the practical 
deployment of FLMMHS for mental health system 
development. 
 
C. Practical deployment of FLMMHS 
Mobile systems offer a range of self-management apps, 
digital consultations and digital-enabled models of therapy 
for patients suffering from mental health conditions, but 
these systems often segregated from other services. 
FLMMHS is expected to be deployed by software engineers 
or Web developers working closely with healthcare or 
health-related professionals. The conceptual model can 
easily be translated to a more practical integrated solution as 
a software library or Web service or complete system 
solution. Barriers previously identified in Table 1 have thus 
been considered when designing the framework to include 
major factors such as HL7 standards for storing data. Other 
factors considered include privacy and security of patients’ 
confidential information and evaluation of the system expert 
stakeholders to understand the deployment acceptance. 
Healthcare services looking at mental health care 
delivery systems can adopt FLMMHS concept to implement 
software solutions. More so, various bodies explications can 
be integrated to improve the process of strategic design, 
delivery and development FLMMHS based systems. 
Systems can be reinforced with digital clinical decision-
making tools, which can help healthcare professionals in 
early diagnosis of mental health-related issue. With an 
integrated care approach, improving access to psychological 
therapies or some other supports can be made easier. 
Knowledge, skills and competences can also be shared 
across multiple disciplines if the designed system is based on 
FLMMHS. A comprehensive implementation of FLMMHs 
efﬁcacy
ﬂexibility , usability , maybe effectiveness , maybe
,
it simplicity , is it ﬂexibility
ﬂexibility , usability
word ; Interviewer : simplicity
simplicity ,
things like
of framework ?
a system , so usability , simplicity
,
what will you rate to
FGM ehh … I don’t know …
effectiveness
of whatever , ehh .. what
I’ll need you to
FGM : I think ﬂexibility
any other thing that
146
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

based system is aimed in future work as illustrated in the 
following section.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Over the years, advancements in technology have led to 
its 
substantial 
deployment 
of 
clinical 
and 
health 
management systems. Technology adoption for managing 
lifestyle in line with human mental health is increasingly 
becoming popular in modern society. However, several 
existing mental health systems were developed with no 
known development reference. This work classifies lifestyle 
management as a potent approach for mental health 
management and presents a Framework for Lifestyle 
Management pro Mental Health System based on a 
collective intelligence approach. Indication from expert 
judges in terms of holistic perception, i.e., flexibilities, 
simplicity, efficacy and effectiveness portray a good 
acceptance index thus, indicating the suitability of the 
framework for mental health system development. Also, 
there is negligible correlation between judges’ level of 
expertise and their perception of the framework’s efficacy, 
therefore, mental health management systems’ development 
is made easy via FLMMHS’ adoption, irrespective of expert 
level or mental-health knowledge. Although the framework 
has been successfully evaluated by experts, future work 
aims on a comprehensive technical implementation of the 
framework, which can be deployable as software library, 
Web service or compact mobile/Web management system. 
Such implementation permits a further empirical validation 
of the effectiveness of mental health systems for managing 
mental health and its disorders. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. O. Isiaq and K. Hamling, ‘A Personalised Lifestyle 
Management Framework for Decision Support System in 
Mental Health’, in The Eleventh International Conference 
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (e-
TELEMED), 2019, pp. 96–101. 
[2] 
National Institute of Mental Health, ‘Transforming the 
understanding and treatment of mental illnesses’, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-
illness.shtml. [Accessed: 01-Mar-2019]. 
[3] 
C. Samele, S. Frew, and N. Urquía, ‘Mental health 
Systems in the European Union Member States, Status of 
Mental Health in Populations and Benefits to be Expected 
from Investments into Mental Health’, 2013. 
[4] 
K. Smith, ‘Mental health: A world of depression’, Nature, 
2014. 
[5] 
A. S. Zigmond and R. P. Snaith, ‘The Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale’, Acta Psychiatr. Scand., 1983. 
[6] 
W. J. Earle, ‘DSM-5’, Philos. Forum, 2014. 
[7] 
World Health Organization, ‘The ICD-10 Classification 
of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical description 
and diagnostic guidelines’, Int. Classif., 1992. 
[8] 
R. L. Spitzer, K. Kroenke, J. B. W. Williams, and B. 
Löwe, ‘A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: The GAD-7’, Arch. Intern. Med., 2006. 
[9] 
World Health Organisation, ‘Global Mental Health, How 
Are We Doing?’, 2015. 
[10] 
M. H. Trivedi et al., ‘Evaluation of outcomes with 
citalopram for depression using measurement-based care 
in STAR*D: Implications for clinical practice’, Am. J. 
Psychiatry, vol. 163, pp. 28–40, 2006. 
[11] 
D. L. Marais and I. Petersen, ‘Health system governance 
to support integrated mental health care in South Africa: 
Challenges and opportunities’, Int. J. Ment. Health Syst., 
vol. 9, no. 1, 2015. 
[12] 
G. E. A. Ndersson, P. I. M. C. Uijpers, P. E. R. C. 
Arlbring, H. E. R. Iper, and E. R. I. K. H. Edman, ‘Guided 
internet-based vs. face-to-face cognitive behaviour 
therapy for psychiatric and somatic disorders’, J. World 
Psychiatr. Assoc., no. October, 2014. 
[13] 
R. Alnanih, O. Ormandjieva, and T. Radhakrishnan, 
‘Context-based user stereotype model for mobile user 
interfaces in health care applications’, in Procedia 
Computer Science, 2013. 
[14] 
D. C. Mohr, S. M. Schueller, E. Montague, M. N. Burns, 
and P. Rashidi, ‘The behavioral intervention technology 
model: An integrated conceptual and technological 
framework for ehealth and mhealth interventions’, 
Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2014. 
[15] 
Samsung, ‘Samsung Galaxy Watch Active’, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.samsung.com/global/galaxy/galaxy-watch-
active/. [Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[16] 
D. C. Mohr, M. N. Burns, S. M. Schueller, G. Clarke, and 
M. Klinkman, ‘Behavioral Intervention Technologies: 
Evidence review and recommendations for future research 
in mental health’, Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry, 2013. 
[17] 
BACtrack, ‘The Leader in Breathalyzers’, 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.bactrack.com/. [Accessed: 28-
May-2019]. 
[18] 
Digital Health Age, ‘Wearable SmartStop to help smokers 
quit’, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://digitalhealthage.com/smartstop-helps-smokers-quit/. 
[Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[19] 
J. Shelton, ‘Top 25 Mental Health Apps for 2018: An 
Alternative to Therapy?’, PSYCOM, 2018. . 
[20] 
Google Play, ‘Best Depression Apps of 2018’, Google 
Android 
Store, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.excelat
life.depression&hl=en_GB. [Accessed: 08-Nov-2018]. 
[21] 
Psych Central Research Team, ‘Depression Test’, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://psychcentral.com/quizzes/depression-quiz/. 
[Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[22] 
PsyberGuide, ‘MoodTrack Diary: Mood Tracker’, 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://psyberguide.org/apps/mood-
tracking-journal-and-diary/. [Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[23] 
BC Mental Health & Substance Use Servicces, ‘BC 
Partners 
for 
Mental 
Health 
and 
Substance 
Use 
Information’, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bcmhsus.ca/health-info/mental-health-
substance-use-resources/bc-partners. [Accessed: 28-Nov-
2018]. 
[24] 
Pacifica Labs Inc, ‘Pacifica App for Anxiety &amp; 
Depression’, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.thinkpacifica.com/. 
[Accessed: 
22-Oct-
147
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2018]. 
[25] 
An Roinn Slainte; Mannystrie O Poustie, ‘Service 
Framework for Mental Health and Wellbeing 2018-2021’, 
2018. 
[26] 
Organisation 
for 
Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development, ‘OECD Mental Health Performance 
Framework’, 2018. 
[27] 
NHS, ‘The Community Mental Health Framework for 
Adults and Older Adults’, 2019. 
[28] 
A. M. Kilbourne et al., ‘Measuring and improving the 
quality of mental health care: a global perspective.’, 
World Psychiatry, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 30–38, Feb. 2018. 
[29] 
N. Sunderji, A. Ion, A. Ghavam-Rassoul, and A. Abate, 
‘Evaluating the implementation of integrated mental 
health care: A systematic review to guide the development 
of quality measures’, Psychiatr. Serv., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 
891–898, 2017. 
[30] 
L. A. Clark, B. Cuthbert, R. Lewis-Fernández, W. E. 
Narrow, and G. M. Reed, ‘Three Approaches to 
Understanding and Classifying Mental Disorder: ICD-11, 
DSM-5, and the National Institute of Mental Health’s 
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC)’, Psychol. Sci. Public 
Interes., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 72–145, 2017. 
[31] 
M. Vrabel, ‘Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses’, Oncol. Nurs. Forum, 2015. 
[32] 
British Library, ‘About British Library EThOS - search 
and order theses online’, EThOS e-theses online service, 
2017. . 
[33] 
TIB, ‘Home - Technische Informationsbibliothek (TIB)’, 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.tib.eu/en/. 
[Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[34] 
Google, ‘Google Scholar’, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://scholar.google.co.uk/. [Accessed: 28-May-2019]. 
[35] 
T. 
Segaran, 
Programming 
Collective 
Intelligence: 
Building Smart Web 2.0 Applications. 2007. 
[36] 
G. Mulgan, ‘Big Mind: How Collective Intelligence Can 
Change Our World - introduction’, in Big Mind, Princeton 
University Press, 2017. 
[37] 
K. Salaheddin and B. Mason, ‘Identifying barriers to 
mental health help-seeking among young adults in the 
UK: a cross-sectional survey’, Br. J. Gen. Pract., vol. 66, 
no. 651, pp. e686–e692, 2016. 
[38] 
J. C. Glenn, ‘Collective intelligence systems and an 
application by The Millennium Project for the Egyptian 
Academy of Scientific Research and Technology’, 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, vol. 97, no. February, 
pp. 7–14, 2015. 
[39] 
E. K. Wakida et al., ‘Barriers and facilitators to the 
integration of mental health services into primary health 
care: a systematic review protocol’, Syst. Rev., vol. 6, no. 
1, p. 171, Dec. 2017. 
[40] 
NHS, ‘How to access mental health services - NHS’, 
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.nhs.uk/using-the-
nhs/nhs-services/mental-health-services/how-to-access-
mental-health-services/. [Accessed: 12-Oct-2018]. 
[41] 
World Health Organization, ‘Evidence-informed policy-
making’, World Health Organization, 2013. 
[42] 
Department of Health, ‘From segregation to inclusion: 
Commissioning guidance on day services for people with 
mental health problems’, 2006. 
[43] 
R. Keynejad et al., ‘Building the capacity of policy-
makers and planners to strengthen mental health systems 
in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic 
review’, BMC Health Serv. Res., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 601, 
Dec. 2016. 
[44] 
Health Level 7 International, ‘HL7 Standards Product 
Brief - HL7 Cross-Paradigm Implementation Guide: 
Behavioral Health Data Exchange, Release 1 - US 
Realm’, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cf
m?product_id=462. [Accessed: 12-Nov-2018]. 
[45] 
WHO (World Health Organization)., ‘Framework and 
Standards for Country Health Information Systems’, Heal. 
Metrics Netw., 2012. 
[46] 
D. D. Luxton, R. A. Mccann, N. E. Bush, M. C. 
Mishkind, and G. M. Reger, ‘mHealth for Mental Health: 
Integrating 
Smartphone 
Technology 
in 
Behavioral 
Healthcare’, Prof. Psychol. Res. Pr., vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 
505–512, 2011. 
[47] 
D. E. Jake-Schoffman et al., ‘Methods for Evaluating the 
Content, Usability, and Efficacy of Commercial Mobile 
Health Apps.’, JMIR mHealth uHealth, vol. 5, no. 12, p. 
e190, Dec. 2017. 
[48] 
S. M. Schueller, J. J. Washburn, and M. Price, ‘Exploring 
mental health providers’ interest in using web and mobile-
based tools in their practices’, Internet Interv., vol. 4, pp. 
145–151, May 2016. 
[49] 
H. A. Pincus, C. M. Pechura, L. Elinson, and A. R. Pettit, 
‘Depression in primary care: linking clinical and systems 
strategies’, Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 311–
318, Nov. 2001. 
[50] 
U. Sarkar et al., ‘Usability of Commercially Available 
Mobile Applications for Diverse Patients’, J Gen Intern 
Med, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 1417–1443, 2016. 
[51] 
E. R. Surjaningrum, A. F. Jorm, H. Minas, and R. 
Kakuma, ‘Personal attributes and competencies required 
by community health workers for a role in integrated 
mental health care for perinatal depression: voices of 
primary health care stakeholders from Surabaya, 
Indonesia’, Int. J. Ment. Health Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 46, 
Dec. 2018. 
[52] 
S. Siddiqi et al., ‘Framework for assessing governance of 
the health system in developing countries: Gateway to 
good governance’, Health Policy (New. York)., vol. 90, 
pp. 13–25, 2009. 
[53] 
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, The 
NICE Guideline on the Treatment and Depression the 
Treatment and Management of Depression. 2010. 
[54] 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 
‘Depression in adults: recognition and management | 
Guidance and guidelines | NICE’, clinical guideline, 
2018.  
[55] 
Mental Health America, ‘Mental Health Facts, Stats, and 
Data’, Mental Health America, 2018.  
[56] 
A. P. Association, Diagnostic an Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders. 2016. 
[57] 
World 
Health 
Organisation, 
‘ICD-10 
International 
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health 
Problems’, 2011. 
[58] 
A. Beck, R. Steer, and G. Brown, ‘Beck Depression 
Inventory-II (BDI-II)’, … Beck Depress. Invent., 1993. 
[59] 
K. Kroenke, R. L. Spitzer, and J. B. W. Williams, ‘The 
PHQ-9’, J. Gen. Intern. Med., 2001. 
[60] 
F. N. Jacka and M. Berk, ‘Depression, diet and exercise’, 
148
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The Medical journal of Australia. 2013. 
[61] 
H. Tanaka et al., ‘An examination of sleep health, 
lifestyle and mental health in junor high school students’, 
in Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 2002. 
[62] 
D. Freeman et al., ‘Articles The effects of improving 
sleep on mental health (OASIS): a randomised controlled 
trial with mediation analysis’, p. 749, 2017. 
[63] 
M. Mukaka, ‘A guide to appropriate use of correlation 
coefficient in medical research’, Malawi Med. J., pp. 69–
71, 2012. 
[64] 
A. Edwards-Jones, ‘Qualitative data analysis with 
NVIVO’, J. Educ. Teach., 2014. 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
Table 3: A Recapitulated Survey Questions with Dimensions of Evaluation for FLMMHS 
 
No 
 
Expert-judge questions 
Experts’ 
knowledge & 
expertise 
Evaluation parameters pro questions 
correspondence  
Efficacy 
Effecti
veness 
Flexibility 
Simplicit
y 
1 
Expert’s level of expertise of 
Web/Software/System development 
Ö 
 
 
 
 
2 
Expert’s experience of clinical & MH 
system development 
Ö 
 
 
 
 
3 
Expert’s knowledge of MH disorders, 
characteristics & symptoms 
Ö 
 
 
 
 
4 
Expert’s perception of utilising the 
framework for developing MH 
management system  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5 
Expert’s knowledge of MH Standards and 
its availability 
Ö 
 
 
 
 
6 
Technology acceptance & change within 
the framework 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
7 
Acceptability of the framework by system 
developers for MH system development 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
8 
Credibility of Framework for MH system 
development 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
9 
Framework acceptability (Question ‘g’ 
repeated) 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
10 
User’s privacy consideration for MH 
system development 
 
Ö 
 
 
 
11 
Provisions of guidelines for developers of 
MH system  
 
Ö 
 
 
 
12 
Skill & knowledge enhancement for 
developers of MH system 
 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
13 
Motivation and support for developer in 
developing MH management system 
 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
14 
Resources consideration for development 
of MH system  
 
Ö 
 
 
 
15 
Guide to MH Policies & Strategies for 
developing MH system  
 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
16 
Easy of comprehending framework for 
MH system development 
 
 
 
 
Ö 
17 
Expert’s perceived usefulness of the 
framework for MH system development 
 
Ö 
 
 
 
18 
Effectiveness/efficacy of the framework 
for developing MH Diagnosis  
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
19 
Effectiveness/efficacy of the framework 
for developing MH Prevention 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
20 
Effectiveness/efficacy of the framework 
for developing MH Alleviation 
 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
21 
Effectiveness of the framework for 
developing MH system holistically 
 
 
Ö 
 
 
22 
Expert’s ideal characteristics of 
framework for MH system development  
 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
Ö 
 
 
149
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table 4: A Matrix Representation of Themes Association via Coded Data 
 
Expertise 
MH 
knowledge 
Expert 
perception 
Flexibility 
Simplicity 
Efficacy 
Effectiveness 
Other 
factors 
Expertise  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
MH 
knowledge 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Expert 
perception 
16 
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Flexibility 
4 
0 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Simplicity 
4 
0 
11 
10 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Efficacy 
7 
3 
8 
5 
6 
- 
- 
- 
Effectiveness 
20 
4 
17 
7 
12 
18 
- 
- 
Other 
factors 
6 
0 
6 
5 
10 
8 
15 
- 
 
150
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

