Population Generation for Agent-based Simulations of Stroke Logistics Policies 
A Case Study of Stroke Patient Mobility 
Abdulrahman Alassadi, Fabian Lorig, and Johan Holmgren 
Department of Computer Science and Media Technology 
Faculty of Technology and Society, Malmö University 
Malmö, Sweden 
e-mail: alassadi@live.com, fabian.lorig@mau.se, johan.holmgren@mau.se
 
Abstract—For acute medical conditions, for instance strokes, 
the time until the start of the treatment is a crucial factor to 
prevent a fatal outcome and to facilitate the recovery of the 
patient’s health. Hence, the planning and optimization of 
patient logistics is of high importance to ensure prompt access 
to healthcare facilities in case of medical emergencies. 
Computer simulation can be used to investigate the effects of 
different stroke logistics policies under realistic conditions 
without jeopardizing the health of the patients. The success of 
such policies greatly depends on the behavior of the 
individuals. Hence, agent-based simulation is particularly well-
suited as it imitates human behavior and decision-making by 
means of artificial intelligence, which allows for investigating 
the effects of policies under different conditions. Agent-based 
simulation requires the generation of a realistic synthetic 
population, that adequately represents the population that 
shall be investigated such that reliable conclusions can be 
drawn from the simulation results. In this article, we propose a 
process for generating an artificial population of potential 
stroke patients that can be used to investigate the effects of 
stroke logistics policies using agent-based simulation. To 
illustrate how this process can be applied, we present the 
results from a case study in the region of Skåne in southern 
Sweden, where a synthetic population of stroke patients with 
realistic mobility behavior is simulated.  
Keywords-Agent-based Simulation; Synthetic Population; 
Population Generation; Policy Making; Mobile Stroke Unit. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Certain medical conditions, for instance strokes, require 
rapid responses of medical professionals to prevent a fatal 
outcome and to facilitate the recovery of the patient’s health. 
However, many victims of potentially life-threatening 
conditions such as strokes are often not surrounded by 
medical professionals when these conditions occur as they 
may appear suddenly and without prior indications. 
Accordingly, to prevent permanent damage from such acute 
medical conditions or even the patients passing away, it has 
become a goal of our society to provide adequate care to all 
citizens as quickly as possible. This includes the 
development of an advanced medical infrastructure that 
provides necessary health care services but also to ensure 
that this infrastructure is available for everyone. Some 
treatments of medical emergencies, however, require 
specialized equipment and personnel, which is only available 
in certain facilities (e.g., specialty hospitals). Especially in 
rural areas, there is a lack of such facilities. Hence, the 
planning and optimization of patient logistics is of high 
importance to ensure prompt access to healthcare facilities in 
case of medical emergencies. 
In a study presented at the IARIA DIGITAL 2021 
conference on Advances on Societal Digital Transformation, 
Alassadi et al. [1] address the challenge of generating a 
realistic population of stroke patients, which takes travel 
behavior into account. Such an artificial population of stroke 
patients is required, for instance, in agent-based simulations 
(ABS) and allows for the assessing the effects of different 
stroke logistics policies. One example of such a policy is the 
optimal placement of Mobile Stroke Units (MSUs) across a 
region. The study uses aggregated and individual-based data 
from different sources, from which probability distributions 
can be derived to generate an artificial population of agents. 
In their study, the authors focus on strokes, which is a 
common cause of mortality [2]. Every year, more than 
1 million people in the European Union suffer from a stroke 
and the one-month case-fatality is up to 35% [3]. The 
occurrence of strokes is associated with the age of the 
individual and most of those suffering from a stroke are 70 
years of age or older. Hence, as the number of people that are 
older than 70 years will increase, the number of strokes is 
also expected to increase [4], [5].  
To investigate the suitability and effects of different 
stroke logistics policies for a specific region, computer 
simulation can be used. They allow for investigating 
different 
policies 
under 
realistic 
conditions 
without 
jeopardizing the health of the patients. Instead of conducting 
real-world studies, different policies and their potential 
effects can be studied and compared in an artificial system. 
To this end, simulation enable what-if analyses of different 
scenarios, to analyze how different circumstances affect the 
behavior of a system without actually interfering with the 
real-world system that shall be investigated.  
The use of simulation in healthcare is well established. 
Barnes et al. [6], for instance, provide a comprehensive 
overview of how simulation can be applied in healthcare 
operations management and underline the successful 
application of simulation for evaluating policy alternatives. 
An increasing application of simulation in healthcare has 
also been identified by Almagooshi [7], e.g., for the analysis 
of patient flows, emergency departments, and treatment of, 
e.g., stroke. 
The effects and success of logistics policies greatly 
depends on the behavior of individuals that are affected by 
the policy. Hence, to investigate how different policies affect 
11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the accessibility to healthcare services for patients, the 
behavior and routines of the potential patients need to be 
represented in the simulation model. We argue that ABS is 
particularly well-suited to investigate the effects of logistics 
policies, not only in terms of strokes but also for other acute 
medical conditions.  
In ABS, an artificial population is generated, which 
consists of so-called agents. Agents are characterized by 
individual attributes such as age, gender, place of residence, 
and health state, and imitate human behavior using Artificial 
Intelligence. A major challenge when using ABS to analyze 
logistics policies, for instance for the treatment of strokes, is 
the generation of an artificial population of patients that 
imitate the behavior of the real-world population such that 
the effects of the policies can be investigated. This might 
include deterioration of health condition according to 
individual attributes such as, e.g., age, gender, but also the 
modeling of the patients’ whereabouts. For instance, when 
investigating the placement of MSUs for the treatment of 
strokes, the locations of the MSUs should be determined 
such that the time to treatment can be reduced for all 
inhabitants of the region. For this purpose, Amouzad 
Mahdiraji et al. [8] studied the average time to treatment for 
different distributions of MSUs and showed that a small 
number of MSUs can indeed significantly reduce the time to 
treatment for most inhabitants in the region. For their study, 
the authors used demographic data on the inhabitants’ place 
of residence for determining where the demand for 
emergency care occurs. However, this does not consider that 
individuals travel and might not be at home when having a 
stroke, for instance, due to leisure activities, shopping, or 
work. Yet, the spatial distribution of strokes potentially 
affects the suitability of different stroke logistics policies 
and, thus, might need to be considered when assessing their 
suitability. 
In this article, we propose a process for generating an 
artificial population of potential patients that can be used to 
investigate the effects of stroke logistics policies using ABS. 
To illustrate how this process can be applied, we present the 
results from a study where a synthetic population of stroke 
patients with realistic mobility behavior is simulated. We 
apply the model to the region of Skåne in southern Sweden 
to investigate how travel behavior is expected to affect the 
spatial distribution of stroke patients. The proposed approach 
allows for testing different policies without jeopardizing the 
health of the patients. The generated synthetic population of 
stroke patients can be used, for instance, to assess different 
logistics policies, e.g., to compare different placements of 
MSUs and to assess how this affects the time to treatment. 
The process, however, is not only applicable for stroke 
patients but can also be adapted and applied for other acute 
medical conditions. 
The remainder of the article is structured as follows. 
Section II presents related work on the use of agent-based 
modeling and simulation in healthcare, on policy making for 
treatment of acute strokes, and on methods for population 
generation. In Section III, the process for generating a 
synthetic population is presented. In Section IV, a case study 
is presented where the proposed process is applied for 
generating a population of stroke patients with travel 
behavior. Section IV presents and discusses the results of the 
case study in Skåne, Sweden, and in Section V, conclusions 
are drawn, and future work is presented. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Diagnosis and treatment processes in healthcare often 
include multiple consecutive steps and involve different 
specialists and caregivers. Planning and optimizing such 
complex processes are challenging and requires the 
comparison of potential configurations under different 
circumstances. Evaluating these processes in the real-world 
prior to their implementation might not only be costly and 
time consuming but also pose a danger to the patients’ well-
being. To overcome this, simulation can be used. By 
building a virtual model of the real-world, an artificial 
system can be created to investigate different scenarios and 
to observe the effects different measures and decisions 
might have on the process of care provision.  
A. Agent-based modeling and simulation in healthcare 
There exist different simulation paradigms, i.e., 
approaches for modeling and simulating phenomena or 
systems. In healthcare, as well as in other domains where 
humans are the object of investigation, individual-based 
simulation paradigms are often applied. An example is 
ABS, a form of microsimulation, which consists of the 
simulation of states and behavior of individuals over time 
[9]. Here, each individual is represented by an agent, an 
autonomous entity that, for example, imitates human-like 
behavior and reasoning. This includes the subjective 
perception of the environment but also the individual 
decision making based on the personal traits and 
characteristics of each individual, which leads to individual 
actions and behavior. 
In logistics and production, for instance, the use of 
simulation is well established [10]. But also in healthcare, 
for instance in terms of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, the 
use of simulation is feasible [11]. Cabrera et al. [12] use 
simulation for designing a decision support system that can 
provide management support for emergency departments. 
This is achieved by analyzing the optimal staff 
configuration to minimize patients’ waiting time and 
maximize patient throughput. A more extensive simulation 
model of hospital processes has been proposed by 
Djanatliev & German [13]. It combines individual-based 
simulation with system dynamics for analyzing different 
innovative workflows prior to their implementation, e.g., 
prostate cancer screening and effects of MSUs on onset-to-
treatment times. 
Simulations of stroke treatment were presented by, for 
instance, Monks et al. [14] and Chemweno et al. [15]. 
Monks et al. investigate clinical benefits of reducing delays 
in thrombolysis (alteplase) of AIS patients. They propose a 
discrete-event simulation model of stroke patients arriving 
at a large district hospital, where measures can be adopted to 
reduce in-hospital delays (e.g., prealert of paramedics) and 
where certain limitations of alteplase treatment (i.e., 
extension of treatment deadline from 3 to 4.5 hours and 
12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

patient age over 80 years) can be relaxed. To assess and 
compare the benefits of policies for reducing waiting times, 
the authors model two treatment paths, the traditional 
treatment and one that takes measures into account for 
reducing in-hospital delays. The results show that an 
extension of the time window in combination with reduced 
delays can lead to 5-times increased thrombolysis rates. 
Chemweno et al. present a discrete-event simulation of the 
diagnostic path of patients in a stroke unit to investigate the 
effect of different test capacities. This is to overcome 
shortcomings of traditional queuing theory models, which 
cannot predict waiting times due to the complexity of 
treatment pathways and interrelationships between required 
resources. This allows for the assessment of policy changes 
in capacity profiles and test resources. The study outlines 
the effects different policies might have on waiting times, 
e.g., adding extra timeslots, shifting from MR to CT scans, 
and implementing joint timeslots.  
B. Agent-based Simulations for Policy Making 
Even though the use of agent-based approaches is 
established in many domains and disciplines, the practical 
use to facilitate policy making is still limited. Most 
applications pursue scientific purposes, which might be due 
to a series of reasons, e.g., lacking trust in the models or 
inappropriateness of models, difficulties in developing or 
using the models, and a lacking awareness that the method 
exists.  
Ruppert et al. [16] argue that a thorough analysis of 
policy options is required before a suitable policy can be 
implemented. To this end, they argue that ABS often are 
complex and, thus, difficult to access by policy makers. 
Silverman et al. [17] underline that simulations are essential 
to address population health challenges, as they complement 
traditional epidemiological toolkits. They particularly 
outline that additional data sources need and especially GIS 
information need to be integrated such that models can serve 
as policy sandboxes and that ABS can become a valuable 
tool for healthcare-related policy making. By proposing a 
process for generating an artificial population of patients 
that can be used in ABS, we contribute to lowering the 
threshold for using simulation in policy making. 
C. Policies for Treatment of Acute Strokes 
What makes the example of strokes particularly well-
suited for studying patient logistics policies is that there are 
two types of acute strokes. Acute ischemic strokes (AIS), 
where a clot or narrowed blood vessel blocks the flow of 
blood to the brain, and hemorrhagic strokes, caused by a 
burst blood vessel [18]. Both types of strokes require 
immediate treatment and delays negatively affect the 
patients’ outcomes. Yet, the treatment of these two kinds of 
strokes differs greatly. To dissolve the blood clot and to 
restore the blood flow, an AIS needs to be treated with 
thrombolytic medication as quickly as possible. In case of 
hemorrhagic strokes, however, there is a contraindication for 
thrombolysis as it might kill the patient. Instead, the effect of 
blood thinners must be counteracted to control and stop the 
bleeding. Hence, making the right diagnosis is a vital first 
step for the efficient treatment of strokes.  
Imaging of the brain, e.g., through CT or MRI scans, and 
specific laboratory tests are required to adequately diagnose 
the cause of a stroke. However, especially in urban areas, the 
access to such scanners and laboratories is limited and the 
patient needs to be transported to a suitable hospital, causing 
valuable time to pass. A stroke logistics policy that can be 
applied to address this challenge is the deployment of Mobile 
Stroke Units (MSUs), which are specialized ambulances 
with all equipment required to diagnose stroke patients. 
Through this, the time between the onset of symptoms and 
the beginning of treatment of the stroke can be shortened, 
which significantly can improve the prognosis of the 
patients. The feasibility of this concept and its capability to 
prevent brain damage of stroke patients was demonstrated by 
Walter et al. [19].  
For the treatment of acute ischemic strokes, intravenous 
thrombolysis to dissolve the blood clot is the only approved 
reperfusion 
treatment 
[20]. 
However, 
according 
to 
Fassbender et al. [21], only less than 5% of the stroke 
patients receive this therapy. One potential explanation is 
that the critical time window of 3 hours is exceeded due to 
the transport to the hospital. To reduce the time to treatment, 
the use of Mobile Stroke Units (MSUs) was proposed, i.e., 
specialized vehicles that are equipped with devices required 
for adequately diagnosing and treating stroke patients. 
Walter et al. [19] compared the use of MSUs to hospital 
treatment and found that the time from alarm to therapy 
could be reduced from 76 to 35 minutes. Calderon et al. [22] 
analyzed the worldwide status of MSUs and compared 
different services outlining the success of the approach. The 
economic viability of MSU treatment was analyzed by Kim 
et al. [23], underlining its cost-effectiveness due to earlier 
provision of therapy.  
The success of MSUs and their effect on treatment times 
also depends on where they are located. Rhudy et al. [24] 
visually analyzed data of MSU dispatches and the 
occurrence of strokes to optimize service provision. For 
Sydney, Australia, Phan et al. [25] searched for optimal 
locations for MSUs by investigating travel times from 
suburbs to each potential MSU hub. For a similar purpose, 
Amouzad Mahdiraji et al. [8] developed an agent-based 
model that allows for analyzing the benefits of different 
MSU configurations. In their study, Amouzad Mahdiraji et 
al. investigated the average time to treatment for different 
distributions of MSUs and showed that a small number of 
MSUs can significantly reduce the time to treatment for 
most inhabitants in the region. Moreover, agent-based 
simulation can also be used to assess other stroke logistics 
policies, e.g., whether patients should be brought to the 
closest hospital or to a specialized thrombectomy center 
[26]. To assess this, Al Fatah et al. developed a simulation 
model of logistical operations of stroke patients, i.e., 
whether patients should be transported to the closest 
hospital or towards a stroke center. The results showed that 
those patients that require special treatment indeed benefit 
from being transported in the direction of a stroke center 
13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

whereas those who do not require specialist treatment 
benefit from being transported to the closest hospital.  
None of the presented approaches takes travel behavior 
into consideration when investigating and optimizing 
locations and service designs of MSUs. Instead, individuals 
are assumed to stay at their home location, which can be 
derived from census data or randomly selected using Monte 
Carlo approaches [26]. 
D. Population Generation 
To generate realistic results when applying agent-based 
simulation, individuals and their behavior must be modeled 
in a realistic way. Especially when modeling a larger 
population of individuals, it is important that the relevant 
features of the artificial population, e.g., age distribution or 
employment status, correspond to those of the original 
population. However, due to privacy reasons, data on each 
individual’s properties is usually not available. The 
challenge associated with synthetic population generation is 
that aggregated data, e.g., census data, and disaggregated 
personal data need to be combined to model each individual, 
such that the characteristics of the modeled population 
correspond to the used input data [27], [28]. In 
transportation, for instance, population generation is used to 
model individual demand for mobility services [29], [30]. 
III. 
POPULATION  GENERATION FOR SIMULATING STROKE 
LOGISTICS POLICIES 
The success and suitability of using ABS for policy 
making strongly depends on how realistically the behavior 
of the individuals is modelled. In this regard, it is relevant to 
use appropriate data and to identify all aspects of human 
behavior and decision-making that are important for the 
scenarios that shall be investigated as well as to adequately 
model them. Especially when using ABS for policy making, 
simpler models of human behavior can limit the adaptability 
of the individuals and, thus, limit the significance of the 
simulation results. This is also in line with the trend from 
simple and abstract models (KISS approach) to more data-
based and descriptive models, taking a wider range of 
evidence into account (KIDS approach) [31]. 
 Modelling human behavior often includes the use of 
real-world data, e.g., socio-demographic census data, for 
generating a realistic population. Chapuis & Taillandier [27] 
identify two main difficulties when generating synthetic 
populations, i.e., expansion and harmonization of available 
data, and discuss different approaches for generating 
synthetic populations for ABS. In particular, the authors 
distinguish 
between 
synthetic 
reconstruction 
and 
combinatorial reconstruction. Synthetic reconstruction is 
mostly based on probability distributions that the generated 
individuals need to correspond to whereas the approach of 
combinatorial optimization is to draw individuals from a 
sample and to (iteratively) modify this sample until it 
satisfies a given fitness criterion. 
Based on a literature review, Chapuis & Taillandier 
conclude that population generation processes tend to be 
poorly described. To overcome this, we propose a process 
for generating a synthetic population of individuals that can 
be used to assess stroke logistics policies. To demonstrate 
the feasibility of this process, we apply it to a case study of 
stroke patient mobility in Skåne, Sweden. 
There exists a number of different approaches for 
generating synthetic populations that can be used in agent-
based simulation models [32]. Some approaches reply on 
the availability of disaggregated data, from which samples 
are drawn and optimized. In our study, some of the available 
data sources contain aggregated data, i.e., census data and 
stroke data, which is due to data protection reasons. 
Thus, we pursue a conventional approach in this study 
as, for instance, described by Barthelemy & Cornelis [33]. 
In this approach, aggregated data, that in average describes 
certain characteristics of the true population, is merged with 
disaggregated data from a sample to generate a 
disaggregated dataset of a synthetic population. After 
identifying all relevant socio-demographic characteristics of 
the population, the underlying distribution of the true 
populations’ characteristics is estimated such that the 
distribution of the characteristics is preserved. Following 
this, individuals are selected from the disaggregated sample 
and added to the synthetic population in accordance with the 
estimated distribution. The goal of this approach is not to 
provide a one-to-one mapping of the real population but a 
matching of individuals to maintain the distribution of the 
relevant characteristics and attributes of the original 
population. 
For the assessment of stroke logistics policies, we first 
need to identify the important aspects of human behavior 
that need to be included. One determining factor for the 
prevalence of health conditions is the age of the individual 
and as we want to analyze logistics policies, the location of 
the individuals is important as well. Hence, we integrate 
census, travel survey, and health data to model the 
occurrence of a medical condition at specific locations. 
The presented process is inspired by Bissett et al. [34] 
and consists of three major steps that gradually add 
complexity to the synthetic population (see Figure 1). First, 
all individuals are generated using socio-demographic 
census data to define the constant attributes, i.e., those that 
do not change over time such as age, gender, or 
municipality of residence. Census data is often aggregated 
on a grid-base, e.g., 1x1 km grid cells. Hence, the grid cells 
need to be assigned to municipalities using GIS data. These 
constant attributes are important when using data from 
different datasets for the population generation as common 
attributes across the datasets, e.g., age or municipality, are 
required for the matching process [33]. 
14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  Process for generating a synthetic population of patients for investigating stroke logistics policies.
Individuals are then equipped with activities, which 
affect personal attributes that change over time, i.e., 
mobility patterns that affect the individuals’ locations and 
stroke occurrences that affect their health condition. In this 
step, disaggregated data is used to complement the 
aggregated census data according to the conventional 
approach described by Barthelemy & Cornelis. For 
modeling mobility, travel survey data can be used, that 
consists of real-world data on travelers (e.g., age and home 
municipality) and the trips they have taken (e.g., origin, 
destination, and trip length). Joining this data with GIS data 
allows for generating time-dependent travel demand 
between zones of a municipality as well as between 
municipalities.  The second dynamic attribute, which is 
coupled to the occurrence of a stroke, can be modeled by 
estimating the probability distribution of strokes from health 
data such that it can be matched according to age groups and 
municipalities. This is achieved by means of probability 
mass functions (PMF) and a non-homogeneous Poisson 
process (NHPP) (cf. Section IV). 
Finally, based on the travel demand, the location of each 
individual can be calculated over time. This is required to be 
able to determine where an individual is located when a 
stroke occurs. 
IV. 
AN AGENT-BASED MODEL FOR GENERATING A 
POPULATION OF STROKE PATIENTS WITH TRAVEL BEHAVIOR 
To allow for a more dynamic and realistic assessment of 
health logistics policies, we proposed a process for 
population generation. The resulting synthetic population 
can be used as input to an agent-based model to investigate 
the effects of different policies. In this article, we use the 
example of stroke patients to show how such an analysis can 
be performed, taking travel behavior of individuals into 
account.  
In this section, we demonstrate how we generate a 
synthetic population of potential stroke patients, combining 
socio-demographic census data, data on real strokes cases 
from a healthcare provider, and travel data from a transport 
service provider. This allows for the simulation of the 
dynamical spatial and the temporal component of stroke 
occurrence and treatment.  
For the study, we selected Skåne, a region in southern 
Sweden. Skåne consists of approximately 1.4 million 
inhabitants, that live in 33 municipalities with a total area of 
nearly 11 000 km2. In Skåne, there are 9 hospitals with 
emergency departments that can treat acute strokes. In 2015, 
there were 3 973 stroke incidents recorded in Skåne, out of 
which 3 830 patients also live in Skåne. Moreover, 12 
patients that have their place of residence in Skåne were 
treated in the neighboring counties Kronoberg, Blekinge, or 
Halland and most of the patients are 45 years of age and 
older. Based on data from the regional healthcare provider, 
Södra Sjukvårdsregionen (Southern Health Care Region; 
SHR), we derived the daily distribution of strokes per hour 
(see Figure 2). Most strokes are reported during the 
afternoon with most of the incidents occurring around 
4 p.m.
15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2.  Total number of strokes per hour extracted from data of the regional healthcare provider.
To model travel behavior, we used data from a regional 
travel survey (Resvaneundersökning för Skåne; RVU) that 
was conducted in Skåne in 2013 [35]. As part of this study, 
travelers were asked about their traveling habits and the 
resulting dataset contains information on approximately 
56 000 distinct trips. This includes, for instance, the origin, 
destination, duration, and purpose of the trip but also socio-
demographic data on the travellers, e.g., age, gender, and 
place of residence.  
Finally, for generating a realistic population, we used a 
census dataset from Statistiska centralbyrån (Statistics 
Sweden; SCB), the Swedish government agency for 
statistics. The SCB dataset includes, for instance, 
information of the density and age of the population of 
Skåne. Yet, this data only provides information on the 
permanent residence of individuals and not on their actual 
location. To allocate the anonymized trips of the RVU 
dataset to actual individuals from the SCB dataset, we 
randomly match the datasets based on the individuals’ age 
group and home municipality.  
For modeling the inter-arrival time of stroke incidents, 
we used a non-homogeneous Poisson process (NHPP) [36]. 
In contrast to ordinary Poisson processes, that are used to 
model events that occur with a fixed average rate of arrivals 
(λ), the rate of arrivals can vary over time in an NHPP 
where λ(t) is the rate function for time segment t for all  
t ∈ [0, t0] and λu(t) is the maximum number of actions in a 
time series with 0 ≤ λ(t) ≤ λu(t). By this means, we can 
explicitly model the accumulation of stroke events during 
the afternoon. In our NHPP, we divide each day into 24 time 
segments, each equipped with a specific probability that a 
stroke occurs during this hour in relation to the number of 
strokes occurring per day.  
Based on the generated number of daily stroke incidents, 
we define two probability mass functions (PMF) to 
distribute strokes across age groups and municipalities. 
These two distributions are then used to generate stroke 
incidents. Each generated stroke event consists of the 
patient’s age group, municipality, day of the year, and time 
of the day. This dataset is then matched with the population 
dataset, to predetermine the stroke patients as well as the 
point in time when the stroke will occur.  
When executing the model, the travel behavior, i.e., each 
trip of an individual, and the resulting locations of each 
individual of the population is simulated over time. The 
generated NHPP events define when the individual stroke 
incidents occur, and, at the generated time of each stroke 
incident, the individual’s current location can be determined 
based on the simulated trips.  
In recent years, ODD (Overview, Design concepts, and 
Details) protocols have been used to describe the structure 
and the dynamics of agent-based models in a standardized 
document [37]. They provide more detailed insights into the 
model and the underlying assumptions, which can be 
relevant for the interpretation of the results as well as for 
replicating experiments. The ODD of the model presented in 
this article can be found in [38].  
V. 
RESULTS OF THE SCENARIO STUDY IN SKÅNE 
We implemented the agent-based model of stroke patient 
travel behavior in the Repast Simphony simulation 
framework [39]. In the simulation, each time unit (tick) 
corresponds to 1 minute in reality. Hence, each day is 
simulated as 1440 ticks. For each tick, it is determined 
whether an individual will go on a trip and move to another 
location. When the predetermined stroke events occur, it is 
checked whether the individual is on a trip, to determine 
where the stroke occurred. 
The probability distributions that we extracted from the 
dataset are shown in Figure 3. The charts show the real data 
(orange) in comparison to the NHPP events we calculated 
(blue). There are only minor deviations from the original 
data for the stroke incidents per hour, per municipality, and 
per age group. To quantify how well the artificial data 
replicates the original data, the Relative Squared Error 
(RSE) and Root Relative Squared Error (RRSE) are given as 
measures. No significant deviation of the generated data 
from the real data can be observed considering the hour of 
the day (RRSE: 0.160) and the age group (RSSE: 0.046).  
 
16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
(a) hour of the day (RSE: 0.026, RRSE: 0.160) 
 
 
(b) municipalities in Skåne (RSE: 0.067, RRSE: 0.259) 
 
 
(c) age group (RSE: 0.002, RRSE: 0.046) 
 
Figure 3.  Distribution of stroke incidents: (a) per hours of the day (b) per municipality in Skåne (c) per age group. For each distribution, the Relative 
Squared Error (RSE) and Root Relative Squared Error (RRSE) are given as measures of the quality of the generated data. 
17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Only for the municipalities in Skåne, a difference can be 
observed for Malmö (RRSE: 0.259). This might be due to a 
bias, which results from Malmö’s role as center of the 
region and as the city has notably more inhabitants 
compared to all other cities and municipalities in Skåne.  
Instead of simulating all inhabitants of Skåne, we only 
simulated the trip activities of those individuals that were 
predetermined to suffer from a stroke. This is to reduce the 
computational complexity of the simulation. To reduce the 
effect of stochastic variations in the results, we replicated 
the simulation five times and calculated the average values 
from these runs. 
On average, 3 912 strokes occur in our simulation. The 
results indicate that 3 839 (98.1%) strokes occur at home 
whereas 73 (1.9%) strokes happen while the individual is on 
a trip and at another location. To check the plausibility of 
these results and to validate the study, we compare them to 
existing data. In the RVU travel data, only 15% of the 
recorded trips are performed by individuals that are 65 years 
of age or older, the main risk group for suffering from a 
stroke. Out of these trips, only 35% are taken in the 
afternoon, which is the time of the day where the occurrence 
of a stroke is most likely. 
Moreover, we analyzed the dataset of stroke incidents 
from SHR. Out of 3 842 stroke incidents of patients that live 
in Skåne, which were recorded within SHR, 3 830 actually 
got their treatment in Skåne. 3 106 (80.84%) of the patients 
that got a treatment in Skåne also got it within their 
municipality or at the hospital that is responsible for their 
municipality. Out of the remaining 736 patients (19.16%) 
that did receive their treatment at another hospital, 497 
patients live in municipalities where the responsible hospital 
does not provide emergency services around the clock. Of 
the remaining 239 patients, 80 were treated at Skåne 
University Hospital, which also provides highly specialized 
treatments for severe cases, 57 received treatment at private 
facilities, whose exact location is unknown, and 59 were 
treated at a hospital in a neighboring municipality, which 
might be due to the patients living closer to the hospital in 
the neighboring municipality. In total, only 46 patients 
(1.2%) receive their treatment obviously outside their home 
municipality, where it can be assumed that they were 
traveling. This corresponds to the results of our simulation. 
Figure 4 provides a visualization of the simulation 
results across the simulated region, Skåne. The occurrence 
of strokes is shown using a heatmap where the intensity of 
the red color indicates a higher (denser) occurrence of stroke 
incidents whereas brighter or completely white areas 
indicate that less strokes occurred or that no strokes 
occurred at all. Overall, the shape of the heatmap 
corresponds to the distribution of inhabitants across the 
region. In the larger cities, an accumulation of strokes can 
be observed (e.g., the Malmö-Lund area in the south-
western part of Skåne) as well as around other larger cities 
such as Helsingborg (northwest), Kristianstad (northeast), as 
well as Trelleborg and Ystad (southern coast).  
The crosses indicate the location of the hospitals. It can 
be observed that there are some accumulations of strokes in 
the central part of Skåne (Höör and Hörby) as well as in the 
eastern (Simrishamn) and northern (Osby and Örkelljunga) 
parts of the region, which do not have hospitals close by. It 
is in particular such areas that are dependent on 
sophisticated logistics policies and that can, for instance, 
benefit from the availability of MSUs. 
Figure 5 complements Figure 4 and shows a more 
detailed view on the Malmö-Lund area. On the left-hand 
side, the heatmap of this area is shown and each red dot 
represents one 1x1 km grid cell as defined by the census 
data used for the population generation process. On the 
right-hand side, an ordinary map of the same area is shown. 
Especially in the densely populated areas of Malmö close to 
the seaside but also in Limhamn (west), Oxie (center), as 
well as Arlöv, Lomma, and Staffanstorp (north), an 
accumulation of stroke incidents can be observed. This 
underlines the plausibility of the generated stroke incidents 
and shows that the distribution of the occurrences 
corresponds to the actual residences of the population. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Heatmap of where strokes occur and locations of the hospitals that provide treatment for stroke patients. 
18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
              
 
Figure 5.  Heatmap of where strokes occur in and around Malmö municipality (left) and OpenStreetMap of the municipalities (right).  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this article, we propose a process for the generation of 
synthetic populations, which can be used for investigating 
the effects of stroke logistics policies. The synthetic 
population corresponds to the original population in terms 
of the distribution of their relevant attributes that are 
required for analyzing a particular health condition, in this 
case, of stroke patients. This includes the age of the 
individuals, their place of residence (municipality) but also 
the imitation of their travel behavior as well as of the 
occurrence of strokes. Such synthetic populations enable the 
use of ABS, a simulation paradigm that uses Artificial 
Intelligence for modelling human behavior, which is a 
crucial factor when investigating the effects of policies. 
In particular, we demonstrate the generation of a realistic 
population of stroke patients, which also takes travel 
behavior into account. This allows for the assessment of 
different stroke logistics policies, such as the optimal 
placement of MSUs across a region. For this purpose, we 
used aggregated and individual-based data from different 
sources, from which we derived probability distributions 
that were then used to generate an artificial population of 
agents. 
To demonstrate the feasibility of the presented approach, 
we used data from the region of Skåne in southern Sweden. 
In the presented study, we simulated the travel behavior of 
stroke patients to investigate where strokes occur. Through 
this, a better understanding of the spatial distribution of 
stroke occurrence is achieved. This is relevant, for instance, 
for the optimal distribution of MSUs, such that the time to 
treatment is reduced for stroke patients. 
Our results show that the generated artificial population 
corresponds to the real data in terms of the time of the day, 
at which strokes occur, the distribution of strokes across the 
municipalities, and the age group of the patients. In total,  
 
approximately 1.9% of the strokes occur while the 
individual is on a trip and not in their municipality of 
residence. This observation corresponds to data on strokes 
that was provided by the healthcare provider. Hereby, were 
able to show by means of simulation that traveling only has 
a minor impact on where strokes occur and, thus, for policy 
making in stroke logistics. 
The generated artificial population of stroke patients is 
based on socio-demographic, healthcare, and travel data of 
the investigated region, to ensure the realistic representation 
of the real-world population. Yet, the presented process of 
population generation can also be applied to other regions 
and for other medical conditions, assuming that the required 
input data is accessible. This facilitates the conducting of 
agent-based simulation studies for investigating the effects 
different stroke logistics policies might have. It also 
increases the credibility of the simulation results such that 
conclusions can be drawn regarding the real world. 
As part of future work, we plan to incorporate the results 
from the population generation into simulations for 
assessing and comparing different policies for stroke 
logistics. Moreover, we intend to investigate and include 
seasonality effects into the model, i.e., tourists that come to 
the region and changed travel behavior during weekends. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Södra sjukvårdsregionen for the 
provision of the anonymized data on the occurrence of 
strokes in Skåne. We would also like to thank the 
anonymous reviewers of DIGITAL 2021 for their fruitful 
and valuable comments that helped us to improve this work. 
This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, 
Autonomous Systems and Software Program – Humanities 
and Society (WASP-HS) funded by the Marianne and 
Marcus Wallenberg Foundation 
 
19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alassadi, F. Lorig, and J. Holmgren, “An Agent-based 
Model for Simulating Travel Patterns of Stroke Patients,” in 
DIGITAL 2021–Advances on Societal Digital Transformation, 
14-18 November 2021, Athens, Greece, 2021, pp. 11–16. 
[2] eurostat, “Causes of death statistics.” [Online]. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Causes_of_death_statistics 
[retrieved: May 2022] 
[3] Y. Béjot, H. Bailly, J. Durier, and M. Giroud, “Epidemiology 
of stroke in Europe and trends for the 21st century,” La Presse 
Médicale, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. e391–e398, 2016. 
[4] H. A. Wafa, C. D. Wolfe, E. Emmett, G. A. Roth, C. O. 
Johnson, and Y. Wang, “Burden of stroke in Europe: thirty-
year projections of incidence, prevalence, deaths, and 
disability-adjusted life years,” Stroke, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2418–
2427, 2020. 
[5] E. Stevens, E. Emmett, Y. Wang, C. McKevitt, and C. Wolfe, 
“The burden of stroke in Europe: the challenge for policy 
makers,” 2017, [Online].  
 
Available: 
https://www.stroke.org.uk/sites/default/files/the_ 
burden_of_stroke_in_europe_-_challenges_for_policy_ 
makers.pdf [retrieved: May 2022] 
[6] S. Barnes, B. Golden, and S. Price, “Applications of agent-
based modeling and simulation to healthcare operations 
management,” in Handbook of healthcare operations 
management, Springer, 2013, pp. 45–74. 
[7] S. Almagooshi, “Simulation modelling in healthcare: 
Challenges and trends,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 
301–307, 2015. 
[8] S. Amouzad Mahdiraji, O. Dahllöf, F. Hofwimmer, J. 
Holmgren, R.-C. Mihailescu, and J. Petersson, “Mobile stroke 
units for acute stroke care in the south of sweden,” Cogent 
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 1874084, 2021. 
[9] P.-O. Siebers, C. M. Macal, J. Garnett, D. Buxton, and M. 
Pidd, “Discrete-event simulation is dead, long live agent-based 
simulation!,” Journal of Simulation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 204–
210, 2010. 
[10] A. A. Tako and S. Robinson, “The application of discrete 
event simulation and system dynamics in the logistics and 
supply chain context,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 52, no. 
4, pp. 802–815, Mar. 2012. 
[11] F. Lorig, E. Johansson, and P. Davidsson, “Agent-Based 
Social Simulation of the Covid-19 Pandemic: A Systematic 
Review,” JASSS, vol. 24, no. 3, p. 5, 2021. 
[12] E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. 
Luque, “Optimization of Healthcare Emergency Departments 
by Agent-Based Simulation,” Procedia Computer Science, 
vol. 4, pp. 1880–1889, 2011. 
[13] A. Djanatliev and R. German, “Prospective healthcare 
decision-making by combined system dynamics, discrete-
event and agent-based simulation,” in 2013 Winter 
Simulations Conference (WSC), 2013, pp. 270–281. 
[14] T. Monks, M. Pitt, K. Stein, and M. James, “Maximizing the 
population benefit from thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke: 
a modeling study of in-hospital delays,” Stroke, vol. 43, no. 
10, pp. 2706–2711, 2012. 
[15] P. Chemweno, V. Thijs, L. Pintelon, and A. Van Horenbeek, 
“Discrete event simulation case study: Diagnostic path for 
stroke patients in a stroke unit,” Simulation Modelling 
Practice and Theory, vol. 48, pp. 45–57, 2014. 
[16] T. Ruppert, J. Bernard, A. Ulmer, H. Lücke-Tieke, and J. 
Kohlhammer, “Visual access to an agent-based simulation 
model to support political decision making,” in Proceedings of 
the 
14th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Knowledge 
Technologies and Data-driven Business, 2014, pp. 1–8. 
[17] E. Silverman et al., “Situating agent-based modelling in 
population 
health 
research,” 
Emerging 
Themes 
in 
Epidemiology, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2021. 
[18] R. A. Grysiewicz, K. Thomas, and D. K. Pandey, 
“Epidemiology 
of 
ischemic 
and 
hemorrhagic 
stroke: 
incidence, prevalence, mortality, and risk factors,” Neurologic 
clinics, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 871–895, 2008. 
[19] S. Walter et al., “Bringing the hospital to the patient: first 
treatment of stroke patients at the emergency site,” PloS one, 
vol. 5, no. 10, p. e13758, 2010. 
[20] E. Berge et al., “European Stroke Organisation (ESO) 
guidelines on intravenous thrombolysis for acute ischaemic 
stroke,” European stroke journal, vol. 6, no. 1, p. I–LXII, 
2021. 
[21] K. Fassbender et al., “‘Mobile stroke unit’ for hyperacute 
stroke treatment,” Stroke, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. e44–e44, 2003. 
[22] V. J. Calderon, B. M. Kasturiarachi, E. Lin, V. Bansal, and O. 
O. Zaidat, “Review of the mobile stroke unit experience 
worldwide,” Interventional neurology, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 347–
358, 2018. 
[23] J. Kim et al., “Economic evaluation of the Melbourne mobile 
stroke unit,” International Journal of Stroke, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 
466–475, 2021. 
[24] J. P. Rhudy Jr et al., “Geospatial visualization of mobile stroke 
unit dispatches: a method to optimize service performance,” 
Interventional neurology, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 464–470, 2018. 
[25] T. G. Phan, R. Beare, V. Srikanth, and H. Ma, “Googling 
location for operating base of mobile stroke unit in 
metropolitan Sydney,” Frontiers in neurology, vol. 10, p. 810, 
2019. 
[26] J. Al Fatah, A. Alshaban, J. Holmgren, and J. Petersson, “An 
agent-based simulation model for assessment of prehospital 
triage policies concerning destination of stroke patients,” 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 141, pp. 405–412, 2018. 
[27] K. Chapuis and P. Taillandier, “A brief review of synthetic 
population generation practices in agent-based social 
simulation,” 2019. 
[28] N. Fournier, E. Christofa, A. P. Akkinepally, and C. L. 
Azevedo, “An integration of population synthesis methods for 
agent-based microsimulation,” in Proceedings of the Annual 
Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, 
DC, USA, 2018, pp. 13–17. 
[29] N. Huynh, M.-R. Namazi-Rad, P. Perez, M. J. Berryman, Q. 
Chen, and J. Barthelemy, “Generating a synthetic population 
in support of agent-based modeling of transportation in 
Sydney,” 2013. 
[30] S. Dytckov, F. Lorig, P. Davidsson, J. Holmgren, and J. A. 
Persson, “Modelling Commuting Activities for the Simulation 
of Demand Responsive Transport in Rural Areas.,” in 
VEHITS, 2020, pp. 89–97. 
[31] B. Edmonds and S. Moss, “From KISS to KIDS–an ‘anti-
simplistic’modelling approach,” in International workshop on 
multi-agent systems and agent-based simulation, 2004, pp. 
130–144. 
[32] O. E. Ramadan and V. P. Sisiopiku, “A critical review on 
population 
synthesis 
for 
activity-and 
agent-based 
20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

transportation models,” Transportation Systems Analysis and 
Assessment, 2019. 
[33] J. Barthelemy and E. Cornelis, “Synthetic populations: review 
of the different approaches,” 2012. 
[34] K. R. Bissett, J. Cadena, M. Khan, and C. J. Kuhlman, 
“Agent-based computational epidemiological modeling,” 
Journal of the Indian Institute of Science, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 
303–327, 2021. 
[35] Region Skåne, “Resvaneundersökning i Skåne,” 2013. 
[Online]. Available: https://utveckling.skane.se/publikationer/ 
rapporter-analyser-och-prognoser/resvaneundersokning-i-
skane [retrieved: May 2022] 
[36] P. W. Lewis and G. S. Shedler, “Simulation of 
nonhomogeneous Poisson processes by thinning,” Naval 
research logistics quarterly, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 403–413, 1979. 
[37] V. Grimm et al., “The ODD protocol for describing agent-
based and other simulation models: A second update to 
improve clarity, replication, and structural realism,” Journal of 
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 23, no. 2, 2020. 
[38] A. Alassadi, “An Individual-based Simulation Approach for 
Generating a Synthetic Stroke Population,” 2021. 
 Available: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:mau:diva-
41895 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[39] Repast 
Simphony, 
Available: 
https://repast.github.io/ 
[retrieved: May 2022] 
 
 
21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

