183
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Phisiomimetics as the Main Principle of architectural Forming and Aesthetic 
Emotions  
 
Olga Chebereva  
Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Higher Education "Nizhny Novgorod State University of Architecture and 
Civil Engineering", Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
chebereva_on@nngasu.ru, chebereva@mail.ru, chebereva02@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— The value of a new evidence-based design 
approach to architectural forms is known. The paper then 
focuses on the essence of the interrelation between 
psychophysiology 
and 
geometric 
semantics 
as 
three-
dimensional environment or stable patterns of architectural 
form as a semiotic structure. The architectural forming 
creativity is the process of generation of architectural form, the 
morphogenesis of "structural information”. The search for 
principles, methods, and regularities of the forming process 
should be carried out from the psychophysiology of perception 
and cognition of architecture. It’s an interdisciplinary study to 
understand the relations between the design of built-
environments 
and 
associated 
human 
emotions. 
This 
interrelation represents the affective and reflex basis of the 
spatial imagination and the corresponding dominant activity of 
the neural network. It turns to be the basis of the study of 
psychophysiology of aesthetic emotions in the perception of 
form. The main subject of the paper is the discussion of proper 
theoretical base for revealing actual directions and methods for 
experimental work providing objective results in neuroscience, 
design research and developing the evidence-based design. A 
list of necessary experiments on personal emotional reactions 
on architecture objects is proposed. The conclusion gives the 
review of applying empirical scientific research knowledge to a 
creative design process.  
Keywords- Architecture; structural information, cognitive; 
spatial imagination; mode of imagination, neural network; 
perception; experimental, aesthetics, evidence-based design; 
creativity; design research; design means. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is an active scientific interest in the effects of 
architectural forms on the brain. Neuroscience and 
neuropsychology of perception of the architectural form and 
artificial spatial environments by humans is an actual 
scientific problem because of the content of the architectural 
theory. The study of it has become a special subject of the 
American Academy of Neuroscience for Architecture. There 
is a special direction of “healing architecture” in European 
projects for healthcare and “contemplative architecture” in 
American cognitive publications. While studying the 
influence of three-dimensional visual stimuli on the brain, 
Russian and European scientists may potentially need a 
multidisciplinary study of the processes related to cognition 
and 
perception. 
So, 
even 
experimental 
database 
neuroscience, 
neuropsychology, 
biology, 
and 
psychophysiology are not enough now, because it does not 
create a complete map of what is happening in the human 
mind. Natural Sciences do not give a huge understanding of 
the processes of perception of the surrounding reality. I.e., 
in general the study needs to be completed by, 
anthropology, philosophy, art theory, the theory of 
architecture, sociology, even archeology and history. Only 
an analytic comparison of different sciences and disciplines 
can create a complete picture of perception processes and 
help to analyze necessary directions and compose the list of 
experimental work in order to reveal what design strategies 
are more human oriented. 
The paper develops previous analysis of the author [1] 
and is organized as follows. Section II differentiates streams 
of aesthetic rating and cognition of recognizable pattern vs. 
archetype of perception [1]-[6]. Section III presents 
theoretical basis for the separation neural networks and 
physiology based modes of spatial imagination according to 
Duran [7] and gives the key for understanding of those 
modes [8]-[10]. In Section IV, there is a brief comparison of 
the neural networks base of Duran’s [7] and Ukhtomsky’s 
[11] concepts. Section V gives the review of the most 
important 
for 
the 
list 
of 
necessary 
contemporary 
anthropological, theoretical architectural and neuroscience 
issues for the important experimental work. Section VI 
gives a list of necessary experiments. The conclusion 
enlightens unresolved problems of the connection between 
formal characteristics of an architectural form as a visual 
stimulus and neural networks and physiology responses. At 
the end there are future perspectives of developing the 
phisiomimetics as the method of research based creative 
design process for architectural forming given.  
II. 
COGNITION OF REGORGNIZABLE PATTERN AND. 
PERCEPTION OF  ARCHITYPE  
In order to compare the variety of scientific conceptions 
[1]-[6], we have to postulate[1] that cognitive and 
perception processes (see Table I) are the interaction of two 
informative horizons, i.e., the language of concepts and the 
visual formal language representing a three-dimensional 
lattice for composite design sliding. The experimental 
aesthetics of Fechner (Table I) discerns associative and 

184
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
direct factors of the aesthetic impact of the form, similar to 
the concept of Shapoval [4] (see Fig. 1). There is a wide 
connection between the streams of aesthetic impact and 
combinatory levels of architectural form. The structure of 
architectural form is a kind of two-level grammar (see Table 
I). 
TABLE I.  
COMBINATORIAL  LEVELS OF THE ARCHITECTURAL FORM 
 
Researcher 
Combinatorial level of architectural forming 
Signs, symbols, 
Pattern 
associations 
formal 
geometric 
(archetypes), 
Abstract 
associations 
Fechner [1] 
associative factor 
formal factor 
Jenks [4] 
signifier 
signifying 
Alexander[5] 
pattern language 
abstract 
General 
recognizable 
types of forming 
geometry 
archetypes 
 
 
Figure 1.  Two streams of  aesthetic evaluation. 
Primary geometrical elements give abstract associations 
because of connection with genetic archetypes of artificial 
perception. The problems of genetic archetypes (primary 
means of the architectural forming): rhythm, meter, space, 
metaphor, etc. equally belong to the problem area of the 
theory of architecture. The rhythm archetype has no clear 
foundation in the theory of architecture: there is a lack of 
general theory of composition at the formal and subject 
levels [1,2]. The fundamental archetypes of architectural 
forming are determined as geometrical manifestations of 
anthropological structures of the imagination [6]. This 
implies the reflexes based on archetypal groups of the 
spatial-imagination basic patterns [7]. 
Stable morphological artifacts of the architecture could 
be called “ARCHItypes” by analogy with recognizable 
types in other fields of culture. The neuropsychological 
studies of the archaeologist and anthropologist David Lewis 
Williams [8] are interesting in this regard. His experimental 
work shows that the motor skills of the modern subjects at 
drawing geometric primitives are completely analogous to 
the cave ones [8]: metric linear grid, ornamental concentric 
and rhythmic motives, spiral forms, etc. (see Fig. 2). 
 
Figure 2.  Comparison of the entopic forms depicted under laboratory 
conditions (after  Siegel  1977) and in Neolithic art [8]. 
All these are currently used by the formal contemporary 
art and architecture. That is why ARCHItypes should be 
considered as stable and typologically recognizable 
elements of architectural forms and composite structures 
composed of them, bearing certain symbolic meanings and 
correlated with the epoch and style. Archetypes are 
geometrized manifestations of the spatial-imagination 
modes having a reflex nature, as it was shown in Williams’ 
experiments and Picasso drawings (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). 
Figure 3 represents the drawing of Picasso (1924) included 
in the illustrated edition of “Unknown Masterpiece” 
[10]written  by Honore de Balzac. 
Let us recall that the primary art examples are more 
ancient than languages and architecture for more than 40 
800 years BC [9]. From this viewpoint, the imagination 

185
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
mechanisms for the mass, space, and rhythmic ratio 
represent the “archetypes” of architectural form [1, 2]. The 
primary elements of architecture and the rules for their 
connection are still the main problem in the theory of 
architectural composition, being not its specific subject. 
 
 
Figure 3.  
Drawings of Picasso (extracted from [10]). 
III. 
DURAND’S COGNITION CONCEPT 
 
A. Durand’s concept about archetypes of spatial 
imagination  
An interesting research of the archetype revealing in art 
structures has been performed by Durand (1921-2012) in the 
middle of the XXth century [7]. This research was based on 
the reflexology of Bekhterev, Jung's psychotherapy 
statistics, and the seminars “Eranos” (see [7] and refs. 
therein). The Durand’s concept is completely compatible 
with the systemic approach [4] currently used in the theory 
of architecture research. It refers to the triad of the thinking 
and modalities as the base. This triad involves the 
imagination process, the subject, and the object of 
imagination. Within the Durand’s concept, this triad 
confronts the absolutely opposite (with respect to 
imagination) concept, i.e., “the time is death” [7]. An 
analysis of imagination modes leads to the inference that 
they are based on both, psychological as well as 
physiological mechanisms of perception and interpreting the 
physical laws and phenomena of the material world. From 
the viewpoint of Durand, anthropological structures of 
imagination, i.e., the process of architectural forming 
appears to be essentially the result of the mode 
geometrization. Neural networks and physiological basis of  
Durand’s concept involves ancient archetypes of spatial 
imagination. It consists of three basic imagination modes. 
The first one is the postulated imagination mode 
corresponding to a social thinking [8]. The main 
physiological 
mechanisms 
of 
the 
postulated 
mode 
correspond to the instinct “toward the goal”, the 
extrapolation instinct, etc. Spatial geometrization of 
postulated mode is based on biomechanical functions of the 
skeletal 
musculature, 
vestibular 
apparatus, 
on 
the 
peculiarities of interaction between individuals. In the triad 
of Vitruvius [11], the postulated corresponds to the 
“benefit”, as well as to the “function” (see Fig. 4). The form 
depends on its purpose. This concept includes the aggregate 
of social meanings of the form and its ideology as indirect 
function providing the social certainty of the form. 
 
Figure 4.  Vitruvian triad. 
 
The 
scheme 
for 
geometrization 
of 
postulated 
imagination in architectural form becomes a structural frame 
for the dynamic and static axes. This mode is based on the 
geometrization of the uprightness instinct and the resistance 
to gravity (tectonics, in analogy to “gravitational forming”). 
Postulated basis underlies the parametric descriptions of the 
boundaries of objects and spaces, as a subject of social 
agreement. The same refers as well to movement 
representation in general, including the spatial element 
connection scheme, functional routes, etc. 
The formal and semantic bases of the postulated mode of  
spatial imagination are linked with geometric metaphors of 
physical phenomena, such as configuration of force fields, 
momenta, trajectories, lines of forces, directions, points of 
force application, etc. Visual representation of these 
metaphors is very close to mathematical concepts in a 
symbolic graphic form used in natural sciences since 
Euclid’s “Elements”. So, postulated elements of the spatial 
imagination are inspired by anatomic proprioceptive signals 
(receptors in the muscles, tendons, joints) and corresponding 
excitation in the neuron ensemble. This statement could be 
illustrated by the project of Toyo Ito [13] with the plan 
based on a math concept (Voronoi diagram, see Fig. 5). 
Implementation of the postulated imagination in the 
architectural form occurs in the structure static and dynamic 
(tonic) axes, manifests itself in a gradient distribution of 
visual masses along these axes. The digestive mode of 
imagination corresponds to the ontogenetic modality of 
thinking. The digestive mode is based on the physiological 
food instinct, i.e., the need for potential energy for building 
systems. This is similar to individual growth of a particular 
organism (the ontogenesis process).  
The digestive metaphor in the architecture could be 
associated with the mass. In the triad of Vitruvius (Fig. 4) 
“Utilitas, Firmitas, Venustas” [12], it actually corresponds 
to 
the 
“structure”; 
the 
same 
is 
the 
“strength”.

186
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.  
The Toyo Ito project of the National Taichung Theater [12]. 
The 
digestive 
mode 
represents 
the 
constructive 
definiteness of the form. The basis of the mental 
representations of the “mass” is a material body or, in a 
broader sense, matter in a condensed state. Anatomically, 
the digestive mode is controlled by the interceptive signals 
(from receptors of internal organs) to the Central Nervous 
System (CNS). Implementation of the digestive imagination 
mode is realized in the mass and space ratio of architectural 
forms. The copulative imagination mode should be 
interpreted more broadly as a regime of change, organizing 
rhythms, divisions, intervals, and fluctuations in the 
proportions of mass and space. Durand’s copulative mode 
implies that an imagination is inherent to the human 
physiological 
processes 
of 
higher 
nervous 
activity, 
biophysics, phylogenetics, i.e., anthropogenic modality of 
thinking. The semantic subtext of rhythm is a manifestation 
of the most important property of life, i.e., the changes. The 
copulative 
mode 
highlights 
the 
difference 
between 
psychological states (joy, sorrow, etc.) as functional 
transition from one process to another one, from one mode 
to the next one, and affects the psychophysiology. 
General physical sense and the archetype of the 
copulative imagination mode is the wave, i.e., the 
oscillatory nature of the matter in general, including 
biological and physiological processes (the electro genesis 
in CNS). In the triad of Vitruvius, the manifestation of 
copulative imagination mode is expressed by the term 
“aesthetics”. Physiologically, this mode is based on the 
signals from exterceptive receptors (coetaneous, visual, 
auditory, olfactory ones), subconscious internal perception 
of electro genesis (alternating currents) of the brain and 
CNS, and low energy electromagnetic fields of the body 
cells. The thesis “primary characteristic of architectural 
masterpiece is the space” [2] corresponds to the antithesis of 
the imagination triad as an objective source “the time is 
death”. The time (under the relativity) and the death 
(biological or cultural memory termination) exist in the 
physical sense only where any substance is presented, i.e., 
the substance in a condensed state, or the biological life. 
The imagination modes control the space as objective (i.e., 
existing regardless of imagination) reality. An artistic 
metaphor "time as death" is opposite to the notion of 
“Mass” as emptiness or vacuum, i.e., something that is 
opposite to the human beings. 
A single natural-scientific source of discoveries and 
“white spots” of the theory of composition is called by the 
term “physiomimetics”. It was introduced by R. Soar and D. 
Andreen [14] for modeling the spatial structures for 

187
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
buildings by analogy with the molecular lattices. But this 
term reflects the core of all methodological techniques of 
architectural forming, in line with the fundamental and 
applied physics (in math models), not only bionics (Fig.6). 
 
Figure 6.  Interrelation and integration between phisiomimetical methods 
and the principles of architecture forming. 
B. Durand’s concept and Anokhin’s “Cognitom”  
 
Architectural forms represent the systemic encoded 
visual “information” in stereo-metric elements of the 
form/space, reflecting the multidimensional data from the 
highest physiological functions.  
 
Figure 7.  
Comparison of the “cognitom” formalization according to 
Anokhin [15] and the hierarchy of formal composition properties. 
At the same time, the functions work as filters and are 
included into the conversion mechanisms (see Figs. 6, 7, 8). 
The triad of imagination is a three-step statement, which 
corresponds to the graphs structure of “cognition”, i.e. a 
hype network brain model proposed by K. Anokhin [15].  
Similar interconnection exists between the “cognitom” 
formalization of the architecture of mind and the hierarchy 
of formal composition properties [16] (see Fig. 7). The 
highest 
level 
usually 
represents 
typical 
patterns, 
compositions (ARCHItypes), the lowest collects primary 
visual elements (extraception stimulus and arhetypes), and 
the middle one includes instruments of interconnection of 
elements (intraception archetypes). 
IV. 
DURAND’S CONCEPT AND UKHTOMSKY’S 
DOMINANCE 
 
Figure 8.  Complementary pairs of four “nucleatides” of architecture 
form and complementary pairs. 
Interesting results come from the consideration of 
architecture history as the homological sets of various 
forms. The architectural form itself becomes a derivative of 
the 
four 
spatial 
operators, 
which 
are 
geometrical 
representations 
of 
abstract 
neural 
networks 
and 
physiological associations (see Fig. 9). The system of higher 
mental functions is controlled by a dynamic dominance. 
According to Ukhtomsky [11], the principle of dominance is 
applicable to the strategies of visual perception, which were 
studied by Arnheim [15]. The dominance might serve as the 
most determining factor integrating feelings in the process 
of visual perception into the whole picture-“gestalt”.  
The linguistic approach [6] to architecture is unable to 
explain, how a suite of primary geometric elements 
transform into the “enigmatic signifier” [5]. The way of 
transmission of multidimensional data of elements into the 
symbolic form of architecture is the actual problem of the 
architectural theory. 
Any threedimentional form can be represented as a 
vector field model. The model’s complexity depends on the 
forming paradigm. The change of paradigms is connected 
with revolutions of scientific knowledge, which implies that 
the science changes the ideology of art [17]. Consideration 
of the archetypical imagination modes in the light of 
physiology and the hypothesis on bi-similar basis of spatial 
imagination (see Fig. 1, Table I) leads to a natural-science 
concept of the geometrical imagination. This implies that 

188
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
there is mutual reflection of the conscious- (ARCHItypes) 
and 
subconscious-level 
(archetypes) 
regularities, 
phenomena, principles of matter organization in living and 
nonliving nature (see Fig. 6). This concept explains the 
hypothesis of supra-modality of visual art and music 
according to Korsakova-Kreyn [18]. 
The dominance is also controlled by the experiences and 
beliefs, as well as by the physiology. According to Maslow 
[19], the pyramid of self-censorship reflects the "upward" 
sequence of dominances from the lowest to the highest 
level. Durand repeated Ukhtomsky regarding the concept of 
an art. Three functional modes of imagination, i.e., 
digestive, copulative, and postulated ones, could be called as 
the mass mode; the metro-rhythmic mode; and the tonic-
axis mode of the architectural structure. The concept “the 
time is death” transforms into the mode of space-time. The 
proof of interrelation between the dominance principle and 
the geometry forming could be provided by representation 
of the ontological categories of architecture (i.e., function, 
design, style, etc.) as a set of connected parameters. 
Ancient Egyptian architecture describes the mass 
prevalence. The Gothic and Baroque architecture actualizes 
the vertical elements and also tonic curved elements with 
actual dynamic axis, which reveals the prevalence of the 
postulated mode . The analysis of actual for each style set of 
formal parameters gives the sequence of imagination modes 
in the history of architecture, which is equal to the structure 
of pyramid of self-censorship according to Maslow (see Fig. 
9). The projection of this concept onto the forming process 
gives an understanding of the form scale as a consequence 
of interaction of copulative and digestive imagination modes 
(see Figs. 8, 9). The archetypes and manifestations of the 
anthropomorphic scale vs. socio scale (Neolithic community 
had about 30-40 people) emerged in the Neolithic period. 
Figure 9.  
Comparison Preliminary graphical analysis of the actualization of imagination modes in the history of architecture. 
 

189
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. PATTERN SIGNIFICANCE AS THE DOMINANT 
MANIFESTATION AND THE REACTIONS OF THE CORE FOR 
THE ARCHITECTURAL FORM. 
A. The Problem of  Paradigms and new signifiers in 
Architecture. History of Architectural forms as the 
History of Emotions and  Metaphors. 
We have met the fact of integration of design, 
architecture, visual arts and scientific progress that changed 
the whole concept of architectural forming into so-called 
nonlinear dynamics paradigm. It is a new kind of aesthetic 
metaphor. The metaphor principle according to Burke [20] 
is that makes the emotional experience socially shared. 
Starting from modern cognitive studies, the author shows 
that the metaphor in general is born from bodily experience. 
Schemes of space-time orientations, sensory and motor 
functions, and cardiovascular reactions to stimuli of the 
external world become metaphors. According to Burke, the 
body generates figurative languages of description, and is 
generated by them. “... Physiological facts are permeated 
with cultural signifiers. They become an integral part of the 
physiological system itself as value” [20, p. 70]. The natural 
meanings are inseparable here from the social, semiotic and 
historical ones. Proceeding from this mutual conditionality, 
the researcher identifies several successive discursive 
regimes, each of which has its own stock of metaphors. E.g., 
the humoral theory, which existed in European culture until 
the 19th century, presupposed a bodily unclosedness, the 
absence of clear boundaries between the zones of the 
material and mental, on the one hand, and between the 
individual body and the surrounding world, on the other. 
The language of “humors” is the language of tides, outflows 
and flows, that blur metric limits of personal space.  
Metric radial limits for different perception types of 
spaces are stable: 1.5-2 meters for personal one, 6-15 meters 
for small group, 25-30 meters for large groups, 130-150 
meters for public halls spaces. 200 meters lie over direct 
perception, 1200 m surpass individual perception. 
The decline of the “humoral regime” brought new 
figurative descriptions, “more mechanistic and invasive,” 
based on the notion of an “individualized” and “isolated” 
body. The architectural and spatial environment of the city 
is full of symbols and metaphors encoded in geometric 
forms and elements woven into the structure of the 
composition. How much a symbol can be perceived as a 
stimulus for neural and physiological reactions? Can the 
spatial environment cause stress reaction or reduce it and 
due to which factors or qualities of architectural form?  
B. The geometric structure and planning of the city and 
stress reactions. 
The rigidity of a geometrically ordered spatial 
environment increases individual stress reaction. a certain 
number of factors in relation to urban fabric transport 
design, fatigue and number of accidents are not taken into 
account in the design.  
An interesting example of such a study is the stress chart 
of the lower one made in 2014 by the results of work [21] 
by a research group led by Professor S. Parin [21], the head 
of the psychophysiology laboratory of the Nizhny Novgorod 
State University named after Lobachevsky. The research 
gives the answer for causes of accidents and driver’s panics 
during a route, the map of stressful zones of the Nizhny 
Novgorod city. The main problem marker is the rhythm of 
the heart of motorists (see Fig. 10). 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  The map of stressful zones of the Nizhny Novgorod city 
developed by S. Parin's group of the Nizhny Novgorod State University 
[21,22], (extracted from [21]), available at: http://stressmap.ru/). 
It is clear that without cooperation with architects 
scientists psycho physiologists can’t produce even on the 
basis of the analysis of the most extensive database 
redevelopment of the spatial environment and the transport 
map of the city. This is a complex multidisciplinary task.  
Architects, in turn, need to improve their skills and 
quality of design solutions within direct knowledge of stress 
factors discovered by psycho physiologists in the city area, 
which is rich in distances surpassing individual perception. 
One of the important and universal factors of chronic 
stress in the city is the density of the population. We can 
convince ourselves that people around us do not affect us. 
But strangers' faces, crowding, smells, emotions strongly 
affect the hormonal system.  
Standard stress reactions are triggered in most mammal 
populations with increasing density. The effect of the 
“population density factor” is the same in all studied, cases 
with different birds and mammals. It got a term so-called 
“overpopulation”. 
Increasing 
density 
and 
increased 
frequency of contacts between individuals causes a stressful 
state that reduces fertility and increases mortality. The 
dependence of adrenal weight (producing cortisol and 
adrenaline) on the density of natural populations has been 
established for animals.  
Similar facts are there in human society. E.g., the New 
York police gives an information that the number of crimes 
in skyscrapers increases almost in proportion to their height. 

190
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
If in three-story houses are committed 8.8 crimes per 
thousand people. That ratio arises up to 20.2 in sixteen-
storey houses. Also, citizens there often suffer from all sorts 
of mental disorders, such as anxious neurosis and affective 
disorder more than in three-story houses.  
The connection between the activity of the adrenal 
weight 
and 
population 
density 
has 
been 
proven 
scientifically. The more a person lives in a larger settlement, 
the more the tonsil activates in response to stress. Note that 
it is more important not to live all the time, but to grow up 
in the village for a healthy psyche. Since the child's age is 
critical for neurogenesis. It is a simple way to reduce 
chronic stress and the proper development of the brain in 
children. Here it is necessary to establish experimentally 
whether the sense of stress is related to the density of urban 
development, its structure, the monotony of the city's visual 
grid fields. 
Despite a great deal of talk about systems, we continue 
to organize cities as if they were a collection of isolated 
parts and not an integrated union of habitat, offices, plants, 
energy and transport routs, water, soils, land, forests, biota, 
and air: “Cities happen to be problems in organized 
complexity present situations in which a half-dozen or even 
several dozen quantities are all varying simultaneously and 
in subtly interconnected ways” [23]. The challenge is to 
reveal the research based opportunities how to transform 
urban complexity based on an industrial model for 
automobiles, sprawl, and economic growth into coherent, 
civil, and self-organizing human environments. In order to 
develop this human-oriented approach is necessary to find 
opportunities to enhance living conditions in cities, and 
research the relationship between humans and the formal 
geometry 
parameters 
of 
surrounding 
forms 
and 
environments, and the interaction between the two.  
C. The geometrшс structure as  the humanity metaphor. 
А number of similar questions about the geometric 
structure as the humanity metaphor are discussed in the 
book written by C. Ellard “Habitat. How architecture affects 
our behavior and well-being.”[23]: “Streets and buildings 
had been designed in accordance with universal and 
functional requirements and ignored the innate human need 
for sensory diversity were a tempting and economical 
solution”.  
But Ellard adds that a reasonable approach to the design 
of city streets and buildings according to the human nature 
is to use visual complexity as much as possible. So, this 
complexity needs to be natural and harmonious. But modern 
architects and their clients need objective measured 
parameters of this harmony.  
The interaction of the disciplines would reduce the 
chances of repeating such architectural stories as the 1950s 
Pruitt-Igoe housing complex in St Louis, Missouri. 33 
featureless apartment blocks by architect M. Yamasaki, 
responsible for the World Trade Center, became notorious 
for social dysfunction. Critics argued that the wide open 
spaces between the blocks of modernist high-rises 
discouraged a sense of community as crime rates started to 
rise. Pruitt-Igoe housing complex was demolished in 1972 
but wasn’t an outlier. The lack of behavioral insight behind 
the modernist housing projects of that era, with their sense 
of isolation from the wider community and ill-conceived 
public spaces, made many of them feel as a factory not for 
humans.  
Thanks to psychological studies, we have a much better 
idea of the kind of urban environments that people like or 
find stimulating. Some of these studies have attempted to 
measure subjects’ physiological responses in situ, using 
wearable devices such as bracelets that monitor skin 
conductance (a marker of physiological arousal), smart 
phone apps that ask subjects about their emotional state, and 
electroencephalogram (EEG) headsets that measure brain 
activity relating to mental states and mood. 
Signifier and signifying of architectural form has 
become a kind of fundamental problem now, a source of 
affordances, atmosphere and mood. On one hand there is 
stable permanent structural symbols and patterns, integrated 
into traditional architectural form, such as cross in the 
Christian temples [24]. On the other, there are changeable 
elements of non stable patterns, which cause mysterious 
signifiers and defense on geometrical parameters at the 
same time. These parameters during a long period of time 
depended on the main epoch style.   
D. The  neiral perseption of architectural forms: 
experiments and practice. 
To research the perception processes of different 
architectural geometry types neuroscience and anthropology 
integrates with eye tracking headsets, giving new research 
possibilities – test elements or environments themselves in 
virtual reality (VR) with a full suite of equipment, from eye 
tracking to GSR, EEG, ECG, (f)EMG, etc. It gives new 
opportunities of seamless real world testing – test inside the 
building, public spaces, in-car, on the street and many more 
real world scenarios with entirely new and immersive 
custom stimuli for the accurate instrumental detection of 
reactions to it.  
Studies using fMRI showed that contemplation of 
architectural masterpieces of the brain causes changes 
similar to the same in meditation. It is proved that 
contemplation of architectural masterpieces reduces 
internal dialogue and improves attention, the functions of 
the prefrontal cortex, activates the occipital lobe, the 
precentral gyrus.  
fMRI allows establishing that the brain response to 
conventional buildings and architectural masterpieces 
varies significantly. There are many ways in the diversity 
of research means with which they assess how comfortable 
a person feels in the city: to track the direction of his sight, 
palpitation, the state of the nervous system, gait and speed 
of movement, finally, his brain activity. All these data are 
then analyzed to reveal patterns and understand how 

191
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
various elements of the environment affect one’s health, 
mood and efficiency.  
Dr. J. Bermudez [25] of Academy of Neuroscience for 
Architecture suggested that look at the buildings that were 
deliberately created for contemplation - museums, 
churches, libraries. Public spaces can have a measurable 
positive effect on the psychological state of a person. 
Bermudez leaded the study to determine the effect of 
architecture on the human brain. His team use fMRI and 
work to turn contemporary cultural manifestation of the 
city, i.e. the “phenomenology of urban architecture”, into 
observations of neurology, the results of which can be used 
by designers and city builders. Bermudez focused on 
buildings and places designed for contemplation and put 
forward a theory that the presence of “contemplative 
architecture” can over time produce the positive effect on 
health as traditional meditation with fewer efforts on the 
part of the individual. 
Contemplative architecture contains the same design 
solutions that were used in religious architecture. 
Bermudez noted that it is logical to use the connection 
between the created beauty and personal experiences for 
ritual purposes. This connection can be intentionally used 
in places intended for contemplation or research of any 
nature: mystical, personal and even scientific. During the 
experiment, 12 architects were shown pictures where were 
buildings themselves and their individual parts, from the 
facade to the interior. The buildings intended for 
contemplation and simple structures were demonstrated. 
As a result, researchers were able to observe the brain 
activity of people who imagined that they were in the 
places shown by scientists. All tested subjects were 
architects, white men, right-handers, who had no 
meditation practice before. A similar selection was made 
to ensure that the studies were uniform, as the Bermudez 
team wanted to be sure that the results of the scan would 
not be affected by any factors other than the pictures 
themselves, in particular: gender, race, education, and hand 
use for writing. E.g., scanning the brain of a right-hander 
and a left-hander performing an identical task gives 
different results. 
The strict control over the suite of the experiment 
increases the chances of achieving the final result. 
Architects were the logical choice for experiment, because, 
their trained look and experience make them more sensitive 
to the details of architecture that the layman will overlook.  
Problems began when scientists set out to measure only 
a few subjects. They conduct online studies in Spain and 
England in order to collect evidence of the unusual 
experience of contemplating architecture, or the facts of 
collision with places whose appearance radically changes 
the state of mind. It is especially important that most of the 
buildings and places mentioned in 2,982 cases were 
designed for contemplation: spiritual, aesthetic, religious or 
symbolic, which allows researchers to conclude that 
“buildings can cause deep, transformative states of 
contemplation, and those buildings that were created for 
contemplation are the most successful” to a greater extent. 
In addition to churches, mosques and other religious 
buildings, some art galleries, monuments, houses and 
museums are examples of contemplative constructions: 
Guggenheim in Bilbao, the Louvre in Paris, Frank Lloyd 
Wright’s Home at Fowlingwater are three of the top ten 
most mentioned objects in research. Dr. Bermúdez 
expanded their research using the results of neurobiological 
works, making significant amendments. His group of 
scientists attracted data on the mental states generated by the 
person himself, which are easily reproduced in the 
laboratory, and about the activity that occurs in the frontal 
cortex when test object makes a judgment about whether or 
not what is beautiful is in front of him.  
The Bermudez team expected that the experience of 
“contemplating architecture” would be strong, and the extra-
esthetic experience would reveal activity in those parts of 
the brain that are associated with emotion and pleasure, and 
not in the frontal cortex. The presence of external stimuli 
(pictures of buildings) also eliminates the tedious self-
regulation that occurs in the frontal cortex during traditional 
meditation. A survey of 12 subjects showed that "weakening 
of attention dispersion, increasing concentration and 
deepening of experience appeared in all subjects; also 
common to all was the emergence of aesthetic judgments, 
apparently inevitable. Preliminary conclusions suggest that 
the brain behaves differently in the case of the 
contemplative and uncontemplative architecture. The state 
of contemplation caused by the “architectural aesthetics” in 
something similar to the state of traditional meditation, but 
with varies.  
In general, the members of the American Academy of 
Neuroscience for Architecture also discuss ambitious design 
of architecture matters and details of the studies. That 
matters are the optimal height of interior spaces for various 
cognitive functions, the best design of the city to identify 
our research capabilities and simplify the search processes. 
The ways of solving problems has much in common with 
the base of the European “healing architecture” [1, 26].  
In the native nature, which makes it so pleasant to look 
at, there are no straight lines. Non-natural city forms have 
straight lines, orthogonal outlines. So, the question arises, 
how different is the perception of visual series of rectilinear, 
orthogonal forms, arbitrary rectilinear contours or nature-
like forms with curvilinear outlines?  
It is very important to check the role and variety of 
psychophysiological impacts that proportions and fractals 
used in order of architectural forms give to the visual 
perception.  
Fechner's test was static and flat, it didn’t take into 
account three-dimensional forms and spaces. Visual 
perception is associated with a linear perspective and 
distortion of the properties. The application of the golden 
section affects the result in Fechner’s experiment.  

192
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Proportions are found in nature, science, art, and 
architecture since the Ancient Greece epoch. The “golden” 
section accompanies all living things. Inanimate nature does 
not know what a “golden section” is, but undestroyed forms 
of inanimate nature are based on the Pythagorean Theorem, 
that is closely connected with the “silver” section.  
There are mathematical fractal matrices, which got the 
name of “silver” section because of math connection with 
the famous “golden” section, which is known as the 
universal manifestation of natural structural harmony. This 
proportion mystically accompanies all living things. These 
proportions could be find in the bends of sea shells, and in 
the form of flowers, and in the guise of beetles, and in a 
beautiful human body.  
It gives the variety of the mathematical fractal matrices 
based on the sequence of square roots of integers and 
integers. The “golden” and “silver” matrices have 
recurrence formulae. They are not arbitrary but have clear 
math order. So, we got another experiment task that is 
practical perception value of proportions.  
Another important point in of visual perception research 
is the difference in the influence of the same proportional 
series that are used in structures of different types. I.e., is 
there a kind of the direct proportion psychophysiological 
impact? Does ir depend on the ratio of proportions, and on 
the type of structure? 
 Arbitrary proportions of buildings and their parts also 
affect our perception. Is this affect negative or not? Is it 
better using the golden section and other proportions, the 
better it is perceived?  
Different kinds of fractals are now popular in the 
architectural forming. They also give a kind of proportion 
ratio series. 
Therefore, it is necessary to understand if the perception 
of the proportions of this mathematical series applied in 
different things and opposite areas of life and culture, in 
particular, in architectural forming is stable everywhere?  
 
 
Figure 11.  The scheme of perception and the structure of the neuron 
(extracted from [27,p.16]).  
E. The brain mechanisms for  visual perseption analysis. 
Professor 
M. 
Arbib 
[27] 
is 
researching 
brain 
mechanisms linking vision to action and language. He 
started from “What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain” 
[27] via U. Pallasmaa’s “The Thinking Hand” [28] to get a 
new observe on how the brain links imagination to 
construction via sketching, whether by hand or on a 
computer [27, 28]. In recent years, this question has 
morphed into two major and connected with each other 
concerns about the conversation between neuroscience and 
architecture, and the conversation between computer science 
and neuroscience. This problem was  discussed in the book 
“How the Brain Got Language” [28]. But we suppose that 
the basis of representation for any spatial structure in the 
mind is pattern, made of the frame containing abstract 
proprioceptive associations as a kind of geometrical canvas. 
Geometric elements often constitute the basis for the 
habitual patterns or construct new ones. And all the formal 
compositional means of geometric elements and their 
combinations influence the range of values of the new 
symbol or correct the semantics of traditional one. This is 
the two-level psihophisiologicaly based language of 
architectural forming. But the base of this language is the 
one that M.Arbib leads in his book [27]: the stimulus, and 
the receptor signal transmitted to the central nervous system, 
the signal processing and the response to the environmental 
challenge in the form of an effectors’ work (see fig. 11) But 
the knowledge of the physiological mechanisms of the 
operation of CNS slightly reveals the curtain of the mystery 
of the cognitive processes of the brain, the work of the 
mind.  
Therefore, the work of philosophers, anthropologists and 
the statistics collected by them, just like the empirical 
experience collected by the architects cannot be ignored 
when compiling a list of necessary experiments in the 
course of cognitive research for the perposes of architectural 
forming. Buildings and cities can affect our mood and well-
being, and that specialised cells in the hippocampus region 
of the brain that are attuned to the geometry and 
arrangement of the inhabited spaces. Urban architects 
haven’t paid scant attention to the potential cognitive effects 
of the city’s inhabitants. The imperative to design 
something unique and individual or, on the contrary, cheap 
and affordable socially and economically tends to override 
considerations of how it might shape the behaviors of those 
who will live with it. It must be changed trough the 
scientific way. R. Dalton [29] tells about both architecture 
and cognitive science: “There are some really good 
evidence-based guidelines out there how to design user-
friendly buildings” [30]. 
J. Manpreet in his book “Designing mindspaces” [29] 
analyses the research method of G. Debord called 
psychogeography is an interdisciplinary study to understand 
the relationship between the design of environments and 
associated human emotions in detail, and further to 

193
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
investigate the Philosophy of Heterotopia to apply it’s 
principles in curating positive experiences.  
This interdisciplinary approach helps to theorize a 
framework which can help designers and architects to take 
advantages of the knowledge from the related fields and 
apply them in re-creating existing urban fabric. To 
understand the elements of this framework, Manpreet 
investigates the role of art, architecture, culture, media and 
technology in orchestrating urban experiences, not only to 
foster creativity and fresh thinking but also to inspire life in 
urban environments. Manpreet’s approach is inspired by the 
Constructivist paradigm of learning. Manpreet has analyzed 
various examples to illustrate findings and understanding of 
experts and fellow researchers in related fields to arrive the 
methodology for final framework. 
Methodology of Manpreet’s research followed a human 
centered design process by keeping experience at the centre, 
and then applying system thinking to understand its core 
and periphery for the final framework. The proposed 
framework is essentially an end product of a literature 
review capturing the details and findings from the related 
fields of philosophy, cognitive architecture, and ontological 
design due to the architectural form of spaces.   
Sussman and Hollander describe the reasons behind our 
attraction to edges, faces, symmetry, curves, and stories in 
the book about cognitive architecture [29]. Cognitive 
architecture is also an approach that focuses on research of 
the human response to the built environment. Buildings are 
intended to be viewed, traversed, and lived in by people. 
Only a handful of theoreticians and practitioners of 
architecture think deeply about human nature and, why and 
how it needs to be considered seriously during design 
process of buildings and urban area. 
Urban sociology is the study of human interaction in 
metropolitan city areas and the development of society by 
means of urban spase and design form. It is a normative 
discipline of sociology seeking to study the structures, 
processes, 
changes 
and 
problems 
of 
an
urban area in order to provide inputs for planning and policy 
making. Urban sociology should be used as a basis for 
creating a comprehensive programming for design of a new 
public space or architectural form.  
 
 
Figure 12.  
Visual representation for the Human tendencies is my 
contribution by adopting and recreating icons made by Freepik (exctracted 
from [30, p.27]) 
Manfrid consider “programming” to be an important 
aspect of architectural design that architects and designers 
can use to reprogram and re-purpose any space, so as to 
enhance experience [29]. R. L. Hemmer programmed in 
2005 a project named “Under Scan” in Lincoln, U. K., 
where the passersby were detected by a computerized 
tracking system, which activated video-portraits projected 
within 
their 
shadow. 
Virtual 
computer 
generated 
environments are slowly mixing our mental landscape 
through media architecture, test subjects were entering 
virtual spaces. Although real human environments have 
always had a layer of virtual elements in the form of printed 
media, paintings and art forms. The term “virtual 
environment” was coined with the advent of computers, and 
problem how to differ virtual from real had already arised.  
The framework (see Fig. 13) proposed by Francis Ching 
in book “Form, Space and Order”[29] gives an overall idea 
to understand any physical or virtual environments (see Fig. 
12). For the purpose of research the association of spaces or 
built environments and its elements with human emotions 
this framework is very useful, as it lays a foundation to get 
better understanding of the basics of architectural form.  
 
Figure 13.  Illustration of the main for perception analisys part of 
framework for designing environments; proposed by F. Ching, ”Form 
Space and Order”  (extracted from [29, p.22]). 

194
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Manfrid studies interiors of built environments in spite 
of the fact people disregard the type of ceiling above them 
and ignore the patterns on the floor, he supposes that man-
made spaces around us without realization have some feeds 
back to shape one’s behavior. So, Manfred suppoes that 
human response to the built environment must be realised in 
detail with correlatoin with the time spended inside. E. g., 
somebody is sitting inside an office with a glass façade and 
his desk is positioned in a way that on a bright sunny day 
the sun directly shines upon his eyes through the glass wall, 
the uncomfortable glare one experiences may disrupt the 
work-plan for the day, and the same situation may get even 
more uncomfortable, if it is summer time and there is 
inadequate air-conditioning. The glass wall may be the 
reason of a whole day without productive work. It depends 
not only on lighting conditions and conditioning, but also on 
the boundaries and metrics of personal space, the 
configuration of the room, it’s overall illumination, 
isolation, color, textures and materials. 
VI. 
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE FUTURE EXPERIMENTS. 
A. Finding Perseption Meanings of  the Structural 
information from the Architectural or Abstract Forms 
So, the architectural form appears at the intersection of 
four imagination modes (see Fig. 8). The material of 
architectural sheaths is mass. But the primary material of 
artificial human environments inside the shells or between 
them is space. Architectural space is organized by function 
graphs within composition means based on axis frames and 
grids. They could be treated as “operators” of the three-
dimensional form related to “structural information” (see 
Fig. 14) and semantic features. 
The first aim of experiments is scientific evidence that 
the aesthetic quality of architecture expresses affects on 
human health and well-being by following means: structure 
and proportions of buildings, population density, and 
geometry or bionics character of designs for artificial 
environments. 
 
Figure 14.  Structural information from the forming processes. 
The second goal of experiments is to reveal a set of 
parameters for architectural environments or forms that 
influence directly test subjects groups.  
The third goal of the experiment is to identify those 
characteristics and qualities of architectural forms and 
environments that have a beneficial effect on the test 
subjects and determine in what combinations this impact is 
positive. The forth additional aim is to reveal if architectural 
styles have some cognitive role in one’s mind. It is rational 
to use the experience of such theorists of art and psychology 
and founders of the modern theory of formal composition, 
as G. Fechner, V. Kandinsky [30] and I. Itten [31] in 
experimental instrumental work. 
B. Equipment Requirements and Registration parameters 
Analysis of the form as a set of parameters of archetype 
modes opened the way for researching dominances of 
emotional perception (see Fig.7). It is reasonable to combine 
the tracking of physiological processes (the frequency of 
respiration, palpitation, EEG parameters, etc.) with purely 
cognitive tasks associated with individual perception and 
spatial thinking of test subjects. Test subjects have to be 
logically divided into groups according to the occupation, 
sex, age, dominance of right-handedness or left-handedness. 
C. The List of experiments 
A suite of experiments according to the previous analyses 
of publications must include the following groups of studies 
with the fixation of the physiological systems work and the 
objects of tested one’s personal concentration: 
1. Experiments based on the V. Kandinsky book “The Point 
and The Line on The Plane”, fixing the physiological 
answers and the trajectories of the glance movement in 
response to images of abstract structures similar to those 
given in Kandinsky's book. The first stage is the repetition 
of images through the same pause or cyclicity. The second 
stage is a repetition through an unsystematic different 
duration.  
2. Experiments for testing the physiological changes during 
the observation of the tested subject the rotation of figures 
(spatial and impossible) without changing the proportions. 
In this case, the analysis of the results should take into 
account the different character of the silhouette, the discrete 
or specific configuration of the forms.  
3. Experiments on the mental rotation of the similar figures 
(spatial or impossible) with difference between proportions, 
color, texture, etc.  
4. Testing the physiological changes when displaying video 
with different scenarios of perception of the same 
architectural form, as well as groups of architectural forms 
of different styles, groups of architectural objects that are 
topologically equivalent (homologous series of architectural 
forms). 
5. Video rotation of detailed or generalized models of 
architectural forms with the study of fixation of tested 
subject’s attention on structure, comparison of little changes 
in similar structures. The first option is to show different 

195
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
images with proportions of the golden section through the 
same pause. The second option is to show the same 
structures with arbitrary proportions and different time 
intervals along the golden section. The third option is the 
display of the same structures with arbitrary proportions and 
different temporary arbitrary time intervals. 
6. Perception of monotonous visual media and architectural 
fields (short and long surfaces, facades) with two stages: the 
repetition of images with a certain frequency and the 
repetition of an unsystematic and with different duration.  
7. Cognitive tasks before and after the experiment. The 
study of the role of the part and whole symbol; dependence 
between the signifying of the symbol and formal 
characteristics; the relationship between detail and the 
whole; a group of experiments on the perception of 
generalized models of well known architectural objects. 
8. The comparison of the perception of artificial three-
dimensional objects with the perception of natural 
prototypes. It is necessary also to account the possibility of 
cognitive dissonance and other stress factors in the subjects' 
reaction, comparison of results for different age and other 
categories of subjects.  
9. An experiment of subjective division of structural and 
composite forms into provocative and harmonizing, 
stimulating with fixing a stable effects that these forms have 
on neuropsychological status of the person. 
10. Structural and architectural design analysis of stress map 
project for redevelopment of the Nizhny Novgorod city area 
and agglomeration. 
For diagnostics of the physiological reactions, not so 
expensive equipment is needed, such as fMRI, the thermal 
imager, ECG, EEG, and the eye-tracker (to account for the 
attention-fixing points of the testing subjects). 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The actual set of experimental work can give the key to 
the main problem of architectural theory: an understanding 
division of structural and composite forms into provocative 
and harmonizing, stimulating and tiring. And give the 
answer to the question if the phisiomimetics is the future of 
architectural forming or a kind of the neotrabalizm 
phenomenon.  
The experiment with instrumental diagnostic care can 
give objective answers, unlike H. Fechner's studies, how 
harmful are arbitrary proportions in architectural forming. 
Whether arbitrary proportions affect human perception and 
means of forming what architects should learn from natural 
forms really negatively.  
Experiments set by A. Shapoval answered the question 
of perception of contours and the silhouette of industrial 
design forms.  
In addition, there is not highlighted in the experimental 
work of A. Shapoval [4] difference in the perception of bent 
and broken rectilinear or folded forms. The question about 
the effect of the curvature of the shape and the nature of the 
influence of this curvature on the subject's well-being 
remains open.  
Only empirical architectural experiments stay numerous: 
“I am attracted by curves, free and sensual. Those curves 
that we can see in mountain silhouettes, in the form of sea 
waves, on the body of a beloved woman”- wrote in his 
memoirs Oscar Niemeyer - an outstanding architect of 
Brazil [32]. This was a core of Niemeyer’s approach to 
design, thanks to which all his projects amaze until our 
days. Simplification of the means spent for the achievement 
of a certain goal leads to a detachment from architectural 
form creative principles and to the extinction of architecture 
as art in general. 
Only neuroscience-based research may resolve the 
dispute of radical functionalists and artists, because the 
constructions of Niemeyer remained unclaimed. Architect 
can add the terrain, details, such as portico, columns, bay 
window, decor, and coloring environment in order to get rid 
of the aggressive and tedious homogeneous visual fields in 
the city. But architect needs objective criteria to evaluate 
visual environments as aggressive or friendly to humanity, 
and to make a comparison with the research of the influence 
of coloring on physiology. 
 Another way to avoid homogeneous visual fields is the 
complete change of the paradigm for future architectural 
forms. But it also requires human oriented cognitive 
research. 
Obviously, one main trend is already clear. The 
transition of mankind to urbanized environments and 
separation from nature requires an ecological new approach 
to urban design, and no new visual “ecology” of the spatial 
man-made environment of cities, the likening of nature, 
geometric balance, measure and a certain ratio of rectilinear 
and geomorphic surfaces in architectural forms.   
That is why architectural forming is now already 
connected with phisiomimetics. And, also we need to 
develop the phisiomimetics research, as the fundamental 
principle of architectural forming. A series of experiments 
have to be connected with the phisiomimetics research 
because of physiological benefits of nature based aesthetics. 
Harmony of the architectural form and space means not 
only similarity to natural forms. It’s not the only way of 
generating forms and spaces. Similarity to nature only 
exaggerates and compensates the prevalence of rigid 
geometry 
in 
contemporary 
architecture 
and 
city 
environments. Nature teaches new ways and methods of 
architectural forming. 
It is necessary to mark that a structure of an architectural 
form can be taken as a system of neural and physiologically 
encoded visual 
stimulus 
information. The systemic 
relationship between psycho physiological concepts and the 
theory of formal composition promises an effective 
experimental study. The list of experimental study proposed 
in this paper is not completed because it should be 
supplemented by wide graphic and video series of visual 
stimuli. A convincing chain of relations between the formal 

196
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
characteristics of the architectural form as visual stimuli and 
neural responses is not complete.  
However, the developed theoretical base guarantees not 
only the right direction of the experimental strategy, but also 
its reliability. The main aim of this study is to find clear 
interrelations between the geometry of architectural form 
and the way of emotional perception. The second aim is to 
establish an interrelation between emotional reactions and 
phisiomimetical patterns of forming to reveal possible new 
ways in architecture forming. The third goal is to clarify 
possible new directions in architectural education, methods, 
strategies, necessary new disciplines, etc. However, the 
greatest difficulty of the forthcoming work will be precisely 
the analysis of the experimental data. An interesting 
perspective is the connection of parametric modeling of an 
architectural form and neuroscience-based strategies for its 
design, but is such a connection possible? This question will 
be answered only by further research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
author 
expresses 
great 
gratitude 
for 
the 
consultations with Professors S. Parin and O. Chernavskaya 
and advises of Dr. Thorsten Gressling. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Chebereva O. “Problems of the System Approach to the Study 
of Psychophysiology of Aesthetic Emotions Concerning an 
Architecture”, COGNITIVE 2018 (The Tenth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and 
Applications : February 18-22, 2018, Barcelona, Spain) 
AIRIA 
XPS 
Press 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
cognitive_2018_2_10_48003 Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[2] L. Azizyan, I. Dobritsyna, G. Lebedeva. Theory of 
composition as a poetics of architecture. Moscow: Progress-
Tradition, 2002. 
[3] Y. Yankovskaya. “The architectural composition and 
semiotics are the genesis of ideas”, Architecton: news from 
universities, 
vol. 
7, 
2004. 
Availble 
from 
http://archvuz.ru/2004_2/3 . Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[4] A. Shapoval. The Theory of Formal Composition: A 
Textbook for Universities. Kazan Design quarter. 2016. 
[5] Cr. 
Alexander. 
A 
pattern 
language.Towns.Buildings.Construction. Oxford University 
Press. 1977. 
[6] Ch. A. Jencks. The New Paradigm in Architecture. Yale 
University Press. 2002. 
[7] G. Durand. Les structures antropologiques de l’imaginaire. 
Paris:Dunod, 1992. 
[8] J. D. Lewis-Williams, “Discussion and Criticism. on Vision 
and Power in the Neolitic: Evidence from the Decorated 
Monuments”, Current Antropology, vol. 34(1), pp. 55-
56,1993. 
[9] “Paleolithic paintings in El Castillo cave in Northern Spain. 
Uranium-series dating reveals Iberian paintings are Europe’s 
oldest cave art”, University of Bristol news. vol. 14, 2012. 
Available from http://www.bris.ac.uk/news/2012/8560.html. 
Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[10] “Pablo Picasso Asemic line drawing”. Available from: 
http://seks-ua.blogspot.ru/2013/10/pablo-picasso-asemic-line- 
drawing.htm Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[11] E.Y.Zueva and K.B. Zueva. The Concept of Dominance by 
A.A. Ukhtomsky and Anticipation. Springer International 
Publishing Switzerland, 2015. 
[12] V. Mako. Architecture and Ideology. Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing, 2014. 
[13] Toyo Ito& Associates: Architects, Projects. Available from 
http://toyo-ito.co.jp/WWW/Project_Descript/2015-/2015-
p_04/2015-p_04_en.html Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[14] R. Soar and D. Andreen , “The Role of Additive 
Manufacturing and Physiomimetic Computational Design for 
Digital Construction ”, Architectural Design, Vol. 82(2), pp. 
126–135, 2012. 
[15] K. Anokhin. “Cognitom is a hyper-network model of a 
dump”, Lecture given in Kurchatov Institute. Available from: 
http://neuroinfo.ru/conf/Content/Presentations/Anokhin2015.p 
df. Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[16] R. Anheim. Art and visisual perception: A phichology of the 
creative eye. University of California press. Berkeley and Los 
Andgeles, California, 1997. 
[17] L. Shlain. Art and phisics:parallel visions in space, time, and 
light. New York: W. Morrow & Company, Inc.,1991 
[18] M. Korsakova-Kreyn and W. J. Dowling, “Emotional 
Processing Music: Study in Affective Responses to Tonal 
Modulationin Controlled Harmonic Progressions and Real 
Music”, Psychomusicology: Music, Mind and Brain, vol. 
24(1), pp. 4/20, 2014. 
[19] Abraham H. and Maslow. Motivation and Personality (2nd 
ed.) N.Y.: Harper & Row, 1970. 
[20] Bourke 
J. 
The 
Story 
of 
Pain: 
From 
Prayer 
to 
Painkillers.Oxford; N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2014. 
[21] “Dangers of the city - in the heart rhythm of motorists. 
Scientists clearly showed the old problem”, NN.RU.: Nizhny 
Novgorod 
online. 
28.03.2015. 
Available 
from: 
https://m.nn.ru/news/gorod/2015/03/28/opasnosti_goroda__v_
serdechnom_ritme_avtomobilistov/ until 2017. Retrieved 
2018.08.31  
[22] S.Parin, 
S.Polevaya, 
A.Polavaya, 
“A 
Neirochemical 
Framework to Stress and the Role of the Endogenous Opioid 
System in the Control of Healf Rate Variability for Cognitive 
Load” Proc. of COGNITIVE 2017: The Ninth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Tecnologies and 
Applications, pp. 16-20, Copyright ©IARIA, 2017.,2017. 
[23] Ellard C. Habitat. How architecture affects our behavior and 
well-being. University of Waterloo (Canada), 2015. The 
Bukowski Agency Ltd and The Van Lear Agency LLC 
[24] Schenk, J. (2012) The cult of the Cross in the Order of the 
Temple. In: As Ordens Militares: Freires, Guerreiros, 
Cavaleiros: Actas do VI Encontro Sobre Ordens Militares: 10 
a 14 de Março de 2010. Series: Ordens militares (7). 
Município de Palmela, GEsOS: Palmela, pp. 207-219. ISBN 
9789728497569J. 
[25]  Von Hoffmann E.  “The Brain on Architecture”// The 
Atlantic. 
Healf./Nov 
10, 
2014 
. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/11/the-
brain-on-architecture/382090/ Retrieved 2018.08.31 
[26] Lawsona B., Healing architecture, a The School of 
Architecture, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK , Arts & 
Health, Vol. 2, No. 2, September 2010, 95–108, DOI 
10.1080/17533010903488517 
[27] Arbib M., Brains, Machines, and Mathematics. McGraw-Hill, 
1964. 
[28] Pallasmaa U. The thinking Hand: Existential and Embodied 
Wisdom in Architecture.John Willey & Sons LTD, 2009. 
[29] Arbib M., How the Brain Got Language: The Mirror Neuron 
Hypothesis. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2012. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199896684.001.000
1  

197
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[30] Manpreet J. Designing mindspaces. Re-inventing urban 
spaces by understanding. Psyhology of design and philosophy 
of heterotopia. The hidden ways that architecture affects how 
you feel.  San Francisco, California 94105, USA Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. MDes, December 2016. 
[31] Kandinsky, W. Punkt und Linie zu Fläche: Beitrag zur 
Analyse der malerischen Elemente. – München: Verlag 
A.Langen, 1926. - SPb .: ABC-Classic, 2005. - P. 63-232. 
[32] Johannes Itten GESTALTUNG UND FORMENLEHRE. 
Vorkurs am Bauhaus und spaeter. © 1963 und 1975 by 
Verlagsgruppe Dornier GmbH, Stuttgart. 
[33] Niemeyer Oscar. The Curves of Time. The Memoirs of Oscar 
Niemeyer. Phaidon Press, 2007. 
 
 
 
 

