A Method for Analyzing Improper Driving  
 Using Passenger’s Danger Perceptions and its Evaluation 
Short paper 
 
Kensho Nishizawa 
Graduate School of Engineering and Science 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: ma21111@shibaura-it.ac.jp 
Tsuyoshi Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: tsnaka@shibaura-it.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—One of the main causes of traffic accidents is 
"improper driving", such as driver's carelessness and 
operation mistakes. To prevent traffic accidents, it is necessary 
to detect the occurrence of improper driving, point it out to the 
driver, and advise improvement. However, the driving 
behavior analysis, which analyzes the driving itself from 
several sensor data, cannot accurately and comprehensively 
detect improper driving because it does not consider the traffic 
situation related to the road, the other vehicles and so on. This 
paper proposes a method that combines the driving behavior 
analysis and the danger perception by passengers. This method 
allows for comprehensive and correct detection of improper 
driving because passengers can objectively see both the driving 
and traffic situation. Experiments to apply this method showed 
its effectiveness. Furthermore, we conducted the other 
experiment to compare the passenger danger perception with 
driver’s one. The results showed that drivers and passengers 
find out different types of dangerous driving, and that 
passengers perceive the driving more objectively. The results 
newly show that the use of objective analysis using the 
passenger's heart rate is effective in providing improvement to 
the driver. 
Keywords-Drive Analysis; Heart Rate; Passenger. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traffic accidents are one of the many serious problems in 
the modern society. One of the major causes of traffic 
accidents is improper driving by drivers, including driver 
errors and carelessness [2]. 
Support systems that point out the occurrence of 
improper driving and provide advice for improvement would 
be effective in preventing drivers from causing accidents. 
Driving behavior analysis is a method that uses sensors to 
measure the behavior of a car and detects abnormal driving 
patterns as improper driving, such as rapid acceleration and 
meandering. However, the driving behavior analysis is not 
highly accurate because only a few driving patterns can be 
analyzed without considering traffic situation, in which the 
driving takes places. Therefore, it is often the case where the 
driving behavior analysis wrongly detects or even misses 
improper driving. This problem can be a major drawback for 
such support systems to give appropriate advice to the 
drivers. 
To solve this problem, we proposed a method that, in 
addition to the driving behavior analysis, utilizes passenger’s 
danger perception of the traffic situation [1]. This paper 
fleshes out the contents to provide detailed discussion and 
evaluation of the method. The proposed method analyzes the 
variation of the passenger's heart rate to detect the 
passenger's danger perception, which is used to compare to 
the abnormal driving patterns detected by the driving 
behavior analysis. If they are matched, the detected patterns 
are considered improper driving. In addition, there are cases 
where driving is deemed improper purely based on traffic 
situation, which cannot be detected by driving behavior 
analysis. The proposed method extracts such cases by 
analyzing the passenger's danger perceptions that do not 
match the occurrence of abnormal driving patterns. This 
allows for more comprehensive and accurate detection of 
improper driving. 
To implement the proposed method, we devised a 
method to detect danger perception based on abnormal heart 
rate of the target. The criteria for determining heart rate 
abnormality are set through experiments. 
An experiment was conducted to show that our method 
works effectively. The results show that the passenger’s 
danger perceptions are useful to improve the accuracy of 
detecting the improper driving, and passenger-perception-
only data, which are the passenger’s danger perceptions 
without matching the abnormal driving patterns, include 
many cases of improper driving. Some, however, were 
caused by things unrelated to improper driving. These must 
be removed to determine passenger heart rate abnormalities 
as dangerous driving. 
A comparative experiment was also conducted to 
compare the passenger danger perception with driver’s one. 
The results showed that drivers and passengers find out 
different types of dangerous driving, and that passengers 
perceive driving more objectively. Moreover, it was found 
that drivers and passengers often perceive the different types 
of dangers, and so considering both may allow for a more 
comprehensive and accurate detection of improper driving. 
In this paper, Section II describes existing methods for 
detecting improper driving and their problems. Section III 
proposes our method, and Section IV describes an 
experiment and its result to show the effectiveness of the 
method, and Section V discusses it. Section VI describes a 
71
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

comparative experiment with the driver's danger perception 
and its results, and Section VII discusses it. Section VIII 
concludes this paper and discusses future prospects. 
II. 
EXISTING METHODS FOR DETECTING IMPROPER 
DRIVING 
A. Driving behavior analysis 
Driving behavior analysis is a method that detects 
dangerous driving patterns by analyzing sensor data on the 
motion of a vehicle while driving [3][4]. The sensor data 
includes speed, acceleration, and angular velocity. These 
data are used to detect dangerous driving patterns, such as 
sudden braking, sudden steering, sudden acceleration, and 
unsteady handing. However, this method has a problem that 
it cannot comprehensively and accurately detect improper 
driving due to the following reasons: 
 
• 
Not all abnormal driving patterns are covered. 
• 
Traffic situations are never considered, and so it 
possibly detects incorrect improper driving. 
 
Concerning the latter, this is because the criteria for 
determining whether a certain driving is improper or not vary 
depending on the traffic situation, in which it is taken place. 
That is, such criteria depend on the combination of driving 
pattern and the traffic situation. 
 
B. Driver’s danger perception 
Another approach to determining improper driving is to 
detect the danger perception while driving from the driver's 
own physiological data. There exist several methods to adopt 
this approach, such as detecting the danger perceptions by 
using heart rate variability [5], monitoring some visual 
behaviors that characterize a driver’s level of vigilance [6], 
and estimating the driver's emotions [7]. These methods can 
detect the driver's danger perception when capturing external 
dangers, such as unexpected events or unsafe situations.  
Since the driver's perception of danger comprehensively 
captures all the driving situation including the driving 
behavior and the traffic situation, it is expected to provide 
more comprehensive coverage than the driving behavior 
analysis, such as pedestrians’ sudden crossing or the other 
vehicles’ improper driving.  
On the other hand, this method has the following 
drawbacks: 
• 
There are individual differences in the human heart 
rate and the way it changes, and these individual 
differences may affect the accuracy of hazard 
detection. 
• 
Changes in heart rate can also occur outside of 
danger perception, causing false detection of danger 
perception. 
• 
Because drivers perceive situations subjectively, 
they tend not to consider their driving to be 
problematic. Therefore, a driver's danger perception 
is not suitable for use in objective determination of 
improper driving. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
A. Approaches 
To solve the problems of the existing methods shown in 
the previous section, we adopt an approach to use the 
passenger's danger perception. Since the passenger's danger 
perception is considered more objective than the driver’s, the 
combination with driving behavior analysis would be 
effective. 
B. How to determine improper driving 
The proposed method for detecting improper driving 
using the passenger's perception of danger is shown in Figure 
1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed method for detecting improper driving  
using passenger’s perception of danger 
The method first does the driving behavior analysis using 
sensor data, such as Global Positioning System (GPS), speed, 
and angular velocity to detect abnormal driving patterns. 
Then, it analyzes the variation of the passenger's heart rate to 
detect the passenger's danger perception. After that, the 
detected danger perceptions are compared to the abnormal 
driving patterns. If they are matched, the detected patterns 
are determined to be improper driving. In addition, there are 
cases where driving is deemed improper purely based on 
traffic situation, which cannot be detected by driving 
behavior analysis. To extract such cases, the method picks up 
the passenger’s danger perceptions that do not match the 
abnormal driving patterns. This allows for comprehensive 
and accurate detection of improper driving. 
C. Passennger’s danger perception analysis 
The proposed method uses the danger perception analysis, 
analyzing the variation of the heart rate to find out 
occurrence of its abnormalities. Through an experiment, we 
defined the following two types of abnormal heart rate 
patterns. 
• 
Rapid increase in heart rate: As shown in Figure 2, 
when the amount of change in heart rate increases 
above the specified threshold within a certain period 
of time, it is determined that there is a rapid increase 
in heart rate. The heart rate is measured every second, 
and the threshold of the amount of change is 10 
beats. 
 
72
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2.  Heart rate variability during rapid heart rate increase 
• 
High heart rate state: As shown in Figure 3, when 
the heart rate value stays high for a certain period, it 
is judged to be in the high heart rate state. The heart 
rate is judge as high when it is over the threshold of 
the average heart rate plus 10. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Heart rate variability during high heart rate state 
The average heart rate is determined based on the data in the 
last three minutes. This compensates individual differences 
in the passenger’s heart rate. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 1 
A. Purpose of the experiment 
The following two hypotheses, which support the 
theoretical basis of the proposed method, are verified by 
actual driving experiments to work as expected. 
 
• 
Hypothesis 1-1: False positives for improper driving 
will be reduced by looking at the match between 
abnormal driving patterns based on the driving 
behavior analysis and danger perception based on 
the passenger’s danger perception analysis. 
• 
Hypothesis 1-2: There exist some danger perceptions 
that do not match abnormal driving patterns, which 
include most of all the improper driving that strongly 
depends on the traffic conditions, which cannot be 
detected by the driving behavior analysis. 
B. Methods for the experiment 
In the driving experiment, the speed and angular velocity 
of the vehicle and the heart rate of the passenger are 
measured every second while driving. Each driving 
experiment consists of one-hour driving. After the driving, 
the actual driving situation was reviewed using video and 
notes recorded during the driving. Figures 4-7 show how the 
experiment took place. 
l 
Figure 4: smartphone sensor, measuring the 
vehicle's angle and angular velocity.  
l 
Figure 5: Apple Watch, measuring the passenger's 
heart rate.  
l 
Figure 6:  video camera on the windshield, recoding 
the vehicle’s forward image.  
l 
Figure 7: notes the passengers take when they 
perceive a danger.  
In this experiment, we use a prototyping system 
implementing the proposed method in Figure 1, except for 
Situation Analysis, which is performed based on the 
passenger’s own judgement by reviewing the recorded video 
after the experiment.  
The subjects of this experiment are 17 university students 
with different driving experiences, and 50 sets of 
experiments took place. Table 1 shows the breakdown of the 
driving experience of the passengers, and Table 2 shows the 
breakdown of the combinations of driver and passenger by 
driving experience. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Measurement of vehicle speed and angular velocity 
 using smartphone sensors 
 
Figure 5.  Measurement of passenger's heart rate using Apple Watch 
 
Figure 6.  Recording of the vehicle's forward image  
using a video camera 
73
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7.  Passengers taking notes when they perceive a danger. 
TABLE I. BREAKDOWN OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE DRIVING EXPERIMENT 
Participants’ driving 
frequency 
Number of 
people 
Number of 
experiments 
Drive on a daily basis 
5 people 
12 sets 
Sometimes drive 
4 people 
10 sets 
Don’t usually drive 
4 people 
13 sets 
No driver’s license 
4 people 
15 sets 
Total 
17 people 
50 sets 
 
TABLE II. BREAKDOWN OF DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS BY DRIVING 
FREQUENCY 
Driver’s driving 
frequency 
Passengers’ driving 
frequency 
Number of 
experiments 
Drive on a  
daily basis 
Drive on a daily basis 
7 sets 
Sometimes drive 
1 set 
Don’t usually drive 
8 sets 
No driver’s license 
4 sets 
Sometimes drive 
Drive on a daily basis 
5 sets 
Sometimes drive 
9 sets 
Don’t usually drive 
5 sets 
No driver’s license 
11 sets 
Total 
50 sets 
 
C. Results of experiments 
1) Verification of Hypothesis 1-1 
A total of 56 abnormal driving patterns are detected by 
the driving behavior analysis. Of these, 9 cases match the 
passenger’s danger perception. Figure 8 shows all the cases 
classified into four danger levels by the review of actual 
situation. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Relationship between abnormal driving patterns  
and passengers’ perception of danger 
Figure 8 shows that the passenger's danger perception 
occurs in most situations where the actual danger level is 
high, and in contrast, the passenger's danger perception does 
not occur in most situations where the actual danger level is 
low.  There can be seen a tendency that the group of 
abnormal driving patterns classified in higher danger level 
have more percentage of ones matching with passenger’s 
danger perception. This supports Hypothesis 1-1 that false 
positives for improper driving in the driving behavior 
analysis can be reduced by using the results of the 
passenger’s danger perception analysis.  
 
2) Verification of Hypothesis 1-2 
Of the results of detecting passenger’s danger perceptions, 
142 cases do not match the abnormal driving patterns. Table 
3 shows the results of categorizing their causes based on the 
review of the actual situation one by one. 
 
TABLE III. CATEGORIZATION OF THE ANALYZED CAUSE OF PASSENGER’S 
HEART RATE ABNORMALITIES 
Dangerous 
driving  
Outside threats 
Emotional 
change 
Unknown 
cause 
18 cases 
43 cases 
62 cases 
19 cases 
 
Details of each item used in the classification and 
examples of actual occurrences are as follows. 
 
a) Dangerous driving: 18 cases 
・ Anxiety or fear felt about the driver’s 
dangerous driving (e.g., accelerating instead of 
stopping at a traffic light change, etc.) 
b) Outside threats: 43 cases 
・ Perceived danger due to external factors, such 
as interruptions by other vehicles or pedestrians 
jumping out (e.g., a driver suddenly getting out 
of a stopped truck) 
・ Anxiety caused by environmental factors, such 
as narrowness of the road and poor visibility 
(e.g., glare from the western sun, thick fog, 
etc.) 
c) Emotional change: 62 cases 
・Excitement or surprise during conversation 
・Drowsiness and fatigue 
 
Hypothesis 1-2 proves correct, from the fact that many 
improper driving cases are included in the passenger’s 
danger perceptions that do not match abnormal driving 
pattern, and few improper driving cases are seen that are not 
detected by either analysis.  
However, the results showed that there are some cases 
other than improper driving among the passenger’s heart rate 
abnormalities. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 1 
From the fact that the higher danger level of abnormal 
driving patterns matches with passenger’s heart rate 
abnormalities well, we found that our approach to using 
passenger’s danger perceptions to reduce the false detection 
of improper driving is reasonable. In addition, we also found 
that the passenger’s danger perceptions can cover most of 
improper driving that the driving behavior analysis cannot 
74
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

detect. These results show that the proposed method can 
detect improper driving comprehensively and correctly.  
However, the important issues to establish our method 
are: 
• 
to extract only passenger’s danger perceptions from 
all the passenger’s heart rate abnormalities. 
• 
to analyze and classify the passenger's danger 
perception that does not match abnormal driving 
patterns. 
However, the above issues are difficult to settled at this 
moment 
because 
they 
require 
a 
comprehensive 
understanding of the factors that cause the abnormal heart 
rate.  
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 2 
A. Purpose of the experiment 
Because the experiments in the previous section did not 
measure driver’s heart rate abnormality, and therefore we 
could not yet prove that the passenger's heart rate 
abnormality is more suitable for detecting objective danger 
perception than the driver’s one.  
In this section, we set the following three hypotheses, 
which show the validity of the proposed method adopting the 
passenger's danger perception by comparison with driver’s 
one: 
 
• 
Hypothesis 2-1: Driver's heart rate abnormality 
matches the driver's danger perception, and a danger 
that the driver is unaware cannot be detected by 
driver danger perception.  
• 
Hypothesis 2-2: Passengers can provide a more 
objective danger perception than the driver, 
including improper driving that the driver is unaware 
of. 
• 
Hypothesis 2-3: While drivers are more careful to 
external dangers and can perceive more small 
dangers than the passengers, passengers can perceive 
improper driving and its situation more objectively. 
Therefore, the passengers can find the driver's 
improvement points. 
B. Methods for the experiment 
In the experiment, we used both driver's and passenger's 
danger perception.  
The driver's and passenger's heart rate are measured 
using the Apple Watch's optical heart rate sensor. After the 
experiment, the recorded video was reviewed, and a review 
was conducted based on the judgment of the driver and 
passengers through discussion. Figures 9 and 10 show how 
the experiment took place. 
l 
Figure 9: Apple Watch, measuring the driver's heart 
rate.  
l 
Figure 10: Driver and passenger reviewing the 
video after the end of driving.  
The subjects of this experiment are 6 university students 
with different driving experiences, and 5 sets of experiments 
took place. Each experiment consists of one-hour driving. 
Table 4 shows the breakdown of the driving experience of 
the passengers, and Table 5 shows the breakdown of the 
combinations of driver and passenger by driving experience. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Measurement of driver's heart rate using Apple Watch 
 
Figure 10.  Driver and passenger reviewing the video after the end of 
driving  
 
TABLE Ⅳ. BREAKDOWN OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE DRIVING EXPERIMENT 
Participants’ driving 
frequency 
Number of people 
Drive on a daily basis 
1 people 
Sometimes drive 
2 people 
Don’t usually drive 
1 people 
No driver’s license 
2 people 
Total 
6 people 
 
TABLE Ⅴ. BREAKDOWN OF DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS BY DRIVING 
FREQUENCY 
Driver’s driving 
frequency 
Passengers’ driving 
frequency 
Number of 
experiments 
Drive on a  
daily basis 
Drive on a daily basis 
0 set 
Sometimes drive 
1 set 
Don’t usually drive 
0 set 
No driver’s license 
1 set 
Sometimes drive 
Drive on a daily basis 
0 set 
Sometimes drive 
0 set 
Don’t usually drive 
1 set 
No driver’s license 
2 sets 
Total 
5 sets 
 
C. Results of experiments 
1) Verification of Hypothesis 2-1 & Hypothesis 2-2 
A total of 107 abnormalities were detected by the driver's 
and passenger's danger perception. Table 6 shows the results 
of classifying the causes of the abnormalities one by one by 
checking the actual situation, along with the presence or 
absence of abnormal heart rate of the driver and passenger. 
 
75
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE Ⅵ. COMBINATION OF HEART RATE ABNORMALITIES AND CAUSE 
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS 
Abnormal  
heart rate 
Cause 
Dangerous  
driving 
External 
factors 
Environmental 
factors 
Other 
Both 
3 cases 
2 cases 
1 case 
8 
cases 
Driver 
only 
4 cases 
21 cases 
4 cases 
39 
cases 
Passenger 
only 
3 cases 
4 cases 
7 cases 
11 
cases 
Total 
10 cases 
27 cases 
12 cases 
58 
cases 
 
Of the cases where heart rate abnormalities were detected, 
the following is a breakdown of the actual abnormal driving 
patterns found. 
 
・Both parties had a heart rate abnormality: 3 cases 
・Heart rate abnormality only in the driver: 4 cases 
・Heart rate abnormality only in the passenger: 3 cases 
 
Table 7 shows the breakdown of the awareness of 
improper driving by the driver and passenger in these 10 
cases. 
 
TABLE Ⅶ. RESULTS OF CLASSIFICATION OF HEART RATE ABNORMALITY 
AND AWARENESS. 
Abnormal  
heart rate 
Awareness 
Both 
Driver only 
Passenger only 
Both 
2 cases 
1 case 
0 case 
Driver only 
1 case 
3 cases 
0 case 
Passenger only 
0 case 
0 case 
3 cases 
 
In all cases where abnormalities were detected in the 
driver's heart rate, the driver himself was aware that he did 
improper driving. On the other hand, in cases where no 
abnormalities were detected in the driver's heart rate, the 
driver was not aware of improper driving. As shown above, 
the driver's heart rate abnormality has a strong correlation 
with the driver's awareness of improper driving. 
In addition, there were 3 cases of improper driving that 
the driver was unaware, but the passenger felt that the 
driving was dangerous, and the abnormal heart rate of the 
passenger made it possible to detect it. 
 
2) Verification of Hypothesis 2-3 
The major causes of the driver’s and passenger’s heart 
rate abnormality that did not match abnormal driving 
patterns as follows. 
 
• 
Driver:  external factors: 21 cases, including  
other vehicles, pedestrians, or other factors may pose 
a danger to my vehicle, and I was worried and 
alarmed. 
• 
Passenger: environmental factors: 7 cases, including 
narrow roads, poor visibility, and other factors caused 
dangerous driving conditions that made me feel 
anxious and uncomfortable. 
 
There are 21 cases of driver’s danger perception caused 
by external factors were detected. In many of these cases, the 
driver quickly predicts the possibility of danger based on the 
surrounding situation. 
On the other hand, there are 7 cases of passenger’s 
danger perception caused by environmental factors were 
detected. These cases capture passenger’s anxiety and 
discomfort about driving in a particular traffic situation. 
VII. ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 2 
Firstly, 10 dangerous driving situations were detected by 
the driver's improper driving. Among them, the drivers were 
aware of their own improper driving when it was detected by 
the driver's heart rate abnormality, and, on the other hand, 
improper driving that the driver was unaware was not 
detected by the driver's heart rate abnormality. This supports 
Hypothesis 2-1 since the driver's awareness of improper 
driving is related to whether the driver's heart rate 
abnormality exists or not. 
Secondly, there were 3 cases of improper driving that the 
driver was unaware of, but the passenger was aware of the 
danger. In these cases, heart rate abnormality of the 
passenger was detected. This supports Hypothesis 2-2 since 
the passenger objectively perceived the situation to recognize 
improper driving. The driver's danger perception detects 
many dangers from external factors. While driving, drivers 
need to pay more attention to their surroundings than their 
passengers. For this reason, we consider that the driver can 
notice existing or potential dangers caused by external 
factors or the possibility of such danger. On the other hand, 
passengers are aware of many danger perceptions from 
environmental factors. Thus, drivers and passengers pay 
attention to different things, and perceive different types of 
dangers. 
Thirdly, we speculate that drivers are unconsciously 
aware of their surroundings and are alert to the possibility 
that an external factor may actually occur. On the other hand, 
passengers objectively perceive dangers in the current 
situation. This suggests that the passenger's danger 
perception is more suitable for recognizing the actual 
dangerous traffic situation and for providing drivers for 
effective advice for improvement. This supports Hypothesis 
2-3. 
Furthermore, since drivers and passengers perceive 
different types of dangers, utilizing both types of danger 
perceptions may allow for more comprehensive and accurate 
detection of improper driving. 
Only five experiments were conducted, in which only a 
few dangers were detected. Therefore, it appears to be 
necessary to conduct more experiments to get more robust 
results in danger perception by both drivers and passengers. 
Concerning the subjects of our experiments, we used almost 
the same aged university students, but it is necessary to use a 
wider variety of subjects to increase the validity of the 
experiments. 
76
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK 
In this paper, we proposed a method for detecting 
improper driving using driving behavior analysis, combined 
with the passenger’s danger perception. The driving 
experiments showed that the proposed method can reduce 
the number of false positives for improper driving, and that it 
includes most of improper driving that the driving behavior 
analysis cannot detect because it strongly depends on traffic 
conditions. However, the passenger heart rate abnormalities 
include many cases not relating to improper driving, which 
need to be excluded. 
In addition, a comparative experiment of driver’s and 
passenger’s danger perception showed that passengers can 
more objectively perceive improper driving that the driver is 
unaware of. And also, since the types of danger that drivers 
and passengers can perceive are different, utilizing both of 
the two factors may provide a more comprehensive and 
accurate detection of improper driving. 
In the future, we will improve our method based on the 
findings in this paper into a comprehensive and accurate 
method for detecting improper driving. We also aim to 
implement a driving improvement support system using this 
method  that provides effective advice to drivers. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Nishizawa and T. Nakajima,  “A Method for Analyzing Improper 
Driving Using Passenger’s Danger Perceptions”, CORETA 2021 - 
Advances on Core Technologies and Applications, Athens, Greece, 
November 14 - 18, 2021 
[2] 
Injury facts, “Motor vehicle safety issues”, Available from: 
https://injuryfacts.nsc.org/motor-vehicle/motor-vehicle-safety-
issues/improper-driving-and-road-rage/ , [retrieved: 12,2022] 
[3] 
P. Wang et al., “You are how you drive: Peer and temporal-aware 
representation 
learning 
for 
driving 
behavior 
analysis”, 
 Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 2457-2466, 2018 
[4] 
Sompo Japan Insurance Inc., “Portable smiling road navi” , Available 
from: https://www.sompo-japan.jp/hinsurance/smilingroad/pc/, (in 
Japanese) [retrieved: 12,2022] 
[5] 
I. Kageyama, Y. Kuriyagawa, and A. Tsubouchi, “Study on 
Construction of Driver Model for Obstacle Avoidance Using Risk 
Potential”, In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on 
Dynamics of Vehicles on Roads and Tracks, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 431-
437, 2017 
[6] 
J. Wang, W. Xu, and Y. Gong, “Real-time driving danger-level 
prediction”, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 
23, no. 8, pp. 1247-1254, 2010 
[7] 
I. Watanabe, R. Yoshida, F. Chen, and M. Sugaya, “Human 
Emotional State Analysis During Driving Simulation Experiment 
Using Bio-Emotion Estimation Method”, IEEE 42nd Annual 
Computer Software and Applications Conference, vol. 2, pp. 589-594, 
2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 14 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

