Wireless Health: Making Your Devices Talk 
A Review, Solution, and Outlook for Wireless Health Connectivity 
 
Stephan Hengstler 
 
MeshEye Consulting 
Campbell, California, United States 
hengstler@alumni.stanford.edu 
 
 
Abstract—With 
the 
technological 
revolution 
in 
digital 
communications and connectivity over the past two decades, 
the healthcare sector is at the beginning of a dramatic 
overhaul. These technologies have already made their way into 
our everyday lives and thus changing the way we do things. 
The healthcare industry with its resistance to change has 
started considering, evaluating, and embracing the way 
connectivity can change medical treatment and personal 
health. In this paper, we review the state-of-the-art in medical 
device connectivity with a focus on wireless solutions. 
Throughout the paper, the discussion primarily applies to the 
United States and it separately studies its three major care 
delivery settings: clinical, office, and home. Based on the 
challenges and requirements that each of these settings 
present, we discuss the key aspects needed for medical device 
connectivity to succeed from both a technological and financial 
perspective. Cellular connectivity can satisfy many of these key 
aspects. Therefore, we have proposed and operated a testbed 
for cellular-enabled upload into Electronic Health Record 
(EHR) systems, which we present here and outline its 
implementation in detail. The paper concludes with a longer 
term outlook on the adoption of digital communications and 
connectivity in the healthcare sector. 
Keywords-cellular; connectivity; devices; health; wireless 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is much excitement in the electronic health 
(eHealth) and mobile health (mHealth) industry about the 
promise that wireless technologies can bring to healthcare. 
Many grassroots efforts are underway promising everything 
from vital sign monitoring to aging in-place. Naturally, one 
may ask which technologies and solutions truly create value, 
which will survive in the end and ultimately benefit us 
humans? 
The business environment feels similar to the beginnings 
of cellular technology in the mid to late 1990s. Many 
companies offer complementary, overlapping, or competing 
product solutions for improving healthcare through the use 
of wireless connectivity—the same kind of wireless 
connectivity we already use on a daily basis in our laptops, 
tablets, and cell phones. Although they share the same base 
technology, the rules of engagement differ for the healthcare 
sector in many aspects from consumer markets. It is us, as 
the end–user, driving market success in consumer markets 
and hence deciding the fate of a product solution or 
technology. A consumer product succeeds if it meets the 
needs of the consumer in terms of cost, features, and 
usability. Not so in the healthcare industry: the success of a 
medical product is driven by multiple other factors such as 
distributor 
alliances, 
marketing 
efforts, 
insurance 
reimbursement, quality reputation and regulatory track 
record. With all the parties involved in the chain of 
treatment, who have a stake in deciding the means of 
treatment, it is us, as the patient, who has the least say in the 
medical devices that facilitate our diagnosis and treatment. 
The research presented here expands upon our seminal 
paper [1] on wireless health and our presentation [2] given at 
the mHealth Summit 2013. In this paper, we will cover and 
discuss the deployment and usefulness of wireless 
connectivity technology in a variety of medical instruments 
primarily in the United States. The paper starts out in Section 
II with a survey of existing connectivity solutions used in 
medical devices today. In Section III, we introduce several 
key aspects that are necessary for a connectivity solution to 
succeed in the healthcare market. Section IV applies these 
keys to cellular connectivity exclusively and presents our 
technology solution for connecting medical devices equipped 
with cellular modems to Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
systems. In Section V, we discuss the direction that we see 
the market taking and our view of what the future holds for 
connectivity solutions in healthcare. Section VI concludes 
the paper with a summary of the insights gained and final 
remarks. 
II. 
EXISTING CONNECTIVITY SOLUTIONS 
The deployment of wireless technology in healthcare 
delivery settings today is widespread. Many solutions 
already exist or are under development aiming to streamline 
the healthcare system [3]. But, as varied as the patient groups 
are, so are the treatment options. Today, wireless solutions in 
healthcare are highly fragmented with little standardization 
beyond the medium access layer. While this fragmentation 
facilitates a high degree of targeted solutions, which address 
specific needs, it makes it difficult for medical instrument 
companies to capitalize on their R&D investments. 
Two different ways of categorizing solutions in use today 
help to shed light on wireless deployment: (i) grouping by 
the intended healthcare setting (clinical, office, and home 
147
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. 
WIRED VERSUS WIRELESS CONNECTIVITY 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Wired 
• Robust, stable and reliable 
• Access control on premise 
• Simple to monitor security 
• Higher cost of installation 
• More complicated to scale 
• Upgrade can be expensive 
Wireless 
• Easy to install and deploy 
• Supports device mobility 
• Readily upgradable to 
latest wireless standard 
• Access control challenging 
• Devices need to be 
configured individually 
• Requires coverage testing 
 
setting) and (ii) grouping by the target patient group 
(teenagers, baby boomers, and general population). Grouping 
solutions by target patient group will lead to a separation by 
health condition, whereas categorizing them by healthcare 
setting will result in a separation by treatment and usage 
environment. The latter grouping is more meaningful with 
respect to medical device functionality and connectivity. 
Therefore, let us take a closer look at which connectivity 
solutions have made their way into the three different care 
delivery settings. 
A. Clinical Setting 
In clinical settings, i.e., clinics and hospitals, the 
objective of connected devices lies in preventing medical 
errors and reducing the cost of treatment. Connected devices 
facilitate this through streamlining the flow of admission, 
diagnosis, billing, and release information. 
Clinical healthcare providers still prefer wired solutions 
for most of their medical instruments. Table I lists the main 
advantages and disadvantages of wired versus wireless 
connectivity in medical devices. For one, wired solutions are 
more secure, reliable, and easier to maintain once installed 
and configured. Such wired instruments include for example 
vital sign monitors, surgical instrumentation, and hospital lab 
equipment. The use of mobile devices that doctors and 
nurses carry around is limited to smart phones, tablets, 
personal digital assistants, and most notably bedside 
monitors [4]. Both wired and wireless devices that are used 
in diagnosis and treatment typically integrate into the 
facility’s Health Information System (HIS) and Laboratory 
Information System (LIS) through the use of instrument 
middleware. 
With few exceptions, IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi [5] is the 
preferred connectivity technology for such devices. Cellular 
technology [6] is only used for text message notifications to 
personnel involved in patient care activities. So far, wireless 
connections only make sense for instruments that doctors 
and nurses carry with them to perform routine tasks or for 
patient bedside monitors according to a clinical laboratorian 
at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation. A prime example of 
such a patient bedside monitor is Abbott’s i-STAT 1 
Wireless System [7]. It is a handheld blood analyzer that, for 
instance, allows quantitative point-of-care measurements of 
Cardiac Troponin I, which is used in the diagnosis and 
treatment of heart attacks.  The handheld analyzer can 
transmit measurement results via Wi-Fi into the patients’ 
electronic medical records.  The primary motivators for 
connecting medical devices into electronic medical records 
lie in the reduction of the overall cost structure, prevention of 
transcription errors, and, in the United States, by federal 
mandate [8], in the reduction of the rate of readmission. 
The deployment of cellular technology in clinical settings 
still faces strong opposition. A frequently encountered 
argument against cellular technology is weak reception or no 
coverage. Cellular coverage largely depends on the network 
carrier. One thing to keep in mind is that coverage can only 
improve over time—if paying customers reside at any given 
location, at least one cell phone carrier will be there to go 
after them. Some hospitals and clinics are installing indoor 
Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) thus actively improving 
cell coverage to the benefit of caregivers and patients alike. 
B. Office Setting 
Doctors’ offices are currently undergoing a fundamental 
change. The federal incentives and mandate towards the 
adoption and meaningful use of electronic health records [9] 
causes smaller doctors’ offices to switch from primarily 
paper-based record keeping to electronic health records for 
their patient base. With it, the use of instrumented testing 
becomes also more lucrative as test results can automatically 
find their way into a patient’s digital medical record. 
However, very few of such devices are in use today; let alone 
advanced devices offering cellular connectivity. 
Especially for smaller practices, the main hurdle is the 
affordability of diagnostic test instruments and their limited 
insurance reimbursement. Test labs service most diagnostic 
testing needs arising in doctors’ offices with an established 
cost structure for reimbursement. This flow of patient testing 
is more cost efficient as long it remains below the cost of 
ownership of in-house instrumented testing. This is primarily 
dependent upon the volume of tests run in a doctor’s office. 
Furthermore, if an instrumented test has not been waived 
through the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments 
(CLIA), a staff member of the doctors’ office needs to 
undergo training to be authorized to perform this particular 
test. Another hurdle lies in that doctors, who have run their 
practice paper-based for most of their career, are unlikely 
open to adopting new technology and change the way they 
have been practicing medicine. This hurdle will diminish 
over time as more and more younger doctors take over—
especially “digital natives” [10] who are accustomed to 
computer, internet and smart phone usage. Note that the 
implied assumption here is that younger doctors bring with 
them a comparatively higher willingness to try new 
technologies in patient treatment. 
The situation is very different in an adjacent point-of-care 
setting: minute clinics. They specialize in the rapid diagnosis 
and immediate treatment of only the most commonly 
occurring infections such as Influenza or Streptococcus, and 
diseases such as diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood 
pressure or asthma. Their volume of tests performed is large 
enough to justify the use of instrumented testing. Therefore, 
medical instruments have started to make their way into 
these point-of-care facilities. Instrument connectivity is of 
little value thus far unless it can relay the prescribed drug 
treatment through the patient’s health record to the pharmacy 
or send reminders of dosage or refills to the patient’s cell 
148
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. The BD Veritor™ System. 
 
 
TABLE II. 
WIRELESS CONNECTIVITY IN HEALTHCARE SETTINGS 
Care 
Setting 
Opportunities 
Challenges 
Clinical 
• Bedside monitoring during 
routine patient visits 
• Patient self-monitoring 
after hospital discharge 
• Clinics are slow in 
adopting new technologies 
• Reduction in overall cost 
of care not yet proven 
Office 
• Facilitate adoption of 
electronic health records 
• Seamlessly relay treatment 
to pharmacy or insurance 
• Insurance reimbursement 
limits return on investment 
• Smaller offices not setup 
for wireless connectivity 
Home 
• Detect, prevent, and 
manage chronic conditions 
• Self-tracking to create 
persistent lifestyle changes 
• Monitoring products lack 
standard and aggregation  
• Gap between tracking and 
persistent behavior change 
 
phone [11]. Since several of these minute clinics operate 
under the same business as pharmacy services, forwarding 
the prescribed drug treatment immediately to the pharmacy 
does make business sense—it saves paper and avoids human 
transcription errors. 
C. Home Setting 
There is a plethora of solutions already available in the 
wireless health market today. The industry has come up with 
enticing catch phrases to market the products in this market 
segment: quantified self, patient-centric, personalized 
medicine, and aging in place. Products ranging from vital 
sign monitoring, such as body weight, body fat, heart rate, 
blood glucose, and oxygen saturation to dieting, fitness and 
sleep trackers are readily available. They generate massive 
amounts of data which, in most cases, are continuously 
uploaded via Bluetooth, WiFi, or USB to an associated smart 
phone app, which analyzes and visualizes the data. The 
ultimate objective has to be the improvement of one’s 
individual personal health [12] through changes in behavior 
and lifestyle. A reduction in healthcare cost is often a desired 
side effect for the people using these devices on a regular 
basis. 
There are two sizeable markets in the United States for 
these personal health products: the teenage population and 
the baby boomers. The two population groups have different 
health challenges and hence the solutions are tailored to their 
needs. Baby boomers are entering the retirement age and 
with it come the onset of several health concerns such as 
congestive heart failure, hypertension, and diabetes. Hence, 
baby boomers spend money on solutions that enable graceful 
“aging in place,” i.e., solutions that detect, prevent, or 
manage such chronic conditions in the convenience of their 
homes [13]. 
In case of the teenage population, who are sometimes 
referred to as “the Fat Kids of America,” the primary health 
concerns are obesity, diabetes, and asthma. The objective 
here is not only the management of these chronic conditions 
under the supervision of the teenager’s parents, but to 
maintain or improve his or her overall health through 
enforcing medication adherence and ultimately creating a 
persistent change in behavior. A representative example of a 
personal health monitor with cellular connectivity is 
Telcare’s cellular-enabled Blood Glucose Meter [14]. To our 
knowledge, this is the first product in the personal healthcare 
market that directly uses cellular connectivity to upload 
glucose measurements in real-time to the patient’s diabetes 
record, which resides on a secure Telcare server. In case of a 
minor, the parents as well as authorized doctors are given 
access to the diabetes record to review glucose level charts. 
Moreover, Telcare’s server provides instant feedback and 
coaching to patients via the smart phone style glucose meter. 
III. 
KEYS TO SUCCESS 
Table II summarizes our review of medical device 
connectivity in the three care delivery settings. With these 
opportunities and challenges in mind, let us take a closer 
look at the keys required for a solution to succeed in each of 
these setting. The overarching key for success of any new 
healthcare solution is overall cost reduction in the healthcare 
delivery process. And that is the premise of wirelessly 
connected medical devices: their attraction lies in cost 
reduction, measurement objectivity, and ease of use. While 
the above mentioned keys are common across all care 
delivery settings, each setting weighs them differently or has 
additional keys to success. 
For illustration and consideration purposes, a good 
example of a medical device that exhibits measurement 
objectivity and ease of use is the BD Veritor™ System [15], 
which the United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) approved in 2010 for the clinical as well as the point-
of-care care (POC) care delivery setting. It is a rapid testing 
platform for the detection of infectious diseases such as 
Influenza Type A and B and Group A Streptococcus. The 
BD Veritor System [16], as shown in Fig. 1, consists of the 
device and the consumables, that is, the mobile reader and 
the sample extractor, test tube, and test cartridge (in the 
figure, the cartridge is shown inserted in the reader). The 
reader is priced at around $300 USD; however, in its current 
version it is lacking the option of connectivity into HIS or 
LIS installations. 
To perform a test with BD Veritor System, the physician 
mixes the patient sample (nasal fluid for an Influenza test 
and saliva for a Strep test) that resides on the sample 
149
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

extractor with the reagents in the test tube. Three drops are 
then dispensed into the sample well of the test cartridge. 
After ten minutes, the physician inserts the cartridge into the 
reader. Finally, the BD Veritor System reader analyzes the 
test strip for ten seconds and displays the final test result. 
A. Clinical Setting 
Since the hospital’s clinical lab along with external 
central labs cover most of the testing needs arising in patient 
treatment, there is not a great deal of potential for adding 
wireless medical devices in the hospital setting. As discussed 
in Section II, the exceptions are devices that doctors and 
nurses use in routine patient treatment or patient bedside 
monitors. 
There is however another emerging class of devices that 
can greatly benefit from wireless connectivity: devices that 
track the state of health of a patient after his or her release 
from the hospital. To achieve this, the patient could be given 
a monitoring device that facilitates home testing and wireless 
data upload into the hospital’s HIS or LIS. One advantage is 
that the patient could recover in the comfort of his or her 
own home while the critical parameters of his or her state of 
health are still being monitored by the hospital’s medical 
staff. The other benefit is that this would lower the 
readmission rate—in line with the United States’ Affordable 
Care Act [8]—while reducing the cost of care at the same 
time. 
The key to making this a reality is to combine a test 
approved for home usage with an easy-to-use device that is 
able to wirelessly transmit the patient’s health parameters 
reliably and securely into the hospital’s HIS or LIS. 
B. Office Setting 
To successfully place wireless medical devices in the 
point-of-care setting, minute clinics or physician offices, 
requires foremost that the solution makes financial sense. In 
this setting, a patient testing service has a fixed 
reimbursement amount no matter how the test is performed, 
i.e., visually read, instrument read, or by a central lab. 
Hence, doctors’ offices will have a difficult time financially 
justifying the expense of instrumented testing if the per 
annum test volume for that particular test is low. In other 
words, wireless medical instruments can only succeed in this 
market if they prove to be less expensive to purchase, install, 
and operate than the already existing solutions in place. 
Although the federal mandate towards the use of medical 
health records may aid in deploying more wired and 
wirelessly connected instruments, most instruments are just 
too expensive to be financially viable testing solutions for 
most doctors’ offices. 
Nevertheless, rapid tests that occur frequently such as for 
infectious diseases (Influenza, Streptococcus, sexually 
transmitted diseases, etc.) may justify usage of wireless 
medical instruments. The keys here are that such instruments 
are cleared for the point-of-care setting, i.e., Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) waived, and 
that their cost of ownership lies approximately below $500 
per year. A BD Veritor System that features connectivity into 
EHR systems would meet these requirements satisfactorily. 
C. Home Setting 
While each of the solutions offered for home deployment 
may address a particular health issue quite adequately, there 
are many challenges facing the wireless health home market 
today. For one, there is little to no standardization. Each 
solution works on its own independent of other health 
products in use. Each solution also requires frequent 
interaction and manual data entry by its user—something a 
society governed by convenience strongly shuns. For this 
reason, the average duration of regular usage does not exceed 
30 days for the majority of these health improvement apps: 
just 5% of all apps (including health apps) are still in use 30 
days after download [17]. In short, they are too intrusive to 
many people’s already hectic and packed life. 
Decentralized storage of data collected through different 
personal health solutions creates another significant 
challenge. How is one to get a comprehensive picture of 
one’s health if the data resides in several different, unique 
applications? There are of course a few solutions like Google 
Health (discontinued as of January 2013) and Microsoft 
HealthVault [18] attempting to address the need of 
centralized data storage through offering a single landing 
page service. But, most personal health products do not 
interface with them and hence data would have to be entered 
manually. Therefore, a major key to succeed in this market is 
easy and seamless integration of the medical sensing devices, 
that is, the ones that provide personal health metrics, into 
personal health record systems. This can only be achieved 
effectively through standardization of the health data 
interfaces. The Continua Health Alliance [19] and the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers [20] for 
instance are actively pushing this standardization and have 
been 
issuing 
design 
guidelines 
and 
standards 
for 
interoperability in personal healthcare [21]. 
Another fundamental issue of personal health tracking is 
that it is not sufficient to create persistent and lasting lifestyle 
changes. Living in a society of instant gratification, we 
expect solutions with this promise of success; but behavior 
change is a process of perseverance—very much in 
contradiction to instant gratification. In fact, Joseph Kvedar 
[22] has found “that only a small portion of the population, 
around 10 percent, will change their behavior based on 
tracker information alone.” Knowing the right thing and 
doing the right thing are worlds apart. Even if personal 
health trackers provide us with vital information of what 
foods to avoid for example, we are still subjected to the 
marketing exposure of unhealthy eating habits. In the United 
States, good examples are the Carl’s Jr. TV commercials for 
its selection of big and juicy burgers [23]. How can one not 
watch one of these commercials without leaving with the 
thought that relishing one of these irresistibly delicious 
burgers results in tremendous pleasure? Knowing that they 
are an unhealthy diet will likely not kill that thought! It is 
like running a marathon with a rock tied to one’s ankle. 
In essence, our lifestyle choices are not only impacted by 
reading our personal health statistics, but also by what we 
expose ourselves to in the form of billboards, commercials, 
and magazines. And to extract oneself from this omnipresent 
150
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Healthcare information flow with cellular connectivity of medical devices. 
Patient Home
Hospital
or Office
Medical
Device
Physician
HIS
LIS
Medical
Device
Patient
Insurance
Provider
Insurance
Record
Payer
Results via GPRS/HL7
Patient Records
Billing Information
Results
Record
Patient Home
Hospital
or Office
Medical
Device
Physician
HIS
LIS
Medical
Device
Patient
Insurance
Provider
Insurance
Record
Payer
Results via GPRS/HL7
Patient Records
Billing Information
Results
Record
 
exposure in the United States is a deliberate effort that has to 
be made daily. To assist us in this effort, our personal health 
systems would also have to tie into our flat panel TVs and 
web browsers and block out commercials and banner ads that 
are inappropriate for our current health condition. But, in 
reality, the opposite is happening. The marketing industry 
exploits our internet browsing behavior for the most part to 
entice us into buying and consuming more and more. 
IV. 
THE CASE FOR CELLULAR 
At this point, it should have become clear that there is no 
one-size-fits-all solution. The three care delivery settings 
considered 
have 
overlapping 
but 
also 
diverging 
requirements, which cannot be met by one solution all at 
once. Therefore, there are many product offerings from small 
to large companies, which focus on one or a few aspects in 
the healthcare delivery process. In short, the market is highly 
fragmented and proprietary solutions are prevalent. 
But for solutions to be cost effective and scalable 
demands standardization and interoperability that in turn can 
proliferate integrated solutions [24]. Therefore, in the near-
term, healthcare solutions will have to target seamless 
integration into the flow of care from patient over provider to 
payer [13]. Clearly, this is a good idea in theory but not 
enough to succeed in the healthcare market. The present 
reality is that the adoption of mHealth connectivity standards 
has been inconsistent [25]. 
We are convinced that the adoption of cellular 
connectivity in medical devices is the starting point to 
enabling 
higher 
levels 
of 
standardization 
and 
interoperability—at least at the front-end, where patient 
health data needs to make it into the digital medical record. It 
is crucial for subsequent treatment to consistently store this 
data digitally in a secure and reliable manner. But, if the 
interface method is lacking any of these attributes, the patient 
data will not be stored consistently leading to patchy health 
records. While there are several connection technologies and 
dataflow models conceivable, cellular technology is already 
dominating the personal consumer space and, as a result, has 
been widely adopted, is standardized, and continuously 
increases in data throughput and geographical coverage. 
Moreover, cellular hardware cost is held down by the large 
scale consumer market and service providers continue to 
drive down data transmission cost. Therefore, medical 
devices equipped with cellular modems can meet several of 
the keys for success discussed in Section III. 
Let us discuss this cellular connectivity solution in more 
detail. Fig. 2 illustrates the flow of healthcare information 
when medical devices are equipped with a cellular GSM 
modem. This enables them to directly communicate with the 
HIS/LIS, or, more generally, the EHR system, through a 
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) Internet connection. 
Test results can then readily be uploaded into the patient 
health record via the HL7 protocol [26]. Note that this direct 
connection eliminates the need for and expense of 
middleware software, a “middle man”, which, for the most 
part, reformats the device’s proprietary data output to the 
standardized EHR data format. Even more importantly, this 
dataflow model does not depend on another database server 
or cloud service operated, for instance, by the device 
manufacturer. Once the patient results have been uploaded to 
the EHR, which can either occur from a hospital, physician 
office, or the patient’s home, other need-to-know parties can 
readily access or be notified of the results. Such parties are 
the primary care physician, the insurance payer, as well as 
the patient itself. 
A. Testbed Implementation 
To explore and validate the feasibility of this cellular 
connectivity solution, MeshEye Consulting has been 
operating an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) connectivity 
testbed with an HL7 portal for test record upload since 
November 2010. The testbed deploys the open-source EMR 
software FreeMED [27] in lieu of HIS/LIS software. The 
151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE III. 
FIELD MAPPING OF VERITOR RESULT TO HL7 MESSAGE 
HL7 Field 
Identifier 
Veritor Result Field(s) 
HL7 Message Field 
MSH-10 
Index of test result 
Message Control ID 
PID-4 
Barcoded patient ID 
Alternate Patient ID – PID 
ORC-12 
Reader serial number 
Ordering Provider 
OBR-2 
Reader serial number and 
index of test result 
Placer Order Number 
OBR-4 
“UPPER RESPIRATORY 
SAMPLE” and 
“INFLUENZA” 
Universal Service ID 
OBX-3 
“UPPER RESPIRATORY 
SAMPLE” 
Observation Identifier 
OBX-5 
Display of test result: 
“FLU A: [+/–] FLU B: 
[+/–]” 
Observation Value 
OBX-6 
None 
Units 
OBX-7 
[+/–] 
Reference Range 
OBX-8 
[+] 
Abnormal Flags 
OBX-11 
“F” for final result 
Observ Result Status 
 
Figure 3. Process steps from patient sample to test result in the MeshEye EMR Connectivity Testbed. 
 
1. Prepare
Test Sample
Medical
Device
2. Develop
Test Assay
3. Read
Test Assay
5. Report
Test Result
4. Record
Test Result
HL7
SMS
1. Prepare
Test Sample
Medical
Device
2. Develop
Test Assay
3. Read
Test Assay
5. Report
Test Result
4. Record
Test Result
HL7
SMS
 
FreeMED installation has been modified to accept test 
records from medical devices in the form of HL7 Version 2.3 
messages encapsulated in XML-RPC requests. A medical 
device prototype equipped with a cellular GSM modem was 
designed to upload its test records to this EMR system via 
GPRS. The testbed has proven that this approach is feasible 
and easy to implement. 
To generate the HL7 messages, the test result fields first 
needed to be mapped to fields in an HL7 ORU-R01 
observation result message. The results of this field mapping 
are shown in Table III for Influenza test results that the BD 
Veritor System reports. To import the HL7 ORU-R01 
messages into FreeMED v0.8.1.1, we used Java to invoke the 
FreeMED XML-RPC call 
 
FreeMED.Transport.parse('HL7v2', message); 
 
where message is the HL7 message in string format. 
To notify the physician of completed tests, the EMR 
connectivity testbed has been configured to send out text 
messages with the test results. The end-to-end delay 
commonly encountered is in the order of 10 to 20 seconds. 
Considering that rapid diagnostic tests typically take at least 
10 minutes to complete, such quality of service (QoS) would 
be acceptable. But cellular network carriers do not make any 
guarantees of end-to-end delay for text messaging, and hence 
it is only a solution good enough for demonstration purposes 
but not for professional field deployment. Moreover, text 
messaging does not lend itself to encryption, which brings us 
to another area of frequent concern: compliance with the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA). 
HIPAA compliance requires the implementation of 
reasonable safeguards for the protection of patient-
identifiable information. Although the EMR connectivity 
testbed does not transmit any information that would allow 
identification of a patient by name, only an assigned patient 
identifier, it makes sense to encrypt the entire payload. This 
usually diffuses any concerns around patient privacy but 
adds the burden of encryption key management. 
The process steps necessary to turn a patient sample into 
a test result notification in the MeshEye EMR connectivity 
testbed are shown in Fig. 3. In the first step, the patient 
sample is mixed with the test reagent in a test tube, which 
takes no more than five minutes. Next, the sample mixture is 
dispensed onto the test cartridge and the test assay develops 
within 10 minutes. In step 3, the cartridge is then inserted 
into the reader which reads the test assay and determines the 
test result with a read time of 10 seconds. Finally, the reader 
uploads the test result via HL7 transparently to FreeMED, 
the MeshEye EMR system, and reports the test result in the 
152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4. Patient test record (top) and instrument test report (bottom) of 
the MeshEye EMR Connectivity Testbed. 
form of a text message notification to one or more cell 
phones. Steps 4 and 5 typically take just under a minute 
when cellular coverage is available. Thus, the entire process 
from test sample preparation to test result reporting 
approaches 15 minutes. Such test process duration is well 
suited for diseases and infections that benefit from being 
detected and treated during a single patient visit. 
B. Testbed Demonstration 
The EMR connectivity testbed was demonstrated to 
several hospitals in California as well as to the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta, GA, in 
May 2011. Fig. 4 shows the patient test record and 
instrument test report that the testbed generated during the 
demonstration. The top of the figure shows the view of the 
patient’s test result entry while the bottom of the figure 
shows the automatically generated instrument test report. 
The report contains all the fields expected of a lab test report. 
In addition, it maps the rough location of the testing site, 
which is derived from the cell tower identifiers within 
communication range of the modem. Most importantly, the 
test result upload completes in real-time, i.e., it usually takes 
less than a minute. This solution would allow the CDC to 
publish their “Influenza Surveillance Report” in real-time 
rather than with data lagging by two weeks. Especially 
CDC’s recently launched influenza app [28] could benefit 
greatly from real-time reporting of infectious disease testing. 
Further advantages of uploading and storing test results 
that have been patient de-identified but tagged with geo-
location information, are their value for data mining 
purposes. In case of Influenza testing, this would allow 
monitoring real-time progression of the infection and 
spotting of pandemics early on. In case of diseases that are 
not seasonal, but chronic in nature, availability of such data 
could help to establish correlations between geographical 
area and the likelihood of developing such diseases. Maps 
that predict the likelihood of developing and progressing 
asthma for instance have already been generated and serve as 
an example of the value of such maps. Taking it even one 
step further, these likelihood maps could help shedding light 
on prevalent factors causing chronic diseases, that is, 
whether they are primarily hereditary or predominantly 
location dependent. 
C. Testbed Limitations 
While deployment of our EMR connectivity testbed was 
straightforward, we found that its deployment in the real 
world is far from this simple. More specifically, we came 
across three major challenges to real-world deployment: (i) 
HIS/LIS installations sit behind a tight firewall, (ii) HL7 is 
not really a universal standard, and (iii) healthcare providers 
may not accept unsolicited observation results. The 
following paragraphs will give more details on these 
challenges. 
Since healthcare providers have to protect patient 
information from unauthorized access, HIS/LIS installations 
are only accessible from within the organization’s intranet or 
at least sit behind a tightly configured firewall. That means 
that it is impossible for our cellular-enabled reader to directly 
upload test records via HL7 over Transmission Control 
Protocol (TCP)/Internet Protocol Suite (IP). Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) tunnels to the organization’s intranet are 
typically established to overcome this obstacle. Nonetheless, 
running a VPN client inside the reader is not feasible given 
its limited computational resources. An alternative would be 
to open up a TCP/IP port in the organization’s firewall 
although 
this 
would 
increase 
the 
vulnerability 
to 
unauthorized intrusion. 
Anyone dealing with HL7 messaging quickly realizes 
that HL7 is not really a universal standard. The saying 
among experts goes “If you have seen one HL7 interface, 
you’ve seen one HL7 interface.” One reason behind this is 
that every HIS/LIS installation configures the mapping of 
HL7 message fields to HIS/LIS database fields differently. 
The third challenge comes from the reader sending an 
HL7 ORU-R01 observation result message without the order 
number issued for the diagnostic test. Therefore, this is 
considered an unsolicited result message which not all 
HIS/LIS installations accept. This challenge could be 
Verix, Mr. Al
Patient ID No. 0815                                D.O.B. 10/16/1968                                            66Y/M
Ordering MD: House Gregory MD                           Physician Copy for Dr: Cavanaugh, Jordan MD
PT Medications: Multivitamins (Centrum)
Specimen(s) Collected: 05/23/2011 05:23                                   
Lab Account No. 0815
Specimen: Swab, Nasopharyngeal                                  
Date Reported: 05/23/2011 05:32
Test Name
Patient's Results
Ref. Range
Units
INFLUENZA A                                P0.85*               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
INFLUENZA B                                 N7.43               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
Key: N = Negative, P = Positive, U = Undetermined, *= critical value
End Of Report
Verix, Mr. Al                 Patient ID No. 0815                    
05/24/2011 00:01
© 2008 American Association for Clinical Chemistry
2011 Courtesy of MeshEye Consulting
View Larger Map
Verix, Mr. Al
Patient ID No. 0815                                D.O.B. 10/16/1968                                            66Y/M
Ordering MD: House Gregory MD                           Physician Copy for Dr: Cavanaugh, Jordan MD
PT Medications: Multivitamins (Centrum)
Specimen(s) Collected: 05/23/2011 05:23                                   
Lab Account No. 0815
Specimen: Swab, Nasopharyngeal                                  
Date Reported: 05/23/2011 05:32
Test Name
Patient's Results
Ref. Range
Units
INFLUENZA A                                P0.85*               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
INFLUENZA B                                 N7.43               
greater than 3.00            % Contrast
Key: N = Negative, P = Positive, U = Undetermined, *= critical value
End Of Report
Verix, Mr. Al                 Patient ID No. 0815                    
05/24/2011 00:01
© 2008 American Association for Clinical Chemistry
2011 Courtesy of MeshEye Consulting
View Larger Map
153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV. 
THE REGULATORY HURDLE AND THE INSURANCE BATTLE 
 
Regulatory Agencies 
Healthcare Payers 
Road-
block 
• Regulations are uncertain 
and approval process is 
slow 
• Payers not convinced 
about overall reduction in 
cost 
Outlook 
• Issue clear guidance 
around connected medical 
devices 
• Simplify submission and 
speed up approval process 
• Conclusive case studies 
and clinical trials needed 
• Account for entire chain of 
healthcare services in 
studies 
 
addressed by scanning the order identifier instead of or in 
addition to the patient identifier. 
We are currently working on finding solutions to the 
above mentioned limitations of our EMR connectivity 
solution. The success depends to a large degree on the 
flexibility of healthcare providers to make changes to their 
IT infrastructure. How much value the set of tests performed 
by a particular instrument creates will primarily drive the 
willingness for such changes. 
V. 
LONGER TERM OUTLOOK 
There is no doubt that interoperability through 
standardization will continue to increase in healthcare 
solutions. From a technology perspective, that is what is 
required to make any medical device talk to any EHR system 
[29]. It also makes sense from a business perspective since 
interoperability is an essential component for a scalable 
connected health market [25]. In short, interoperability 
through standardization will likely pave the way for 
widespread use of connected medical devices. Not 
surprisingly, the history of digital technology already 
features numerous examples of standards that triggered 
widespread use: Ethernet, GSM, Wi-Fi, and UMTS to name 
just a few. 
But, knowing the right thing does not necessarily 
translate into doing the right thing. In fact, the healthcare 
industry in the United States is known for its resistance to 
change and slow rate of technology adoption. For instance, 
Thompson states that “I feel frustrated that physicians don’t 
quite seem to be practicing in the 2012 world of technology I 
see on the exhibit floor [at the annual AACC Clinical Lab 
Expo 2012]” [30]. Healthcare investor G. Kurtzman puts it 
this way [31]: “Unless there is a “pull” from customers, 
patients, providers, or payers, an entrepreneur in healthcare 
IT won’t be able to capitalize on just a good idea.” Along 
these lines, the two parties that still need to drive the idea of 
connected health with more conviction are the payers and the 
regulators. The roadblock, that regulatory agencies and 
healthcare payers pose, and the outlook, that we anticipate 
for them, are summarized in Table IV. 
The regulatory agencies’ mandate includes issuing 
regulations for marketability of medical devices and 
enforcing them in the marketplace. There still remains a lot 
of uncertainty concerning the regulation of mobile health 
applications and related connected health devices. Therefore, 
the regulatory agencies have to clarify the approval process 
of these emerging technologies. In the United States, the 
FDA already took a big leap forward towards more clarity in 
2013 when it issued its final guidance on mobile medical 
apps [32]. The next step is to speed up their approval 
process. This will also make the pursuit of connected health 
solutions more attractive to the investment community. 
With respect to regulatory approval of wireless medical 
devices, there is an important distinction between 
unidirectional and bidirectional communication of the device 
to a web server or a cloud service. When the device only 
transmits data to the web server but does not receive any data 
back, regulatory approval is generally only required for the 
medical device as an autonomous, stand-alone device. But 
once the wirelessly connected device receives any 
information back from the web server or cloud service that 
could alter its functionality, the approval process applies to 
the system encompassing both, the medical device and the 
web server or cloud service. 
The healthcare payers, that is, the insurance providers, 
have to be persuaded that connected healthcare solutions not 
only make sense but also reduce the overall cost of 
treatment. This is especially important in the United States, 
which has the highest cost structure in healthcare. It will 
require several more case studies and clinical trials to make a 
convincing case for the overall reduction in healthcare cost. 
Such studies and trials are however intricate and costly since 
the entire chain of healthcare services involved in patient 
treatment has to be accounted for. 
Finally, a strong push for wireless connectivity in 
healthcare is coming from several players at the bottom of 
the food chain of healthcare reimbursement: medical device 
manufacturers and cellular network providers. Device 
manufacturers have an increasing interest in equipping their 
products with connectivity. This would provide them with 
instrument quality control (QC) data as well as access to test 
results, which may allow them to move up in the food chain. 
Network providers see the opportunity in high-volume data 
contracts in machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, 
which is viewed as their next big market after the cell phone 
market volume has started to level off. This alliance between 
device manufacturers and network providers is however not 
without challenges. Device manufacturers will have to 
negotiate pricing for cellular data subscriptions that meet 
their revenue models without directly transferring increased 
cost to healthcare providers. In other words, network 
providers prefer per monthly billing whereas healthcare 
providers purchase medical devices in one time transactions. 
This is the cash flow gap that device manufacturers will have 
to bridge. 
With respect to cellular connectivity in medical devices, 
the outlook is the same as for connectivity in general. 
Nevertheless, it has to bear the additional burden of 
subscription fees paid to cellular network service providers. 
But, there is hope in sight [33]: “[…] The number of devices 
with integrated cellular connectivity increased from 0.73 
million in 2011 to about 1.03 million in 2012, and is 
projected to grow at a CAGR rate of 46.3 percent to 7.1 
million in 2017.” And by the laws of supply and demand, 
increased deployment will result in lower cost of cellular 
connectivity in medical devices. Certainly, in-home 
monitoring devices, which we mentioned in Section III for 
154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the clinical setting, will contribute to this market growth 
[33]: “For example, in the U.S., readmission penalties 
established by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services will drive hospitals to adopt telehealth solutions for 
monitoring post-discharge patients.” However, most likely 
countries other than the United States will lead the way—
countries, in which cellular subscription fees adapt more 
rapidly to market supply and demand, as is the case in most 
countries across Europe and Asia. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We reviewed the current state of connectivity technology 
for medical devices in the healthcare sector giving special 
attention to wireless connectivity. The review highlighted the 
diversity and fragmentation of existing solutions to address 
the demands in the clinical, office, and home care setting in 
the United States. Therefore, the one key aspect to increase 
adoption of connected medical devices is interoperability 
through standardization. Cellular connectivity can enable 
standardized, seamless, and ubiquitous integration of medical 
devices into EHR systems. For this reason, we proposed and 
presented a cellular connectivity testbed that confirms and 
demonstrates the validity of this approach. Our EMR 
connectivity testbed indicates that medical devices can be 
seamlessly integrated into the flow of patient treatment 
across all three healthcare delivery settings. However, it 
remains to be seen whether wireless connectivity can 
actually lead to an overall reduction in the cost of care and 
change towards healthy lifestyle choices. Moreover, 
regulators and payers still have a long way to go before 
wireless connectivity becomes the norm in everyday patient 
diagnosis and treatment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author gratefully acknowledges the discussions, 
inspiration, and involvement of his colleagues at Alverix Inc. 
in San Jose, California, and the Becton, Dickinson and 
Company (BD) Diagnostics Group located in Baltimore, 
Maryland, and San Diego, California. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Hengstler, “Wireless Health: Making Your Devices Talk,” 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Emerging Network Intelligence (EMERGING 2013), Sept. 
2013, pp. 19–25. 
[2] S. Hengstler, “Making Your Devices Talk: The Case for 
Cellular Connectivity,” Fifth Annual mHealth Summit 
(mHealth '13), Dec. 2013. 
[3] “mHealth in an mWorld: How mobile technology is 
transforming health care,” Deloitte Center for Health 
Solutions, Deloitte, 2012, pp. 1–21. 
[4] P. B. Luppa, C. Müller, A. Schlichtiger, and H. Schlebusch 
(2011), "Point-of-care testing (POCT): Current techniques 
and future perspectives," TrAC Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry, vol. 30, no. 6, Jun. 2011, pp. 887–898. 
[5] Wi-Fi® in Healthcare: Security Solutions for Hospital Wi-Fi 
Networks,” White Paper, Wi-Fi Alliance, Feb. 2012, pp. 1–
11. 
[6] S. Saw, T. P. Loh, S. B. L. Ang, J. W. L. Yip, and S. K. Sethi 
(2011), “Meeting Regulatory Requirements by the Use of Cell 
Phone Text Message Notification With Autoescalation and 
Loop Closure for Reporting of Critical Laboratory Results,” 
American Journal of Clinical Pathology, vol. 136, no. 1, Jul. 
2011, pp. 30–34. 
[7] Abbott Point of Care i-STAT 1 Wireless System, Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://www.abbottpointofcare.com/Products-and-
Services/iSTAT-Wireless.aspx 
[8] United States Department of Labor, Affordable Care Act, 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/healthreform/ 
[9] Government Health IT, Policymaking, Regulation, & 
Strategy: Meaningful Use, [retrieved: December, 2014] 
Available: 
http://www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-
implementers/meaningful-use 
[10] M. Prensky (2001), "Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants Part 
1", On the Horizon, vol. 9, no. 5, Oct. 2001, pp.1–6. 
[11] I. Sachpazidis, S. Fragou, G. Sakas, “Medication adherence 
system using SMS technology,” Proc. Intelligent Sensors, 
Sensor Networks and Information Processing Conference 
(ISSNIP 2004), IEEE Press, Dec. 2004, pp. 571–575. 
[12] P. Sonnier, POLL RESULTS: What is the single greatest 
health benefit afforded by Digital Health solutions? 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://popperandco.com/2012/07/ 
[13] L. C. Baker, S. J. Johnson, D. Macaulay, and H. Birnbaum 
(2011), “Integrated Telehealth and Care Management 
Program for Medicare Beneficiaries with Chronic Disease 
Linked to Savings,” Health Affairs, vol. 30, no. 9, Sept. 2011, 
pp. 1689–1697. 
[14] Telcare Cellular-Enabled Blood Glucose Meter, Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://www.telcare.com 
[15] A. Paxton, “Rx for optimizing rapid flu test performance,” 
CAP Today, vol. 27, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 1–5. 
[16] BD Veritor System, Product Website, [retrieved: December, 
2014] Available: http://www.bd.com/ds/veritorsystem/ 
[17] R. Gary, “Why 95% of Mobile Apps are Abandoned—and 
Tips to Keep Your Apps from Becoming Part of that 
Statistic,” Nuance Communications Inc., iss. 20, Nov. 2011, 
pp. 1–2. 
[18] Microsoft 
HealthVault, 
Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
December, 2014] Available: https://www.healthvault.com 
[19] Continua Health Alliance, Organization Website, [retrieved: 
December, 2014] Available: http://www.continuaalliance.org 
[20] IEEE Standards Association, IEEE Standard 11073-10103-
2012 – Health informatics—Point-of-care medical device 
communication, [retrieved: December, 2014] Available: 
http://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/11073-10103-
2012.html 
[21] D. Bowman, “Continua Health Alliance Releases 2011 
Design Guidelines,” FierceHealthIT, iss. 9, Sept. 2011, pp. 1–
2. 
[22] E. Waltz, “How I Quantified Myself: Can self-measurement 
gadgets help us live healthier and better lives?,” IEEE 
Spectrum Magazine, vol. 49, no. 9, Sept. 2012, pp. 43–47. 
[23] Carl Karcher Enterprises, Inc., Company Website, [retrieved: 
December, 2014] Available: http://www.carlsjr.com 
[24] J. Hatcliff et al., “Rationale and Architecture Principles for 
Medical Application Platforms,” Proceedings of the 2012 
IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS ’12), Apr. 2012, pp. 3–12. 
[25] “Interoperability: An essential component for scalable 
mHealth,” mHealthInsights, PwC, Mar. 2013, pp. 1–3. 
155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[26] Health Level Seven International, Introduction to HL7 
Standards, 
[retrieved: 
December, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/ 
[27] FreeMED Electronic Medical Record Software, Product 
Website, 
[retrieved: 
February, 
2014] 
Available: 
http://freemedsoftware.org 
[28] G. Slabodkin, “CDC's influenza app should be more reliable,” 
Editor’s Corner in FierceMobile Healthcare, iss. 15, Jan. 
2013, pp. 1–2. 
[29] B. Malone, “The Cutting Edge of Lab Connectivity: Will 
New Standard Deliver Plug-and-Play Solutions?” Clinical 
Laboratory News, vol. 38, no. 9, Sept. 2012, pp. 1–5. 
[30] B. Malone, “Spotlight on Point-of-Care Testing: Innovation, 
Expansion Evident at AACC Clinical Lab Expo in Los 
Angeles,” Clinical Laboratory News, vol. 38, no. 10, Oct. 
2012, pp. 1–8. 
[31] G. Kurtzman, GUEST POST: The question every healthcare 
IT startup must answer, [retrieved: December, 2014] 
Available: 
http://venturebeat.com/2012/08/25/healthcare-it-
startup-tips/ 
[32] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and 
Drug 
Administration, 
“Mobile 
Medical 
Applications,” 
Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration 
Staff, Sept. 2013, pp. 1–43. 
[33] G. Slabodkin, “Research predicts strong growth of patient 
home monitoring systems by 2017,” FierceMobile Healthcare, 
iss. 18, Jan. 2013, pp. 1–2. 
 
156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

