New Types of Human Computer Interactions through Digital Healthcare in France
Bourret Christian 
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Val d’Europe, France 
e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
Depeyrot-Ficatier Thérèse  
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Val d’Europe, France 
e-mail: t.depeyrot@ndv-consulting.com
 
 
Abstract - The Healthcare sector, like all other sectors of our 
society, is strongly impacted by digital transformations and 
must tackle huge problems (especially of costs), hoping digital 
devices help to solve them. We propose to consider it through 
new uses of Interactive Devices in the scope of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) solutions for the improvement of Human 
Computer Interactions, principally through Telemedicine 
Platforms in France.  First of all, we define our scientific 
position and the methodology used. Secondly, we present the 
use of data in telemedicine with data processing and some 
cases analysis of AI applications in telemedicine. We then 
analyze the effects of the combination of the two technologies. 
Furthermore, we consider the impacts of the Covid pandemic 
with new types of remote interactions, especially for the 
elderly. We discuss the main challenges of this digital 
transformation with the risk of a "solutionist" and 
"technocentric" approach, sometimes forgetting that health is 
above all based on a human dimension and human 
interactions. We also outline the question of territories and the 
integration of telemedicine in the healthcare system. Finally, 
we give a conclusion focusing on the main challenges 
undertaken as well as providing some perspectives, integrating 
lessons of the Covid pandemic. More globally we outline the 
importance of the digital transformation of the French 
Healthcare System with new types of human computer 
interactions both for the resilience of the healthcare 
organizations, improving care and cure with territorial 
dimensions, with the new challenges of the Covid pandemic. 
Keywords - Artificial Intelligence; Telemedicine Platforms; 
Territories; Healthcare; Digital Transformations; France; Covid 
pandemic. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare is an essential sector in the digital 
transformations of our entire society, using interactive 
devices. In the developed countries, Healthcare systems 
must tackle huge problems (especially costs), hoping digital 
devices help to solve them and also help to improve the 
quality of care and their results. It is also the problem of 
traceabilily of medical acts. An approach may be through 
uses of interactive devices such as artificial intelligence 
solutions for the improvement of human-computer 
interactions through telemedicine platforms [1]. 
In France, the Isaac’s report [2] clearly highlighted the 
main challenges of this transformation, with digital 
technology enabling the transition from curative to more 
predictive medicine. More recently, Villani’s report [3] 
stressed the importance of Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
particularly in the healthcare sector. The Institute’s 
Montaigne report considers e-Health as a priority project to 
transform the French Healthcare System [4]. 
The question of healthcare is linked to the territories, in 
particular with the subject of social and territorial 
inequalities in health [5], with the concern of "medical 
deserts", with issues of traceability of care acts and health 
pathways, with the possible contributions of telemedicine to 
improve it and experiment new innovative ways.  
This French healthcare system, already in a severe crisis 
(the question of operating costs having led to hard staff 
reductions in recent years) has been strongly impacted since 
March 2020 by the Covid pandemic, imposing in particular 
the search for new solutions based on digital tools and new 
uses of data [6].  
In this paper, we examine the background of the 
transformation of the healthcare system and the current 
context of the development of telemedicine platforms and 
AI. We clarify the scope and the objectives of the survey 
that deals with the production and use of healthcare data on 
telemedicine platforms. Then, we intend to address, through 
an example, the issue of the AI solutions to implement 
better Human Computer Interactions in telemedicine. To get 
a relevant picture of the recent situation, we choose the 
examples amongst new worldwide trends and French 
implementations. During teleconsultations, there are no 
physical examinations, so they seem somewhat like tele 
regulation and are required to reduce uncertainty in 
diagnosis. We intend to identify how combining AI and 
telemedicine may specifically support and improve the 
process of a remote medical consultation. Finally, we try to 
bring out the 
main findings 
concerning 
technical 
approaches as well as other considerations. 
The transformation of the French healthcare system has 
become vital due to the combination of demographic 
evolution and the epidemiologic transition. With the 
decrease of infectious diseases that have led to the model of 
hospital, important changes have been brought with the rise 
of degenerative diseases and multi chronical pathologies. In 
this context, the patients are more and more involved in 
their healthcare pathway. They use search engines to get 
information on Internet, they share opinions and feelings on 
social networks, they interact on platforms to obtain 
medical appointments and they take charge of their 
healthcare records. 
With the implementation of Healthcare Information 
Systems (HIS) in doctors’ offices or hospitals, important 
volumes of medical data are produced. They gave rise to the 
81
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implementation of data warehouses for archiving them in 
secure ways and managing their use. With multi-chronic 
pathologies, data for analysis are not only medical 
parameters but they come from different sources, on issues 
such as nutrition, habits and behavior, environment, etc. 
This wide scope of data is produced by the interactions of 
patients on digital platforms, characterized as social 
technical 
devices. 
Moreover, 
the 
chronic 
patients’ 
healthcare requires the coordination of all the healthcare 
providers in the hospitals and in the ambulatory system. 
The different stakeholders have to exchange information for 
the organization of their patients’ healthcare pathways and 
the monitoring. Medical data are produced and recorded in 
the different Electronic Healthcare Records (EHR) on 
proprietary software and in the "Dossier médical partagé" 
(DMP) in France, used till recently as repositories. But the 
priority is to enable data retrieval and sharing. Healthcare 
coordination should be based on interactive devices and 
updated data. 
After an introduction (Section I), in Section II, we first 
define our scientific position and the methodology used. 
Then, in Section III, we present the use of data in 
telemedicine and Artificial Intelligence data processing.  In 
Section IV, we consider observations on AI applications in 
telemedicine through cases analysis. In Section V, we then 
analyze the effects of the combination of the two 
technologies. In Section VI, we analyze the consequences 
of the Covid pandemic on the human computer interactions. 
After a discussion in Section VII, we give a conclusion 
focusing on main challenges tackled and perspectives for 
future works, integrating new uses of data and information 
and communication challenges.  
II. 
SCIENTIFIC POSITION AND METHODOLOGY 
In a research-action approach, this paper associates two 
researchers, one with a university position and the other 
with a more consulting position and implication in 
experimental activities on the deployment of interactive 
devices, such as AI and telemedicine projects in the 
territories. Their complementarity allows for a back and 
forth between theory and practice, by comparing practical 
results with theoretical issues, to produce knowledge for 
action. 
This work therefore lays in the field of Human 
Computer Interactions (or Interfaces) - HCI, which 
corresponds to the analysis of the means or tools put in 
place so that humans can work with machines, mainly 
computer tools, by controlling them to develop or improve 
services in healthcare. We place ourselves in the 
perspective of analyzing the development of new services 
for users of our health system (organizations, professionals, 
patients, etc.) in a dual dimension of care and social 
perspectives.  
There are questions of ergonomics, ease of use and 
adaptation to the conditions and contexts of use, and ethics, 
particularly concerning uses of data and societal issues 
(limiting inequalities) and therefore the ambivalence of 
these tools: undeniable possibilities for improving care and 
its quality and traceability, but also risks of technical abuses 
(technicism) or rationing of care. 
We position our research within the interdisciplinary 
field of information and communication sciences, in the 
perspective outlined by F. Bernard [7], proposing to 
articulate the four dimensions of links and relationships 
(interactions in a systemic dimension), meaning, knowledge 
and action. We insist on the complementarity of 
information and communication, stressing both the 
importance of information to shape organizations and data 
for their management and development, and also of 
communication to foster change [8], by promoting 
cooperative 
dynamics, 
articulating 
the 
project 
and 
storytelling dimensions of all actors [9], both human and 
socio-technical devices. We propose an approach that we 
call 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Organizing 
Ecosystems (ICOE). The notion of “organizing” was 
proposed by Weick [10], focusing on processes, and 
interdependence of interactions, to study human activity by 
means of “sensemaking recipe” in a set of dynamics to try 
to grasp the complexity of organizations. For us, 
information and communication contribute to the shaping 
and ecosystems, which can be organizations, companies, 
groups or territories. We thus articulate the approaches of 
Economic Intelligence and Quality [11], in the wake of 
Wilensky [12], when he speaks of Organizational 
Intelligence, without forgetting the innovation dimension in 
process approaches [13].  
In the wake of Goffman [14], we particularly mobilize 
the notion of situation (situations of activity, management, 
information, communication, decision, evaluation, etc.) 
with all the ambivalence of technology [15]. Tensions exist 
between those who are in favor of new uses of digital 
technology to improve patient services, such as G. 
Vallancien 
[16] 
and 
those 
who 
fear 
regression, 
rationalization may meaning rationing or “uberization” 
(standardization 
and 
precarization 
of 
the 
health 
professions), such as the National Board of Doctors or 
Conseil National de l'Ordre des Médecins en France [17]. 
Using the "situational and interactionist semiotics" 
proposed by A. Mucchielli [18], we analyze situations of 
activity, also integrating the dimension of emotions and 
leadership [19] and trust building in complex projects [20].  
The aim is to promote new services for patients and 
healthcare 
professionals, 
with 
the 
importance 
of 
information (data uses) and communication to improve 
cooperation with a strong territorialization and proximity 
dimension, with the emergence of new professions such as 
data scientist or specialists about human data interfaces 
[21], with specificities in the health sector. 
III. 
THE USE OF DATA IN TELEMEDICINE AND THE AI 
DATA PROCESSING 
We intend to examine the use of healthcare data on 
telemedicine platforms and then, the AI solutions that could 
improve the processes. The recent trend in new 
technologies is melding telemedicine with AI. Figure 1 
gives an idea of the advance of those two technologies. For 
getting a comprehensive overview of the context, we can 
82
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

observe the expected expansion in telemedicine and AI in 
the twenty next years through the following chart extracted 
from a study of the English National Health System (NHS).  
 
 
Figure 1. Top 10 digital healthcare technologies and their projected impact 
on the NHS workforce from 2020 to 2040 [22]. 
A. 
The Use of Data in Telemedicine 
According 
to 
the 
French 
regulation 
definition 
(telemedicine decree: 2010), five situations or types of 
telemedicine can be distinguished: tele consultation, tele 
expertise, tele monitoring (for chronic diseases), tele 
assistance and medical answers for emergency regulation. 
The types of patients addressed by telemedicine are: 
 
Every patient in contact with their general 
practitioner within their healthcare pathway, 
 
The dependent elderly,  
 
Patients with chronic diseases: diabetes, heart 
failure, 
renal 
failure, 
Chronic 
Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD), etc. 
 
Outpatients after surgery in hospital. 
In terms of technological structure, a telemedicine 
platform is a connecting device, where the central data 
repository is related to interfaces. For teleconsultations, 
there are instantly interactions between the patients and the 
doctors, who receive measurements and answers, as well as 
view and analyze patients’ health data through a web portal. 
The portal is customized for the exchanges between 
stakeholders: patients and professionals, according to the 
medical specialties. It can be accessed from a computer 
browser or also from a smartphone on a mobile app with an 
ergonomic 
workflow 
interface. 
The 
integration 
of 
algorithms for a preliminary analysis of medical data and 
imaging is now expanding. The platform has to support the 
entire process chain for providing services: 
 
The medical appointment, linked to calendaring, 
 
The collect of the patient’s agreement, 
 
The stakeholders’ authentication, 
 
The diagnosis and medical report, 
 
The prescription (for drugs, etc.), 
 
The data recording, 
 
The billing and payment processes. 
Usually, booking a telemedicine appointment is possible 
through this interface where it can be scheduled. The 
waiting line may be displayed on a dashboard, and a virtual 
(space organized as a waiting room for the patients. 
(Sometimes documents can be exchanged beforehand 
(questionnaire, measurements, medical imaging, etc.). 
Recording the National Healthcare Insurance (Caisse 
Nationale d’Assurance Maladie) card is the usual way to 
check the identity of the patient. Some other forms can be 
found like the patients’ agreement and the eligibility 
questionnaire. The payment system and the online 
prescriptions can be supplied through the portal. Additional 
services consist of the integration of the EHR (Electronic 
Health Record) for adding data and the report of the 
teleconsultation, with eventually the telemedicine video 
record. 
The Healthcare Insurance Fund may provide a financial 
aid to physicians for purchasing the following connected 
devices: oxymeter, stethoscope, dermatoscope, otoscope, 
glucometer, electrocardiogram (ECG), doppler device, 
echograph, device for blood pressure measure, camera, 
tools for ocular and hearing tests and equipment for 
breathing functional exploration. As a socio technical 
device, a telemedicine platform contributes to the 
transformation of the healthcare system mainly with an 
extended 
use 
of 
data 
through 
Human-Computer 
Interactions. As there is no physical presence for the patient 
and consequently no auscultation, the doctors have to 
secure their medical acts by whatever means possible. 
Different types of data are needed for improving the general 
process that includes mainly assessment, diagnosis and 
medical prescription. Data have to be retrieved and 
completed for the anamnesis, the medical case history. The 
diagnosis that is sometimes based on medical imaging 
requires decision support systems, as prescription too. 
 
B. 
 AI Data Processing and Solutions 
1) 
Machine learning, deep learning:  
With the implementation of EHR in hospitals and the 
extension of Information Systems (IS) for the healthcare 
production, medical data began to be mass produced; then, 
the data management could develop with the creation of 
algorithms. As data mass production reduces the limitation 
in the use of  statistical rules,  AI devices are more and 
more reliable with deep learning. They were first learning 
algorithms, with data analysis (neural networks) and the 
capability for the machine to deduct rules to get a result. AI 
applications were especially numerous for the analysis of 
medical imaging, allowing the development of diagnosis 
support 
systems, 
for 
example 
in 
cardiology 
or 
ophthalmology, with satisfactory rates of reliability.  
Genetics is now providing huge amounts of data, which 
paves the way to the search for predictive models. Thus, AI 
83
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

solutions strengthen the evolution towards a personalized, 
preventive, predictive and participative medicine. 
 
2) 
Mass production of healthcare data:  
Human-Computer Interactions increased with the 
patients’ empowerment, developed in France since the 
March 4th 2002 (Law about Sickness People Rights and 
Quality of Health System with the idea of “Health 
Democracy”), as they access, more frequently through 
social technical devices; they not only use various search 
engines to get relevant information, but mainly digital 
platforms on computers or smartphones to know the 
conditions and costs of healthcare, getting on line 
appointments or healthcare appreciations, discussing on 
forums, using connected objects or contributing to design 
innovative products. Data can also be retrieved from the 
informal exchanges on the social media that have become at 
the origin of useful information related to healthcare 
(behavior, habits, ways of living, feelings). In a more global 
approach 
towards 
the 
determinants 
of 
healthcare, 
information lead to new perspectives in retrieving more data 
and crossing them to build algorithms that could help to 
improve the patients’ healthcare. The data integrates not 
only medical, but social, psycho-social information to 
obtain the signs of any evolution in the living conditions of 
a person and the risks of degradation. 
 
3) 
Different uses of AI:  
 
The following figure displays the main uses of AI in 
healthcare: 
 
Figure 2. Typology of AI uses in healthcare (the mature uses are pointed 
out in green) [23]. 
Through the main characteristic of AI, which is to 
manage huge amounts of data and provide quick results, we 
try to clear the applications that would especially enhance 
the value of the telemedicine process, combining data 
retrieval, data analysis and the decision support system. 
 Retrieval of the Appropriate Information: AI 
applications can retrieve the patients’ information 
automatically, from EHR and other sources. 
Basically, machine learning can help to analyze 
clinical data in a patient’s EHR to provide patient care 
recommendations. 
 
Automatic Analysis of Medical Imaging: AI 
solutions are especially relevant for analyzing huge 
masses of data from medical imaging. In 2018, 
DeepMind developed a software using a neural 
network learning system for detecting ophthalmic 
pathologies from scanner eye retina imaging [24]. 
The 
detection 
focuses 
on 
age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy, 
glaucoma or retinal detachment. DeepMind obtained 
a precision of around 94% for the AI application it 
developed. Such AI solutions in medical imaging 
can provide aid for diagnosis, which helps to secure 
them. 
 
AI Advice for Prescriptions: Machine learning 
algorithms may recommend treatment options and 
solutions for the patients. 
They 
help 
the 
doctors 
when recommending 
prescriptions by taking into account the existing 
ones, checking and validating prescriptions to make 
sure that the drugs prescribed are compatible with 
the patient’s data. 
IV. 
THE OBSERVATION OF AI APPLICATIONS IN 
TELEMEDICINE 
A. 
The Analysis of New Trends for AI in Telemedicine 
Some applications for telemedicine now use machine 
learning to help the medical professionals with diagnostic 
support based on symptoms and patient health data. New 
trends pivot on the capabilities and benefits of AI in 
combining high speed data retrieval from very different 
sources, analysis of huge amounts of data and its results 
with the decision support system. AI solutions may be used 
for the patients’ orientation, helping to screen patients in 
telemedicine as they do for emergency calls. 
B. 
Data Collection before a Consultation 
    Lemonaid Health, an AI application before virtual video 
consultations: Lemonaid provides video consultations with 
medical professionals [25]. It uses machine learning at the 
beginning of the process with the evaluation of the patient’s 
state of healthcare. The patient has to complete a 
questionnaire online that includes medical history, current 
medicines, allergies and regular symptoms. An AI model of 
screening based on the complexity of the case analyzes the 
information obtained to categorize the patient and orientate 
him to the suitable healthcare provider. Doctors evaluate the 
situation, usually during a video consultation available with 
an assigned healthcare professional.  
C. 
Personalized Diagnosis Support 
The telemedicine application Ada Health (Germany): A 
diagnosis support for telemedicine [25] uses a machine 
learning AI application to provide personalized diagnosis 
support.  The patient has first to complete his medical 
profile in an initial survey. A chatbot uses a series of 
questions to identify possible symptoms. 
84
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. 
A Case Example of Telemedicine Using AI 
1) MédecinDirect: MédecinDirect is a telemedicine 
platform [26] that provides medical advice and remote 
consultations through contracts with companies and mutual 
funds for their stockholders. Facing the increase of the 
activity in remote medical consultations, MédecinDirect 
uses AI solutions in order to keep the quality level and to 
reduce the length of time for providing an answer. They 
fulfill two major aims: improving the anamnesis and 
securing both the diagnosis and the prescribed treatment.       
2) Analysis Based on the Reasons for the Consultation: 
The healthcare practitioners have to ask different questions 
for the clarification of symptoms and to retrieve the 
patients’ medical history, without omitting to get important 
information. Built on the use of a great number of 
exchanges recorded on the platform, the analysis aims at 
standardizing 
the 
different 
healthcare 
professionals’ 
answers. After the analysis of the major reason for the 
consultation from natural language, AI solution proposes to 
the doctor a complete set of relevant questions in order to 
better define the medical case history. A conversational 
agent may be integrated into the process of asking 
questions. 
E. 
Decision Support System                                                             
AI is used for creating an inference engine that enables 
the provision of medical recommendations to doctors for 
the exclusion of serious risks, for making diagnosis and 
assisting medical prescription. 
Following the publication of Villani’s report, the 
creation of the French “Health Data Hub” (HDH) 2019 is 
part of the French strategy for IA: improving the 
accessibility to mass data, the project aims at supporting the 
development 
of 
IA 
uses. 
This 
national 
platform 
consolidates French healthcare data from different sources 
(mainly National Health Insurance, in French Assurance 
Maladie and hospitals) and in the long run, the project may 
answer to advanced needs of data for IA techniques and 
succeed in multiplying the possibilities for data treatments. 
A call for projects for the HDH was organized for “The 
improvement of medical diagnosis by IA”; among the 
approved projects in 2020, the building of a database of 
ophthalmological images illustrates the extension of IA uses 
for designing decision support systems for the healthcare 
professionals: such services will encourage the development 
of new types of medical consultations.  
The health data hosting by Microsoft is the subject of 
controversy in a context of discussions about the digital 
sovereignty. 
V. 
THE EFFECTS OF COMBINING TELEMEDICINE AND AI 
TECHNOLOGIES 
A. 
The Impacts for the Doctors 
The processes are noticeably different between remote 
medical consultations and consultations with the physical 
presence of the patients, and change the relation doctor / 
patient. Patients reactions are not the same when there 
exists a “mediator artifact” (computer, tablet, etc.) between 
medical professionals and patients. This fact explains why 
some doctors are still reluctant to the practice of 
telemedicine.  
AI and telemedicine are complementary. AI really 
contributes 
to 
securing 
the 
whole 
process 
of 
a 
teleconsultation. First, getting accurate information about 
the patient’s state of health helps the professionals in their 
assessment. Then, any information improving the decision-
making and enabling to confirm the appropriate diagnosis is 
really valued. Finally, the prescription is much more 
reliable if the doctors get all the information about the 
patients’ other drugs and prescribed medicine. AI 
algorithms have to be trustworthy, especially since they are 
used for healthcare. The use of AI solutions may be time 
saving for doctors. They can give them more time for 
doctor-patient interaction. So AI may be a real help for 
doctors in the teleconsultation process, but some challenges 
have still to be solved [27]; it introduces a risk due to an 
insufficient accuracy in the results of AI. Retrieving 
significant amount of data for the training procedure in 
order to create reliable algorithms is very important. The 
data retrieval and their standardization are very important 
factors facilitating faith in the algorithms created. 
B. 
The New Scopes for the Patients 
The development of teleconsultations seems to result 
not only of recent changes in regulation and of the context 
of “medical desertification”, but also of the patients’ current 
needs. 
Some policy holders have access to telemedicine 
platforms with their healthcare insurance contracts; more 
patients want to avoid waiting for a medical consultation 
going to the doctor’s office and use such platforms for 
getting information fast and accurately. With the 
empowerment for their healthcare, patients are more 
involved in digital processes, like booking online for 
medical appointments or filling in information forms before 
consultations. They also communicate about their patients’ 
experience on social media and forums, so that they 
contribute to producing data that can be retrieved for AI in 
healthcare. This observation leads to the questioning 
concerning the evolution towards digital medicine, with 
direct access for patients to the information automatically 
produced by AI, and less human interactions with the 
healthcare professionals. This will strongly change the 
doctor-patient relationship, which has hitherto focused on 
the human dimension of interactions. 
VI. 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE COVID PANDEMIC ON THE 
HUMAN COMPUTER INTERACTIONS IN HEALTHCARE 
The ambivalence of technology and the tensions 
between technophiles and technophobes are been reduced 
with the new needs that Covid 19 has brought to the word. 
In France, according to G. Babinet, the Covid-19 is 
revealing the low level of digitization in the healthcare 
system [4]. 
85
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. 
The emergence of the digital medicine 
      In June 2020, the Montaigne’s Institute think tank 
estimated the potential value creation of e-health in France 
at between €16.1 and €22.3 billion per year [4]. This 
economic value creation can be divided into 5 categories of 
innovations and impacts: 
. 3.3 to 4.7 billion through patient empowerment and the 
prevention of complications, particularly for chronic 
diseases. 
. 3.4 to 4.7 billion through dematerialization and data 
exchanges, with optimization of the medical time of 
healthcare professionals. 
. 3.7 to 6.4 billion through telemedicine, notably with the 
use of teleconsultations to limit hospitalisations. 
. 2.4 to 3.4 billion through the automation and optimisation 
of care pathways in both primary care and hospital and at 
their articulation between these two sectors. 
. 3.3 to 4.2 billion through transparency and decision 
support, by limiting the redundancy of healthcare acts and 
overpayments.  
The health crisis due to the present pandemic has 
brought out a transformation of both the patients and the 
doctors’ uses.  
With the important needs for medical consultations 
during 
the 
lockdown 
period, 
the 
number 
of 
teleconsultations exploded. The obstacles to the acceptance 
of this model of healthcare seem lower. Telemedicine may 
address the increasing medical needs.  
"Video consultation has become part of the daily life of 
the French," Doctolib says. The health crisis is largely 
responsible for this, since teleconsultations have really 
exploded during the confinement: from a total of 100,000 
video consultations carried out between the launch of the 
service in January 2019 and February 2020, the number has 
risen to 4.6 million, an increase of 4.5 million acts in barely 
six months. Another revealing figure: in the last six months 
(February – August), 32,500 healthcare professionals have 
used Doctolib, compared to only 3,500 before the epidemic, 
which is almost 10 times less. General practitioners 
represent 69% of the users of the video consultation, details 
Doctolib. Next come psychiatrists (7.5% of users), 
gynaecologists (4%) and paediatricians (3.3%). Although 
telemedicine is used in all regions, the majority of 
procedures are currently carried out in Ile-de-France (46.5% 
of appointments), ahead of the Auvergne-Rhônes-Alpes 
(10% of appointments) and PACA (8.5%) regions [28]. 
It may be part of an evolution towards the "smart 
medicine" with the "all connected", in a convergence 
between the networks for persons, objects, process and data 
towards the Internet of Everything (IoE) [29]. 
A digital revolution for medical practices may really 
have begun with new habits that are really different from 
the face-to-face medical singular conference and may 
change 
it 
deeply. 
The 
combination 
of 
advanced 
technologies may stimulate the appropriation and extension 
of the digital medicine, but without forgetting the 
indispensable human dimension of medicine. 
For facing the pandemic situation, in a hasty way, 
many tools (apps or telemedicine platforms) were provided 
to the healthcare professionals, mainly free.  After this 
period of exponential expansion in their diffusion then in 
their appropriation, the uses may now be extended, owing 
to the existing risk of second wave or other pandemic 
situations. This may lead to another generation of 
telemedicine platforms sharing data among multiple users 
and integrating data from video assessment, patient 
electronic profile, event logs from connected devices with 
the Internet of Things (IoT) for improving the remote 
healthcare management [30].  
Such technological developments pave the way to 
digital and personalized medicine.  The concept of 4P 
Medicine (Leroy Hood, Institute for Systems Biology, 
2013) is composed of 4 dimensions: Personalization, 
especially with the patient’s genetic profile, Prevention, 
with a global approach for healthcare rather than a focus on 
diseases, Prediction, with the most appropriate medical 
treatments for the patient, and Participation, involving the 
patient’s responsibility in his healthcare. Another “P” has 
often been suggested as 5th with Pertinence or Proof of the 
effectiveness of the medical service rendered to the patients, 
or even “P” as Pathway, with the evolution towards the 
management of the patients’ healthcare pathways. A new 
"P" may also be considered with the development of 
Platforms assembling diagnosis, treatment and clinical trial 
process 
and 
connecting 
the 
different 
healthcare 
professionals involved [31]. 
B. An 
innovative 
combination 
of 
technologies 
addressing healthcare concerns 
AI may be used with the analysis of rare but significant 
events for detecting the first indicators in order to predict a 
pandemic. Multiple information sources, including data 
from the social networks, may be combined in analytical 
datasets for very complex analysis creating correlations and 
connections for defining the distinctive features of a viral 
pandemic model. AI technologies may also help to forecast 
the needs for medical and nursing staffs, anticipate the 
situations, and assess the risks for the patients. Furthermore, 
an AI model using computed tomography may enable to 
detect the virus through a rapid diagnosis of patients: a 
recent study showed that the algorithm produced have 
higher sensitivity compared to the evaluation of the images 
and clinical data by radiologists [32]. 
Telemedicine may also help to support emergency care 
from remote facilities [33]. As the recent pandemic pointed 
out, telemedicine may be requested to provide medical 
answers 
in 
emergency 
situations 
requiring 
urgent 
regulation; a mobile telemedicine platform like Nomadeec, 
developed by Exelus, enables tele-triage, teleconsultation 
and tele expertise for remote diagnoses and patient 
orientation decisions. It provides services as elements of a 
86
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

paramedical check-up, that can be sent to the professionals 
or video conferences. If the request is not a real emergency, 
the patient may be orientated to a healthcare permanency. 
Diagnosis recommendations and decision-making tools are 
based on AI. Several medical devices can be Bluetooth-
connected to the platform for digital capture of vital signs: a 
thermometer, a blood pressure monitor, an oximeter, a 
stethoscope, a glucometer, an electrocardiogram device, etc. 
and the interface displays the relevant data, photos, videos 
on the same screen. Tele prescriptions are included. Real 
time transmissions can be sent to hospitals, syntheses, 
reports and mails automatically generated.  
A Covid-19 orientation algorithm has been provided by 
the Ministry of Health for self-evaluation during the current 
pandemic. Based on cases study and scientific watch, it 
integrates severity and unfavorable prognosis factors as 
variables. The answers to the questionnaire determine the 
orientation of the patients; the results are presented on a 
decision map. This process of online questionnaire filling is 
now proposed by some hospital groups: they ask their 
patients to fill the form before coming for a consultation or 
hospitalization. This evolution is a step for more patients’ 
empowerment in the management of their healthcare. 
The scope for teleconsultations includes the chronic 
pathologies follow up. The monitoring of the patients 
suffering from chronic diseases may also be enhanced 
thanks to a combination of technologies. It often requires 
remote surveillance that may be based on the regular data 
collection from connected devices. With the pandemic, the 
preparation of a mobile app has been achieved within the 
scope of the prevention program called “Integrated care for 
older people” (Icope), implemented by the Gérontopôle in 
Toulouse. Icope monitor may help for frailty screening: it 
aims at evaluating and following the elderly person’s main 
functions: mobility, memory, nutrition, state of mind, 
eyesight and hearing.  This program is part of the program 
Inspire of the World Healthcare Organization (WHO) 
launched for identifying the aging people who are mostly in 
risk of chronic pathologies as Alzheimer’s disease, 
atherosclerosis, 
osteoarthritis, 
cancer 
or 
Age-related 
Macular Degeneration (AMD); the main goal is to reduce 
care dependence through targeted and personalized 
prevention strategies. The elderly persons are encouraged to 
register their own data. Alerts are automatically generated 
in case of functional decline or loss; as they are received in 
the Icope monitoring center, a nurse calls the elderly person 
and then informs the general practitioner who may plan a 
teleconsultation or a tele expertise for getting the advice of 
a geriatrician or of another medical specialist.   
AI may be value-adding in the analysis for the patient risk 
stratification in order to plan healthcare interventions. 
HoloLens 2 is an example of extended uses of the 
virtual reality (VR) with the pandemic: in order to reduce 
the time spent with contaminated patients, the doctors in the 
hospitals of the Imperial College Health NHS Trust 
equipped themselves with Microsoft helmets: the device 
preserves the human appearance; medical notes or images 
such as radiographs and scanners can be projected on the 
visor above the patients; the wearer may interact with the 
virtual elements through movements or voice; a camera can 
film and transmit in live the images via a video stream on a 
platform to a computer located in another room for other 
doctors, which enables to limit the number of professionals 
in contact with the patients.  
The pandemic circumstances may lead to hasty the 
appropriation of pioneering techniques that have to be 
evaluated in terms of security and ethics in order to consider 
their possible extension over time and their integration in 
the healthcare management process.  
C. Profound changes for the healthcare professionals  
Considering the doctor patient relationship, the 
pandemic leads to a paradigm shift as many consultations 
may now become digital, particularly if they are related to a 
prescription renewal or to a chronical disease monitoring. 
The health crisis also points out that the medical 
resources have to be spared; in order to answer to the needs 
for homecare, it would be important to rely on all the 
healthcare providers involved.  
Recently, the Ministry of Health has recommended to 
the Regional Healthcare Agencies (in French, "Agences 
Régionales de Santé", ARS) to organize for the patients 
suffering from the Covid-19 the extension of the use of tele 
expertise in different specialties: pneumology, infectious 
diseases, geriatrics, palliative care, physical medicine and 
rehabilitation; this evolution may prefigure changes in the 
medical organization.   
The technologies may help to secure the different 
process for appropriate delegation of tasks. Thereby, the 
data registration of the patient’s medical history and the 
description of the symptoms before a teleconsultation may 
be supported by decision aid based on AI tools for being 
carried out by a nurse or an orthoptist in ophthalmology.    
In France, the lockdown period has brought several 
changes in the healthcare regulation: the nurses are now 
authorized to practice the remote monitoring called telecare; 
the midwifes may perform teleconsultations for remote 
pregnancy monitoring; speech therapists, occupational 
therapists are now authorized to practice teleconsultations, 
and psychomotor therapists, remote tele-rehabilitation. 
Physical therapists may manage telecare for their patients 
and the remote pharmaceutical monitoring may be planned 
for fragile persons.  
Physiotherapy is considered as important for patients 
during or after their stays in an intense care unit for the 
improvement of the functional mobility. The remote 
respiratory tele rehabilitation gets equal results compared to 
pulmonary rehabilitation in a follow-up care and 
rehabilitation unit [34]. The tele rehabilitation process is 
also a support to develop the autonomy of the patients in 
order to keep them at home. It might be extended to cases 
of ambulatory orthopedic surgery, or after a stroke: 
87
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

teleconsultations could be regularly scheduled with the 
surgeons or neurologists, and telecare with the physical 
therapists. 
Finally, it was observed that the Covid pandemic and 
the lockdown period induced anxiety and worsened the 
suicide risk. Phone, teleconsultations and telecare are 
considered as means of improving the psychiatric follow up 
in distress and decompensation situations. Those specific 
modes of intervention have to be secured and supported by 
technological tools and data processing, for collecting 
accurate information at the different steps of the process: 
before, during and after the interaction with the patients; AI 
tools are adequate for retrieving the data from different 
sources and analyzing them. 
D. The perspective of breakthrough innovation in the 
organization of the homecare monitoring 
The development of chronic diseases and the increase of 
the elderly population make urgent some changes in the 
homecare monitoring. This necessary evolution for 
healthcare at home should accelerate in order to cope with 
other pandemic situations.  
AI may be an innovative way for adding value in the 
management of the elderly patients’ pathways, for instance 
with the use of predictive information thanks to the 
behavioral data recording. Teleconsultations for geriatrics 
and other specialties (psychiatry, cardiology, dermatology, 
pneumology, endocrinology, neurology) may be planned 
with the hospitals and the telecare process may enable to 
follow up situations remotely in relation with a nurse or 
another caregiver at the patients’ bedside. 
Furthermore, 
technologies 
may 
improve 
a 
real 
populational approach, in order to identify the urgencies 
and priorities with the detection of frailty situations. 
Developing the teleconsultations and connected devices 
monitoring may help to avoid hospitalizations. The 
extension of the telecare may complete the digital medicine 
with interventions of different healthcare providers.  
Sharing the healthcare professional resources on a 
territory may enable to deal with their rarefaction. Some 
establishments for the elderly (in French, "Etablissement 
d’Hébergement pour Personnes Agées Dépendantes", 
EHPAD) experiment their intervention on their territory as 
an "EHPAD out of the walls" or "EHPAD at home"; such 
changes offer many opportunities for homecare: portable 
devices can eventually track vital signs such as blood 
pressure, 
heart 
rate 
and 
temperature; 
healthcare 
measurements devices might be connected to the EHPAD 
platform for providing direct information for remote 
patients monitoring; teleconsultations may be organized 
with the EHPAD for geriatric evaluation, psycho geriatrics 
in case of crisis, and monitoring for wounds and pressure 
sores, palliative care, drug iatrogenic. The EHPAD 
coordinating doctor may analyze the iatrogenic risks in 
relation with the general practitioners. The EHPAD 
occupational therapist may provide specific support to the 
patients and the psychologist help to reduce the elderly’ 
anxiety or behavior disorders. 
The whole remotely digital organization at home may 
also be improved for many services: an example is the 
direct delivery of the medicine after their prescription 
during a teleconsultation. 
 
According to S. Bertezène, "the Covid crisis first 
exacerbated all the dysfunctions, then there was immense 
organizational resilience" and solidarity with innovative 
ways. The territorial cooperation dimension was essential, 
notably through the CPTS (Health Territorial Professional 
Communities / Communautés Professionnelles Territoriales 
de Santé) or the GHT (Territories Hospitals Groups / 
Groupements Hospitaliers de Territoires), including the 
EHPAD. 
S. Bertezène insists on the imperative for less 
administration and constraints and on the importance of 
trust in all the actors. She develops the notion of "hidden 
costs" of bureaucracy, which, if controlled, would allow for 
salary increases and investments. The resilience of the 
healthcare system implies restoring meaning and give the 
means to act as the government has committed itself to do 
[6]. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
The interactive devices studied (AI, telemedicine) are 
certainly very promising and should constitute major levers 
of the digital transformation to make the health system 
evolve from a purely curative and fee-for-service medicine 
to a more preventive medicine, as envisaged by the Isaac’s 
report [2]. The Covid pandemic has made these 
transformations even more imperative. 
We have already highlighted in the wake of J. Ellul [15], 
the ambivalence of technology and the tensions between 
technophiles and technophobes. In France, the Descartes’ 
country, engineers have always occupied a privileged place, 
with the risk of technological "solutionism" drifting away 
from technocentric approaches, with tools too often 
developed without real consultation with users, whether 
they are health professionals or patients and their families. 
The integration of new project management methods 
(known as "agile", integrating users into the various stages 
of project development) such as the method for developing 
trust in complex projects, for instance the Fears - 
Attractions - Temptations (FAcT)-Mirror method proposed 
by G. Le Cardinal [20], are interesting approaches. 
Developing trust is essential to promote resilience of the 
whole French healthcare system.  
New tools also renew territorial approaches to health 
and in particular those of health inequalities, which can 
have an individual, social (isolation and poverty) and 
collective dimension, concerning not only individuals, but 
the collective dimension of territories, the question of 
"medical deserts", territories without health professionals, 
these "medical deserts" being also "digital deserts" [5] with 
88
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

specific work on AI and rurality, data and weakened 
territories or smart cities and smart territories. 
Another essential aspect is the evaluation of the impact 
of these new devices and their added value in improving 
services for both health professionals, patients and their 
families. This is another area of research we are working to 
propose, still in an approach based on information and 
communication issues, a more contributory evaluation by 
integrating 
the 
expectations 
and 
emotions 
of 
all 
stakeholders, tool designers, users: health professionals, 
patients and their families. These patients are gradually 
affirming their role with the notion of "health democracy" 
enshrined in the law on "Patients' rights and the quality of 
the health system" of March 4th 2002. 
All these developments imply a new “territorialization” 
of health management, with an affirmation over the past 
thirty years of “healthcare interface organizations” 
(healthcare networks, multi-professional healthcare centers, 
home hospitalization, etc.) to overcome the barriers 
between urban medicine and the hospitalization sector, or 
new territorial groups of urban medicine, with whom there 
are still challenges of coordination and traceability of acts. 
All these digital transformations are also reflected in the 
affirmation of new coordination professions [35] and also to 
give meaning to data, not only data scientist but also human 
data mediation [21]. But if we have outlined the challenges 
of the digital transformation of the health system through 
the implementation of new devices, mainly AI and 
telemedicine, we must not forget the whole human 
dimension of healthcare, well emphasized by M.J. Thiel, 
with the suffering and anxiety of illness and the end of life 
[36].  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
With the rise of more uses in telemedicine, we are 
witnessing a new step in the transformation of the 
healthcare system, with major challenges to overcome. The 
Covid pandemic has fostered the evolutions [6]. 
The digital process in telemedicine is a Human- 
Computer Interaction, both requiring and producing data. It 
contributes to the increase of the volume of healthcare data 
and therefore to the possible development of AI. 
Telemedicine is based on data exchanges between the 
stakeholders and data processing. Data collection in this 
case is even more important than when there is physical 
presence in a medical consultation. The doctors have to act 
without any information from the patient’s auscultation. 
The relevant information must be available, thus the 
necessity to gather as much data as possible, i.e., recent 
information, then, to select the required information and to 
get support when making a decision.  
The use of AI strengthens the requirements of the 
information systems interoperability, as data are collected 
from different sources where their meaning may be 
different. Data entered into an AI system should be 
complete and accurate. A healthcare data normalization 
engine, 
curated 
and 
versioned 
data 
sets 
for 
the 
terminologies could be used. But in order to improve the 
quality of the available data, especially with large-scale data 
sources, we would need some of the standardization tools 
for curating the data that do not yet exist [37],[38]. A 
standard 
terminology, 
such 
as 
the 
Systematized 
Nomenclature for Human and Veterinary Medicine 
(SNOMED) 
Clinical 
Terms 
achieves 
semantic 
interoperability. Archetypes provide the shared meaning of 
data with the specifications of its format.  
Furthermore, the implementation of AI solutions 
highlights the complex ethical questions about the use of 
medical and behavioral personal data, with the upcoming 
extension to genetics. From an ethical point of view, 
beyond the patients’ free consent, the use of their healthcare 
data mandates a differentiated exploitation according to 
their sensitivity.  
The future trends may be the temptations to use AI for 
services to patients without any human interaction, in 
answer to their various questions about the seriousness of 
the symptoms, how to understand, what to do, when seeing 
a doctor is essential. We have outlined the risk of any only 
“solutionist’ approach, as medicine is managing human 
beings and not only materials or connected objects. The 
challenges are very important and shape the whole future of 
our society. Health is an essential sector to observe the 
issues and challenges of the digital transformation of our 
entire society and new uses of data, with their ambivalence 
[15]. As productions of new technical devices, they can 
allow essential and imperative transformations (cooperation 
based on trust among all the actors) but also with risks of 
abuses (more controls and bureaucracy). The path to 
resilience can include some hard stones ...  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Bourret, T. Depeyrot,   “Uses of Interactive Devices such 
as Artificial Intelligence Solutions for the Improvement of 
Human-Computer 
Interactions 
through 
Telemedicine 
Platforms in France“, ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, IARIA, Valencia, 21 – 25 November. 
[2] H. Isaac, "From a curative health system to a preventive 
model using digital tools"/"D’un système de santé curatif à un 
modèle préventif grâce aux outils numériques", Paris: 
Renaissance 
numérique, 
2014, 
http://fr.slideshare.net/RenaissanceNumerique/lb-sante-
preventive-renaissance-numerique-1. 
[3] C. Villani, "Giving meaning to artificial intelligence: for a 
national and European strategy"/"Donner du sens à 
l'intelligence artificielle : pour une stratégie nationale et 
européenne", 
Paris: 
French 
Government, 
2018, 
https://www.enseignementsup-
recherche.gouv.fr/cid128577/rapport-de-cedric-villani-
donner-un-sens-a-l-intelligence-artificielle-ia.html. 
[4] Montaigne’s Institute, "E-Health: Let's increase the dose !"/ 
"E-Santé 
:Augmentons 
la 
dose!", 
Paris, 
2020, 
https://www.institutmontaigne.org/publications/e-sante-
augmentons-la-dose 
[5] C. Bourret, "Tackle the challenge of Social and Territorial 
Inequalities in Health (ISTS) by meeting interface and 
telehealth organizations in a « digital humanism » approach 
to health?"/"Relever le défi des Inégalités Sociales et 
Territoriales en Santé (ISTS) par la rencontre des 
organisations d’interface et de la télésanté dans une approche 
d’« humanisme numérique » en santé ?", Contemporary 
Trends in Organizational Communication / Tendances 
89
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

contemporaines en communication organisationnelle, in S. 
Alemanno, C. Le Moënne, and G. Gramaccia, Revue 
Française 
des 
Sciences 
de 
l’Information 
et 
de 
la 
Communication 
September 
2016, 
http://rfsic.revues.org/2013, DOI : 10.4000/rfsic.2013. 
[6] M et M Conseil, Digital Meetings for the Health System. 
Rebuilding our Health System : Lessons for the Crisis / 
Rencontres digitales pour le système de santé. Refonder notre 
système de santé : quelles leçons tirer de la crise ?, June 25 th 
2020, 
Zoom 
Conference. 
Proceedings 
available 
on :  
https://www.mmconseil.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/ActesValidés_RD-Système-de-
santé_DEF.pdf 
[7] F. Bernard, "Information and Communication Sciences (ICS) 
as a discipline of openness and decompartmentalization"/ 
"Les 
SIC 
une 
discipline 
de 
l’ouverture 
et 
du 
décloisonnement", 
in 
A. 
Bouzon, 
Organizational 
communication in debate. Fields, concepts, perspectives / La 
communication 
organisationnelle 
en 
débat. 
Champs, 
concepts, perspectives, Paris: L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 33 – 
46. 
[8] V. Carayol, "Organizational communication. An allagmatic 
perspective"/"Communication 
organisationnelle. 
Une 
perspective allagmatique", Paris: L’Harmattan, 2004. 
[9] N. D’Almeida, "Organisations between projects and stories" 
/"Les organisations entre projets et récits", in A. Bouzon, 
Organizational communication in debates. Fields, concepts 
and perspectives / La communication organisationnelle en 
débats. 
Champs, 
concepts 
et 
perspectives, 
Paris: 
L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 145 – 158.   
[10] K. E. Weick, "The Social Psychology of Organizing", New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1979. 
[11] C. Bourret, "Economic Intelligence Meeting Quality 
Prospects in France with Particular Focus on Healthcare 
Issues", Journal of Business and Economics, New York: 
Academic Star Publishing Company, 2015, vol. 6, n° 8, pp. 
1487 - 1502. 
[12] H. L. Wilensky, "Organizational Intelligence: knowledge and 
policy in government and industry", New York: Basic Books 
Publishers, 1967. 
[13] J. P. Caliste and C. Bourret, "Contribution to a typological 
analysis of processes: from compliance to agility" / 
"Contribution à une analyse typologique des processus : de la 
conformité à l’agilité", 10th International Congress Qualia / 
10ème 
Congrès 
International 
Qualita, 
Université 
de 
Technologie de Compiègne, 2013. 
[14] E. Goffman, "The Neglected Situation", in J.J. Gumperz and 
D. Hymes, The Ethnography of Communication, American 
Anthropologist, Washington DC, 1964, pp. 133 – 137. 
[15] J. Ellul, "The technique or challenge of the century"/"La 
technique ou l’enjeu du siècle", Paris: Economica, 1990. 
[16] G. Vallancien, "Medicine without a doctor. Digital 
technology at the service of the patient"/"La médecine sans 
médecin. Le numérique au service du malade", Paris: 
Gallimard, Coll. Le Débat, 2015. 
[17] National Board of Physicians / Conseil National de l’Ordre 
des 
Médecins, 
"Health 
Uberization 
Risk"/"Risque 
d’ubérisation 
de 
la 
santé", 
2015, 
https://www.lequotidiendumedecin.fr/archives/uberisation-
de-la-sante-lordre-veut-verifier-la-conformite-des-
prestations-medicales-en-ligne. 
[18] A. Mucchielli, "Situation and Communication"/"Situation et 
communication", Nice: Les éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[19] D. Goleman, R. Boyatzis, and A. Mc Kee, "Primal 
Leadership: 
Realizing 
the 
Power 
of 
Emotional 
Intelligence", 2002 /"L’intelligence émotionnelle au travail", 
Pearson Education, France, 2010. 
[20] G. Le Cardinal, J. F. Guyonnet, B. Pouzoullic, and J. Rigby, 
"Intervention Methodology for complex problems: The 
FAcT-Mirror method", European Journal of Operational 
Research, Elsevier, n° 132, 2001, pp. 694-702.  
[21] A. Nesvijevskaia, "Big Data Phenomenon in Companies: 
Project Process, Value Generation and Human Mediation – 
Data"/"Phénomène Big Data en entreprise : processus projet, 
génération de valeur et Médiation Homme– Données", Ph D 
in Information and Communication Sciences / Doctorat en 
Sciences de l’Information et de la Communication, G. 
Chartron, Paris: CNAM, 2019. 
[22] "Preparing the healthcare workforce to deliver the digital 
future", February 2019, The Topol Review, Health Education 
England. 
[23] "Artificial intelligence – latest developments and perspectives 
for France"/"Intelligence artificielle - État de l’art et 
perspectives pour la France", Pôle interministériel de 
Prospective et d’Anticipation des Mutations économiques, 
February 2019. 
[24] S. Ravindran, "How artificial intelligence is helping to 
prevent blindness", Nature Outlook, April 2019. 
[25] K. Sennaar, "Artificial intelligence in Telemedicine and 
Telehealth", February 2019, https://emerj.com/ai-sector-
overviews/artificial-intelligence-in-telemedicine-and-
telehealth/. 
[26]  "Teleconsultation: an AI tool for maximizing the medical 
time"/"Téléconsultation: un outil d'intelligence artificielle 
pour 
optimiser 
le 
temps 
médical", November 
2018, 
https://web.babbler.fr/document/show/teleconsultation-un-
outil-dintelligence-artificielle-pour-optimiser-le-temps-
medical/newsroom#/. 
[27] D. Pacis, E. Subido, and N. Bugtai, "Trends in telemedicine 
utilizing artificial intelligence”, AIP Conference Proceedings 
1933, 
040009, 
February 
2018, 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5023979.  
[28] LCI – La Chaîne de l’Info,  « Covid-19: teleconsultations are 
exploding again since the beginning of September / « Covid-
19 : les téléconsultations explosent de nouveau depuis la 
rentrée de 
septembre», 
Available 
on :  
https://www.lci.fr/sante/coronavirus-les-teleconsultations-
medicales-explosent-de-nouveau-en-france-depuis-la-rentree-
2164583.html 
[29] I. Saleh, "Internet of Things (IoT): Concepts, Issues, 
Challenges and Perspectives"/ "Internet des Objets (IdO) : 
Concepts, Enjeux, Défis et Perspectives. Internet des objets", 
2018,  2. 10.21494/ISTE.OP.2018.0229. 
[30] F. Stradolini, N. Tamburrano, T. Modoux, A.Tuoheti, D. 
Demarchi, and S. Carrara, "IoT for Telemedicine Practices 
enabled by an Android™Application with Cloud System 
Integration" 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits 
and Systems (ISCAS), Florence, 2018, pp. 1-5, doi: 
10.1109/ISCAS.2018.8351871. 
[31] CS. Hu, T. Tkebuchava, "New "P" in Medical Model", Chin 
Med 
J 
(Engl), 
February 
2016, 
129(4):492-3. 
doi: 
10.4103/0366-6999.176074. PMID: 26879028; PMCID: 
PMC4800855. 
[32] X. Mei, H. Lee, K. Diao, Y. Yang et al. "Artificial 
intelligence–enabled rapid diagnosis of patients with COVID-
19", Nature 
Medicine, 
2020 
May 
19th, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0931-3 
[33] L. Wang, A. Cheryl, "Telemedicine Based on Mobile 
Devices and Mobile Cloud Computing", International Journal 
of Cloud Computing and Services Science (IJ-Closer) , 2014, 
3. 10.11591/closer.v3i1.6037. 
[34] A. Delafontaine, S. Ditcharles, T. Hussein, M. Hoffschir, G. 
Gaetan Plantefeve, D. Michon, "Physiotherapy versus 
COVID-19: a major public health role to short, medium and 
long terms in the patient's rehabilitation process" "La 
90
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Kinésithérapie face au COVID-19: un rôle de Santé publique 
majeur à court, moyen et long termes dans le processus 
reéducatif - réadaptatif des patients", in Kinésithérapie, la 
Revue. 
2020 
May 
11. 
French. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.kine.2020.05.005. Epub ahead of print. PMCID: 
PMC7211741. 
[35] C. Bourret, "New Intermediation Jobs in Health Interface 
Organizations"/"Nouveaux métiers d’intermédiation dans les 
organisations d’interface en santé", "Health Ecosystem: New 
Modes of Information Regulation" / "Ecosystème de santé : 
nouveaux modes de régulation de l’information", in D. 
Dufour-Coppolani and P. Hassanaly, Information, Data and 
Documents / Information, Données et Documents (I2D), n° 3, 
2016, pp. 32-33. 
[36] M. J. Thiel, "Where is medicine going? Meaning of medical 
representations and practices"/"Où va la médecine ? Sens des 
représentations et pratiques médicales", Strasbourg: Presses 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, 2003. 
[37] S. Shilo, H. Rossman, and E. Segal, "Axes of a revolution: 
challenges and promises of big data in healthcare", Nat 
Med 26, 29–38, 2020, doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0727-5. 
[38] M. Matheny, S. T. Israni, M. Ahmed, and D. Whicher, 
"Artificial Intelligence in Health Care: The Hope, the Hype, 
the Promise, the Peril", National Academy of Medicine 
(NAM) Washington, D.C., 2019. 
 
 
91
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

