 
Telehealth-based Intrapartum Monitoring: Impact of Clinical and Technical 
Factors on Remote Decision Making
Hiwale Sujitkumar, Krishnan Navaneetha, Addepalli Jeevan Ram, and Ulman Shrutin  
Philips Research India, 
Philips Innovation Campus, Manyata Tech-Park, 
Bengaluru, India-560045 
e-mail: {sujit.hiwale, navaneetha.krishnan, jeevan.ram.addepalli, shrutin.ulman}@philips.com 
 
 
Abstract - Digital Labour and Delivery Solution (DLDS) is a 
mHealth-based 
solution 
for 
structured 
and 
instant 
communication during intrapartum care. The primary 
objectives of this study were – (1) to evaluate feasibility of the 
DLDS 
for 
information 
exchange 
among 
healthcare 
professionals for remote intrapartum monitoring and decision 
making; and (2) to study impact of various clinical and 
technical factors on decision agreements between the doctors. 
The inclusion criteria for the study were, a live-singleton 
pregnancy with cervical dilatation > 4 cm but < 8 cm at the 
time of admission, and presenting without any complication 
necessitating any immediate intervention. The feasibility of the 
DLDS was evaluated by comparing the decisions taken by a 
remote doctor using the DLDS to that of decisions taken by a 
doctor in a labour room. Impact of clinical parameters 
(mother’s age, parity, anemia and presence of intrapartum 
complications) on decision agreement between the doctors was 
studied by comparing agreements in different subcategories of 
these parameters. Similarly, the total number of observation 
records for a subject were also studied to find their impact on 
decision making. The overall agreement between the two 
doctors for 110 cases (220 independent decision points) was 
0.764 using unweighted Cohen’s kappa and 0.723 using 
weighted Cohen’s kappa statistic. The doctors had comparable 
agreements in all the sub-categories of the clinical parameters, 
indicating minimal impact of clinical parameters on decision 
agreement between the doctors. A significant improvement was 
observed in the agreement as the total number of assessments 
available during the course of labour increased. The 
substantial 
agreement 
between 
the 
two 
doctors 
for 
intrapartum decision making demonstrates the feasibility of 
the DLDS for remote intrapartum monitoring and decision 
making. This also indicates that DLDS was able to convey the 
appropriate information to the remote doctor in the different 
sub-categories 
of 
the 
clinical 
parameters. 
The 
study 
recommends further investigation of DLDS for a general 
purpose remote intrapartum monitoring. 
Keywords- 
feasibility 
study; 
inter-observer 
variability; 
intrapartum; mHealth; obstetrics; partograph; telemedicine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last few decades, obstetrics care has evolved 
significantly from delivery at home, to delivery at a 
specialty center under the supervision of a trained medical 
or paramedical team. A short time interval between onset of 
complications and time to intervene makes intense 
monitoring and prompt decision making very important 
during the intrapartum phase. Structured and instant 
communication can play a very important role to make 
intrapartum care effective and safe. These are areas where 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) can 
play a major role. In recent times, mobile devices 
(smartphones and tablets) have emerged as one of the most 
important enablers of ICT in healthcare. Considering the 
need gaps in intrapartum communication and the potential 
of mobile devices for telehealth, we have designed a Digital 
Labour and Delivery Solution (DLDS).  DLDS is a tablet-
based solution designed for 
systematic information 
gathering and sharing during intrapartum monitoring [1].  
Intrapartum monitoring and decision making is a very 
complex procedure. Availability of structured and instant 
data is just one aspect of this process. Many other factors 
such as clinical history and complication of a patient, and 
technical factors such as how frequently a patient is assessed 
during course of labour and frequency of vital parameters’ 
recording can also have a significant bearing on decision 
making. This could be a reason that obstetricians have shown 
to have a poor agreement during intrapartum decision 
making [2]. This is especially important during remote 
monitoring. Therefore, it is equally important to study impact 
of these parameters on remote intrapartum monitoring.  
The primary objectives of this study were to evaluate the 
feasibility of the DLDS in information exchange among 
health care professionals for remote intrapartum monitoring 
and decision making, and to study impact of various clinical 
and technical factors on decision agreements between the 
doctors. The feasibility of DLDS in information exchange 
for remote intrapartum monitoring and decision making is 
covered in detail elsewhere [1]. This paper mostly focuses on 
study of impact of various clinical and technical factors on 
decision agreements between the doctors by comparing 
agreements in different subcategories of these parameters.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows, Section II 
summarizes the literature review of the communication tools 
used during intrapartum phase; Section III covers details of 
the study protocol and statistical methodology. The study 
results are summarized in Section IV. Section V provides 
commentary 
on 
overall 
results 
and 
their 
possible 
implications for clinical practice. Section VI concludes with 
the most important findings and future work directions. The 
acknowledgement section closes the article. 
151
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
REVIEW OF LITERATURE  
As the complications during intrapartum phase are 
responsible for almost 42% of maternal mortality, 32% of 
still births, and 23% of neonatal deaths [3], prompt 
monitoring and instant communication is very important 
during intrapartum phase for an effective decision making. 
This also highlights need of an effective collaboration 
between doctors and midwives with well-defined roles and 
responsibilities. However, contrary to this requirement, it 
has been observed that intrapartum care suffers from a poor 
teamwork. A study conducted in the USA has observed that 
less than 50% of doctors and less than 37% of nurses in 
labour room rated their teamwork as adequate [4], indicating 
magnitude of poor teamwork in the intrapartum care. 
It is well recognized that a poor teamwork or 
interprofessional collaboration is one of the important 
reasons for adverse clinical outcomes and poor delivery of 
health services and patient care [5][6][7]. Among various 
issues, which have an adverse impact on teamwork, poor 
communication patterns have been identified as one of the 
most important issues. This is evident by a fact that issues in 
communication have been identified as the root cause in 
72% of total cases related to infant deaths and injuries 
during delivery [8]. Poor communication is usually a result 
of a poor transmission or exchange of information. Paper-
based methods and telephonic communication are two 
conventional methods used by intrapartum monitoring team 
for information exchange.  
Intrapartum monitoring team is usually composed of 
midwives/nurses, junior doctors and senior obstetricians 
working in a labour room.  The role and responsibilities of 
each of them are usually defined and bounded by a 
hierarchical system, although overlaps do exist. Midwives 
are primarily assigned for intrapartum monitoring of vital 
parameters and for basic interventions, while doctors are 
responsible for clinical decision making and advanced 
surgical interventions. Midwives are stationed in the labour 
room all the time during their shifts, while doctors may or 
may not be constantly present in the labour room due to 
various other responsibilities assigned to them. In the latter 
case, midwives regularly update the doctors to get 
management guidance.  
Two important conventional methods of communication 
during intrapartum monitoring are paper-based method and 
telephonic communication, a brief review of these methods 
is presented as follows. 
A. Paper-based method 
In a conventional paper-based workflow, all patient 
related information, history and management details are 
recorded on paper sheets. This time-honoured method is 
simple to follow, inexpensive and has wide acceptance 
among healthcare workers around the globe. Although, easy 
to use and simple, there are few significant disadvantages 
with this method – (1) the data recorded by this method is 
often unstructured and non-standardized, this makes it 
difficult to standardize the care practices; (2) it is not 
possible to share the recorded information with multiple 
people simultaneously; (3) this method has been shown to 
be prone to manual errors, which could be a cause of legal 
litigations [9]; and (4) over a period of time, storage and 
retrieval of paper records become quite challenging, which 
makes it very difficult to use recorded information for any 
analytics or predictions. The most significant disadvantage 
from intrapartum monitoring perspective, is the inability to 
remotely share the critical patient information in real time 
for collaborative decision making. To make the paper-based 
method more structured and effective various different 
approaches have been tried in the past; one important 
initiative in this regard is the use of partograph for 
intrapartum monitoring. 
The partograph (a.k.a. partogram) is a simple, 
inexpensive tool, which provides health professionals a 
pictorial overview of the labour for early identification and 
diagnosis of the pathological labour. It was first proposed by 
Emanuel Friedman in 1954, as a cervicograph [10]. 
Subsequent 
large 
multi-centric 
prospective 
studies 
conducted by the World Health Organization (WHO) 
concluded that partograph was able to clearly differentiate 
between normal and abnormal progress in labour; the WHO 
recommended its universal application in all the labour 
rooms [11].  Following this, a number of studies were 
conducted across the globe to determine the effect of 
partograph use on perinatal morbidity and mortality; 
however, there is still no consensus in the literature on the 
effectiveness of the partograph [12].   
Despite its proven effectiveness in labour monitoring, 
partograph has not been utilized optimally in many settings 
across the world [12][13]. It has been observed, that the rate 
of partograph utilization during intrapartum monitoring 
varies significantly in different setups, being as high as 
97.8% in Niger study to as low as just 1.4% in a study done 
in Bangladesh [14]. The suboptimal utilization of 
partograph does not stop here, it has been observed that in 
most of the cases where partograph is used, the clinical 
parameters are either not recorded or recorded less 
frequently than prescribed.  It is well-documented that, 
when information on the partograph is incomplete, 
misinterpretation is more likely and it may lead to delayed 
diagnosis, inappropriate or no action, and consequent 
development of serious complications [15].  
Despite its effectiveness, sub-optimal utilization and 
poor recording of partograph parameters during labour is a 
matter of great concern for quality intrapartum care 
throughout the world. To address this issue it is important to 
understand the barriers for partograph use. Based on 
published literature, barriers to partograph use can be 
grouped in three broad categories – (1) implementation 
related barriers; (2) caregivers related barriers; and (3) 
clinical workflow-related barriers. Out of these barriers, the 
caregiver-related issues, mainly – (1) insufficient knowledge 
on how to use partograph [16][17]; (2) work overload due to 
152
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

shortage of staff [17]; and (3) time consuming nature of 
partograph plotting were found to be the most important 
barrier for effective partograph use [18]. 
To reduce barriers in partograph use and increase its 
utilization different approaches have been tried across the 
globe such as PartoPen, mlabour, DAKSH and E-
Partograph. These digital initiatives have rejuvenated 
interest in partograph and have shown a good user 
acceptance in feasibility studies [19][20].  
B. Telephonic communication 
Telephonic conversations among healthcare workers are 
now primary mode of remote consultation and monitoring in 
intrapartum care. This method is very simple, universally 
available and offers advantages of real time communication 
in a cost effective manner. Availability of mobile phones 
has further enhanced the reach of this method. However, 
there are few significant disadvantages with this method – 
(1) effectiveness of communication is limited by education 
and experience of involved parties; (2) limited access to 
information, 
leading 
to 
misunderstanding 
or 
underestimation of complications [21][22][23];  (3) it is not 
possible to record information for analysis, or audit or for 
medico-legal purpose. Moreover, telephonic triaging is 
considered as the most complex and vulnerable part of the 
out-of-hospital care process and has also been shown to be 
associated with patient dissatisfaction [21][24]. 
To make telephonic conversions more structured and 
effective various approaches have been tried. One important 
initiative in this regard is use of Situation–Background–
Assessment–Recommendation (SBAR) technique. SBAR 
allows the medical team to communicate with each other in 
a standard way by using a structured method for the transfer 
of vital information. SBAR technique was first used in 
military communication, followed by aviation industry for 
effective communication.  This has been later adopted by 
many health care settings as a communication tool. 
SBAR has been shown to be an excellent tool for 
information sharing and has found application in many sub 
specialties of medical care. It has been observed in a number 
of studies that SBAR technique has not only improved 
communication between healthcare professionals but also 
has improved the overall quality of care [25][26]. However, 
a few studies have also reported no or little improvement in 
overall communication or quality of care [22].  
SBAR is shown to be an effective communication tool, 
but it is not free of disadvantages. It has been observed that 
– (1) SBAR concept is difficult to learn and practice, 
therefore it requires extensive education and training along 
with frequent follow-ups for effective implementation [27]; 
(2) SBAR approach requires changes in nursing practice 
[27]; (3) it a is time consuming technique [26]. 
Despite its limitations, SBAR is a very effective tool for 
structured communication. To enhance it further there are 
now attempts to design it in the electronic form. The initial 
studies have indicated encouraging results in this regard 
[28]. 
C. mHealth applications in the intrapartum space 
The use of ICT in healthcare has grown exponentially in 
the last two decades; however, it still lacks way behind in 
comparison with other sectors like finance, retail, 
transportation etc. This is usually because of high cost, 
limited evidences of benefit, non-availability or complexity 
associated with the new technologies, and lack of end-user 
centric solutions [29]. Fortunately, mHealth has overcome 
many of these classical barriers with their ubiquitous 
presence and high acceptance among end users, even in the 
remote parts of the world [30]. Availability of cheap and 
portable computing platform in the form of mobile devices 
has further accelerated the reach of ICT in healthcare. While 
mHealth solutions have overcome several barriers of 
conventional communication tools, other barriers like 
intermittent power and connectivity, low literacy levels, low 
levels of technical training, and maintenance and scalability 
costs are yet to be fully solved.   
In the intrapartum space, applications like PartoPen [19], 
and DAKSH [20] are introduced to make communication 
structured and more effective. These application have 
mostly focused on digitization of labour records, partograph 
and usability aspects. However, none of them have 
systematically studied their applicability for remote 
intrapartum monitoring and decision making. Moreover, 
they have also not studied impact for various clinical and 
technical factors on decision agreement during remote 
intrapartum care.  
D. A summary of literature review and indentification of 
communication needs for the intrpartum care 
To improve communication during intrapartum care, 
many tools and techniques such as partograph, SBAR, and 
digital partograph have been introduced.  These are shown 
to be effective but underutilized due to time constrains and 
stiff learning curves. The literature indicates that the 
existing methods of communication have limitations when it 
comes to clear and real-time information exchange during 
intrapartum and have been shown to be either inadequate or 
cumbersome for this purpose [9][21]. Moreover, none of 
these techniques provide an integrated solution for 
intrapartum monitoring and decisions, making them of 
limited use for a hospital setup.  
An emergence of affordable smartphones and increase 
cellular connectivity and data transfer facility with 3G, 4G 
and upcoming 5G networks are likely to provide a 
significant boost to the use of the mobile platform for 
providing healthcare services. On other hand, lack of 
regulations or stringent regulations and data security issues 
are likely to be major hurdles for a wide spread use of this 
technology platform in healthcare. Going forward, one very 
important driver for this platform will be its high 
penetration in the developing countries, which have a high 
153
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

burden of diseases, limited human resources and funds to 
provide adequate healthcare. These countries are likely to be 
the primary consumers of mHealth solutions.   
A digital solution, which incorporates real time data 
sharing 
capacities 
with 
standardized 
communication 
(partograph and SBAR) and decision protocols along with 
seamless connectivity has potential to address information 
sharing need gaps and is likely to be a way for future of 
intrapartum communication. Taking positive trends from 
digital health journey so far, many mHealth models for 
information sharing and data processing are already in 
various stages of development. DLDS is one such mHealth 
solution for intrapartum care. The DLDS is designed to 
serve as an integrated solution for remote intrapartum 
monitoring and decision making.  
The primary objectives of this study were - (1) to 
evaluate the feasibility of the DLDS in information 
exchange among health care professionals for remote 
intrapartum monitoring and decision making; and (2) to 
study impact of various clinical and technical factors on 
decision agreements between the doctors.  We had a 
primary hypothesis that a remote doctor can be equally 
adept at decision making if he/she is provided with all the 
necessary information. The effectiveness of the DLDS was 
evaluated by comparing the decisions taken by a remote 
doctor (outside of a labour room) using intrapartum 
information provided by the DLDS to that of decisions 
taken by a doctor in a labour room (in-charge doctor). 
Impact of clinical and technical factors was studied by 
comparing decision agreements in different subcategories of 
these parameters. 
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
This section provides details about the study protocol and 
statistical methodology. 
A. Study design 
This observational study was conducted in a medical 
college hospital in Mysuru (Mysore), India in 2016. 
Inclusion criteria for the study were a live-singleton 
pregnancy with cervical dilatation > 4 cm but < 8 cm at the 
time of admission to a labour room. All the cases with 
planned caesarean section or cases with complication(s) or 
indication(s), which required immediate intervention or 
where a trial of labour was contraindicated were excluded. 
The study was conducted in accordance with local 
regulations after approval of an institutional review board. 
Subjects were enrolled only after obtaining informed consent 
in writing. 
B. Study protocol 
All the enrolled subjects were managed as per the 
established clinical workflows and protocols of the hospital. 
The subjects were regularly assessed by an in-charge doctor 
(doctor involved in an active management of a subject). 
After each assessment, the in-charge doctor took one 
management decision from four possible options - (1) “Wait 
and watch”, i.e., to continue the expectant management 
without any active intervention; (2) “Accelerate the labour”, 
i.e., accelerate the labour process either by means of artificial 
rupture of membranes or by medication; (3) go for “Assisted 
vaginal delivery”, i.e., use of forceps or vacuum extraction 
method for delivery; and (4) go for “Caesarean section”.  
All the subjects and newborns were monitored up to 24 
hours after delivery for any adverse outcomes. Outcomes 
monitored included obstructed labour, uterine rupture, post-
partum haemorrhage, stillbirth, early neonatal mortality, 
Apgar score at five minutes, and newborn’s admission to a 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU).  
For each subject, complete clinical history, examination, 
investigation details and management decision for each 
assessment were entered in the DLDS. To prevent any 
influence of the DLDS on clinical workflow and patient 
management an additional nurse (not actively involved with 
patient management) was appointed for data entry in the 
DLDS. The study workflow is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
C. DLDS application 
DLDS has been developed as a monitoring and 
communication solution for labour, delivery and immediate 
post-partum care. DLDS is a tablet-based solution built on an 
Android platform and allows secured sharing of information 
over a Wi-Fi network. Its intuitive design and user interface 
allows systematic and easy entry of the past and present 
history, examination and investigation details of the patient 
with an option to customize entry fields. It also provides an 
advanced visualization for various clinical trends and 
partograph. For guidance (e.g., normal ranges of clinical 
parameters, 
recommended 
frequency 
of 
intrapartum 
parameters assessment etc.) and alerts (e.g., alert and action 
line for partograph) the well-established guidelines and 
protocols given by the reputed organizations such as the 
WHO were incorporated in the DLDS. The DLDS can be 
used as a stand-alone delivery solution or could be integrated 
with maternal telehealth platforms such as Mobile Obstetrics 
Monitoring [31]. For the study, two DLDS tablets were used; 
the one in the labour room was designed to anonymize and 
securely transmit information to the other tablet over a 
wireless network connection. 
D. Workflow of the remote doctor 
A doctor who was not involved in the management of 
any of the study subjects was assigned as a ‘remote doctor’. 
To ensure that there is no discrepancy in decision making 
due to skill and knowledge differences, doctors with a 
similar profile as the in-charge doctor was selected as a 
remote doctor. The remote doctor was asked to use the 
second DLDS application to review case records (without 
management decision information) and enter one of the four 
management decisions in the DLDS. For each subject, the 
remote doctor reviewed the case records at the two instances, 
first at the time of admission and the last record before any 
active intervention or delivery (refer to Fig. 1). 
154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Workflow of the study. Decision 1 to 4 denotes one of the four possible management decisions taken by the in-charge doctor. The remote doctor 
reviewed the subject records using the Digital Labour and Delivery Solution (DLDS) at two instances and took one of the four possible management decisions. 
 
E. Potenial impact of clinical and technical factors on the 
decision agreements between the doctors 
Decision making during intrapartum phase is a complex 
procedure. Doctors’ consider many clinical parameters 
during decision making such as the age of the patient, 
obstetric history, presence of complications and so on.  To 
study the effectiveness of the DLDS in conveying this 
information, the decision agreements between the in-charge 
and the remote doctor in various sub-categories of clinical 
parameters were studied. Other than pre-mentioned adverse 
outcomes such as obstructed labour, uterine rupture, post-
partum haemorrhage, stillbirth, early neonatal mortality, 
Apgar score, and newborn’s admission to a NICU, other 
clinical parameters such as, mother’s age, parity, anemia 
(Haemoglobin <= 11 gm/dL) and presence of intrapartum 
complications (leaking/bleeding per vaginam) were also 
studied to find out their possible impact on decision 
agreement between the doctors. Impact of clinical factors 
was studied by comparing decision agreements in different 
subcategories of these parameters. 
Apart from the clinical parameters, technical factors 
such as a number of times a particular patient is 
assessed/observed with recording of vital parameters also 
has bearing on intrapartum decision making. This is 
especially important for remote decision making. To study 
the impact of a number of assessments on decision making, 
the cases were divided in three sub-categories based on the 
total number of observation records available and decision 
agreements between the doctors were studied in each of 
those sub-categories. 
F. Statistical analysis methodology 
The decisions taken by the doctors for each case were 
extracted from the two DLDS applications. The agreement 
between the in-charge doctor and the remote doctor on the 
four types of management decisions was assessed using the 
Cohen’s kappa statistics. However, as different types of 
management decisions have different implications in clinical 
practice, it is important to study not only overall agreement 
between the two doctors but also an extent of disagreement 
for individual decisions.  This is important as some decisions 
are closer to each other when compared to other decisions 
(e.g., a decision to go for “Caesarean section” is much closer 
to a decision to go for “Assisted vaginal delivery” in 
comparison to a decision of “Wait and watch”). 
  
As Kappa analysis does not account for the difference in 
decision types, weighted Kappa analysis was used for this 
purpose. The weights used to grade the differences in 
decisions are presented in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
WEIGHT MATRIX FOR DECISION GRADING  
Decision 
taken by 
in-charge 
doctor 
Decision taken by the remote doctors 
Wait and 
watch 
Accelera-
te labour 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
Caesarea-
n section 
Wait and 
watch 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Accelerate 
the labour 
1 
0 
1 
2 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
2 
1 
0 
1 
Caesarean 
section 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 
155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The agreement scale proposed by Landis and Koch was 
used to grade and compare the agreements between the 
doctors in various sub-categories of clinical and technical 
parameter [32]. All statistical analyses were done using 
Microsoft Office Excel-2016 and R (version 3.5.2). 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The study results are summarized in this section. 
A. Demographic characteristics of the study population  
In total, 110 subjects were enrolled for the study. The 
mean maternal age was 24.21 + 2.69 year, with a mean body 
mass index of 24.48 + 2.08 kg/m2. The nulliparous women 
constituted 30.43% of the study population. Gestational age 
was in the range of 37 to 41.6 weeks (median = 39.55 
weeks).  The mean birth weight of the neonates was 3037.98 
+ 345.25 g, with a range of 2320 g to 4040 g. 
B. Intrapartum monitoring and labour outcomes 
Throughout labour, all the subjects were monitored using 
the conventional workflows and protocols of the hospital. 
None of the cases had any significant antenatal complication. 
The average duration of labour was 7 hours 3 minutes (+ 63 
minutes). On an average, each subject was assessed 15.63 (+ 
0.518) times during labour, which comes out to be one 
assessment per 28 minutes. During each assessment, vital 
parameters, examination details and management decision 
for a subject were entered in the DLDS application. 
Five cases were delivered by caesarean section. Two 
cases were delivered by forceps extraction method. The rest 
of the cases were delivered vaginally.  Four cases had history 
of leaking/bleeding per vaginam. None of the other cases had 
any adverse intrapartum or immediate postpartum outcome.  
All the neonates had Apgar score of eight or more at five 
minutes and none of them required admission to a NICU.  
C. Agreement for the management decisions 
The remote doctor was asked to review 220 records (two 
records per case) using the DLDS.  The confusion matrix of 
the four management decisions taken by both the doctors is 
summarized in Table II.  
TABLE II.  
DECISION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE DOCTORS 
Decision 
taken by 
in-charge 
doctor 
Decision taken by the remote doctor  
(using DLDS) 
Total 
Wait and 
watch 
Accelera-
te labour 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
Caesarea-
n section 
Wait and 
watch 
103 
10 
0 
0 
113 
Accelerate 
the  labour 
11 
88 
0 
1 
100 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
1 
0 
1 
0 
2 
Caesarean 
section 
2 
2 
0 
1 
5 
Total 
117 
100 
1 
2 
220 
 
It was observed that for the “Wait and watch” decision 
the remote doctor was in a perfect agreement with the 
decisions of the in-charge doctor in 91.15% of total records; 
for “Accelerate the labour” this agreement was 88%.  
Agreements for “Assisted vaginal delivery” and “Caesarean 
section” were 50% and 20%, respectively.  Nevertheless, as 
these two categorizes had very few samples (not even 30 
samples, a general requirement for statistical analysis) it is 
difficult to comment on their statistical significance. 
The overall agreement between the two doctors for all the 
decisions combined was 0.764 using unweighted Cohen’s 
kappa statistics. The weighted Cohen’s kappa between the 
two doctors was 0.723.  
D. Impact of clincial parameters on the agreement 
between the doctors 
In this study following clinical parameters, mother’s age 
parity, anemia (Haemoglobin <= 11 gm/dL) and presence of 
intrapartum complications (leaking/bleeding per vaginam) 
were studied to find out their possible impact on decision 
agreement between the doctors. All of these parameters were 
divided in two sub-categories to compare decision 
agreements. In study population, none of the subject was 
over 35 years of age and only a few were above 30 years; 
therefore, 25 years was used as a threshold to divide subjects 
in two sub-categories.  
The unweighted Cohen’s kappa statistics between the in-
charge and remote doctor for various sub-categories of 
clinical parameters are summarized in Table III. It was 
observed that the in-charge and remote doctor had 
comparable agreements for all the studied clinical parameters 
with substantial agreements in all the sub-categories. 
TABLE III.  
IMPACT OF CLINCIAL PARAMETERS ON AGGREMENT 
BETWEEN THE DOCTORS 
Clinical 
parameters 
Sub category 
No. of 
decision 
points 
Cohen’s 
kappa 
Age (year) 
Age <= 25  
132 
0.775 
Age > 25 
88 
0.745 
Parity 
Nulliparous 
80 
0.747 
Multiparous 
140 
0.774 
Anaemia (Hb <= 
11 gm/dL) 
Yes 
22 
0.748 
No  
198 
0.759 
Complications 
(leaking/bleeding 
PV) 
Yes 
8 
0.800 
No 
212 
0.755 
Hb = Haemoglobin, PV = Per vaginam. 
 
As none of the cases had obstructed labour, uterine 
rupture, post-partum haemorrhage, stillbirth, early neonatal 
mortality, low Apgar score, and newborn’s admission to a 
NICU we could not study the possible impact of these 
complications on decision agreement between the doctors.  
 
156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

E. Impact of total number of assessments records on the 
agreements between the doctors 
For remote monitoring it is important that a doctor has 
frequent data from the labour room. To study impact of a 
number of assessment records on the decision agreements, 
the cases were divided in three subgroups based on the total 
number of assessments for each case. The unweighted 
Cohen’s kappa statistics between two doctors for the three 
sub-categories are summarized in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
IMPACT OF TOTAL ASSESSMENTS RECORDS ON THE 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE DOCTORS 
Parameter 
Sub category 
No. of 
decision 
points 
Cohen’s 
kappa 
Number of 
assessment 
(records) 
<= 10 
assessments 
24 
0.576 
11 - 20 
assessments 
160 
0.779 
>= 21 
assessments 
36 
0.837 
 
As per the Landis and Koch scale, a significant 
improvement was observed in the agreement between the 
in-charge and remote doctor as the total number of available 
assessments records increased. For the group with less than 
or equal to 10 assessments the doctors had just a moderate 
agreement among themselves, whereas for the group with 
more than 20 assessments the agreement was almost perfect.   
V. 
DISCUSSION 
One very crucial part of communication is transmission 
or exchange of information in a structured way for effective 
decision making. Unfortunately, the existing modes of 
intrapartum communications are shown to be insufficient for 
this purpose [21][22] making them a less reliable medium for 
information exchange [9][23]. The main objective of this 
study was to evaluate feasibility of the DLDS application for 
remote intrapartum monitoring and decision making.  This 
was done by comparing decisions taken by a remote doctor 
using the DLDS to that of the in-charge doctor. In this 
regard, a substantial agreement was observed between the 
two doctors for intrapartum decision making. This 
demonstrates the feasibility of the DLDS for remote 
intrapartum monitoring and decision making.  
It was observed that the agreement between the doctors 
for non-operative mode of deliveries was significantly higher 
than for operative deliveries. This finding is in line with the 
published literature, where complete agreement for caesarean 
section decision has been observed to be about 65% [2].  
Nevertheless, the lower agreement for operative deliveries 
(in particular more decisions of “Assisted vaginal deliveries” 
and “Caesarean section” by the in-charge doctor) needs 
further investigation. This could be due to the remote doctor 
missing some crucial information or the doctor in-charge 
getting negatively influenced by real-life factors such as 
stress of other emergencies to attend, lack of sleep, or 
pressure from the healthcare workers or patients. However, 
as only seven cases were delivered by a non-vaginal route, it 
is difficult to generalize findings of this study to mode of 
deliveries other than vaginal. 
A number of clinical and technical factors can have a 
major impact of intrapartum decision making. To study 
effectiveness of the DLDS in conveying this information, 
the decision agreement between the doctors in the various 
sub-categories of the clinical parameters were assessed. It 
was observed that the in-charge and remote doctor had 
comparable agreements in all the sub-categories of the 
clinical parameters, indicating minimal impact of clinical 
parameters on decision agreement between the doctors. This 
also indicates that DLDS was able to convey the appropriate 
information to the remote doctor in all the sub-categories of 
the clinical parameters. For total number of assessment, a 
significant improvement was observed in the agreement 
between the in-charge and remote doctor as the total number 
of assessments increased. This clearly indicates advantage 
of having more data points in decision making and also 
makes a strong case for having frequent and automated 
monitoring of vital parameters during labour.  
Small sample size from a single center and recruitment of 
just one doctor in the labour room and one for remote 
assessment are two important limitations of our study. 
However, as this was a feasibility study we first wanted to 
test and verify our concept before conducting a large study 
with multiple doctors. Despite having a small sample size, 
we compared 220 independent decisions points between the 
two doctors. Furthermore, as none of the cases in our study 
had any adverse outcome, it was not possible to assess 
adequacy and quality of information provided by the DLDS 
to the remote doctor in such situations. Nevertheless, it was 
observed that the remote doctor could use the DLDS 
application for decision making for all the sub-categories of 
the clinical parameters.  
On the study design, the use of an additional nurse for 
data entry is likely to have contributed to better and more 
comprehensive data gathering, which may not have been 
possible in conventional workflows. However, having a 
complete and accurate data entry is prerequisite for any 
digital solution and it is bound to have some change in the 
existing workflow.  It also brings the advantage of enhanced 
patient 
safety 
by 
improving 
the 
communication, 
comprehensiveness, and organization of patient notes [33]. 
Moreover, it has been also indicated that introduction of 
digital records are likely to reduce risk and liability for 
obstetric providers, especially in the intrapartum care [34]. 
This study has also demonstrated that more data led to a 
better decision agreement, which further supports advantage 
of complete and accurate data entry in decision making.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The strength of this study lies in being one of the first 
studies where the feasibility of a telehealth solution for 
remote intrapartum monitoring and decision making has 
been studied systematically. The finding of this study could 
serve as an important input for further research in this area. 
In the future, we would like to extend this work on a larger 
sample size with recruitment of more remote and in-charge 
157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

doctors.  Moreover, we would also like to conduct a 
dedicated usability study to understand and improve user 
interactions with the DLDS.  
To conclude, our study has demonstrated a substantial 
agreement in the intrapartum decisions taken by a remote 
doctor using the DLDS and decisions taken by a doctor in a 
labour room.  The study has also demonstrated that the in-
charge and remote doctor had comparable agreements in all 
the sub-categories of the clinical parameters. This indicates 
that DLDS was able to covey the appropriate information to 
the remote doctor in the different sub-categories of the 
clinical parameters. The study has also clearly indicated 
advantage of more data points in decision making. This 
supports the hypothesis that it is possible to remotely 
monitor intrapartum labour progress and take appropriate 
decisions if a remote doctor is provided with all necessary 
information. It further supports use of telehealth solutions 
such as DLDS for remote intrapartum monitoring. 
Considering limited resources and shortage of trained 
healthcare workers in the developing countries, we believe 
that there is a huge need for intrapartum telehealth solutions 
in 
such countries. The study recommends further 
investigation of DLDS for a general purpose remote 
intrapartum monitoring. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We duly acknowledge help of the staff of JSS, Medical 
college, Mysuru, India for this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Hiwale, N. Krishnan, J. R. Addepalli, and S. Ulman, 
“mHealth Solution for Remote Intrapartum Monitoring: A 
Feasibility Study,” in eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, Athens,  Greece, 2019, pp. 118–122. 
[2] 
S. A. Pillai et al., “Decisions to Perform Emergency 
Caesarean 
Sections 
at 
a 
University 
Hospital: 
Do 
obstetricians agree?,” Sultan Qaboos Univ. Med. J., vol. 16, 
no. 1, pp. e42-46, Feb. 2016. 
[3] 
J. E. Lawn et al., “Two million intrapartum-related 
stillbirths and neonatal deaths: where, why, and what can be 
done?,” Int. J. Gynaecol. Obstet. Off. Organ Int. Fed. 
Gynaecol. Obstet., vol. 107 Suppl 1, pp. S5-18, S19, Oct. 
2009. 
[4] 
J.-M. Guise and S. Segel, “Teamwork in obstetric critical 
care,” Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet. Gynaecol., vol. 22, no. 
5, pp. 937–951, 2008. 
[5] 
L. Lingard et al., “Communication failures in the operating 
room: an observational classification of recurrent types and 
effects,” Qual. Saf. Health Care, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 330–
334, 2004. 
[6] 
S. Kvarnström, “Difficulties in collaboration: A critical 
incident study of interprofessional healthcare teamwork,” J. 
Interprof. Care, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 191–203, 2008. 
[7] 
M. 
Zwarenstein, 
J. 
Goldman, 
and 
S. 
Reeves, 
“Interprofessional collaboration: effects of practice-based 
interventions on professional practice and healthcare 
outcomes,” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., no. 3, p. 
CD000072, 2009. 
[8] 
J. Commission, “Sentinel Event Alert, Issue# 30, Preventing 
Infant Death and Injury During Delivery,” Wash. DC Jt. 
Comm., 2004. 
[9] 
T. Schabetsberger et al., “From a paper-based transmission 
of discharge summaries to electronic communication in 
health care regions,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 75, no. 3–4, pp. 
209–215, Mar. 2006. 
[10] 
E. Friedman, “The graphic analysis of labor,” Am. J. Obstet. 
Gynecol., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 1568–1575, Dec. 1954. 
[11] 
“World Health Organization partograph in management of 
labour. World Health Organization Maternal Health and 
Safe Motherhood Programme,” Lancet, vol. 343, no. 8910, 
pp. 1399–1404, Jun. 1994. 
[12] 
T. Lavender, A. Hart, and R. M. D. Smyth, “Effect of 
partogram use on outcomes for women in spontaneous 
labour at term,” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., vol. 7, p. 
CD005461, 2013. 
[13] 
E. Ollerhead and D. Osrin, “Barriers to and incentives for 
achieving partograph use in obstetric practice in low- and 
middle-income countries: a systematic review,” BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 281, Aug. 2014. 
[14] 
E. Landry, C. Pett, R. Fiorentino, J. Ruminjo, and C. 
Mattison, “Assessing the quality of record keeping for 
cesarean deliveries: results from a multicenter retrospective 
record review in five low-income countries,” BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 139, Apr. 2014. 
[15] 
F. Ngabo et al., “Quality of Care for Prevention and 
Management 
of 
Common 
Maternal 
and 
Newborn 
Complications,” USAID, Mar. 2012. 
[16] 
A. C. Umezulike, H. E. Onah, and J. M. Okaro, “Use of the 
partograph among medical personnel in Enugu, Nigeria,” 
Int. J. Gynaecol. Obstet. Off. Organ Int. Fed. Gynaecol. 
Obstet., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 203–205, May 1999. 
[17] 
B. Kushwah, A. P. Singh, S. Singh, B. Kushwah, S. 
Campus, and R. Huzur, “The partograph: an essential yet 
underutilized tool,” J Evol Med Dent Sci, vol. 2, no. 24, pp. 
4373–4379, 2013. 
[18] 
M. M. Opiah, A. B. Ofi, E. J. Essien, and E. Monjok, 
“Knowledge and utilization of the partograph among 
midwives in the Niger Delta Region of Nigeria,” Afr. J. 
Reprod. Health, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 125–132, Mar. 2012. 
[19] 
H. Underwood, J. Ong’ech, G. Omoni, S. Wakasiaka, S. R. 
Sterling, and J. K. Bennett, “Improving partograph training 
and use in Kenya using the partopen digital pen system,” in 
Biomedical 
Engineering 
Systems 
and 
Technologies, 
Springer, 2014, pp. 407–422. 
[20] 
M. Singh, “DAKSH: Digital Partograph and Intrapartum 
Monitoring Mobile Application,” p. 7, 2019. 
[21] 
P. Giesen et al., “Safety of telephone triage in general 
practitioner cooperatives: do triage nurses correctly estimate 
urgency?,” Qual. Saf. Health Care, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 181–
184, 2007. 
[22] 
E. Joffe, J. P. Turley, K. O. Hwang, T. R. Johnson, C. W. 
Johnson, and E. V. Bernstam, “Evaluation of a problem-
specific SBAR tool to improve after-hours nurse-physician 
phone communication: a randomized trial,” Jt. Comm. J. 
Qual. Patient Saf., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 495–501, 2013. 
[23] 
K. Nagpal et al., “Information transfer and communication 
in surgery: a systematic review,” Ann. Surg., vol. 252, no. 2, 
pp. 225–239, 2010. 
[24] 
R. Leibowitz, S. Day, and D. Dunt, “A systematic review of 
the effect of different models of after-hours primary 
158
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

medical care services on clinical outcome, medical 
workload, and patient and GP satisfaction,” Fam. Pract., 
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 311–317, 2003. 
[25] 
K. De Meester, M. Verspuy, K. G. Monsieurs, and P. Van 
Bogaert, “SBAR improves nurse–physician communication 
and reduces unexpected death: A pre and post intervention 
study,” Resuscitation, vol. 84, no. 9, pp. 1192–1196, 2013. 
[26] 
S. M. Renz, M. P. Boltz, L. M. Wagner, E. A. Capezuti, and 
T. E. Lawrence, “Examining the feasibility and utility of an 
SBAR protocol in long-term care,” Geriatr. Nur. (Lond.), 
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 295–301, 2013. 
[27] 
B. B. Pope, L. Rodzen, and G. Spross, “Raising the SBAR: 
how better communication improves patient outcomes,” 
Nursing2014, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 41–43, 2008. 
[28] 
R. S. Panesar, B. Albert, C. Messina, and M. Parker, “The 
Effect of an Electronic SBAR Communication Tool on 
Documentation of Acute Events in the Pediatric Intensive 
Care Unit,” Am. J. Med. Qual., p. 1062860614553263, 
2014. 
[29] 
S. Hiwale, S. Ulman, and K. Subbaraman, “Barriers to 
Adoptions of IoT-Based Solutions for Disease Screening,” 
in Pre-Screening Systems for Early Disease Prediction, 
Detection, and Prevention, Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 
2019, pp. 50–68. 
[30] 
S Vishwanath, K Vaidya, R Nawal, A Kumar, “Touching 
lives through mobile health-Assessment of the global 
market opportunity.” Pricewaterhouse Coopers, 2012. 
[31] 
“Philips - Mobile Obstetrics Monitoring Maternal telehealth 
software,” Philips. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.philips.co.id/healthcare/product/HC867055/mo
bile-obstetrics-monitoring-maternal-telehealth-software. 
[Accessed: 23-Jul-2019]. 
[32] 
J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer 
agreement for categorical data,” Biometrics, vol. 33, no. 1, 
pp. 159–174, Mar. 1977. 
[33] 
J. Cowan, “Clinical governance and clinical documentation: 
still a long way to go?,” Br. J. Clin. Gov., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 
179–182, 2000. 
[34] 
J. Stausberg, D. Koch, J. Ingenerf, and M. Betzler, 
“Comparing paper-based with electronic patient records: 
lessons learned during a study on diagnosis and procedure 
codes,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 470–
477, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
159
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

