222
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Real World is a Messy Place: 
The Challenges of Technology Use in Care Provision 
 
                                                                                                                  
Anthony P. Glascock 
Department of Anthropology 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
email: glascock@drexel.edu 
 
Abstract—This paper reports on the ongoing demonstration 
project to assess the effectiveness of three distinct eHealth 
technologies to contain costs, make the provision of care more 
efficient, and to contribute to the wellbeing of individuals with 
intellectual and developmental disabilities and severe mental 
illness by increasing their independence. The challenges of 
providing care for these populations is discussed, as well as the 
demographic trends that will, over time, not only result in a 
threefold increase in the number of individuals in populations, 
but dramatically impact the cost of their care. Data collected 
from 14 different locations over the past three years will be 
discussed in order to determine if the selected technologies 
resulted in an improvement in living conditions and wellbeing, 
and to judge the acceptance of the technologies by both staff and 
customers. Findings indicate that the technologies have largely 
exceeded expectations resulting in plans to expand the project to 
other facilities, to build a new residence in which all the tested 
technologies will be installed and to begin to move beyond 
company owned facilities into residences within the community. 
 
Keywords—real world; intellectual and developmental disabilities; 
severe and persistent mental illness; eHealth; demonstration 
project; multiple technologies; financial impact; business decisions 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The impetus behind the inception of this Project was the 
recognition that the only way to provide cost effective care to 
individuals with disabilities and severe mental illness, is to 
incorporate appropriate technologies into existing care models 
which is the driving force for a multi-year, multi-site 
demonstration project being undertaken in the eastern United 
States.  Findings from the first Stage of the Project [1] were so 
encouraging that a second Stage is underway and a third being 
planned.  
The urgency to contain the cost of delivering care to a 
wide range of populations has seen the development of new 
technologies, as well as the innovative use of existing 
technologies, in an ever enlarging number of care models. 
Thus, it is not surprising that new and reconfigured eHealth 
technologies are increasingly being used to provide care and 
services to individuals with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities (IDD) and those with Severe and Persistent 
Mental Illness (SMI) [2][3]. As in the use of new 
technologies, in each and every care model there are 
challenges to using innovative  technologies  in addressing the 
needs of  these  two  populations, but the necessity to  contain, 
 
Rene A. Burke, Sherri T. Portnoy, Shaleea Shields 
NHS Human Services 
Lafayette Hill, PA 19444, USA 
email: rburke1@nhsonline.org, SPortnoy@nhsonline.org, 
sshields@nhsonline.org 
 
and if possible, reduce the cost of providing care to these 
populations, makes the use of technology, in some form, 
inevitable. However, three different trends intersect in such a 
way that result in the urgency to develop more efficient care 
models for the IDD and SMI populations: the cost of care; the 
aging of the two populations, and a reduction in the number of 
qualified staff providing care to the IDD and SMI populations. 
First, because of a wide-spread belief that very large state-
run institutions resulted in dehumanizing individuals with 
disabilities, deinstitutionalization, in both the United States 
and Europe took place from the mid-1960’s through the 
1970’s. This process of deinstitutionalization had a dramatic 
impact on the care models employed [4][5]. Between 1967 
and 2008, the population of individuals with disabilities in 
large state-run institutions declined from a peak of 194,650 to 
32,909 
in 
2009 
[6]. 
The 
impact 
of 
this 
massive 
deinstitutionalization on the cost of care varied significantly, 
but the impact on the care model was significant as most 
individuals with IDD and SMI moved into the community, 
many living in some form of group home. The number of 
individuals living in any particular group home varies based 
upon the needs of the individuals. The most common number 
of residents is four with some group homes having as many as 
eight to ten residents. In the most severe cases, an individual 
lives alone in a residence with 24 hour supervision. Although 
costs of providing care to the residents in group homes vary 
based upon the needs and location, the average cost is between 
$40-50,000 per year per resident and if an individual needs to 
live alone, the cost can top $150,000 per year [5][7]. 
Second, the rapidly increasing number of such individuals 
brought about by the same demographic factors as for the 
general population is adding even greater cost to the care of 
IDD and SMI populations [8]. In particular, it is estimated that 
the number of adults with disabilities will almost double 
between 2000 and 2030 to over 1.2 million [9]. As individuals 
with IDD or SMI age, they are as susceptible to chronic 
illnesses as the general population, but the cost of caring for 
them is much greater. For example, care for an individual with 
IDD who has congestive heart failure costs approximately 
eight times more than for a person without IDD [5]. The ratios 
for other chronic diseases and individuals with IDD versus 
SMI vary somewhat, but the reasons are consistent. Many 
individuals with IDD and SMI make poor lifestyle decisions—
use tobacco products and abuse alcohol and drugs. In addition, 
many are unable to self-manage disease, e.g., adhere to 

223
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
complicated medication regimes and follow complex health 
care instructions. Thus, greater cost of care for individuals 
with IDD and SMI when combined with the cost of residential 
care in general, results in a compelling reason for attempting 
to use technology to contain costs. 
A third reason is that there is an increasing imbalance 
between the growing needs of the IDD and SMI populations 
and the number of qualified staff available to provide care. 
Projections from the federal government suggest that the need 
for trained staff will increase by over 30% in the next decade, 
while the supply of individuals who traditionally have filled 
these jobs is expected to increase only by 7% [10]. In addition, 
the high turnover rate for individuals caring for these 
populations adds another dimension to the staffing challenges. 
It is estimated that turnover for direct support professionals 
(DSPs) ranges between 50-70% depending on the specific jobs 
undertaken, e.g., residential care versus in-home care. This 
high turnover rate adds at least $2,500 in direct expenses plus 
a minimum of an additional $1,000 of indirect expenditures 
for an organization to replace a single DSP, thus adding to the 
ever increasing cost of providing care to these populations 
[11].   
In the next section, a brief discussion of attempts at using 
technology to provide care for these populations is 
accompanied by a short description of the the overall goals 
and objectives to be achieved by the introduction of the new 
technologies. In Section III, the different Projects undertaken 
are described along with the care models employed and the 
technologies introduced. The next section discusses the 
methodologies employed in gathering data on the individuals 
with disabilities and mental illness and staff in order to assess 
the effectiveness of the technologies in care delivery, while 
Section V offers a discussion of findings for the first two 
Stages. What has been learned from the analysis is 
summarized in the Discussion Section, while plans for the 
roll-out of the technologies to other facilities and the financial 
model to pay for this expansion comprise the concluding 
section. 
 
II.  THE PROJECT    
  
 Even though NHS Human Services, through its 
subsidiaries, is one of the United States’ leading non-profit 
providing education and human services to individuals with 
special needs., it was clear by 2012 that to be able to continue 
to provide cost-effective and high quality care to individuals 
with disabilities and severe mental illness, it was essential to 
introduce new and innovative technologies into existing care 
models.  As a result, in the spring of that year, the organization 
created 
an 
Assistive 
Technology 
Executive 
Steering 
Committee to plan a demonstration project.  One of the first 
tasks of this Committee was to assess the state of related work. 
 
A.  Related Work 
 
It was quickly apparent that there had been few other 
attempts to utilize technologies in a similar manner. From its 
inception, the Project was viewed as a demonstration project 
to assess both the benefit that could be gained by 
incorporating specific technologies into existing care models, 
and the ability of the company to pay for the use of the 
technologies. As such, the Project was neither a pilot study of 
the use of a specific technology within a controlled 
environment [12], nor a short-term, funded research project 
[13], nor a study relying on a small number of volunteers to 
evaluate the effectiveness of a given approach to the use of a 
selected technology [14]. Thus, previous studies were of only 
limited help in the planning and implementation of the project.  
Certainly, the fact that the selected technologies had all 
been tested and were all commercially available was a definite 
advantage for the Project and saved much time and money. 
However, the downside was that many of the technologies had 
been tested by a relatively small number of individuals, 
usually 
20-50, 
and 
in 
controlled 
environments 
[15][12][13][14]. Given that the goal of the Project was for the 
selected technologies to be used in the provision of care for 
hundreds and, eventually, for thousands of individuals within 
the normal care model and not in a laboratory or controlled 
environment proved challenging. It is one thing for a 
technology to be effective in a controlled environment being 
used by carefully selected individuals, and another to be 
incorporating the technology into existing care models within 
the community.  
Another limitation on the usefulness of related works was 
that the majority of studies of individuals with disabilities that 
exist focus on children within the context of school 
[16][17][18], rather than adults living in the community. Some 
studies of younger populations did prove to be of limited 
utility because of the convergence of similar technologies, i.e., 
iPad, but most were too focused on educational issues to be 
that helpful. A final limitation of the literature, even if the 
populations were similar, was that the rapid advances in 
technology made many of the studies, even if conducted less 
than a decade ago, out of date [19][20][21]. 
Nevertheless, the related work did confirm one of the 
basic premises that motivated the Project in the first place, that 
the utilization of technologies in the provision of care to 
individuals with disabilities and severe mental illness is 
limited [22]. Given the trends outlined in the Introduction, this 
underutilization 
of 
technology 
must 
be 
rectified. 
Consequently, the effort to use a series of technologies within 
the NHS care system should be viewed as more than just a 
localized demonstration project; it is, in reality, a test of the 
resolve to make these technologies widely available within the 
larger IDD and mental health communities [23]. 
 
B.  The Strategic Plan 
 
The planning process was inclusive and there was a 
recognition that in order to “do it right” it would take time to 
put everything in place. The first step was to encourage 
employees to propose sites at which new technologies could 
be used. During the remainder of 2012, proposals were 
received and evaluated based upon specific criteria: 
administrative and staff buy-in; existence of suitable 

224
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
technology; evidence that technology would enhance care 
provision; evidence that, if successful, the technology could be 
used at a large number of other care facilities within the 
organization; and a financial model showing that the 
technology was sustainable—the organization would be 
reimbursed for its use. Finally, there was an attempt to achieve 
a rough balance among the different care models employed 
throughout the organization. This process took over a year 
which afforded a thorough evaluation of the resources 
available at each of the selected sites. The final decision was 
confirmed at an all-day meeting of administrators and 
representatives from each of the chosen sites in the fall of 
2013. 
 
C.  The Project Goals 
 
As planning progressed, three main goals emerged: 1) to 
determine which, if any, of the technologies being tested can 
allow for an improvement in living conditions and the care 
being delivered in the selected facilities; 2) to judge the 
acceptance of the technologies by both the staff and 
individuals with disabilities and mental illness; and 3) to 
assess whether the technologies should be rolled out to other 
facilities with similar care models. In order for any of the 
Projects to be deemed successful, it was necessary to 
determine if the new technologies allowed for an improvement 
in living conditions and the care being delivered in that the 
individuals with disabilities and mental illness express that 
their lives are better after the introduction of the technologies 
than before. It was also necessary to determine if care 
delivered is more timely, efficient and cost effective than the 
care delivered without the technologies.  
It was also essential to ascertain if staff could properly use 
the new technology, that they believed in its effectiveness, and 
accepted that the technology would require that they did their 
jobs differently. Likewise, it was necessary to determine if the 
individuals with disabilities and mental illness accepted the 
use of the new technologies in the care that they received, if 
they were intimidated or not by the technologies and if they 
would willingly comply with requirements for the use of the 
technologies. Finally, even if it was determined that the new 
technologies provided improved care, were accepted by staff 
and individuals with disabilities and mental illness, it was still 
vital to find out if the care provided with the new technology 
was reimbursable as a billable expense.   
 
D. Project Timeline 
 
Given 
the 
challenges 
of 
incorporating 
multiple 
technologies into existing care models, the Assistive 
Technology Executive Steering Committee decided that it was 
best to start slowly with a gradual roll-out, rather than trying 
to introduce multiple technologies simultaneously. Although 
this gradual approach meant that some components of the 
Project would begin before others, thus risking the loss of 
initial enthusiasm, the ability to focus on getting one 
technology up-and-running, instead of having to deal with 
potential problems with three technologies, appeared prudent.  
In addition, a preliminary plan was developed for the roll-
out of the technologies to other locations, if, of course, they 
proved successful in providing care and were cost effective. 
Once again, a measured approach was taken and a two-step 
roll-out envisioned. The first expansion would be to a small 
number of locations that mirrored the initial test sites in care 
model, size and staffing. 
Rather than create a formal timeline for the Project, a 
three-stage timeline that relied on measured success, rather 
than arbitrary dates was formulated. This flexibility was 
possible because the Project was largely self-funded and 
because long-term success in incorporating the selected 
technologies into the organization’s care models far 
outweighed any short-term success brought about by reaching 
arbitrary benchmarks. 
 
III.  THE TECHNOLOGIES AND LOCATIONS 
 
After reviewing the submitted proposals, the Assistive 
Technology Executive Steering narrowed the proposals to 
three that were to be part of the first phase of the Project: 1)  
the Communication Technologies Project (CTP); 2) the 
Smarthome Project (SHP); and 3) the Biometrics Project 
(BMP). Based upon the desire to stagger the start dates of the 
three Projects, it was decided to begin the SHP early in the 
summer of 2014, followed by the CTP in late summer and the 
BMP later in the fall. Although the SHP began slightly before 
the CTP, the CTP has advanced at a faster rate than the other 
two Projects which were delayed by unanticipated problems in 
the renovation of facilities and the equipment to be used to 
monitor vital signs.  
 
A.  The Communication Technologies Project (CTP) 
 
The CTP began in the late summer of 2014 with the 
selection of sites and upgrading of wireless routers.  Work 
continued during that summer with the focus of training staff 
in the use of AbleLink software [24] that had been selected for 
use and during the fall of 2014, staff and individuals with 
disabilities were surveyed and the Glasgow Depression Scale 
(GDS) administered to all individuals with disabilities 
participating in the Project [25][26]. The main goals of the 
CTP was fourfold: to enable individuals with disabilities to 
stay in touch with family and friends; to allow a greater ability 
for them to communicate with members of the support 
services team; to encourage them to acquire basic computer 
skills; and to permit safe and secure access to the internet in 
order for them to pursue their particular interests. Seven sites 
were selected for inclusion in the first phase of the CTP. Five 
of the sites are group homes and two program centers, all in 
Western Pennsylvania. The group homes are single sex 
residences for between three and six individuals. In contrast, 
the two program centers serve between 90 and 130 individuals 
on any given day. 
The hardware introduced into the five group homes were 
iPads and laptops while at the day programs, all-in-one 
desktop computers, laptops, tablets and iPads were made 
available. The hardware was customized to meet the needs of 

225
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the IDD population, e.g., large keyboards, headphones. After 
much research, a software package designed specially for 
individuals 
with 
cognitive 
disabilities—AbleLink—was 
purchased and installed. AbleLink allowed individuals to 
experience a more self-determined and fulfilled life through an 
empowering technology characterized by a person-centered 
design philosophy. Several AbleLink applications were 
installed that allowed individuals to use email (voice 
activated), Skype and webcam broadcasts, along with 
providing prompts for tasks that increased independence.  
In 2015, the CTP was expanded to include three 
additional locations in Pennsylvania and Virginia: a large 
congregate intermediate care facility (ICF) and two adult 
training facilities (ATF). The ICF has 103 residents, of whom 
30 are included in the project while the Pennsylvania ATF has 
29 individuals receiving services of whom 16 individuals are 
participating in the Project and the Virginia ATF has twenty-
two individuals receiving services with 10 participants in the 
Project. The ATFs are non-residential centers which provide 
services in functional activities, assistance in meeting personal 
needs and assistance in performing basic daily activities to 
individuals who are 59 years of age or younger and who do 
not have a dementia-related disease as a primary diagnosis. 
Unlike the first Stage, rather than laptops, tablets and iPads 
being 
made 
available 
to 
the 
participants, 
AbleLink 
applications were enabled on all-in-one computers. This 
configuration was deemed to be the most useful equipment for 
their client base and size within these facilities. 
Three additional sites have been selected for inclusion in 
the third Stage of the CTP: a large congregate intermediate 
care facility with an estimated 30 participants; a large adult 
training facility with an estimated 60 participants and a 
smaller adult training facility with an estimated 29 
participants. Currently, funding is being secured to enhance 
the internet capabilities in the three facilities, and training of 
the identified staff has begun with the goal of all three 
facilities being up-and-running in the fall of 2016. 
 
B.  Smarthome Project (SHP) 
 
The SHP required a remodeling of a residential unit 
which faced construction problems delaying the start of the 
Project several months. However, by the summer of 2014, the 
four residents were able to move into the remodeled facility 
and be administered surveys and the GDS. The main 
objectives of the SHP were to increase the independence of 
the four IDD residents and to conserve energy through the use 
of “green” appliances and more efficient heating and air 
conditioning systems (HVAC). To achieve the goal of 
increasing the independence of residents, a Smart TV was 
installed, iPads and remote controls for lighting and window 
blinds were made available to them. Additionally, motorized 
cabinetry and cook tops and sinks were installed in a lowered 
position to allow wheelchair access. Finally, to reduce the 
amount of energy consumed, remote control HVAC systems 
and smaller and more easily accessible dishwashers and 
refrigerators were installed. 
NHS' second Smarthome Project is currently in the 
planning phase.  Over $650,000 in funding has been secured 
to build a brand new facility, as opposed to retrofitting an 
existing residence.  The building plans include a six bedroom 
residence to support the six individuals who will live in the 
wheelchair accessible home.  The home will be designed to 
include: a fully accessible kitchen; home automation system; 
tintable 
window 
technology/moveable 
blinds; 
green 
components; more accessible bathroom components; and the 
CTP technology and biometrics system used in the other two 
projects. 
Given the cost of building new Smarthome facilities, 
there are no concrete plans to expand the SHP beyond the 
currently planned location. However, the goal is to gradually 
include smart technology in renovations of existing homes and 
build new facilities incorporating all previously used smart 
technologies that have proven to be sustainable and useful in 
the everyday lives of the residents, as well as additional 
technologies that can increase independence. 
 
C  Biometric Project (BMP) 
 
The BMP began in the summer of 2014 with the 
development of protocols, the installation of the technology, 
training of staff, retrospective data collection, the creation of 
event and error forms and administering surveys to residents 
and staff and the GDS to the residents. The main goal of the 
Project was to use technology to reduce the number of 
emergency room visits and hospitalizations and thus, by doing 
so, curtail costs by delivering care in a more timely manner 
and at a lower level of care [27]. Two group homes with four 
residents each were selected for inclusion along with a Long 
Term Structured Residence (LTSR), a locked facility that 
served eight male individuals with serious and persistent 
mental illness. The technology installed was a basic vital signs 
monitoring system including a digital scale, blood pressure 
cuff and pulse oximeters. The software included with the 
system allowed data to be sent to an external location and was 
configured to send alerts when the data collected went outside 
preconfigured parameters.   
Planning for Stage 2 of the BMP began in 2015, but the 
project has yet to get underway because of the complexity of 
the facility selected. The location is a large adult behavioral 
health outpatient clinic serving over 400 individuals. The goal 
is to use a vital signs kiosk for the purpose of capturing basic 
biometric measures, initially blood pressure and weight, 
during the intake procedure. The plan is to electronically 
transfer the collected data to both the individual’s psychiatrist 
and general practitioner in real time and be available in the 
individual electronic record. In addition, the goal is to be able 
to display a longitudinal record on the vital signs and have a 
warning system that indicates when any one of the vital signs 
is outside the normal range.  
Preliminary plans for a Third Stage for the BMP are under 
way, in which a vital signs monitoring system is installed in 
the residences of individuals living in the community. The 
goal of the Stage is to have the data collected sent for review 
and evaluation by a clinical professional who could consult 

226
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with the individual by phone or video for the purpose of 
providing reassurance and/or guidance for the next step in 
receiving additional care. It is anticipated that the initial 
systems will be installed by the first quarter of 2017. 
 
IV.  METHODS    
 
There were several challenges to the selection of the 
methods to use to collect data on the three Projects. First, the 
Projects were not a test of the technologies themselves, as it 
was already known that they worked. Instead, the objective of 
the Projects was to determine how the selected technologies 
could be used to enhance the provision of care, while at the 
same time curtailing the cost of that care. Thus, the methods 
had to capture specific data on various components of care 
delivery. This entailed collecting data on the staff at each of 
the sites, both the way they used the technologies, and their 
level of acceptance and willingness to change how they did 
their jobs. Data also had to be collected on the level of 
acceptance of the technologies by individuals at each of the 
sites. If individuals were uncomfortable with the use of the 
new technologies it would not be possible to roll out the 
technologies to other facilities. Secondly, although ideally the 
same methods of data collection would be used at each of the 
sites, this proved impossible because of the differences in the 
nature of the sites and the care models employed.  
 
A.  Communication Technologies Project 
 
The main challenge was to develop questions that could 
be answered by individuals with disabilities and would, at the 
same time, provide the data necessary on which to make future 
decisions [28][29]. Achieving these twin goals necessitated 
the development of a Project-specific questionnaire for the 
CTP, which included simple straightforward questions and 
took no more than 15 minutes to administer. The questions 
asked included: 
 Which of the following electronic devices do you use to 
communicate with friends, family or other people? 
 How much help do you need to use these devices? 
 When you want to communicate with friends, family or 
other people, how often is the device available? 
 What devices do you use to play games or watch 
movies? 
 How much help do you need to use these devices to play 
games or watch movies? 
 When you want to play games or watch movies, how 
often is the device available? 
 
 The questions were to determine the amount of change 
that took place in both device use and amount of help needed 
by individuals with disabilities during the length of the 
Project.  Staff were trained to administer the questionnaire to 
individuals with disabilities at each of the sites with the goal 
being that the same staff member at each of the sites would 
administer the questionnaire at initiation of the Project and at 
three, six and 12 month intervals. However, this proved to be 
difficult because of the high rate of staff turnover. Thus, in 
order to minimize the impact of staff turnover for the CTP and 
the SHP, specific staff at the program centers and the 
individuals’ case workers were designated to conduct the 
surveys. 
The staff questionnaire was self-administered and, similar 
to the questionnaire for individuals with disabilities, was 
repeated at three, six and 12 month intervals. The GDS was 
administered by staff members at the inception of the Project 
and six and 12 month intervals.  
For reasons that are discussed below in Section E, the 
GDS was not administered to individuals in the second Stage 
of the CTP. All other instruments were used to collect data in 
the three facilities in Stage 2 and it is anticipated that they will 
be used in the locations in Stage 3. 
 
B.  Smarthome Project 
 
The methods used for the SHP were closely matched to 
those used for the CTP: Project-specific questionnaires were 
given to the residents at the initiation of the Project and three, 
six and 12 month intervals; likewise the GDS was 
administered at the initiation of the Project and six and 12 
month intervals. Questions focused on the ability of the 
residents to undertake basic tasks within the home, e.g., meal 
preparation, putting away groceries, controlling the lighting 
and blinds in their rooms, using computers and other 
electronic devices, using email to communicate with family 
and friends. Thus, it was possible to determine changes in both 
the residents’ ability to use the new technologies and the 
impact on the technology of residents’ well-being.  
 
C.  Biometric Project 
 
The methods employed for the BMP, to a large extent, 
mirrored those for the other two Projects with a couple of 
exceptions. Staff were surveyed at the beginning of the Project 
and after six and 12 months. Questions for the staff focused 
on: 
 The comfort level of staff members in the use of the 
biometric devices; 
 The reliability of the devices; 
 The acceptance of the devices by individuals with 
disabilities; and 
 The perceived change in the quality of care with the use 
of the biometric devices.   
 
Similarly 
residents 
at 
the 
three 
facilities 
were 
administered questionnaires and the GDS at the inception of 
the Project and at six and 12 month intervals. In addition to 
these instruments, event and error forms were developed for 
use. The event forms were used to record each event triggered 
by a biomedical alert, the actions taken by staff in response to 
the event and the outcome, e.g., a visit by a nurse, emergency 
room visit or hospitalization. The error forms were used to 
record problems with the various devices comprising the vital 
signs array, steps taken to correct the problem, the potential 

227
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
risk to the health/safety of the residents and how the problem 
was resolved. 
 
D.  Limitations of the Methods 
 
There were several factors which limited the effectiveness 
of the data collection and the quality of the data. First, the fact 
that individuals at all the sites had either developmental and 
intellectual disabilities or were diagnosed with severe mental 
illness limited the type of questions that could be asked and 
often required prompting by the staff member administering 
the instrument. Secondly, although not optimal from a 
research perspective, given the scope of the three Projects, it 
was necessary for staff to administer the questionnaires and 
GDS. These staff members were para-professionals whose 
main responsibility was not research, but instead, the delivery 
of care. Staff turnover also impacted the ability of the 
questionnaires and scales being administered at the designated 
intervals. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the Projects 
were not research per se, but a real world evaluation of the 
effectiveness of technology within challenging care models. In 
other words, the information collected was that which could 
help NHS determine whether the technology installed in the 
sites should be rolled out to other facilities, rather than what 
would necessarily be collected in a controlled research project.  
 
E.  Modifications in Methodology 
 
The limitations outlined above have resulted in 
modifications in the methods used during the second and third 
Stages of the Project. The most significant was the 
discontinuing of the use of the Glasgow Depression Scale for 
three reasons: 1) no significant differences were obtained 
when the results from the pre-Project and the six and the 12 
month intervals were compared, primarily, it is believed, 
because of the small sample size; 2) in the vast majority of 
cases, the GDS was not filled out by individuals receiving 
services, but instead by a caseworker, which violated the GDS 
protocol; and 3) the close contact between individuals and 
case workers provided a better guide to the psychological state 
of participants than the use of the GDS.  
The inclusion of the outpatient clinic in Stage 2 of the 
BMP will also require significant changes in the methods 
employed. Brief questionnaires will be used to ascertain both 
the acceptance of the kiosk by individuals receiving services 
and the acceptance by staff. An event form, similar to that 
used during Stage 1 of the Project, will be used to track the 
care delivered when one or more of the vital signs for an 
individual are outside the normal range. The goal is through 
tracking body mass index and blood pressure to assist in the 
identification of two comorbid conditions most associated 
with mental illness—obesity and hypertension—so that 
appropriate care can be provided. Finally, the kiosk software 
should be able to create omission reports for missing data and 
an error form, modeled after the one used in Stage 1, will be 
used in order to track any problems that may arise with the 
recording and transfer of the vital signs data. 
 
V .  FINDINGS 
 
In an ongoing, multi-year, multi-stage, multi-site, multi-
technology Project, in some ways, all findings are preliminary, 
since data are continuously being generated and will continue 
to do so for the foreseeable future. However, there are 
sufficient findings available from the first Stage of each of the 
three Projects to draw conclusions on the success of the use of 
the selected technologies. There is also adequate data from 
Stage 2 of the CTP to present some preliminary findings, but 
since the second Stages of the SHP and the BMP are still in 
the planning phase, no data are available for analysis. 
However, with the completion of the second Smarthome 
facility in 2017, and the anticipated roll-out of the outpatient 
clinic in the fourth quarter of 2016, and the home vital signs 
systems later that year, data will be available for on-going 
analysis.  
 
A.  Community Technology Project 
 
The findings from a comparison of the data collected 
from the four sets of questionnaires are, from an organization 
perspective, very encouraging.  Questions were asked about 
the use of electronic devices, both the number of devices used 
and the purpose for the use of the device.  Answers to these 
questions showed a distinct pattern of the increase in both 
device use and the number and type of applications used. 
Sixteen of the 35 individuals (44%) for which data on all four 
sets of questionnaires are available were using more devices 
after 12 months than at the initiation of the Project, while 
fifteen (43%) were using more applications than in the prior 
12 months. For the majority of individuals, the added device 
was a laptop that was made available in their residences. The 
pattern that emerged was quite clear. Individuals learned to 
use new applications on the desk-top computers at the day 
programs and then used the applications on the laptop when 
they returned to their residences.   
The findings for the amount of help that individuals 
required to use the new devices and applications are a bit more 
complicated to interpret. The raw findings are: 2 (6%) of the 
individuals did not need help throughout the twelve months; 
11 (31%) of them had no change in the level of help needed to 
access the devices and applications; 12 (34%) increased the 
level of help needed to access the devices and applications; 
and 10 (29%) decreased the level of help needed to access the 
devices and applications. These data are confusing enough, 
but in addition, there is no distinct relationship between the 
individuals who increased their use of devices and 
applications and the need for help. The amount of staff time 
required to train staff in the use of the technologies and to help 
individuals with new devices and applications is a key factor 
in the decision to expand this Project to other facilities and 
therefore, having more usable findings is extremely important.  
Similarly, the findings from the GDS are ambivalent. 
Although there is a slight overall decrease in the number of 
answers that reflect a depressive state for over one-third of the 
individuals with disabilities, there is no apparent relationship 

228
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
between an increase in the use of devices and applications and 
a decrease in a depressive state.  
Although the main conclusion that can be drawn from the 
staff surveys is that the staff believes strongly that the 
introduced technologies have been greatly beneficial, the 
findings did expose some problems. A full quarter of staff 
believed that the technology was not useful for all individuals 
with disabilities. In particular, those individuals who had 
problems with reading grew frustrated when attempting to use 
the various applications. Secondly, almost half of staff 
reported that there were problems with the applications 
periodically crashing and/or having difficulty in getting the 
applications to work properly. However, the data did indicate 
that over time, the technological problems decreased 
significantly. Finally, the data confirmed the high rate of staff 
turnover, as only 12 of the 50 staff who completed at least one 
survey completed all three. In fact, an equal number—12—of 
staff completed only the last survey as those who had 
completed all three.  
Findings from the three locations in Stage 2 of the CTP 
confirm the findings from the analysis of data from Stage 1. 
Since the findings from administering the questionnaire during 
Stage 1 at three and six month intervals contributed little if 
anything to the analysis, it was decided to only survey 
individuals receiving services and staff at the initiation of the 
Project and after 12 months. Questions were, once again, 
asked about the use of electronic devices, both the number of 
devices used and the purpose for the use of the device and, 
once again, the answers followed the same pattern: thirty-one 
of the 38 individuals (82%) reported that their use of 
electronic devices had increased over the twelve months and 
likewise, the same number reported that their use of 
applications had increased. There were two differences 
between the findings for Stages 1 and 2. The first was that 
fewer than 25% of the individuals included in the surveys 
reported that they used no electronic devices at the beginning 
of the Project, whereas approximately 50% of individuals in 
Stage 1 reported that they used no devices at the beginning of 
the project. The second difference between the findings for the 
two Stages is that a full 23% of individuals in Stage 2 were 
using no electronic devices at the end of the 12 months. In 
other words, their behavior had not changed, even though a 
direct effort had been made to encourage these individuals to 
engage in the project and utilize the readily available devices.  
Another major difference in the findings from the two 
Stages is the amount of help from staff needed by individuals 
using the devices. Unlike the findings in Stage 1, the findings 
from Stage 2 indicate that the individuals who had increased 
the electronic device and application use needed “a lot of 
help”; from 29% to almost 90%. This dramatic increase in the 
help needed appears to be the result of the fact that such a 
small number of individuals in Stage 2 indicated that they 
used no devices at the beginning of the Project. Thus, the vast 
majority of individuals in Stage 2 were starting from ground 
zero resulting in the help of staff members to get them “up to 
speed”. It will be interesting to see if the amount of help 
needed declines during the second year of the Project. 
As was the case in the findings from Stage 1, the vast 
majority, 18 of 20 (90%) of staff at all three locations in Stage 
2 viewed the Project as successful and they believed that the 
individuals who used the electronic devices benefited. Also, 
similarly to the results of the staff surveys in Stage 1, some 
staff in Stage 2 expressed a level of frustration with the 
amount and type of training they received in the use of the 
technology and various applications. However, the number of 
staff who expressed this frustration declined from almost 50% 
in Stage 1 to only 20% in Stage 2, thus indicating that the 
change in the type of training had been, to a certain degree, 
successful.  
 
B.  Smarthome Project 
 
There were no problems with data collection for the SHP. 
All four individuals with disabilities completed the three 
questionnaires and GDS administered upon initiation and 
three, six and 12 months into the Project. Nevertheless, the 
simple fact that there were only four residents in the study 
does limit the ability to generalize and reach firm conclusions 
about the wisdom of expanding the Project to other facilities.  
The findings are largely positive, as three out of the four 
residents expressed that over the twelve months of the Project, 
their level of independence had increased: three out of the four 
residents expressed an increase in the ability to operate blinds 
and lights without help; two out of the four residents 
expressed an increase in the ability to undertake chores in the 
kitchen without help; and one out of the four residents 
recorded a greater ability to communicate with family. 
Answers on the GDS indicated that two of the four residents 
experienced a slight decrease in their level of depression. Staff 
also filled out the GDS for the residents and once again, it 
appeared that the same two residents experienced a decline in 
their level of depression.  
In addition to the quantitative data collected, more 
informal interviews with both residents and staff revealed a 
very high level of satisfaction with the modifications made in 
the residence and the addition of the Smart TV, iPads and 
remote controls for blinds and lights. In particular, staff 
indicated that the mood of the residents had become more 
positive and that residents are much more active in the kitchen 
and taking pride in their increased independence.  
 
C.  Biometric Project 
 
The findings for the BMP are the most problematic of the 
three Projects, primarily because of equipment issues that 
delayed its start and continued during the entire data gathering 
period. Nevertheless, there are sufficient data to draw some 
conclusions that can be used as the Project is expanded to 
other facilities. For this analysis the two residential facilities 
serving IDD residents will be lumped together, while the 
findings for the LTSR are presented separately. 
Staff surveys at the two IDD facilities showed that at the 
beginning of the Project over one-half of the staff did not 
know how to use at least one of the devices that was being 
installed. However, by the 12 month mark, all but one staff 

229
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
member, not only could use all of the devices, but were 
comfortable using them. The 12 month survey also indicated 
that, overall, staff were very positive about the use of the 
biometric equipment: a clear majority believed that care had 
improved with the use of the equipment; and all staff believed 
that residents had accepted the use of the equipment and were 
comfortable with its use. Over the 12 months of the Project, 
there were 10 instances when one or more vital sign reading 
was beyond the safe range. In seven cases, a physician was 
contacted and in three cases, a nurse was contacted. Although 
in none of these cases was hospitalization necessary, four 
residents were put on outpatient observation in order to more 
carefully track their vital signs.  
The only negative finding was the number of problems 
with the equipment recorded in 32 error logs. Just over 50% of 
the errors were a failure of the data to upload from the device 
to the iPad, which was used to record and forward the data to 
the nursing staff. In one-third of the error logs, the problem 
was that the devices were not actually recording any data, e.g., 
the blood pressure cuff not indicating a reading. These 
findings have led to a reevaluation of the vital signs system 
being used. 
All staff at the LTSR, when surveyed, expressed a high 
level of familiarity with all equipment used in the Project, both 
at the inception and twelve months later. Eight of the nine 
staff reported that the residents were comfortable with the use 
of the vital signs array, but one-third reported that the 
equipment was not as reliable as they would have liked. This 
unreliability was reflected in the nine error reports that 
indicated both problems with uploading data, and the blood 
pressure and oximeter cuffs not generating a reading. Finally, 
there were eight events when one or more vital sign reading 
was beyond the safe range. In four of the cases, the nurse was 
contacted and the resident more closely monitored for the next 
24 hours. 
VI.  DISCUSSION 
 
As stated in the previous section, not only have the three 
Projects in Stage 1 been on different timelines, but Stage 2 of 
the CTP has produced findings from three additional sites with 
the result being that the discussion of the findings from the 14 
different sites is complicated by this variation in timeline and 
amount of data available for analysis. However, there are 
sufficient findings for the steering Committee to make crucial 
decisions as to the success of the technologies in providing 
cost effective care to the different locations. In particular, it is 
possible to determine what has exceeded expectations, what 
has worked as hoped and what has not worked as well as 
hoped. Additionally, valuable lessons have been learned that 
can be used to move the SHP and BMP to Stage 2 and the 
CTP to Stage 3. 
 
A. Successful Implementation 
 
Findings from both Stages clearly indicate that the CTP 
has been a tremendous success and has far exceeded 
expectations. The vast majority of individuals in all ten 
locations embraced the new technology and the applications 
made available through the Project. These individuals were 
able, in a relatively short period of time, to use the technology 
to communicate with family and friends, safely surf the 
internet in order to pursue their individual interests and to play 
games and watch movies—none of which they could do on 
their own before the Project. Although not all individuals at 
the ten facilities were able to utilize the technology, the 
majority could and they were able, over time, to do so with 
less staff help. Staff were equally pleased with the 
introduction of the technology and consistently reported that 
individuals were happy with their increased independence.  
Perhaps the most positive finding is that the technology 
and applications employed in the CTP proved equally 
effective in quite different types of facilities with dissimilar 
care models. Five of the locations were small single sex group 
homes, with between three and six individuals; two were 
Adult Training Facilities serving between 80 and 130 
individuals who varied in level of ability and had been brought 
to the facility from their group homes; one was a large 
congregate ICF in which over 100 people lived of whom 30 
participated in the CTP; while the final two locations were 
small adult training facilities to which individuals with 
disabilities were transported for skills training. The success of 
the CTP in these varied locations has allowed the Steering 
Committee to, not only plan for Stage 3 of the Project, but to 
begin planning for a much larger roll-out in the near future. 
This is exactly the success that was hoped for, in that a single 
technology and application (AbleLink) can be used throughout 
the organization without having to find, test and use a variety 
of different applications in facilities with varied care models. 
The SHP also exceeded expectations. Even though the 
number of residents impacted by the introduction was small, 
four, the findings clearly show that they benefited from having 
the new technologies. Their independence increased over the 
duration of the Project because they were able to undertake 
tasks that they could not accomplish prior to the introduction 
of the new technology. The simple ability to control the lights 
and blinds in their own rooms, not only increased their level of 
independence, but staff reported that the residents’ mood 
became increasingly positive over time. 
This does not mean that everything went smoothly, even 
though the assistive technologies installed in the Smarthome 
were all well tested and appeared appropriate for the residents. 
One example of a technology not working as intended was an 
adjustable sink that could be lowered to a height that made it 
usable for an individual in a wheelchair. The original bowl of 
the sink was much shallower than normal kitchen sinks to 
allow for the space underneath for wheelchair accessibility.  
Unfortunately, this design made it much more likely that water 
was splashed during usage resulting in the individual using the 
sink frequently being soaked by the splash of water from the 
faucet. This led, not only to the necessity for the DSP to 
change the resident’s clothes, but often the resident becoming 
agitated, thus disrupting the home’s routine. Also, several of 
the individuals living in the residence have motor skill and 
spasticity issues which made it even more difficult for them to 
operate the water controls placed at the rear of the sink.  The 

230
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
solution was to reconfigure the sink with more sensitive 
controls placed at the front of the sink, rather than at the back. 
This reconfigured sink will be installed in future Smarthomes. 
 
B. Meeting Implementation Objectives 
 
Although the BMP did not exceed expectations, it 
certainly succeeded in meeting the objectives set out at the 
beginning of the Project. The vital signs system is able to 
record, upload and send data to an external location as was 
hoped. In addition, the system was able to determine when 
readings are outside established norms and this information 
was used at all locations to take action, e.g., notify nurses, 
inform physicians. It is too early to determine if the use of the 
technology has reduced emergency room visits and 
hospitalizations, but staff believe that the system is able to 
allow more timely care and, as a result, the well-being of 
individuals has increased. However, even this degree of 
success was sufficient to begin planning for the use of a vital 
signs monitoring system in an outpatient clinic, as well as an 
even more ambitious plans to use such a system in the 
residence of selected individuals. 
 
C. Hardware and Software Problems 
 
Even though the CTP far exceeded expectations, there 
have been some issues surrounding the reliability of both the 
hardware and applications used and staff concerns. Most of 
the technology problems were resolved during Stage 1 of the 
Project, but the need for better and more continuous staff 
training lingered as Stage 2 commenced. Many staff expressed 
the need for better hands-on training at the beginning of the 
Project and for on-going training, once individuals receiving 
services began to explore additional capabilities of the 
AbleLink applications. The high rate of staff turnover 
indicated that a more thorough on-going training program than 
was anticipated at the inception of the Project was necessary. 
In response to these findings, members of the Steering 
Committee periodically conducted Skype sessions during the 
year with all staff responsible for Stage 1 and Stage 2. These 
sessions reinforced the goals of the Project, allowed the 
sharing of resources/ideas and encouraged on-going peer led 
discussions at each of the Project locations. In addition, newly 
identified staff for Stage 3 have been included in these Skype 
sessions during the spring and summer of 2016.   
The biggest issue with the technology occurred in the 
BMP. The number of error reports filed at the three facilities, 
confirms the overall impression that a different vital signs 
system needed to be used as the Project moved forward. This 
has resulted in several vital signs monitoring systems being 
evaluated and a much more robust and flexible system being 
selected for use at the outpatient clinic. The encouraging 
conclusion is that, even with the problems with the 
technology, the results were sufficiently encouraging to plan 
for the Project’s expansion. 
 
 
 
D. What Has Been Learned 
 
In the last three and one-half years, many lessons have 
been learned about the process of incorporating new 
technologies into NHS’s various care models Among the most 
important are: 1) detailed planning is indispensable; 2) there 
must be buy-in at all levels—board, C.E.O, upper 
administration, management and line personnel; 3) one 
technology must be working before the next one is introduced; 
and 4) everything takes longer than originally thought. 
In the early stages of the Project, many individuals at 
NHS believed that things were moving too slowly; they were 
anxious to “get-on-with-it”.  This urge to move quickly is 
natural, especially from individuals who have been recruited 
because they are enthusiastic about the introduction of new 
technologies. Nevertheless, taking the time to plan every step 
of the Project was vital to success. Even with careful planning, 
mistakes were made and problems encountered. Likewise, 
there must be buy-in at every level of the organization and this 
also takes time. Without buy-in and commitment, there is the 
tendency to “cut the losses” when problems arise. The buy-in 
of the NHS Board, C.E.O. and upper administrators was key 
to the continuation of the Project when things went wrong. 
The incremental approach to the introduction of the 
technologies also proved to be a wise decision. Once again, 
there was a push to introduce “everything” at once, but the 
plan to make sure that one technology worked before 
installing a second, allowed staff and individuals with 
disabilities and severe mental illness to adjust to the first 
change before a second was introduced. Finally, although 
initially people involved with the Project were confident that 
the timeline for their slow and cautious approach was realistic, 
as the three Projects got under way there was a realization that 
the amount of time necessary to get 14 different sites up-and-
running was going to take longer than anyone had anticipated. 
Fortunately, the fact that there was agreement among all 
individuals in the Project that the long-term goal of the 
implementation of the selected technologies throughout the 
organization, rather than success in one or two locations, 
allowed the Projects to progress at the slower pace required. 
 
VII.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
When the Assistive Technology Project was being 
planned in 2012 there were doubts whether, because of its 
scale and complexity, it could achieve its objectives. Even as 
the technologies were being installed in the first Stage and 
problems emerged, there were concerns that trying to evaluate 
three distinct technologies in 11 locations was just too 
ambitious. However, the Project leadership persevered and 
with the commencing of the second Stage and planning for a 
third, it is impossible to conclude otherwise than that the 
Project has been a success.  
 
A. Improvements for Next Stage 
 
  Based on an analysis of the results from the three Projects 
in Stage 1, several adjustments have been made to both the 

231
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
technologies employed and the implementation protocols for 
the next two Stages. First, problems with the biometric 
instruments used in the BMP have led to a switch to more 
robust products from companies that offer greater technical 
support. In addition, the needs inherent in collecting vital signs 
at an outpatient clinic have led to the decision to employ a 
kiosk that collects a series of vital signs. The advantage of the 
kiosk is threefold: first, it is a self-contained unit that can be 
easily placed in a small room at the clinic; second, it allows 
for as few as one vital sign to be collected and up to six, thus 
allowing the ability to start off slowly by collecting two vital 
signs—blood pressure and weight—and adding more as 
individuals receiving services and staff become comfortable; 
and third, it allows the information collected to be sent 
electronically to psychiatrists and physicians, prior to face-to-
face meetings. The switch to a more robust system has also 
enabled concrete plans to collect vital signs in the residences 
of individuals receiving services from NHS and to send this 
data to care providers at a remote site in Stage 3 of the BMP. 
Similarly, dissatisfaction on the part of staff and 
individuals with disabilities with several products in the SHP 
has resulted in the selection of more sophisticated equipment 
that incorporates more sensor technology. In addition, the 
positive results from the CTP and BMP will allow for these 
technologies to be incorporated into the Smarthome currently 
being constructed. 
An unexpected finding from the CTP has led the Steering 
Committee to dramatically alter the selection of facilities for 
Stage 2. It was thought that expansion would be to small 
group homes, but the overwhelming success of the AbleLink 
technology in the larger day facilities has resulted in the 
technology being installed in a large congregate ICF and two 
adult training centers and plans for further installations in 
Stage 3 in similar facilities. Longer term plans include the 
installation of AbleLink in group homes, but the use of the 
technology in larger facilities has proven to be more cost 
effective because of the more efficient use of staff.  
 
B. Expansion 
 
The best measure of this success is that NHS has made 
the decision to extend all three technologies to additional 
locations. The CTP has already been expanded to three new 
locations bringing the total number of participants to 
approximately 200 and there are plans to include three 
additional facilities before the end of 2016. NHS is also 
working with AbleLink to develop new applications 
specifically targeting individuals with disabilities, as well as 
working to refine and enhance existing applications.  
The Delaware County Adult Behavioral Health Outpatient 
Clinic will be added to the BMP by the end of 2016, and vital 
sign monitoring systems will be installed in the residences of 
selected individuals with disabilities during 2017. The 
complexity of incorporating vital signs monitoring into an 
outpatient clinic is, from NHS’s perspective, outweighed by 
the opportunity to effectively offer psychiatric services, 
primary care physicians and pharmacy services in one location 
along with an integrated medical record. Likewise, the 
difficulty of recruiting participants, installing systems and 
establishing a remote monitoring location is balanced by the 
benefits of being able to track vital signs and respond to alerts.  
Perhaps the most significant indication of the success of 
the overall Project is that there are plans to build, ground up, a 
new facility in Western Pennsylvania which will include 
technologies from all three Projects.  
 
C. Financial Model 
 
From the inception, one of the key components of the 
Project was to construct a financial model that would allow 
NHS to be reimbursed for the care delivered by the use of the 
new technologies. The Project itself, costing over $200,000 in 
real money and much more when the amount of staff time 
expended is included, has been financed by grants. Although 
grant funding is satisfactory for a project whose goal is to 
evaluate the appropriateness of new technologies in the 
delivery of care, it is not a satisfactory means for developing a 
sustainable financial model.  A sustainable financial model 
can only exist if the care delivered with the use of the new 
technologies is reimbursable by Medicare (the health 
insurance program for people in the United States who are 65 
or older. Medicare Part B covers certain doctors' services, 
outpatient care, medical supplies, and preventive services) 
and, especially, Medicaid (the U.S. government program, 
financed by federal, state, and local funds, of hospitalization 
and medical insurance for low income persons of all ages) as 
billable services that can be reimbursed to NHS. Without the 
ability to be reimbursed for the services provided through the 
use of the technologies, a hoped for roll-out to a large number 
of locations will be impossible.  
The problem is that, currently, most of the care delivered 
in the three Projects is not billable and thus, not reimbursable, 
but this situation is changing. A number of states have granted 
Medicaid waivers that can now allow reimbursement for care 
delivered with some of the selected technologies, but not all of 
the services delivered through the use of the selected 
technologies are reimbursable. For example, one of the 
challenges faced by the Steering Committee in using a kiosk 
to collect vital signs at the out-patient clinic is how to pay the 
staff member who will help customers in using the system. It 
is anticipated that this staff member will need to be available 
to help with the kiosk all day, five days a week. If NHS is 
unable to bill Medicare/Medicaid for her time, the 
organization will be unable to continue providing this service 
and expanding to other facilities. If the three Projects have 
done nothing else, they have confirmed that the use of 
technology to aid in the delivery of care to individuals with 
disabilities and severe mental illness is inevitable. The 
increasing numbers, along with the aging of both populations, 
is increasing the cost of care exponentially, at the same time as 
the number of people available to deliver the care is 
stagnating. The only way to maintain, let alone enhance, the 
level of care to these populations is through the innovative use 
of technology and the only way to make this happen is to 
develop a means of reimbursing this care. This must and will 
occur; the only question remaining is when?   

232
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Glascock, R. Burke, S. Portnoy, and S. Shields, “Planning for 
sustainability: Multiple technologies for different care models,” 
Proc. eTELEMED 2016, pp. 68-76, 2016. 
[2] G. Demiris, B. Hensel, M. Skubic, and M. Rantz, “Senior 
residents’ perceived need of and preferences ‘smart home’ 
sensor technologies,” Inter J. Tech Ass in Health Care, vol. 24, 
no. 1,  pp. 120-124, 2008. 
[3] E. E. Stip and V. Rialle, “Environmental cognitive remediation 
in schizophrenia: Ethical implications of ‘smart home’ 
technology,” Canadian J. Psychiatry, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 281-291, 
2005. 
[4] E. Novella, “Mental health care and the politics of inclusion: a 
social systems account of psychiatric deinstitutionalization,” 
Theor Med Bioeth, vol. 31, pp. 411-427, 2010. 
[5] M. Knapp, J. Beecham, D. McDaid, T. Matosevic, and M. 
Smith, “The economic consequences of deinstitutionalization of 
mental health services: Lessons from a systematic review of 
European experience,” Health and Social Care in the 
Community, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 113-125, 2011.  
[6] National Council on Disability. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2012/DIToolkit/Costs/inDetail/
retrieved August 2016. 
[7] National Institute of Mental Health. [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/index.shtml, 
retrieved 
August 2016. 
[8] Administration on Aging—Projected Future Growth of Older 
Population. [Online]. Available from:  http://www.aoa.gov/ 
Aging_Statistics/future_growth/future_growth.aspx, 
retrieved 
August  2016.  
[9] C. Tinglin, “Adults  with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities: A unique population,” Today’s Geriatric Medicine, 
vol 6, no 3, pp. 2-26, 2013. 
[10] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of the 
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
aspe.hhs.gov/.../supply-direct-support-
professionals-serving-individuals- 
intellectual-disabilities-and-
other-developmental-disabilities-report-c, 
retrieved 
August 
2016. 
[11] The New Jersey Council on Developmental Disabilities 
Recommendations 
on 
the 
Direct 
Support 
Professional 
Workforce. [Online]. Available from: https://www.njcdd.org/ 
2012-04-23.../direct-support-professionals, 
retrieved 
August 
2016.   
[12] M. Miza and J. Gammel, “Consumer directed goal planning in 
the delivery of assistive technology for people who are aging 
with intellectual disabilities,” J. Applied Research in Intellectual 
Disabilities, vol. 22, pp. 445-457, 2009. 
[13] S. Stock, D. Davies, M. Wehmeyer, and S. Palmer, “Evaluation 
of cognitively-accessible software to increase independent 
access to cell phone technology for people with ID,” J. 
Intellectual Disability Research, vol. 52, pp. 1155-1164, 2008. 
[14] D. Bryen, A. Carey, M. Friedman, and S. Taylor, “Cell phone 
use by adults with intellectual disabilities,” Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities, vol. 45, pp. 1-2, 2007. 
[15] C. Li-Tsang, S. Yeung, and C. Hui-Chan, “Factors affecting 
people with IDD in learning to use computer technology,” Inter 
J. Rehabilitation Research, vol. 28, pp. 127-133, 2005. 
[16] H. Parette, “The importance of technology in the education and 
training of persons with mental retardation,” Education and 
Training in Mental Retardation, vol. 26, pp. 165-178, 1991. 
[17] D. Hammond, D. Whatley, K. Ayres, and D. Gast,    
“Effectiveness of video modelling to teach iPad use to students 
with moderate intellectual disabilities,” Education and Training 
in Autism and Intellectual Disabilities, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 525-
538, 2010.  
[18] B. Bryant, R. Byant, M. Shih, and S. Seok, “The role of      
assistive technology in support of needs assessment for children 
with disabilities,” Exceptionality, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 203-213, 
2010. 
[19] A. Carey, M. Friedman, and D. Byrant, “Use of electronic 
devices by people with intellectual disabilities,” Mental 
Retardation, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 322-333, 2005. 
[20] B. Weinberg, and A. Kjellberg, “Participation when using 
cognitive assistive devices from the perspective of people with 
disabilities,” Occupational Therapy Instruction, vol. 17, no. 4, 
pp. 168-176, 2010. 
[21] Braddock, M. Rizzolo, M. Thompson, and  R. Bell,  “Emerging 
technologies and cognitive disability,” J. Spec Ed and Technol, 
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 49-56, 2004. 
[22] E. Tanis, S. Palmer, M. Wehmeyer, D. Davies, S. Stock, K. 
Lobb, and B. Bishop, “Self-Report computer-based survey of 
technology use by people with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities,” Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, vol. 
50, no. 1, pp. 53-68, 2012.  
[23] B. Bryant, S. Seok, M. Ok, and D. Bryant, “Individuals with 
intellectual and/or developmental disabilities use of assistive 
technology devices in support provision,” J. Spec Educ Technol,  
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 41-57, 2012.  
[24] Ablelink Technologies Home Page. [Online]. Available at 
http://www. ablelinktech.com, retrieved August 2016. 
[25] J. Mindham and C. A. Espie, “Glasgow Anxiety Scale for 
people with an Intellectual Disability (GAS-ID): Development 
and psychometric properties of a new measure for use with 
people with mild intellectual disability,” J. Intellectual 
Disability Research, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 22-30, 2003. 
[26] H. M. Evenhuis, “Characteristics of instruments screening for 
       depression in adults with intellectual disabilities: Systematic  
       review,” Research in Developmental Disabilities, vol. 31, no. 6,  
        pp. 1109-1120, 2010. 
[27] Centers for Disease Control, Adults with Disabilities and Vital 
Signs. 
[Online]. 
 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cdc.gov 
/vitalsigns/disabilities, retrieved August 2016. 
[28] M.  Tasse, R. Schalock, J. Thompson, and M. Wehmeyer, 
Guidelines for interviewing people with disabilities. American 
Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities. 
Washington, DC, 2005.  
[29] K. Caldwell, “Dyadic interviewing: A technique valuing 
interdependence in interviews with individuals with intellectual 
disabilities,” Qualitative Research, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 488-507, 
2013. 
 

