The Use of the Forest Status Quality Indicator in Planning Policies for Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Ten Case Studies on Forest Plantations in North Italy
Silvia Assini  
Dept. of Earth and Environment Sciences 
University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
Email: silviapaola.assini@unipv.it 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
Email: mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a new application of the 
previous defined Forest Status Quality Indicator in planning 
policies of forest conservation. Starting from previous analysis 
and conclusions about the importance of the forest plantations 
for ecological restoration, new case studies confirm the 
possibility of using this indicator to efficiently guide policy 
makers and planners to choose the best position and extensions 
of forest types/patches for restoration and connectivity. By 
considering the present situation of the forest quality, we 
propose a method to compute a predicted value of the indicator 
by considering, in addition, the contribution of plantations, 
once they will be naturalized in the territory under 
consideration. The new, predicted value of the Forest Status 
Quality Indicator is a function of the ecological components, 
which are at the basis of the naturalistic approach of its 
definition. The results are shown on ten important case studies 
of plantations in the West Po Plain (North Italy). The method 
of prediction can be used to measure the impact of plantations 
on the quality of the forests and to define under which 
hypothesis they can play an important role in biodiversity 
conservation.  
Keywords-biodiversity; environmental indicator; forest status 
quality; Geographic Information Systems; conservation policy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper is based on the authors’ work [1] and reports 
the extension of their current research activity. Compared to 
[1], nine more case studies are added; moreover, the present 
paper provides the list of all the forest types found in the 
studied locations, which was not possible in the previous 
work. Finally, the theory about the ecological indicator, 
called Forest Status Quality (FSQ), already reported in [1], 
has been validated by showing a new application to the 
definition 
of 
policies 
for 
forest 
management 
and 
conservation. 
The previous target, i.e., to propose and measure 
indicators related to some specific aspects of biodiversity, 
within a given territory, has been extended to show how an 
indicator can be used to assess the efficacy of a policy of 
forest conservation. 
 The naturalistic indicator FSQ has been introduced for 
the first time in literature with an investigation about its 
relationship with another ecological indicator, the  land use 
Anthropentropy Factor [2][3]. However, the preliminary 
results were very promising in giving a realistic assessment 
of the situation of forests quality in a given territory. 
For this reason, the research has been carried further 
along this direction. Here, we recall from the previous 
contribution [1] some important aspects of FSQ indicator, in 
order to appreciate the improvement of the ongoing 
researches. 
In literature, the most common approach to define 
biodiversity indicators is to use separately the following 
primary attributes of biodiversity: (1) species/composition, 
(2) structure, and (3) function  [4], or  landscape metrics [5]. 
The main innovative feature of FSQ, with respect to 
literature,  is the joined evaluation of species composition 
and structure and landscape metric. In fact, the biodiversity 
components are: the stratification, the percentage of alien 
species 
and 
the 
percentage 
of 
protected 
species. 
Stratification can be easily depicted in four layers: tree, high 
and low shrub, and herb layers (see Figure 1). Figure 2 
shows some typical alien species in the territory under 
investigation. On the other hand, often protected species 
(see Figure 3) correspond to true forest species, such as 
Anemone 
nemorosa, 
Campanula 
trachelium, 
Carex 
elongata, Convallaria majalis, Listera ovata, Neottia nidus-
avis, and Primula vulgaris. The three components 
characterize the different forest patches of the territory 
under investigation of the ten case studies. 
Furthermore, the FSQ indicator takes into account also a 
landscape feature, i.e., the size of the forest patches.  
Consequently, only patches greater than 10.000 square 
meters are considered. In fact, patches smaller than 1 ha 
generally show low species richness [6] and a scarce 
floristic quality due to the edge effect which can increase 
the abundance of weedy and alien species [7]-[9]. The 
richness and floristic quality (due to true forest species) of 
the forest patches can be influenced not only by their size, 
but also by their shape. However, a correlation between the 
shape and the species richness of forest patches can be 
found when the patch size is sufficiently high. In fact, 
Dzwonko and Loster [10][11] found a negative correlation 
between the shape index of Patton [12] and the number of 
shrubs and forest species. In that case, they worked with a 
restricted dataset of only 27 forests, with varying patch size 
from 0.03 to 1.6 ha. With such small patch sizes, it is 
possible that the entire patch was subject to the edge effects 
[13]. Honnay et al. [13] analyzed 234 forest patches varying  
21
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  
The layers of the stratification in a forest: tree, shrub (high 
and low), and herb layers. 
 
Figure 2.  
Examples of some alien species in the territories under 
investigation: Solidago gigantea, Robinia pseudoacaica, and Amorpha 
fruticosa. 
 
Figure 3.  
Examples of some protected species in the territories under 
investigation: Anemone nemorosa, Erythronium dens-canis, and 
Convallaria majalis. 
 
in size between 0.5 and 5216 ha and found a correlation 
between the Patton shape index and the number of species in 
edges and clearings, the number of woody species and lianas 
and, as a consequence, with the total number of forest plant 
species. For these reasons, in a second improved definition 
of the FSQ indicator [1], also the shape of forest patches has 
been taken into account.  
Patches with linear shapes are excluded, applying an ad 
hoc morphological operator on the image data set provided 
by the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) of the project 
(as explained in Section II.) Such linear patches, together 
with those smaller than 10.000 square meters, that can be 
considered as punctual patches, do not represent core areas 
hosting complex forest ecosystems (as the wide patches of 
compact shape where the edge effect is reduced) important 
for woody and herbaceous true forest species. However, they 
can represent critical elements to connect core areas and 
support the structure of a local/regional ecological network, 
and the evaluation of their quality should be better 
considered from the connectivity perspective. Therefore, 
only forest patches with similar geometric characteristics 
(wide size and compact shape) were considered, with the aim 
to evaluate more homogenous elements and to have a more 
realistic picture of the forest quality, which is useful for 
conservation purposes.  
Besides embedding the geometric characteristics in the 
computation of the FSQ indicator, a second aspect has been 
considered [1]: the evaluation of the importance of forest 
plantations. This idea is at the basis of the new research 
activity here reported. In fact, in the first elaboration of the 
FSQ indicator [2][3], only natural forests were considered, 
while plantations were excluded from the evaluation. 
However, the Region Lombardy, in 2002, started and 
financed an important project aimed to create ten new plain 
forests, each of them with a size of about 40 ha and planted 
with native trees and shrubs [14][15]. 
Actually, such forests have not still developed a typical 
structure of mature wood and a typical nemoral herb layer, 
which will require at least 20-30 years. Anyway, because of 
their importance for the restoration of the Lombardy plain 
and conservation purposes, the initial idea of considering 
also such new forests give interesting preliminary results on 
a first case study in the Municipality of Travacò Siccomario 
(Province of Pavia). 
After these preliminary results [1], in this paper we 
extend the analysis on other nine great forest plantations of 
the Region Lombardy, with an innovative approach to 
predict the efficacy of these plantations in their contribution 
to FSQ. This will be further explained in Section III. First, a 
brief description of preliminary researches on the theory 
about FSQ is given in Section II. Conclusion and future 
work end the paper in Section  IV. 
II. 
PRELIMINARY RESEARCH ACTIVITIES 
In this section, a brief summary of the theory of FSQ 
indicator is given. Moreover, preliminary results are reported  
with more details in [1], in order to appreciate how the 
research has been evolving to make improvements and new 
contributions with respect to the state of the art. 
 
A. Definition of the Forest Status Quality Indicator 
The FSQ expresses the forest quality status as the value 
of its ecological components, with particularly reference to 
the biodiversity conservation. A set of sub-regions occupied 
by natural forest Fi (i = 1, 2, n) was defined. Each of Fi may 
have one or more occurrences, denoted by the index k, in 
the territory (k = 1, 2, max(i)). The number of occurrences 
may vary from a minimum of 1 to a maximum, which 
depends on the forest type (max(i)). Each k-th occurrence is 
characterized by: (a) an area Ak
i, expressed in square meters, 
22
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for i = 1, 2,…n and k = 1, 2, … max(i), and (b) a type of Ti, 
derived from the GIS ERSAF Database “Map of the Forest 
Types of Lombardy” [16]. For each forest Ti, we found the 
correspondence with one or more phytosociological tables 
[17]. For each forest type Ti, we defined a set of the 
following indicator components (si, ai, pi): the stratification 
(number of layers) of a forest type i (si), the percentage 
frequency of alien species (ai) in the corresponding 
phytosociological table/s, and the percentage frequency of 
protected species (pi) (according to the Lombardy regional 
law, L.R. 10/2008) in the corresponding phytosociological 
table/s. The three components can assume only discrete 
values, from 0 to 3, according to an if – then – else 
algorithm described in [2] [3]. After determining the values 
of the set of components for stratification, alien and 
protected species, for each forest Ti, it is possible to 
compute the FSQ Indicator of a municipality of area S as  
 
FSQ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S  
(1) 
The FSQ definition is the weighted values of the 
components, where the weights are the ratios between the 
areas of the forest patches and the area of the territory under 
investigation. By using the primitives of the open source 
QGIS software [18], the values of Ak
i in the territory under 
investigation have been computed, in order to estimate the 
value of the FSQ indicator, according to (1), for all the 
municipality of our case studies. Obviously, according to 
(1), FSQ indicator is a real number in a limited range: the 
minimum value is 0, which corresponds to the dramatic 
situation where no forests are present in the territory with at 
least one occurrence of area greater than 10.000 square 
meters. The maximum possible value is 9, which is derived 
by considering the  unrealistic situation of a municipality 
where no anthropic presence occurs, and the territory is 
entirely occupied  Ak
i = S) by forests of very high 
quality (set of components (si, ai, pi) = (3,3,3)). 
TABLE I.  
THE METRIC ON THE FSQ INDICATOR FOR FOREST 
QUALITY. 
Class of forest 
quality 
Evaluation of Forest quality and policy  
Intervals of FSQ 
Suggested policy 
1 
Unsatisfactory 
0 <= FSQ <= 0.9 
 
Very low level forest quality. 
A 
high-impact 
policy 
of 
restoration 
and/or 
requalification of forest is 
mandatory.  
2 
Satisfactory but 
improvable 
0.9 < FSQ <= 1.8 
 
Sufficient forest quality but 
improvable. A policy for 
forest 
biodiversity 
preservation is preferable. 
3 
Good 
1.8 < FSQ <= 3.6 
 
Good forest quality, the first 
level of satisfactory situation. 
4 
Optimum 
3.6 < FSQ <= 4.5 
 
The optimun situation, with a 
high quality of forests. 
5 
Overbalanced 
FSQ > 4.5 
 
The overbalanced situation, 
forests 
overcoming 
other 
ecosystems. A policy for 
shrubland  and grassland 
biodiversity preservation is 
preferable. 
We have defined a set of ranges for the FSQ indicator, 
starting from an unsatisfactory forest quality, a satisfactory 
but improvable situation, a good, an optimum situation and 
overbalanced situation. In Table I, the metric for the FSQ 
indicator and the suggested policy actions are shown.  
 
B. The Erosion Operator 
The introduction of the factor “shape” of the forest 
patches in the computation of the FSQ slightly modify the 
original definition in (1), where only the areas of forest 
patches are considered and weighted by the naturalistic 
components (si, ai, pi). The only limitation introduced on the 
geographic data is still a quantitative one (the 10.000 square 
meters as the minimum accepted size of the forest patch to 
be evaluated). However, we decided to take into 
consideration a characteristic that refers to the shape of a 
patch, i.e., to reduce the edge effect, which, in turn, reduces 
the floristic quality. This can be done by applying the 
standard mathematical morphology operator of Erosion [19], 
with a structural element of a circle of radius of 50 meters. In 
fact, Erosion is a typical image processing operator that 
allows to “erode” a connected area, starting from its 
perimeter and proceeding inside, of an extent that 
corresponds to the shape of the structural element. In our 
case, the structural element is a circle of a given radius, in 
order to reduce the areas of the forests to their real inner 
shape, by excluding the areas near the boundary. If we use a 
circle as structural element, the shape of the forest will be 
remodeled in a symmetric way, all along the boundaries. The 
diameter of the structural element determines the minimum 
distance that a forest patch must have from its center to all 
the points of its boundaries, in order to be considered in the 
FSQ computation. 
As a result of the Erosion, the forest patches with a linear 
shape (a thin stripe less than 100 meters of amplitude) 
disappear from the map, as it can be seen in the experimental 
results reported in Section II.E. All the other patches are 
reduced by the erosion, to minimize the “edge” effect. With 
the introduction of the Erosion operator, we applied to each 
area Ak
i the Erosion operator E[], thus leading to a new 
expression of FSQ, denoted by FSQe: 
 
FSQe = iksi + ai + pi)*E[Ak
i]/S  
(2) 
The new operator FSQe takes into consideration both the 
quantitative (areas) and the qualitative (shapes) aspects of the 
forest patches. 
 
C. The hardware and software infrastructure 
In order to compute the values of FSQ in (1) and (2), we 
settled a software environment, capable of measuring the 
areas  of the territories of the municipalities under 
investigation, the areas of the forest patches, and to 
implement 
the 
Erosion 
operator. 
The 
same 
hardware/software infrastructure has been used both for the 
previous results [1][2][3], and for the new research activity 
here  presented. 
23
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The hardware resource is a standard Workstation with a 
64 bit Intel® CoreTM I7-3630QM microprocessor at 2.4 
GHz, with 12 GB RAM with a Full HD resolution monitor, 
for easily displaying details of the maps, and Windows 10 
operating system. 
The software equipment is based on QGIS software [18], 
2.14 version, for visualizing, managing and processing 
geospatial information. In fact, as in the previous 
contribution [1][2][3], we have used a GIS map database 
(ERSAF database), free available from the Region 
Lombardy [16], in order to derive the useful description 
about the distribution of the forest in the territory. In Figure 
4, the visual map for a portion of the Municipality of the 
preliminary case study [1] is shown. Different colors refer to 
different types of forests. Particularly, the compact pink area 
refers to the forest plantation. The other colors refer to 
natural forests. 
The second GIS map we used is provided by ISTAT, the 
Italian National Institute of Statistics, for the administrative 
boundaries of the municipalities [20]. By using the QGIS 
primitives, it is possible to compute on this map the area of 
the municipality under investigation, i.e., the value of S in 
(1) and (2). By combining information of the two GIS maps 
[16][20], it is possible to define exactly which of the Forests 
Types of the ERASAF Database belongs to each  
Municipality under investigation. 
The Erosion operator (see Section II.B) has been 
implemented by using the primitives of morphological 
operators in Matlab environment [21] for image processing. 
Finally, some ad hoc software has been developed for  the 
generation of the quantitative results of Section III and their 
storing and management in a typical relational database, to 
facilitate access and subsequent use in future  researches. 
D. The Study Area 
The study area in the preliminary research [1] is the 
Municipality of Travacò Siccomario. It is located in the 
Lombardy plain at an average altitude above sea level of 66 
meters, and is mainly characterized by agricultural fields and 
urban areas. Natural forest areas are localized along 
watercourses and channels, often as linear elements 
dominated by mixed woody species as Salix alba, Populus 
alba, Quercus robur, Ulmus minor and, very frequently, the 
invasive Robinia pseudacacia. Wide forest patches are 
limited and dominated by the woody species above 
mentioned. As we consider only forest types that have at 
least one occurrence in the territory of area greater than 1 ha, 
only 
three 
types 
of 
natural 
forests 
survive 
these 
requirements: the Salix alba communities, the Populus alba 
communities, and Robinia pseudoacacia communities. 
Moreover, in this study we want to include also 
plantations in the FSQ computation. In 2003-2004, one of 
the great plain forests of the Lombardy Region was realized 
in this municipality. This project was entitled “The Great 
Forest between the Two Rivers”, because it is at the join of 
Ticino with Po River (see Figure 5). In particular, meso-
xerophilous and meso-igrophilous forest patches were 
realized on a surface of about 41 ha, planting native trees 
(such Populus nigra, Ulmus minor, Acer campestre, Malus 
sylvestris, Carpinus betulus, Quercus robur, Salix alba, 
Alnus glutinosa, Populus alba, Prunus padus) and native 
shrubs (such Crataegus monogyna, Corylus avellana, 
Prunus spinosa, Sambucus nigra, Cornus sanguinea, 
Frangula 
alnus, 
Viburnum 
opulus, 
Salix 
cinerea). 
Considering the woody floristic composition, the new forest 
can be considered as the forest type Oak-Elm wood (also 
including the Black Alder variant) [22]. The value set of 
components for stratification, alien and protected species is 
3,2,2 for this plantation. In Table II, all the forest types, of 
area greater than 1 ha, for the case study of Travacò 
Siccomario are shown. 
TABLE II.  
FOREST TYPES FOR THE PRELIMINARY CASE STUDY [1]. 
Naturalistic 
components 
 (si, ai, pi) 
Description of forest types 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
(1,1,0) 
Willow wood of bank 
(3,1,0) 
White Poplar formation 
(2,1,0) 
Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
(3,2,2) 
Plantation (Oak-Elm wood, also including the 
Black Alder variant) 
 
 
Figure 4.  
The territory under investigation (Municipality of Travacò 
Siccomario) in the preliminary case study [1]: the blocked colored areas 
superimposed on the geographic map show the presence of the natural 
forests (light greeen and light blue) and the plantation (pink). 
 
Figure 5.  
The “Great Forest between the Two Rivers” forest plantation 
project: an overview of the territory where river Ticino joins the river Po. 
Travacò Siccomario, Pavia, Italy, satellite map 
24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 6.  
The territory under investigation after the Erosion operator 
applied to all the forest patches.  
 
E.  Preliminary Experimental Results 
By applying the erosion operator to compute the FSQe, 
according to (2), we can compare the effect of the Erosion on  
each forest types of Table II. Clearly, the erosion has reduced 
the areas of the forest patch. However, the loss of the areas is 
not equal for all the four forest types. In fact, the loss is 
determined by the shapes of the patches, which are quite 
different in the territory under examination. The loss 
percentages are the following: 3.6% for the plantation, 
35.2% for the Salix alba communities, 51.3% for the 
Populus alba communities, and 61.2% for the Robinia 
pseudoacacia communities. It is interesting to note that the 
plantation is the forest type with the lowest loss; this means 
that in the project the plantation patch has a shape, which is 
very close to an ideal core area. Moreover, the Robinia 
pseudoacacia communities have the highest loss, and it is a 
positive aspect, because of the very low floristic quality, due 
to the dominance of alien species in linear and fragmented 
patches. In Figure 6, the map of the territory after the erosion 
is shown. The reduction of the colored areas of the forests 
types is evident, by comparing Figure 6 to Figure 4. In 
Figure 7, the areas of the forests (Y axis) before and after the 
erosion are plot, for each forest type of Table II.  
 
III. 
PLANNING CONSERVATION POLICIES USING THE FSQ 
INDICATOR 
 
In the preliminary study [1], we have evaluated the 
naturalistic components of the plantation in the municipality 
of Travacò Siccomario. This initial idea can be further 
investigated by directly explaining the contribution of 
plantations in the definition of the FSQ indicator. This 
operation is computed starting from the original formula (1) 
of FSQ, without the erosion operator, because, according to 
the results reported in Section II, the Erosion operator is 
quite irrelevant on the plantations (Figure 7), due to their 
compact shapes. 
Suppose that, in a given municipality under investigation, 
there is a plantation of area Ap, with its naturalistic 
components (sp, ap, pp). For simplicity, we show the 
discussion in the case of a single plantation, but the theory 
can be easily extended to the case of more than one patches. 
By reconsidering formula (1), we can separate the 
contribution to the global value of FSQ in two distinct parts: 
the first is due to the natural forest patches in the territory, 
the second is due to the plantation only. A new definition of 
FSQ is possible, which considers also the plantation 
contribution. We denote this “new” FSQ with the symbols 
FSQ’, and (1) becomes: 
 
 FSQ’ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S + sp + ap + pp)*Ap/S (3) 
 
 Usually, a plantation have not still developed a typical 
structure of mature wood; moreover its naturalistic 
component can be only estimated, in its actual value of the 
triplet (as in the first case study of Travacò Siccomario, 
wheresp, ap, pp) has been set to (3,2,2)), but we have no 
assurance that these values will be the same after 20-30 
years, when the plantation will become, presumably, a new 
mature and “natural” forest. For this reason, it is interesting 
to study the variation of FSQ’ in (3), for each possible values 
of the triplet sp, ap, pp). This analyses can express the 
strength of the naturalistic components in rising (or 
lowering) the FSQ’ indicator. By analyzing (3), we can 
observe that the sum of the three naturalistic components sp, 
ap, pp) is a linear, multiplicative coefficient of the second 
term. In order to reduce the complexity of the study 
(actually, in (3) there are four independent variables, i.e., the 
area of the plantation Ap and the three components sp, ap, 
pp), we can substitute in (3) one variable x defined as 
 
 
x = sp + ap + pp  
(4) 
 
where x can assume only discrete values, in the range [1,9]. 
By observing that in (3) the first term corresponds to the 
FSQ value, computed without plantations according to (1), 
by substituting the value of FSQ (1) and x (4) in (3), we can 
write 
 
 
FSQ’ = FSQ + x*Ap/S 
(5) 
 
where FSQ’ is the new value of the FSQ indicator, which 
includes plantations too, FSQ is the original value, which 
excludes plantation, according to the initial hypothesis [2], 
[3], x is the independent variable and Ap is the area of the 
plantation. The new definition of FSQ’ can be used to reach 
two different goals: (a) if the plantation is already present in 
the territory, by varying x, we can compute the minimum 
and maximum gain of the FSQ value; (b) if the plantation is 
not still present, but it is the object of a planned, future 
project of a policy for forest conservation, it is possible to 
study as the indicator can improve, from its actual value of 
FSQ to the new value, i.e., FSQ’, and consequently we can 
also determine to what extent the class of forest quality of  
 
Travacò Siccomario, Pavia, Italy, satellite map 
25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7.  The areas (in square meters, on Y-axis) for each the forest types (on the X-axis), before and after the Erosion. 
 
the territory may improve (according to Table I). The two 
cases will be analysed in details in Section III.A and Section 
III.B, respectively.  
 
A. Ten case studies of existing plantations 
We consider ten case studies, which are part of the 
project, “Ten Great Forests for the Plain”, in Region 
Lombardy, in the North part of Italy (Figure 8). The project 
is the result of two years of intensive work toward a goal 
strongly shared by Regions, Provinces, Municipalities, 
ERSAF "Regional Agency for Services to Agriculture and 
Forests" and several other organizations and associations in 
the area. At present, eight forests have been funded, and 
seven have been completed. By careful analysing the ERSAF 
GIS database [16], we have identified further three great 
plantations in Region Lombardy. Therefore, we consider ten 
case studies, listed in Table III. Their positions in Region 
Lombardy are depicted in Figure 9. For completeness, in 
Table IV, a list of the natural forest types located in the 
territories of the ten case studies is provided, together with 
their reference syntaxa and the values of the triplets of 
naturalistic components. The Type Lab field in the Table is a 
label, which refers to the ERSAF database [16] used as input 
data source, and it is reported to help any comparative 
analysis and reference to the database. Moreover, in Table V, 
the membership of each forest type to each case study is 
reported.  
By using the primitives of the open source QGIS 
software [18] on the GIS ERSAF data set [16], for each 
municipality of the ten case studies, we have computed the 
following values: 
 
 
the FSQ value (according to (1)) ; 
 
the areas of all the plantations (the term Ap in (5)). 
 
At this point of the analysis, we can obtain a first 
important set of results: for each case study, it is possible to 
plot FSQ’, according to (5), as a function of x (see(4)), i.e., 
as a function of the forest quality of the plantation, expressed 
in terms of its naturalistic components of stratification, alien 
and protected species. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  The geographic position of Region Lombardy in the North West 
part of Italy. 
 
 
Figure 9.  The ten case studies in the Region Lombardy. 
Area (mq) 
 
26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III.  
THE TEN CASE STUDIES OF EXISTING PLANTATIONS: 
DENOMINATION AND GEOGRAPHICAL COORDINATES. 
Case 
study 
Name of the 
Municipality 
Geographic Position  
Latitude 
Longitude 
1 
Travacò 
Siccomario 
45° 9'7.58"N 
 9° 9'42.82"E 
2 
San Gervasio 
Bresciano 
45°18'22.41"N 
10° 8'54.31"E 
3 
Milzano 
45°16'22.29"N 
10°11'29.93"E 
4 
Cremona 
45° 8'25.53"N 
10° 1'55.86"E 
5 
Gadesco-Pieve 
Delmona 
45° 9'38.92"N 
10° 7'19.31"E 
6 
Gerre De’ 
Caprioli 
45° 5'26.18"N 
10° 2'7.59"E 
7 
Casalmaggiore 
44°59'17.91"N 
10°25'10.63"E 
8 
Bigarello 
45°10'55.20"N 
10°54'44.63"E 
9 
Carbonara di Po 
45° 2'16.78"N 
11°13'26.36"E 
10 
Pioltello 
45°29'22.90"N 
 9°19'34.25"E 
 
TABLE IV.  
FOREST TYPES IN THE TEN CASE STUDIES: REFERENCE 
SYNTAXA AND NATURALISTIC COMPONENTS. 
Type 
Laba 
 
Naturalistic 
components 
(si, ai, pi) 
Description of forest types 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
1 
3,2,3 
Oak-Hornbeam wood of the lowlands  
Syntaxa: 
Polygonato 
multiflori-Quercetum 
roboris subass. carpinetosum and anemonetosum 
Sartori 1984; Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus 
and Physospermum cornubiense community; 
Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus and Holcus 
mollis community 
14-15 
3,2,2 
Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder 
variant) 
Syntaxa: 
Polygonato 
multiflori-Quercetum 
roboris subass. ulmetosum Sartori 1984 
172 
3,3,1 
 Black Alder wood of gulley 
Syntaxa: Alnus glutinosa, Populus alba and 
Ulmus minor community 
173 
2,3,2 
Typical Black Alder wood 
Syntaxa: Osmundo regalis-Alnetum glutinosae 
Vanden Berghen 1971; Carici elongatae-
Alnetum glutinosae W. Koch 1926 et R. Tx. 
1931; Carici acutiformis-Alnetum glutinosae 
Scamoni 1935 
177 
1,1,0 
Willow wood of bank 
Syntaxa: Salix alba community; Salicetum albae 
Issler 1926 
183 
3,1,0 
White Poplar formation 
Syntaxa: Populus alba community  
188 
2,1,0 
Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa: Robinia pseudoacacia community 
189 
3,2,0 
Mixed Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa:Robinia pseudoacacia, Quercus robur 
and Ulmus minor community 
a. According to ERSAF database [16] 
 
 
The fundamental question is: what is the improvement of 
the forest quality due to the presence of the plantation, 
expressed by the indicator FSQ’, if compared to the situation 
where plantations are not present or considered (FSQ value)? 
To find the answer, it is convenient to plot the absolute 
gain of FSQ’ over FSQ, as a function of x. By considering 
(5), we can express the absolute gain as 
 
 
FSQ’/FSQ = 1 + x *Ap/[S*FSQ] 
(6) 
 
In Figures 10 and 11, the absolute gain in (6), expressed 
as a percentage, is plot as a function of x, for the ten case 
studies. They are grouped in two sets: the first one (Figure 
10) refers to the municipalities that show a modest increment 
of the FSQ’ (low increasing cases), if compared to FSQ (less 
than 5%). The second set shows very interesting gains (high 
increasing cases), up to 90%. Obviously, Equation (6) is a 
straight line, where the slope is directly proportional to the 
area of the plantation (Ap) and inversely proportional to the 
area of the municipality. For this reason, case studies where 
the area of the plantation is considerably less that the area of 
the municipality show less values of gain. 
The case study #8, Bigarello, suggests important 
considerations about policy of forest conservation. In fact, as 
it can be inferred from Table V, in the municipality of case 
study # 8 there are not natural forests of areas greater than 1 
ha; therefore, the value of FSQ is zero. For this reason, this 
case study does not appear in Figure 10 and 11, because the 
absolute gain is numerically, equal to infinite (FSQ = 0 in 
(6)). 
The plots of Figures 10 and 11 are very interesting 
because they show a potential very impressive gain in the 
Forest Status quality Indicator, if we choose carefully the 
area of the plantation and also the forest types involved, i.e., 
their naturalistic components, expressed by the cumulative 
variable x. 
For this reason, we have analysed the projects of the 
plantations and, considering the planted species, we have 
defined the corresponding forest types (see Table VI) with 
their current value of the triplet (sp, ap, pp) for each case 
study, as follows: 
 
 
Case Study 
#1: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 2  
 
Case Study 
#2: 
sp = 3; ap = 3; pp = 3 
 
Case Study 
#3: 
 sp = 3; ap = 3; pp = 3 
 
Case Study 
#4: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 2 
 
Case Study 
#5: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 2 
 
Case Study 
#6: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 2 
 
Case Study 
#7: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 2 
 
Case Study 
#8: 
sp = 3; ap = 3; pp = 3 
 
Case Study 
#9: 
sp = 3; ap = 3; pp = 3 
 
Case Study 
#10: 
sp = 3; ap = 2; pp = 3 
(7) 
 
By substituting (4) and (7) in (6), we can obtain the 
absolute gain of the forest plantation, for each case study. 
The final results are summarized in Table VII. Some of them 
are noteworthy: for example case study # 8 goes from an 
initial dramatic situation (FSQ = 0, i. e., no forests) to a 
limited but interesting little improvement (FSQ’ = 0.13). 
Furthermore, in the case study #6, thanks to the new 
plantation, the municipality is able to improve its class of 
forest quality, from class 1 (FSQ = 0,014784877, thus < 0.9, 
See Table I), to class 2 (FSQ’ = 0,925521).  In the other 
27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cases, the increasing in the FSQ’ is not sufficient to 
determine also an improving in the forest quality class. 
However, the absolute gain (expressed in percentage in 
Table VII) can be relevant, as in the case studies #2, #7, and 
#10 and, presumably, an enlargement of the plantation will 
be sufficient to improve the forest quality class. 
Moreover, the enlargement is the only option, because 
the forest types corresponding to the plantations are coherent 
with the natural potentiality of the territories and cannot be 
changed. 
 
TABLE V.  
FOREST TYPES IN THE TEN CASE STUDIES. 
Type Laba 
Forest Types 
Case Study 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
1 
Oak-Hornbeam wood of the lowlands 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14-15 
Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder variant) 
 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
172 
Black Alder wood of gulley 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
173 
Typical Black Alder wood 
 
 * 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
177 
Willow wood of bank 
* 
 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
183 
White Poplar formation 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188 
Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
189 
Mixed Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
 
 * 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
a. According to ERSAF database [16]
 
 
Figure 10.  The absolute gain of FSQ’ over FSQ, for low-increasing cases. 
 
Figure 11.  The absolute gain of FSQ’ over FSQ, for high-increasing cases. 
28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 12.  The map of the FSQ indicator on the Region Lombardy. 
B. The use of FSQ’indicator for conservation policies  
Developing biodiversity conservation planning tools is 
a big challenge for scientists [23][24]. The two main 
points a conservation policy should focus on are [25]: 
 
 
to identify what are the sites where a quantitative 
target for biodiversity conservation has to be 
achieved and 
 
to measure the contribution that these sites make to 
biodiversity conservation. 
 
We think that the new formulation of the Forest Status 
Quality Indicator, i.e., the expression of FSQ’ (according 
to (3)) can be a valid help in the achievement of these 
goals. First of all, the term quantitative target is well 
expressed by an indicator of type B [26], or performance 
indicator, such as the FSQ’ is. In fact, the FSQ’ indicator, 
compares the current conditions of the forest status quality 
to a specific set of reference conditions (the metric of 
Table I, which is the same for the original definition of 
FSQ and for FSQ’).  
In order to identify the sites where  high-impact policy 
of restoration and/or requalification of forest are 
preferable, we can use the value of FSQ in order to 
identify the municipality, i.e., the sites, where the project 
and realization of plantation can be a valid response to 
conservation issues. For this purpose, we can consider the 
municipalities whose FSQ value (according to (1)) is in the 
class 1 (unsatisfactory, see Table I), i.e., the FSQ value is 
less than the first range threshold of 0.9. We have 
computed the values of FSQ for all the 1544 municipalities 
29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of Region Lombardy (we recall that this value is computed 
without the plantation contribution, only natural forest are 
considered.)  
In Figure 12, we have shown the visual map of Region 
Lombardy; besides the five classes, the first class  is split 
in two colors: in black, to highlight the municipalities of 
class 1 with FSQ = 0, and  in red, the municipalities of 
class 1 but FSQ > 0. By looking to the map, conservation 
policy maker should best individuate sites for plantation 
restoration. The situation in Lombardy is very worrying: a 
percentage of 54,3% of the municipalities are of class 1, 
with almost  13% of the municipalities has a FSQ value 
equal to zero. The distributions of the municipalities for 
each class of forest quality (according to Table I) is shown 
in Figure 13. 
TABLE VI.  
THE FOREST TYPES FOR THE TEN CASE STUDIES. 
Case 
study 
Forest 
type 
corresponding to the 
plantation 
Area of 
the forest 
plantation 
(in ha) 
1 
Oak-Elm wood 
42 
2 
Mix between Oak-Elm 
wood, 
Oak-Hornbeam 
wood of the lowland, 
eastern variant, and Oak-
El wood, variant with 
shrubs  
37 
3 
Mix between Oak-Elm 
wood, 
Oak-Hornbeam 
wood, eastern variant, 
and 
Oak-El 
wood, 
shrubby variant 
3 
4 
Oak-Elm wood 
93 
5 
Oak-Elm wood 
4 
6 
Oak-Elm wood 
100 
7 
Oak-Elm wood 
246 
8 
Oak-Hornbeam wood of 
the 
lowland, 
eastern 
variant 
40 
9 
Oak-Hornbeam wood of 
the 
lowland, 
eastern 
variant 
15 
10 
Oak-Hornbeam of the 
lowland 
14 
 
TABLE VII.  
THE GAIN OF THE PLANTATION, FOR EACH CASE 
STUDY. 
Case 
study 
FSQ 
(without 
plantation) 
FSQ’ 
(with 
plantation) 
Absolute gain 
(formula (6)) 
1 
0.056634801 
0.228433 
4.03% 
2 
0,022777227 
0,336234 
14.8% 
3 
0,138502546 
0,163295 
1.18% 
4 
0,060074294 
0,151868 
2.53% 
5 
0,011700202 
0,02501 
2.14% 
6 
0,014784877 
0,925521 
62.6% 
7 
0,003876087 
0,271513 
70.05% 
8 
0 
0,135032936 
NaN 
9 
0,024306075 
0,113267 
4.66% 
10 
0.003438496 
0.0775 
22.54% 
Once 
we 
have 
individuated 
the 
sites 
where 
conservation policy should be realized, we can measure 
the effect of the gain of the forest status quality due to new 
plantations by computing the corresponding value of 
FSQ’, exactly as we have shown for the ten case studies. 
The absolute gain according to (6) is a good indicator of 
the efficacy of the conservation policy, as it expresses the 
improvement of forest quality due to the new plantation 
realized in the territory under investigation.  
Suppose, for example, that a municipality has a current 
value of FSQ below the first threshold, and we want to 
reach at least the class number 2. By applying the 
definition of the metric, this means that FSQ’ must be at 
least greater than 0.9. Supposing to choose a high quality 
forest for plantation, namely a forest showing the highest 
value for the naturalistic components (3,3,3), by 
substituting FSQ’ = 0.9 and x = 9 in (6):  
 
 
0.9/FSQ = 1 + 9 *Ap/[S*FSQ] 
(8) 
 
we can derive the minimum area of the forest plantation 
Ap to reach the goal: 
 
 
Ap = S *(0.9-FSQ)/9 
(9) 
 
In this way, we can use the naturalistic components, 
the FSQ and FSQ’ indicators to help policy makers to 
determine where and how perform a possible policy of 
forest requalification by new plantation settlements. 
However, the choice of the forest type in the area of 
plantation cannot primarily follow the criterion of the 
highest value for the triplet of the naturalistic components, 
but the one of the coherence of the forest type with the 
natural potentiality and ecological conditions of such area. 
Subsequently, the area of the plantation  sufficient to reach 
our goal will be calculated, as in (9).  To better understand 
this concept of coherence, we can consider the example of 
the plain rivers, where forests will not reach the highest 
values for the naturalistic component, due to the human 
and natural disturbance. For this reason, policy makers 
have to be aware of the necessity of choosing wide areas 
for the plantations. 
 
 
Figure 13.  The distribution of all the municipalities of Region 
Lombardy, in each class of forest quality, according to the metric (See 
Table I). 
30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, an application of the innovative indicator 
for forest quality assessment has been proposed with the 
aim to support planning policies for forest conservation. 
Despite the fact that it is an experimental research model, 
the results suggest that it could be used in real world 
purposes and cases. Actually, the analysed case studies 
confirm that our methodological approach is realistic in 
evaluating the forest quality. Moreover, it can give useful 
information about (a) the choice of forest types to enhance 
and (b) the surfaces necessary to plantations, if at least a 
satisfactory level of forest quality is pursued. The 
computation of such indicator on the territory of Region 
Lombardy is particularly challenging due to the following 
features:  Region Lombardy ranks first in Italy for the 
population and for the number of local municipalities, 
second for population density, and fourth for area. It is 
also the most invaded Region by non-native species, 
which represent the 16.9% of the total vascular flora [27]. 
Furthermore, in Lombardy more than 800 municipalities 
show an unsatisfactory level of forest quality, and they are 
more concentrated in the Po Plain. Such Plain is a very 
polluted area, with values of PM2.5 (mg/cubic meter)  
between 26 and 35, and its greatest city, Milan, showing 
values between 36 and 69 [28]. Here, we firmly believe 
that  serious policies of forest restoration are crucial, not 
only for biodiversity conservation, but also for the human 
health, due to the important role of forests in pollution 
control [29]. 
The present application of the FSQ, together with the 
previous contributions on the same topic [1][2][3], 
highlights the strength of the synergy between the 
botanical and computer science competences in addressing 
problems about environmental topics and in providing 
indicator based solutions for policy makers and planners. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Assini and M. G. Albanesi, “A New Improvement of the 
Naturalistic Indicator of Forest Quality. An Italian Case 
Study,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Bioenvironment, 
Biodiversity 
and 
Renewable 
Energies 
(BIONATURE 
2016), 
Lisbon 
(Portugal), 26-20 June 2016, pp. 7-10, Copyright (©) 
IARIA, 2016, ISBN 978-1-61208-489-3.  
[2] S. Assini and M. G. Albanesi, “A Naturalistic Indicator of 
the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land Use 
Anthropentropy 
Factor,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Sixth 
International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity 
and Renewable Energies (BIONATURE 2015), Rome 
(Italy), 24-29 May 2015, Copyright (©) IARIA, 2015, pp. 
27-33, ISBN 978-1-61208-410-7. 
[3] S. Assini and M.G. Albanesi, “A New Biodiversity 
Composite Indicator Based on Anthropentropy and Forest 
Quality Assessment. Framework, Theory, and Case Studies 
of Italian Territory,” IARIA International Journal On 
Advances in Life Sciences, 7 (3-4), 2015, pp. 177-194. 
[4] T. Gao, A.B. Nielsen, and M. Hedblom, “Reviewing the 
strength of evidence of biodiversity indicators for forest 
ecosystems in Europe,”  Ecological Indicators,  57, 2015, 
pp. 420-434. 
[5] S. Schindler, K. Poirazidis, and T. Wrbka, “Towards a core 
set of landscape metrics for biodiversity assessments: A 
case study from Dadia National Park, Greece,” Ecological 
Indicators,  8, 2008, pp. 502-514. 
[6] P. Digiovinazzo, G. F. Ficetola, L. Bottoni, C. Andreis, and 
E. Padoa-Schioppa, "Ecological thresholds in herb 
communities for the management of suburban fragmented 
forests,” Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 259, 2010, 
pp. 343-349. 
[7] D. A. Saunders, R. J. Hobbs, and C. R. Margules, 
"Biological consequences of ecosystem fragmentation: a 
review,” Conservation Biology, vol. 5, 1991, pp. 18-32. 
[8] O. Honnay, K. Verheyen, and M. Hermy, “Permeability of 
ancient forest edges for weedy plant species invasion,” 
Forest Ecology and Management, vol.161, 2002, pp.109-
122. 
[9] W. F. Laurance et al., “Ecosystem decay of Amazon forest 
fragments: a 22-year investigation,” Conservation Biology, 
vol. 16, 2002, pp. 605-618. 
[10] Z. Dzwonko and S. Loster, “Species richness of small 
woodlands 
on 
the 
western 
Carpathians 
foothills,” 
Vegetatio, vol. 76, 1988, pp. 15-27. 
[11] Z. Dzwonko and S. Loster, “Species richness and seed 
dispersal to secondary woods in southern Poland,” Journal 
of Biogeography, vol. 19, 1992, pp. 195-204. 
[12] D. R. Patton, “A diversity index for quantifying habitat 
edge,” Wildlife Society Bulletin, vol. 3, 1975, pp. 171-173. 
[13]  O. Honnay, M. Hermy, and P. Coppin, “Effects of area, 
age and diversity of forest patches in Belgium on plant 
species richness, and implication for conservation and 
restoration,” Biological Conservation, vol. 87, 1999, pp. 
73-84. 
[14] F. Sartori and S. Assini, “First evaluation of the regional 
afforestation actions of the lombardy plain,” Transl. “Prime 
valutazioni sulle opere regionali di riforestazione della 
pinaura lombarda,” «NATURA BRESCIANA» Ann. Mus. 
Civ. Sc. Nat., Brescia, 36, 2009, pp. 191-196. 
[15] S. Assini and F. Sartori, “Vegetation and restoration – 
Monitoring of the actions: the great plain forests of the 
Lombardy Region. Analyses and perspectives,” Transl. 
“Vegetazione e riqualificazione – Monitoraggio degli 
interventi: le grandi foreste di pianura della Regione 
Lombardia. Analisi e prospettive,” Quaderni di Tutela del 
Territorio, Regione Piemonte, 3, pp. 57-65, 2009. 
[16] Regional Regional Agency for Services to Agriculture and 
Forests, Transl. Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e 
Foreste, “Map of Forest Types of Lombardia,” Transl. 
“Carta 
dei 
tipi 
reali 
forestali 
della 
Lombardia,” 
http://www.geoportale.regione.lombardia.it/galleria-mappe, 
page 3 [retrieved: May, 2017]. 
[17] C. Andreis and F. Sartori, eds, “Forest vegetation of 
Lombardia. 
Phytosociological 
classification,” 
Transl. 
“Vegetazione forestale della Lombardia. Inquadramento 
fitosociologico,” Archivio Geobotanico, vol. 12-13, 2011, 
pp. 1-215. 
[18] QuantumGIS 
software, 
http://www.qgis.org/en/site/ 
[retrieved: May, 2017]. 
[19] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, Morphological 
image processing. 
[20] ISTAT, On line database of Territorial and Cartographic 
information, 
http://www.istat.it/it/strumenti/territorio-e-
cartografia [retrieved: May, 2017] 
[21] Matlab 
software, 
https://it.mathworks.com/help/images/ 
[retrieved: May, 2017]. 
31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[22] R. del Favero, ed., “The forest types of Lombardy,” Transl. 
“I tipi forestale della Lombardia”, CIERRE Edizioni, pp. 
506, 2002. 
[23] D. Simberloff, “The role of science in the preservation of 
forest biodiversity,” Forest Ecology and Management , vol. 
115, 1999, pp. 101-111. 
[24] L.  Failinga and R. Gregory, “Ten common mistakes in 
designing biodiversity indicators for forest policy,” Journal 
of Environmental Management, vol. 68, 2003, pp. 121–
132. 
[25] Sahotra Sarkar et al., “Biodiversity Conservation Planning 
Tools: Present Status and Challenges for the Future,” Annu. 
Rev. Environ. Resour, vol. 31, 2006, pp. 123–59. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.energy.31.042606.085844. 
[26] E. Smeets and R. Weterings, “Environmental indicators: 
typology and overview,” European Environment Agency 
Technical 
Report 
n. 
25/1999 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/TEC25 
[retrieved: 
May, 2017] 
[27] L. Celesti-Grapow et al., “Non-native flora of Italy. Species 
distribution and threats,” Plat Biosystems, vol. 144(1), 
2010, pp. 12-28. 
[28] Global ambient air pollution, World Health Organization, 
http://maps.who.int/airpollution/ [retrieved: May, 2017] 
[29] Forest Ecosystem Services,  Europen Commission JRC, 
http://forest.jrc.ec.europa.eu/activities/forest-ecosystem-
services/ [retrieved: May, 2017]. 
32
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

