A WYSIWYM Interface for Semantic Enrichment of
E-Prescriptions using Linked Open Drug Data
Ali Khalili∗ and Bita Sedaghati†
∗Institute of Informatics, University of Leipzig, Germany
khalili@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
†Institute of Pharmacy, University of Leipzig, Germany
bita.sedaghati@uni-leipzig.de
Abstract—In this paper, we present an approach to enrich
electronic prescriptions using linked open drug data. The pro-
posed approach employs WYSIWYM (What-You-See-Is-What-
You-Mean) interface for integrated authoring, visualization and
browsing of semantic data in medical prescriptions. The gen-
erated semantic medical prescriptions serve as intelligent e-
prescription documents enriched by drug-related meta-data
thereby know about their content and the possible interactions.
In an e-health system, semantic prescriptions provide an inter-
operable interface which helps patients, physicians, pharmacists,
researchers and pharma companies to collaboratively improve
the quality of pharmaceutical services by facilitating the process
of shared decision making. In order to showcase semantic
prescription we develop a mobile/web application called Pharmer.
Pharmer provides different views for the different personas
involved in the process of e-prescribing. It employs datasets in
Linked Open Drug Data (LODD) such as DBpedia, DrugBank,
DailyMed and RxNorm to automatically detect the drugs in a
prescription and to collect multidimensional data on them. It
also supports automatic prevention of possible drug interactions
in a prescription.
Keywords—Semantic prescription, e-prescription, WYSIWYM,
semantic annotation, e-health.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this article, we elaborate on the basic requirements of se-
mantic prescriptions and will extend our previously published
work [1] to address novel user interfaces as well as novel
shareholders to take advantage out of the semantic medical
prescriptions.
As reported in MedicineNet [2], medication errors are the
most common type of medical errors in health care. Errors
such as improper dose of medicine, adverse drug interactions,
food interactions, etc. often stem from invalid prescriptions
and unawareness of the patients. Medication-oriented errors are
usually the result of failures during the medication process [3].
Electronic prescriptions which are recently gaining attention in
the e-health domain, are one of the solutions proposed to solve
these type of errors. In an e-prescription system, prescriber
electronically sends an accurate, error-free prescription directly
to a pharmacy from the point-of-care.
During the recent years, the adoption of e-prescriptions has
been spreading relatively rapidly. In the US, the so called Elec-
tronic Prescribing Incentive Program is a reporting program
that uses a combination of incentive payments and payment
adjustments to encourage electronic prescribing by eligible
professionals [4]. As recently published by [5], hospitals’
use of computerized prescriptions prevented 17 million drug
errors in a single year in the United States. The Canadian
Medical Association (CMA) and the Canadian Pharmacists
Association (CPhA) have approved a joint statement on the
future of e-prescribing that aims to have all prescriptions for
Canadians created, signed and transmitted electronically by
2015. The Australian government removed commonwealth leg-
islative barriers to electronic prescribing started from 2007 [6].
A system called epSOS [7], which performs the use of e-
prescriptions all around Europe, is currently passing the ex-
tensive practical testing phase.
However, one of the main challenges in current e-
prescription systems is dealing with the heterogeneity of avail-
able information sources. There exist already different sources
of information addressing different aspects of pharmaceutical
research. Information about chemical, pharmacological and
pharmaceutical drug data, clinical trials, approved prescription
drugs, drugs activity against drug targets such as proteins,
gene-disease-drug associations, adverse effects of marketed
drugs, etc. are some examples of these diverse information.
Managing these dynamic pieces of information within current
e-prescription systems without blurring the border of the
existing pharmaceutical information islands is a cumbersome
task. On the other hand, Linked Open Data as an effort to
interlink and integrate these isolated sources of information
is obtaining more attention in the domain of pharmaceutical,
medical and life sciences.
Combining the best practices from Linked Open Data to-
gether with e-prescription systems can provide an opportunity
for patients, researchers as well as practitioners to collaborate
together in a synergetic way. A consequence of introducing
linked data in health care sector is that it signiﬁcantly changes
the daily duties of the employees of the health care sector.
Therefore, the most challenging aspect will not be the tech-
nology but rather changing the mind-set of the employees
and the training of the new technology [8]. Furthermore, the
information generated via that approach can be employed as
a data source for researchers. Drug companies are also able
then to take the advantage of considering these informative
statistical data.
Semantic prescriptions are a proposed approach to utilize
semantic web technologies in e-prescription systems. As intel-
204
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ligent prescriptions, they can automatically handle the medical
errors occurring in prescriptions and increase the awareness of
the patients about the prescribed drugs and drug consumption
in general. Semantic prescriptions also enable the creation
of more efﬁcient and effective search approaches for drug
discovery and consumption. We created a tool called Pharmer
as a showcase application to facilitate the process of semantic
prescription generation. Pharmer adopts a bottom-up approach
for enriching the normal e-prescriptions with semantic anno-
tations using a set of predeﬁned datasets from Linked Open
Data.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows:
Section II, Section III and Section IV provide a background
on the basic concepts such as Linked Open Data, Semantic
Content Authoring and WYSIWYM (What-You-See-Is-What-
You-Mean) interface employed in this paper. In Section V,
we describe the process of semantic e-prescribing and will
showcase Pharmer as a WYSIWYM UI to effectively create
semantic prescriptions. Then we discuss the possible use cases
of Pharmer in Section VI. To better clarify the use cases of
the Pharmer system, an example scenario including Pharmer
stakeholders is drawn in Section VI-C. Finally, Section VII
concludes with an outlook on future work.
II.
LODD APPLICATIONS
In computing, Linked Data describes a method of publishing
structured data so that it can be interlinked and become more
useful. It builds upon standard Web technologies such as HTTP
and URIs, but rather than using them to serve web pages for
human readers, it extends them to share information in a way
that can be read automatically by computers. This enables data
from different sources to be connected and queried [9]. Tim
Berners-Lee, the inventor of the Web and Linked Data initiator,
suggested a 5 star deployment scheme for Linked Open Data:
1) make your stuff available on the Web (whatever format)
under an open license, 2) make it available as structured data
(e.g., Excel instead of image scan of a table), 3) use non-
proprietary formats (e.g., CSV instead of Excel), 4) use URIs
to identify things, so that people can point at your stuff, 5)
link your data to other data to provide context.
A. Linked Open Drug Data (LODD)
Particularly in the areas of health care and life sciences
with the wealth of available data, large scale integration
projects like Bio2RDF [10], Chem2Bio2RDF [11], and the
W3C HCLS’s (Health Care and Life Sciences) Linked Open
Drug Data (LODD) [12] have not only signiﬁcantly contributed
to the development of the Linked Open Data effort, but have
also made social and technical contributions towards data
integration, knowledge management, and knowledge discovery.
There are already many interesting information on pharma-
ceutical research available on the Web. The sources of data
range from drugs general information, interactions and impacts
of the drugs on gene expression, through to the results of
clinical trials. LODD [13] has surveyed publicly available data
about drugs, created Linked Data representations of the data
sets, and identiﬁed interesting scientiﬁc and business questions
Fig. 1. Available datasets related to life sciences and pharmaceutical research.
that can be answered once the data sets are connected (cf.
Figure 1).
B. LODD Applications in Medical Domain
There exists few approaches that address the medical
and pharmaceutical applications using LODD. TripleMap
(http://www.triplemap.com) is a project connecting widespread
distribution of journal articles, patents and numerous databases
in
pharmaceutics
research.
TripleMap
as
a
web-based
application provides a dynamic visual interface to integrate
RDF datasets such as the LODD. Showing an unexpected
associations between entities related to researcher’s interest
is main advantage of TripleMap inspired by the broad
interconnected data available in the LODD data sets. The
goal of the TripleMap project is to deliver and sustain an
‘open pharmacological space’ by using and enhancing the
state-of-the-art semantic web standards and technologies [14].
Another related project is the Open Pharmacological
Space (OPS), Open PHACTS
(Pharmacological Concept
Triple
Store
http://www.openphacts.org)
project
under
the
European
Innovative
Medicines
Initiative
(IMI
http://www.imi.europa.eu/).
The
goal
of
this
project
is
integration of chemical and biological data using Linked Data
standards to support drug discovery [15].
Linked Cancer Genome Atlas Database [16] as another
Linked Data project aims to create an atlas of genetic
mutations responsible for cancer. The project provides an
infrastructure for making the cancer related data publicly
accessible and to enable cancer researchers anywhere around
the world to make and validate important discoveries.
205
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Although these projects address the backend side of creating
LODD applications, there has been a clear lack of applications
with user-friendly, efﬁcient and effective interfaces to make
Linked Data resources accessible to end-users outside the
biomedical community. One of the use cases of LODD datasets
addressed in this paper is authoring of Semantic Prescriptions
which are prescriptions enriched by Linked Open Data.
III.
SEMANTIC CONTENT AUTHORING
A Semantic Document is an intelligent document (with ex-
plicit semantic structure) which “knows about” its own content
so that it can be automatically processed in unforeseen ways.
Semantic documents facilitate a number of important aspects
of information management [17]. For search and retrieval, they
provide more efﬁcient and effective search interfaces, such as
faceted search [18] or question answering [19]. In information
presentation, they support more sophisticated ways of ﬂexibly
visualizing information, such as by means of semantic overlays
as described in [20]. In information integration, they provide
uniﬁed views on heterogeneous data stored in different appli-
cations by creating composite applications such as semantic
mashups [21]. For personalization, they provide customized
and context-speciﬁc information which better ﬁts user needs
and will result in delivering customized applications such
as personalized semantic portals [22]. For reusability and
interoperability, they facilitate exchanging content between
disparate systems and enabling applications such as executable
papers [23].
The above beneﬁts, however, come at the cost of increased
authoring effort. A Semantic Authoring User Interface is a
human accessible interface with capabilities for writing and
modifying semantic documents which are either. Semantic
Content Authoring (SCA) is a tool-supported manual compo-
sition process aiming at the creation of semantic documents
which are either:
•
fully semantic in the sense that their original data model
uses a semantic knowledge representation formalism
(such as RDF, RDF-Schema or OWL) or
•
based on a non-semantic representation form (e.g.,
text or hypertext), which is enriched with semantic
representations during the authoring process.
With an ontology and a user interface appropriate for
the type of content, semantic authoring can be easier than
traditional composition of content and the resulting content
can be of higher quality [24].
IV.
WYSIWYM USER INTERFACE
The term WYSIWYG as an acronym for What-You-See-
Is-What-You-Get is used in computing to describe a system
in which content (text and graphics) displayed on-screen
during editing appears in a form closely corresponding to its
appearance when printed or displayed as a ﬁnished product.
WYSIWYG text authoring is meanwhile ubiquitous on the
Web and part of most content creation and management
workﬂows. It is part of content management cystems (CMS),
weblogs, wikis, fora, product data management systems and
Semantic Representation Data Models
Visualization
Techniques
Exploration
Techniques
Authoring
Techniques
Helper components
Bindings
Configs
Configs
Configs
WYSIWYM Interface
Fig. 2.
WYSIWYM conceptual view.
online shops, just to mention a few. However, the WYSIWYG
model has been criticized, primarily for the verbosity, poor
support of semantics and low quality of the generated code
and there have been voices advocating a change towards a
WYSIWYM (What-You-See-Is-What-You-Mean) model [25],
[26].
Similar to the WYSIWYG UI, the WYSIWYM term
as deﬁned in [27] targets the novel aspect of integrated
visualization,
exploration
and
authoring
of
unstructured
and semantic content. The rationale of our WYSIWYM
concept is to enrich the existing WYSIWYG presentational
view of the content with UI components revealing the
semantics embedded in the content and enable the exploration
and authoring of semantic content. Instead of separating
presentation, content and meaning, our WYSIWYM approach
aims to integrate these aspects to facilitate the process of
Semantic Content Authoring.
WYSIWYM model as depicted in Figure 2, is deﬁned by:
•
a set of semantic representation data models (e.g., RDF),
where each one has an associated set of data model
elements;
•
a set of visualization techniques (e.g., framing using
borders and background) and a set of possible conﬁgu-
rations for them;
•
a set of exploration techniques (e.g., faceted browsing
based on the type of entities) and a set of possible
conﬁgurations for them;
•
a set of authoring techniques (e.g., form editing, inline
edit) and a set of possible conﬁgurations for them;
•
a
set
of
bindings
to
map
each
element
of
a
semantic
representation
model
to
a
visualization/exploration/authoring technique;
•
a set of helper components (e.g., automation, real-time
tagging, recommendation).
Medical prescriptions are a good candidate to be enriched by
the WYSIWYM semantic annotations interface. Semantically
206
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

date
genericName
Prescription
Instruction
Drug
Ontologies
 Prescription Content
description
absorption
affectedOrganism
biotransformation
halfLife
indication
mechanismOfAction 
absorption
pharmacology
toxicity
dosageForm
quantity
comments
dosage
...
...
...
Bottom-Up
Enrichment
Fig. 3.
Bottom-up semantic enrichment of prescriptions.
enriched prescriptions enable the traditionally written prescrip-
tions to be utilized in novel ways as discussed above. In the
following sections, we ﬁrst describe the e-prescriptions and
then discuss how they can be enriched as semantic documents.
V.
SEMANTIC E-PRESCRIBING
E-health has evolved and emerged recently in many forms.
E-prescription is one of those forms and deﬁned as a computer-
generated prescription utilized by health-care providers. E-
prescribing as it is commonly called, is the use of an au-
tomated data entry system to generate a prescription that is
then transmitted through a special network to a pharmacy in
such a way that the data goes directly into the pharmacy’s
computer system. It plays an important role in improving
the quality of patient care. For the prescriber, e-prescribing
happens when a physician uses a computer or handheld device
with a software that allows him or her to (with the patient’s
consent) electronically access information regarding a patient’s
drug beneﬁt coverage and medication history; electronically
transmit the prescription to the patient’s pharmacy of choice;
and, when the patient runs out of reﬁlls, his or her pharmacist
can also electronically send a renewal request to the physician’s
ofﬁce for approval.
One of the main challenges of the current e-prescription
systems is the heterogeneity and evolving nature of available
information sources. There exist already different sources of
information addressing different aspects of pharmaceutical
research. Recruiting available e-prescription systems in order
to connect the existing dynamic pharmaceutical information is
a challenging task. Linked Open Data when combined with
existing e-prescribing systems, proposes a solution to tackle
this challenge.
We deﬁne Semantic Medical Prescriptions as intelligent
e-prescription documents enriched by dynamic drug-related
meta-data thereby know about their content and the possible
interactions. As depicted in Figure 3, semantic prescriptions
are created based on a bottom-up process [28] in which normal
e-prescriptions (unstructured or semi-structured with lower
Document Layer
Semantic Layer
Application Layer
Drug 
Detection
Drug Information 
Collector
Annotator
Authoring UI
Visualizer
Fact Extractor
Interaction Finder
prescription
Semantic prescription
- Instructions
- General 
  Information
NLP Services
DBpedia 
Spotlight
BioPortal 
Annotator
Linked Open Drug Data
Fig. 4.
Architecture of the Pharmer system.
level of expressiveness) are enriched with semantic metadata
coming from a set of predeﬁned ontologies (with upper level
of expressiveness).
A. Architecture
The Pharmer system architecture is depicted in Figure 4
and consists of three layers:
a) Document Layer: This layer includes the traditional e-
prescription document plus two components as Drug Detection
and Drug Information Collector. Drug detection component
performs the natural language processing (NLP) of the e-
prescription document to detect the terms referring to a drug in
the prescription. The component uses DBpedia Spotlight [29]
and BioPortal annotator [30] NLP services to parse and
analyze the text looking for known drugs. DBpedia Spotlight
is a tool for automatically annotating mentions of DBpedia
resources in text (i.e., Named Entity Recognition). BioPortal
annotator is an ontology-based Web service that annotates
public datasets with biomedical ontology concepts based on
their textual metadata.
Automatic drug detection component is conﬁgurable so
that users can easily add other existing NLP services for
drug detection. When user is writing the prescription, this
component asynchronously performs the drug recognition and
adds the related annotations as real-time semantic tagging.
Another component in this layer is drug information
collector which grabs all the information regarding a speciﬁc
drug from Linked Open Data. To pursue this, it utilizes
207
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

datasets such as DrugBank, DailyMed and RxNorm (available
at [12]) by sending federated SPARQL queries.
b) Semantic Layer: There are two main components in
this layer namely Annotator and Authoring UI. The annotator
component handles the automatic annotation and embeds the
general information of the drugs as meta-data into the e-
prescription. Annotator adopts the RDFa format. RDFa (Re-
source Description Framework in attributes) is a W3C Rec-
ommendation that adds a set of attribute level extensions to
XHTML for embedding RDF metadata within web documents.
RDFa fulﬁlls the principles of interoperable metadata such as
publisher independence, data reuse, self containment, schema
modularity and evolvability.
The authoring UI component provides users with a set
of input forms to manually embed the meta-data related to
prescription instructions into the prescription document.
c) Application Layer: This layer provides a set of ap-
plications on top of the generated semantic prescriptions.
Interaction Finder checks the possible interactions between
the prescribed drugs by querying the relevant dataset in LODD
and warns the prescriber about them. Visualizer is responsible
for graphically representing the embedded semantics of a
prescription (e.g., as depicted in Figure 7). The Fact Extrac-
tor generates the RDF/Turtle representation of the semantic
prescriptions.
B. Features
The main features of Pharmer can be summarized as:
•
WYSIWYM
User
Interface.
Pharmer
employs
the
WYSIWYM
concept
for
integrated
visualization,
exploration and authoring of un-structured and semantic
content. In Pharmer, users are able to directly manipulate
the conventional e-prescriptions in order to enrich them
with semantics. The generated annotations can be
viewed by different sets of user interfaces with are
conﬁgurable by users. For example, users can select
speciﬁc border/background colors to distinguish the
annotated drugs in a prescription.
•
Providing Different Semantic Views. Semantic views
allow the generation of different views on the same
metadata schema and aggregations of the knowledge
base based on the roles, personal preferences, and
local policies of the intended users. Pharmer suggests
two types of views: generic and domain speciﬁc
views. Generic views provide visual representations of
drug information (e.g., as information view depicted
in Figure 6 or graph view in Figure 7). Domain
speciﬁc views address the requirements of a particular
domain user (e.g., a researcher need speciﬁc views
for
visualizing
the
atomic
structure
of
chemical
compounds).
•
Real-time Drug Tagging. Real-time tagging means
creating drug annotations while the user is typing. This
will signiﬁcantly increase the annotation speed [31].
Users are not distracted since they do not have to
interrupt their current authoring task. Pharmer has a
client-side component which interacts with the server
asynchronously to make real-time tagging possible.
•
Drug Suggestion. When searching for a drug, Pharmer
suggests the similar drugs by taking into account the
history of search terms and by sending SPARQL queries
to the relevant datasets.
•
Automatic
Drug
Annotation.
Automatic
annotation
means the provision of facilities for automatic mark-up
of prescriptions. The automatic process of annotating in
Pharmer is composed basically of ﬁnding drug terms
in prescription using an NLP service, mapping them
against an ontology (i.e., DBpedia), and disambiguating
common terms.
VI.
USE CASES
A. Pharmer as a Ubiquitous Computing Platform for Semantic
E-Prescribing
Mobile and ubiquitous computing devices are increasingly
present and prevalent in the health contexts. This trend brings
a number of possibilities of mobile health (m-health) to ad-
dress critical aspects of health care and health system needs,
by virtue of these devices’ ubiquity, simplicity, and cost-
efﬁciency [32]. In particular, in the process of semantic e-
prescribing, having a mobile application will facilitate the
creation of semantic medical prescriptions using any device
and in any location.
Pharmer mobile application as shown in Figure 5 provides
a mobile user interface for authoring of semantic prescriptions
as well as accessing multi-dimensional data on medical pre-
scriptions. Current ubiquitous devices are programmable and
come with a growing set of facilities including multi-touch
screens and cheap powerful embedded sensors, such as an
accelerometer, digital compass, gyroscope, GPS, microphone,
camera and other type of sensors. Utilizing these rich set of
facilities in the context of medical prescriptions will enrich the
patient medical prescription with sensor data thereby improves
the quality of e-health services. For example, the location of
user and some indicators like blood pressure or hear rate can
be received from sensors by which Pharmer can specify the
suitable drugs located in pharmacies close to the user.
B. Pharmer as a Professional Social Network for Health-care
Service Providers
Pharmer offers couple of advantages over current e-
prescribing systems. The main beneﬁt of using semantic
prescriptions is the persistent connection to up-to-date drug
information coming from multiple dynamic data sources. So,
when the information about a drug is updated occurs (e.g.,
change in its effects or interactions), the semantic prescription
automatically adopts to this new change.
208
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 5.
Screenshot of Pharmer Mobile Application (available at http://bitili.com/pharmer/mobile).
Once writing a prescription it is very critical to consider
drug interactions. Drug interactions are divided to three cat-
egories namely food-drug, drug-drug and drug-plant interac-
tions. Coadministration can either be synergistic or antagonis-
tic which respectively increase or decrease the drugs effect.
The interactions may sometimes lead to change in the drug
effect. By applying semantic prescriptions, all types of drug
interactions are prevented and the probability of errors in
prescriptions are reduced to a great extend.
A semantic prescription is a self-contained document, which
is aware of its content and is connected to the linked open
data. In contrast to database-oriented e-prescriptions, semantic
prescriptions can easily be exchanged among other e-health
systems without need to changing their related infrastructure
hence enabling a connection between physicians, pharmacists,
patients, pharmaceutical researchers, insurance and drug com-
panies.
Pharmer as a prescribing tool is able to be incorporated in a
health care social network. Such a network composed of health
care professionals and patients who collaboratively write,
correct and modify prescriptions in a semantically enriched
environment. This social health care network provides patients
and health care providers with services. It further facilitates
relations between patients and health care professionals in
order to improve shared decision making (SDM).
As information source, the network accesses LODD, where
diagnostic and prescribing data has been located as well.
Accessing such pieces of information, Pharmer is able to
be used as a helper tool for facilitating the diagnosis and
prescribing in assistance to physicians. Privacy of that network
is also a critical point worth considerations.
1) Shared Decision Making: The traditional model of med-
ical decision-making, in which doctors make decisions on
treatment has no longer used in updated health care. The role
of the patient, instead, in the consultation has been highlighted,
mainly through introducing‘patient-centred’ strategies. There-
fore, nowadays the models promoting patients active involve-
ment in the decision-making procedure becoming developed.
A model introduced by Charles et al. [33] deﬁnes shared
decision making only under the following four key character-
istics. These keys are:
•
both the patient and the doctor are involved
•
both parties share information
•
both parties take steps to build a consensus about the
preferred treatment
•
an agreement is reached on the treatment to implement
Pharmer as social network facilitates shared decision
making through the connection amongst patient and physician
on one hand and pharmacist on the other hand. According
to Charles et al. model, Pharmer not only connects patients
and physicians but also pharmacist as third party has an
supervisory role on medication choice.
2) Fast Diagnostic Tool: Free access to LODD enables
Pharmer to not only linked to e-prescribing systems but
also to further assist physicians in diagnosis and treatment.
Pharmer with direct connection to up-to-date information
enables physicians to reconﬁrm their diagnosis and help
them in ﬁnding proper treatment approaches. Physician,
after general examination, enters the observed symptoms in
Pharmer system and there, with the wealth of data available,
Pharmer assists in diagnosis followed by therapies.
209
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 6. Screenshot of the Pharmer application (general view, drug information
view and prescription authoring view).
3) Privacy: Systems containing patient treatment history
proﬁles, such as Pharmer, are required to be considered about
privacy issues. This issue is solved by providing different
users, with different views which is password protected. In
such a protection, patient has only access to his proﬁle while
physician has access to all data of his patients, the same
holds true for pharmacists and insurance companies. Other
organisations(e.g., research institutes or pharma companies)
can access to patients information as statistical data and only
if the patient agrees. This protection helps Pharmer users to
ensure data privacy.
Fig. 7.
Graph view in Pharmer.
C. Example Scenario
As depicted in Figure 8, Pharmer approach is very versatile
and can be applied in a vast number of use cases by different
stakeholders. The arrows in the ﬁgure can be summarized as
the following:
1) The physician diagnoses the disease and writes the corre-
sponding semantic prescription using the Pharmer, where
patient’s medication history is available.
2) The patient accesses to drug information, food interac-
tions and adverse drug reactions via Pharmer.
3) The pharmacist veriﬁes the prescription and considers
alternative options suggested by Pharmer.
4) Pharma companies utilize the Pharmer data store in order
to balance their production and distribution according to
the market taste and demand
5) The Researchesrs easily access to the abundant data
source and prescription statistical data.
6) Pharmer informs insurance companies to perform fair
coverage plans according to covered drugs and patient’s
medication history.
All the above stakeholders utilize Linked Open Data as their
integrated information source.
As a scenario, a 63 year old man with the history of MI
(Myocardial Infarction) and type 2 diabetes visits a heart
and coronary specialist complaining about frequent headaches
and heavy head feeling. The specialist, after general in-
spection and monitoring vital signs, asks for a blood test.
He then considers symptoms including high blood pressure
(sys/dias:158/95 mmHg) and high Fasting Blood Sugar (150
mg/dl). He diagnoses high blood pressure and severe type 2
diabetes. Thereby, The patient proﬁle is deﬁned in Pharmer
by patient’s information besides diagnosis. “no weight loss” is
mentioned as a preference in the patient’s proﬁle. Regardless
of the patient’s preferences, the physician would prescribe
Metformin as a drug of choice. However, since the major
side effect of Metformin is weight loss, the physician
replaces Metformin with Rosiglitazone.
Considering the medication that the patient took before
(Glibenclamide only), The specialist dispenses a new
210
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 8.
Pharmer ecosystem.
semantic prescription by entering the following drugs:
•
Rosiglitazone 4 mg Oral Tablet once daily
•
Glibenclamide 5 mg Oral Tablet bid
•
Atenolol 50 mg Oral Tablet once daily
He then checks for the possible drug interactions by clicking
the attributed button in the Pharmer software. As the Pharmer
is connected to Linked Open Drug Data, it is capable of
recognizing the most recent updated drug interactions (avail-
able at Drugbank dataset). He ﬁnds out that Sulfunyl Urea
class drugs (here Glibenclamide) are not compatible to be
coadministrated with beta-blockers (here Atenolol). So, he
needs to replace it with another drug. Using the Pharmer and
its connection to Linked Open Data, the physician can ﬁnd the
possible alternatives. Then he decides to choose Captopril
as replacement.
The semantic prescription is then sent to the patient’s
pharmacy of choice. There, the pharmacist is able to review
the semantic prescription and comments on that directly in the
system so that the physician is also aware of the corresponding
changes. The pharmacist comments may cause minor or major
modiﬁcations in the semantic prescription. For instance, using
the Pharmer she is able to check the appropriate dose of each
medicine or suggest cheaper alternatives (if possible). In this
case, as the Rosiglitazone elevates cardiovascular risks,
the pharmacist suggests Rosiglitazone to be replaced by
Pioglitazone. This change happens as a realization of
the shared decision making between physision, pharmacist
and patient. Thereafter, the patient who was referred to the
pharmacy takes the prescribed drugs.
Before he starts taking the tablets, he enters in Pharmer
system with his ID as patient. There, he is able to observe drug
information embedded in the error free semantic prescription
besides the preferred time and drug intake instructions. He
is also informed about the possible food interactions. The
patient’s proﬁle completes as he visits physicians or ask for
reﬁlls. Furthermore, he is followed up by the physician and the
pharmacist via the Pharmer. After 2 months the patient visits
another specialist for his recurrent symptoms of diabetes. The
specialist via the Pharmer accesses to the patient’s medical
proﬁle and increases the anti-diabetic drug dose.
A researcher in an academy research institution investigates
Captopril (as an Angiotansion II antagonist) effect on
preventing diabetes recurrence. Having the data from the
aforementioned patient follow up along with other similar
patients allows investigator to lead her goal. In this case, for
example, the Captopril along with anti-diabetic drugs led
to diabetes recurrence. Observing all the corresponding patient
proﬁles will either conﬁrm or reject the research assumption.
A pharma company manager requires to determine the
compliance rate of Captopril in the market in order to
balance the production based on market demand. Applying the
Pharmer allows him to simply access to these data and decide
how to go on with this product. He is also able to collect the
evidence which may prevent further dispense of Captopril
211
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by physicians or consumption among patients. Pharmer allows
insurance companies to customize and individualize their ser-
vices based on patient’s medical records. Recruiting Pharmer
which contains information on insured drugs, the physician
can choose the drugs accordingly. In the scenario, insurance
company checks the dispensed medication with the disease
and patient’s insurance status therefore decides to refund the
patient.
VII.
CONCLUSION
Providing a consistent connection between patients, physi-
cians, pharmacists, pharmaceutical researchers and pharma
companies is a crucial step towards enhancing the quality
of knowledge management and thereby e-health services in
the pharmaceutical domain. With Pharmer, we presented in
this article an approach for user-friendly implementation of
Semantic Prescriptions as intelligent medical prescriptions to
improve the integration and interoperability of e-prescribing
systems with other e-health services.
We see the work presented in this article as an initial
step in a larger research agenda aiming at promoting the
authoring and annotation of semantically enriched medical
documents. Regarding future work, we envision to extend the
Pharmer application towards different modalities, such that the
annotation of images and other medical objects is supported.
Furthermore, we aim to integrate the other existing linked open
datasets (e.g., related to publications, laboratories or insurance
documents) into the Pharmer to extend its stakeholders.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues from the AKSW
research group (http://aksw.org) for their helpful comments and
inspiring discussions during the development of the WYSI-
WYM model for authoring of semantic medical prescriptions.
Authors would also like to acknowledge the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD) for the ﬁnancial support of this
work.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Khalili and B. Sedaghati, “Pharmer – towards semantic medical
prescriptions,” in eTELEMED 2013, The Fifth International Conference
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine.
IARIA, 2013, pp. 9–
14.
[2]
M. Melissa Conrad Stoppler. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=
55234
[3]
A. R. Gonz´alez, ´A. Garc´ıa-Crespo, R. C. Palacios, J. M. G. Berb´ıs,
and E. Jim´enez-Domingo, “Using ontologies in drug prescription: The
semmed approach,” IJKBO, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2011.
[4]
Electronic prescribing (erx) incentive program. Last visited date:
28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.cms.gov/erxincentive
[5]
W. Galanter, S. Falck, M. Burns, M. Laragh, and B. L. Lambert,
“Indication-based prescribing prevents wrong-patient medication errors
in computerized provider order entry (cpoe),” Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 20, pp. 477–481, 2013.
[6]
Medicare. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/
[7]
epsos : the european ehealth project. Last visited date: 28/11/2012.
[Online]. Available: http://www.epsos.eu/
[8]
J. Puustj¨arvi and L. Puustj¨arvi, “The challenges of electronic prescrip-
tion systems based on semantic web technologies,” in ECEH, 2006, pp.
251–261.
[9]
C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked Data - The Story
So Far,” International Journal on Semantic Web and Information
Systems (IJSWIS), vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/jswis.2009081901
[10]
Bio2rdf. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http:
//bio2rdf.org/
[11]
Semantic
web
in
systems
chemical
biology.
Last
visited
date:
28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http://chem2bio2rdf.wikispaces.com/
[12]
Linking open drug data (lodd). Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/wiki/HCLSIG/LODD
[13]
M. Samwald, A. Jentzsch, C. Bouton, C. Kallesoe, E. Willighagen,
J. Hajagos, M. Marshall, E. Prud’hommeaux, O. Hassanzadeh, E. Pich-
ler, and S. Stephens, “Linked open drug data for pharmaceutical
research and development,” Journal of Cheminformatics, vol. 3, no. 1,
2011.
[14]
M. Samwald, A. Jentzsch, C. Bouton, C. S. Kallesøe, E. Willighagen,
J. Hajagos, M. S. Marshall, E. Prud’hommeaux, O. Hassenzadeh,
E. Pichler, and S. Stephens, “Linked open drug data for pharmaceutical
research and development,” Journal of Cheminformatics, vol. 3, no. 19,
2011.
[15]
A. J. Williams, L. Harland, P. Groth, S. Pettifer, C. Chichester,
E. L. Willighagen, C. T. Evelo, N. Blomberg, G. Ecker, C. Goble,
and B. Mons, “Open phacts: semantic interoperability for drug
discovery,” Drug Discovery Today, vol. 17, no. 21–22, pp. 1188 –
1198, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1359644612001936
[16]
M. Saleem, S. S. Padmanabhuni, A.-C. Ngonga Ngomo, J. S. Almeida,
S. Decker, and H. F. Deus, “Linked cancer genome atlas database,” in
Proceedings of I-Semantics, 2013.
[17]
A. Khalili, S. Auer, and D. Hladky, “The rdfa content editor – from
wysiwyg to wysiwym,” in COMPSAC 2012, 2012, pp. 531–540.
[18]
D. Tunkelang, Faceted Search (Synthesis Lectures on Information
Concepts, Retrieval, and Services).
Morgan and Claypool Publishers,
Jun. 2009.
[19]
V. Lopez, V. Uren, M. Sabou, and E. Motta, “Is question answering
ﬁt for the semantic web? a survey,” Semantic Web ? Interoperability,
Usability, Applicability, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 125–155, September 2011.
[20]
G. Burel, A. E. Cano1, and V. Lanfranchi, “Ozone browser: Augmenting
the web with semantic overlays,” ser. CEUR WS Proceedings, vol. 449,
June 2009.
[21]
A. Ankolekar, M. Kr¨otzsch, T. Tran, and D. Vrandecic, “The two
cultures: mashing up web 2.0 and the semantic web,” in WWW 2007,
pp. 825–834.
[22]
M. Sah, W. Hall, N. M. Gibbins, and D. C. D. Roure, “Semport - a
personalized semantic portal,” in 18th ACM Conf. on Hypertext and
Hypermedia, 2007, pp. 31–32.
[23]
W. Muller, I. Rojas, A. Eberhart, P. Haase, and M. Schmidt, “A-r-e:
The author-review-execute environment,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 4, pp. 627 – 636, 2011, iCCS 2011.
[24]
K.
Hasida,
“Semantic
authoring
and
semantic
computing,”
in
Proceedings of the 2003 and 2004 international conference on
New frontiers in artiﬁcial intelligence, ser. JSAI’03/JSAI04.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 137–149. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1899169.1899184
[25]
J. Spiesser and L. Kitchen, “Optimization of html automatically
generated by wysiwyg programs,” in WWW 2004, pp. 355–364.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/988672.988720
[26]
C. Sauer, “What you see is wiki – questioning WYSIWYG in the
Internet age,” in Proceedings of Wikimania 2006, 2006. [Online].
Available: http://wikimania2006.wikimedia.org/wiki/Proceedings:CS1
[27]
A. Khalili and S. Auer:, “Wysiwym authoring of structured content
212
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

based on schema.org,” in The 14th International Conference on Web
Information System Engineering (WISE 2013), 2013.
[28]
A. Khalili and S. Auer, “User interfaces for semantic content authoring:
A systematic literature review,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://svn.
aksw.org/papers/2011/journal SemanticContentAuthoring/public.pdf
[29]
Dbpedia spotlight. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available:
http://spotlight.dbpedia.org/
[30]
Bioportal annotator. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available:
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/annotator
[31]
“One Click Annotation,” ser. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, G. T. W.
G. A. Grimnes, Ed., vol. 699, February 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://CEUR-WS.org/Vol-699/Paper4.pdf
[32]
P. Petrucka, S. Bassendowski, H. Roberts, and T. James, “mhealth: A
vital link for ubiquitous health,” Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
(OJNI),, vol. 17, p. 2675, 2013.
[33]
C. Charles, A. Gafni, and T. Whelan, “Shared decision-making in
the medical encounter: What does it mean? (or it takes at least two
to tango),” Social Science & Medicine, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 681 –
692, 1997. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0277953696002213
213
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

