Early Stages of Business Modeling for Open Source Home Care Technology 
Lessons learned from an initial inventory 
 
Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Marike Hettinga, Ruud Janssen, Jan M. Nauta, Sikke Visser  
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{ege.lohuis, m.hettinga, tjwm.janssen,  
j.nauta, s.visser} @windesheim.nl 
 
 
Abstract— Many eHealth innovations never get beyond the 
project phase. Initiating a viable business model in an early 
stage of the development of eHealth  innovations enhances the 
chance of structural embedding the innovations in routine 
health care. This paper presents the early stages of business 
model development for an  innovative IT supported home care 
system based on open source software. After a literary review 
on open source business models and the home care market, the 
eHix method, a business model approach developed by 
research group ICT Innovation in Health Care to is used build 
up the business model for the home care system.  The structure 
of the eHix, a method in which one is only allowed to move to 
the next phase if the previous phase is completed, ensures an 
efficient and effective route to business modeling. Going 
through the first stage of the business modeling, it is clear that 
the 
mapping 
of 
intended 
target 
groups 
and 
their 
accompanying needs in various scenarios becomes key to 
determining the right value proposition for the intended home 
care system. In-depth analysis of all the stakeholders and their 
interest in the network then provides the essential criteria for 
the feasibility of the various scenarios. It is only after all the 
scenarios of the care system are mapped that the revenue 
models can be identified efficiently and further selective steps 
can be taken towards feasible business models that show the 
potential of the innovation to its full advantage. 
 
Keywords- Home care technology; Open source software; 
Business modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper provides an extension of the work presented at 
the eTELEMED 2014: The Sixth International Conference 
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine [1]. The 
work centers on the Hightech@home project, a project 
aimed at developing technology and knowledge concerning 
open source IT supported home care. 
Home care is this paper is defined as the whole of care, 
nursing, treatment and support of the person seeking help at 
home, performed with the aid of self-care, informal care, 
volunteering and/or (additional) professional care and 
specifically designed to enable the person seeking help to 
live independently in his or her own home [2].  
With the use of open source software the project is 
geared towards increasing availability of IT supported home 
care and lowering costs of IT supported home care by 
avoiding vendor lock-ins. The project team aims to enhance 
the chance of structural embedding of the IT innovation in 
routine home care; the end of the project should not imply 
the end of the innovation. Therefore the project also includes 
a viable business model for the Hightech@home care 
innovation.  
This paper focuses on an analysis of the business 
modeling in the early stages of the Hightech@home care 
technology development, reflects on the initial findings and 
posits further challenges to the business modeling of open 
source home care technology. The paper aspires to contribute 
to the body of knowledge regarding the early stages of 
business modeling for home care technology and to clarify 
the fundaments of viable business models for home care 
innovations in order to increase the likelihood of practical 
embedding of these innovations in routine home care.  
A. The Hightech@home project 
The Hightech@home project consists of five tracks. The 
first track, the technical design and development, focuses on 
a portal being generically available through any web 
browser. The portal will facilitate video contact and transmit 
and receive data from sensors located in the house, on a 
portable device or on the body of the user. Technical design 
and development is iteratively informed by the user research 
in the second track. The iterative cycles start with small- 
scale experiments with mock-ups leading to a field study 
when robust prototypes are available. During this field study 
data will also be retrieved to perform a cost-benefit analysis,  
which is the third track of the project. To ensure the 
structural embedding, viable business models are developed 
in the fourth track. Finally, the fifth track aims to facilitate 
Bachelor students in the Hightech@home project in 
particular and in eHealth research in general through the 
development of a digital learning environment. 
B. The choice for open source software 
The Hightech@home project’s choice for open source 
software is based on the current lack of low-cost, high-
quality, high-tech, plug-and-play home care technology. 
Open source software is defined in this project as software 
of which the source code is available at no cost, the user is 
free to customize this code and integrate it into other systems 
252
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and products [3].  Open source software has the potential to 
enable system interoperability, which literally unlocks the 
consumer technology we already have in our homes and 
carry around.  
If high-tech sensor and communication technology is 
available for home care, the costs are high. Potential users 
with the greatest need for this type of technology, e.g., 
elderly, chronically ill, often lack the required financial 
means. Vendor lock-in (mostly through the use of closed 
protocols) is one of the reasons for the high pricing. 
Customers are dependent on one vendor after an initial 
choice for home care technology. If there is, for instance, a 
wish for extending the current technology with additional 
sensors, customers appear to be dependent on the original 
vendor. Hence low-cost alternatives are not an option. 
Although 
completing 
a 
single 
project 
like 
the 
Hightech@home project will not break through an 
established vendor lock-in, the aim is to produce open source 
technology and knowledge, thus providing a starting point 
towards interoperability.  
Existing home care technology often requires a 
technician for its installation. This not only results in extra 
costs, but also raises the threshold for people to start using it. 
By designing and developing plug-and-play technology by 
means of a co-creation process with potential end-users, the 
Hightech@home project ensures that customers (clients or 
patients), informal carers and care professionals are able to 
install the equipment. Furthermore, having interoperability at 
the center of development, allows for (re-)use of already 
existing technology.   
By designing and developing an innovative home care 
application, the Hightech@home project aims to provide a 
starting point towards low-cost, high-quality, high-tech, 
plug-and-play home care technology. Being aware of the 
budding opportunities of this innovation, the project also 
strives to contribute to the structural embedding of this 
innovation in routine home care. The end of an innovative 
project like this should not imply the end of the innovation, 
which is often still the case with innovative eHealth 
applications [4].   In the reality of health and home care there 
is still a gap to be bridged between the opportunities offered 
by innovative applications in health and home care and the 
actual practice of routine health and home care. Although 
suggestions are constantly being made for the integration of 
innovations in health care, a comprehensive approach which 
supports the adoption of innovations into routine health care 
practice is still lacking [5].   
C. Business modeling the project 
IT-related business model innovations have been 
identified as a mayor factor in achieving structural 
innovation in health care [6]. Initiating a viable business 
model in an early stage of the development of the 
innovation enhances the chance of structural embedding the 
innovation in routine health care. Characterizations and 
definitions of business models are abundantly present in 
literature. Since the concept of service is a focus in the 
Hightech@home project and a number of partners – a 
foundation,  several small  and medium enterprises (SMEs),  
a professional care organization and a University of 
Professional Education -  will work together to create and 
deliver the service, we apply the definition of Bouman et all. 
(2008) to characterize the business model envisioned for 
this project:  ‘A business model is a blueprint for a service 
to be delivered, describing the service definition and the 
intended value for the target group, the sources of revenue, 
and providing an architecture for the service delivery, 
including a description of the resources required, and the 
organizational and financial arrangements between the 
involved business actors, including a description of their 
roles and the division of costs and revenues over the 
business actors [7].’   
In earlier projects [5] the research group IT (Information 
Technology) Innovations in Health Care at Windesheim 
University of Applied Sciences developed a business model 
approach to be used as an instrument to bridge the gap of 
innovative eHealth ideas to successful IT-based care 
services. A key component of this approach is an online 
webtool: the eHealth Innovation Matrix [8]. Therefore 
theHix method is used during the Hightech@home project. 
The use of this method implies the application of relevant 
instruments and knowledge as included in all five phases 
distinguished in the eHix model 
– this will be explained at section II Methodology.  
Hightech@home’s aim to achieve a better chance of 
structural embedding the innovation poses the question of a 
feasible business model. Hence this paper sets out to address 
the following research questions: 
What business model would be most feasible for the 
Hightech@home open source technology innovation ? 
- 
What are the specifics of open source and business 
models for open source software? 
- 
What characterizes the home care technology 
market, and specifically in the Netherlands?  
- 
What are the particulars to be considered in the 
early stages of business model development for open source 
home care technology?  
This introduction has provided a summary of the aim of 
the Hightech@home project and its focus on open source 
and business modeling open source technology. Section II 
gives an overview of literature on the area of open source, 
business modeling and home care technology in the 
Netherlands. This is followed by the overview of the 
methodology used to build a business model. The 
methodology is then applied to the early stages of the 
development of the home care technology. The preliminary 
outcomes regarding the business models are being discussed 
and the paper closes with a conclusion and the identification 
of further work. 
 
253
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE AND BUSINESS MODELING 
IN HOME CARE 
A. Open Source Software and Business Modeling 
 
1) Open Source Software 
The use of open source software is central to the 
Hightech@home project. In order to determine the 
implications of the use of open source software for the 
business model design of the home care innovation, it is 
important to have insight into the potential advantages and 
disadvantages of the use of open source software. The first 
advantages obviously are the low costs of purchase and 
flexible customizing; the source code of open source 
software is available at no cost and the user is free to 
customize and integrate the code into other systems and 
products.   
A fast time-to-market is mentioned in literature as an 
advantage of open source software in that adjustments and 
improvements by the community are quickly picked up and 
shared [9]. Another advantage is the fact that there are many 
tools and components available in the communities. Open 
source software can also increase the flexibility in 
integration projects with other tools and solutions, since one 
does not have to deal with intellectual property [10]. This 
benefit reduces the possibility  of  vendor lock-in. 
In addition to the low purchase costs, the flexibility, the 
ability to customize and a fast time-to-market, Krishnamurty 
(2005) mentions the advantage of the support of a 
community of developers and testers. According to 
Krishnamurty, this will increase the robustness and reliability 
[11]. An interesting observation from West (2007) is that 
organizations usually invest heavily in the protection of 
intellectual property, often leading to the redevelopment of 
existing solutions. The open source model with its 
unprotected 
adaptability 
implies 
an 
evolutionary 
development rather than redevelopment. This implies that 
initial innovation budgets can be used more efficiently in 
open source projects. In addition to the above benefits West 
(2007) also notes less marketing spending as open source 
technology generally "sells" through word of mouth. 
There are a significant number of disadvantages of the 
use of open source software mentioned in literature. Martin 
(2013) gives an excellent up-to-date overview of these 
disadvantages – starting with the degree of uncertainty 
regarding the support of the open source software [10].  
Dependence on the strength of the community of developers 
and testers is a risk. While standard license structure with 
traditional software gives the guarantee of the supplier, the 
availability and continuity of the community is not always 
adequately secured, causing a serious liability that has to be 
taken 
into 
account. 
Also 
new 
developments 
and 
improvements on the open source software do not have to be 
in line with the users’ IT strategy. Besides, the more the open 
source products are being customized, the less one can make 
use of standard training. This means that the user should 
allow more resources for these aspects. Other disadvantages 
regarding the use of open source software include the control 
of version and usability. Versioning can be quite complex, 
since there are many different developers making 
adjustments and improvements. This can also make usability 
problematic, as it depends on the developers in the 
community and the available resources. 
 
2) Business models for Open Source software 
Considering the specifics of the open source software, its 
advantages and disadvantages, it is clear that these specifics 
pose a challenge in developing a viable business model. 
Revenue models for open source software in literature make 
the fundamental distinction between commercial open source 
and community open source [12].  Community open source 
is open source software that is owned by a community or a 
legal entity representing the community. The community 
members typically do not derive direct revenues from the 
software but subsidize it from complementary products and 
services. In contrast, commercial open source is open source 
software that is owned by a single legal entity with the 
purpose of deriving income from the software. The open 
source software used in the Hightech@home project is 
community open source software. The source code of the 
project is available under only one license, the GNU General 
Public License Version 2 or later [13], and anyone can enter 
the market and generate revenue from the project.  
There is often still the notion that utilizing open source 
software development does not offer any chances for 
revenues from products and thus there cannot be any 
successful open source business models [14].  However, 
already two decades ago open source successes showed that 
fruitful business models can be built around open source 
projects and products [3]. There are various ways of 
generating revenue from community open source software to 
be found in literature – for a good overview see Korhonen 
(2013). Overall the open source business models seem to 
center on the sale of complementary products and service to 
complete a whole product solution. The three dominant ways 
to collect revenue from community open source software are 
usually consulting and support services around the software, 
derivative products built on the community open source 
software, and increased revenue in supplementary layers of 
the software stack [15].   
Besides selling complementary products and/or services, 
companies also have ways of capturing value and indirect 
revenues from the open source software by creating and 
guiding the formal architecture of the open source software.  
Particularly for platform technologies, control of the 
interfaces regulates the supply of complementary assets [16].  
Therefore, a company that waives ownership of the software 
code creates a shared platform that fits best its own internal 
architecture and suite of complementary  products. Similarly, 
ongoing leadership of open source community software 
allows a company’s developers to influence the code to be 
most compatible with a firm’s own requirements and 
software  architecture, even in independent projects [9].   
Even without influence, companies that are actively involved 
in the open source development may gain technical 
knowledge, which is suitable for deployment and support or  
254
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

an expert reputation, which is useful in marketing. 
While the models of revenue are developed with the open 
access of the software code as a focal point, over the years 
hybrid open source business models have been developed 
[17]. A hybrid model fuses open source licensing with 
commercial licensing of software. For example, customers 
want to extend a product they have acquired and this product 
comes with an open source license. The customers must then 
release the modifications they made under the same open 
source license. If customers do not want to do that, they can 
purchase a commercial license. The company using the 
hybrid model manages the licenses and competes against 
proprietary vendors. This business model requires the 
company to control very tightly the source code of the 
product. This might lead to a situation where open source 
developers and communities do not contribute much at all, 
defying the purpose and perceived benefits of open source 
community software. 
Besides generating revenue, it is clear that the company 
has to address the challenges of working with open source in 
order to develop a successful open source business model. 
These challenges are mostly caused by the numerous actors 
in the open source software development [14]. The business 
model must be flexible enough when it comes to release 
dates and requirements implemented per release [18].  For a 
solid integration of open source business models into the 
company, the requirements of interacting with the open 
source 
development 
communities 
also need 
to 
be 
acknowledged and practiced by the company [19]. 
Developing the open source business model, the company’s 
own needs also have to be taken into account. As Munga et 
al. (2009) remark, companies cannot use traditional business 
models as such with open source, but can adapt these models 
by making open source a fundamental part of them, while 
asking themselves what the future implications of this open 
source business model are. 
The use of community open source software like the 
software in the Hightech@home project has considerable 
implications for the business model. The various models in 
literature do suggest creative solutions. Services and 
derivative products around the software, shared platform 
creation and hybrid models fusing open source benefits with 
commercial interests are all possible features to be taken into 
account while developing a sustainable business model. 
Because of the numerous actors in the open source software 
development, flexibility in the business model seems to be a 
key component for success. 
 
B. Home Care Technology and the market in The 
Netherlands 
In addition to the specifics of open source software, we 
also need to take the distinctive market into account while 
developing the business model for the Hightech@home 
project. So what is distinctive about the health and home care 
market, and specifically the Dutch market?  
Dutch health care is accessible for everybody – this 
makes it unique [20].  Internationally there are only a few 
countries in the word where this is the case – only 5 % of the 
world population lives in a country where good care is 
accessible to everybody. Worldwide the health care system 
has been put under strain for the last decade. The increasing 
life expectation, improved survival of people with acute and 
long-term conditions and a greater array of available 
treatment options are placing an increasing burden on 
healthcare systems internationally.  The most vulnerable 
groups in society such as the elderly, the chronically ill  and 
people with disabilities are encouraged to live at home 
longer than before.  In addition, the economic crisis that 
emerged in 2008 still stunts the economic growth, which 
used to compensate and finance the increasing costs of health 
care. Even with substantial developments in IT applied in 
healthcare over recent decades, the perceived increase in 
productivity does not seem to compensate the increased 
expenditure yet [20].   
Regarding the Dutch home care market specifically, there 
is a large range of technological possibilities available [21].  
The home care technology varies from disclosure of 
information in text and images, video communication, screen 
case, telemonitoring to other IT applications like ambient 
technology which enables monitoring in and around the 
home. Many projects haven been initiated. The drivers for 
these projects are mostly rising expectations of patients, 
increased efficiency, increased life expectancy and demand 
of care, treatment and prevention, improved availability of 
technology 
and 
safety 
and 
quality 
demand 
[22].   
Nevertheless, there is not much evidence of structural scaling 
and implementation of these projects. Many obstacles are 
encountered here. For instance, there are many initiatives for 
which the health costs are not compensated or investments 
are too high or there is a lack of other means for structural 
financing. Care professionals often do not comprehend the 
added value or have clinical concerns against the 
implementation of home care technology. Failing change 
management seems to focus too much on technological 
implementation.  Doubts have arisen about safety and 
privacy, and lack of clinical involvement and lack of 
scientific foundation are other barriers that hamper structural 
scaling [22].   Also the economic crisis contributes to short-
term politics and leaves little room for investment in the 
necessary cultural and organizational change. In addition 
every Dutch health and home care facility seems to have its 
own 
in-house 
innovative 
technology 
to 
distinguish 
themselves in the health market, thereby increasing the costs 
and not realizing the potential economies of scale. Overall 
the Dutch home care technology market can be characterized 
as an unstructured and unorganized market with many 
parties providing part of the solution [21].    
With this in mind, we take a closer look at the landscape 
of home care technology in the Netherlands. Fig. 1 illustrates 
the Dutch health care scene with its many parties.  While the 
Dutch government regulates the financing of the health care 
system, 
the 
health 
insurance 
companies 
and 
the 
municipalities purchase the care for the clients through the 
professional care organizations within these constrains. The 
clients receive their care from these selected care 
organizations and in return pay their premium to their health 
insurance company and tax to their municipality. Besides 
255
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

professional care, many clients also rely on informal care; 
there are about 3.5 million informal carers in the Netherlands 
on a population of 16 million people [23].  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The Dutch health care landscape with its many parties 
 
Since the beginning of 2014 a significant transition has 
been taken place, as a result of which a substantial part of 
the arrangements for home care will be implemented by the 
municipalities, who will take on this role for the very first 
time. The municipalities have considerable flexibility in 
determining what home care facilities and arrangements 
they deem necessary to organize or fund. It is expected that 
the municipalities will focus on cooperation with local 
parties (healthcare providers, day care facilities, community 
centers, social housing corporations, etc.). There is a lot of 
room for interpretation in the current framework contracts 
of the municipalities for their health and home care 
purchasing. It is not yet clear how the funding will be 
worked out by the municipalities, but heavy budget cuts are 
expected on all fronts [24].  
Besides the technological developments and complex 
finance structure of the Dutch home care market, there is 
another important factor that defines the home care market: 
the dual client demand.  Dohmen (2012) mentions the dual 
client-demand of home care technology - purchased by care 
organization but marketed to the end-user, the care consumer 
- as one of the most pressing aspects that makes the 
development and implementation of home care technology 
difficult [21].  Both parties can have different – often 
conflicting – requirements and demands. For instance, a care 
organization might be looking for a more efficient manner of 
care-giving, while its clients are happy enough with partial 
support. In addition to this, there is a gap between usage and 
expectation. The younger generation of care-professionals is 
often more used to working with technology than their older 
clients while the reverse can also be seen: a large part of the 
care-professionals is not trained in the use of information 
technology, while their younger clients are quick to master 
the technology. 
With this context in mind, we see that the entrepreneur 
who is looking to market a home care innovation is dealing 
with multiple stakeholders in a turbulent landscape. The 
routes to the potential market are numerous and complex and 
entail different approaches in design, development and 
marketing of the innovation. To come to a viable business 
model in the home care market the method used to develop 
the model obviously has to incorporate these aspects.  
It is clear from literature overview that the characteristics 
of the home care technology market in the Netherlands and 
the specifics of open source and business models for open 
source software pose challenges to the development of a 
business model for an open source home care system. The 
home care market is divers and complex and the use of open 
sources software asks for flexibility in the business model. 
On the way to develop feasible business models for the 
Hightech@home care system the particulars of the early 
stages of business model development for open source home 
care technology will come to the fore in the first 
methodological steps. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In order to develop a feasible business model for the 
Highttech@home open source project in a structured manner 
and to bring about the specifics of the early stages of 
business modeling, the eHix framework is used. As 
mentioned in the introduction of this paper, in earlier projects 
the research group IT (Information Technology) Innovations 
in Health Care at Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences developed a business model approach as an 
instrument to bridge the gap of innovative eHealth ideas to 
successful IT-based care services. This approach, the eHealth 
Innovation matrix (eHix), is well-suited to the characteristics 
of an IT service innovation like the Hightech@home home 
care services [25].  
The starting point of the eHix method is the STOF model 
(Bouwman, De Vos & Haaker, 2008) [25]. This model 
provides a systematic approach for service and business 
modeling of innovative ICT services and offers a solid 
foundation for the design and examination of the different 
aspects of the business model, such as the service user, the 
technology, the organizations, finance and regulations. The 
STOF model describes the business model based on four 
perspectives or domains: the Service perspective - a 
description of the service, the value proposition (the value of 
the service for users) and the intended audience; the 
Technology perspective - a description of the required 
technical functionality and architecture to deliver the service; 
the Organization perspective - a description of the resources, 
activities and roles and structure in which the value network 
partners to provide the service - and the Finance perspective 
- a description of how the service generates revenue 
(earnings) and the distribution of costs and benefits among 
the parties involved in the value network. 
Naturally these different aspects will change in the 
course of an innovation process. The service develops under 
the influence of input of target users, the choice of 
technology is changing as a result of learning from 
experiments and organizations play different roles at 
different stages. That is why the eHix combines the STOF 
model with a phasing that provides support for the lifecycle 
of the innovation process. The five phases of Hettinga (2009) 
form the basis for the phasing: inventory phase, design & 
development phase, experimental phase, pilot phase and 
implementation phase [26].  In the inventory phase the ideas 
of a new service are created and the needs and requirements 
256
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the users for example are analyzed. In the design and 
development phase, the technology is designed and 
developed, and thoughts about the business model of the 
service are initiated. In the experimental phase users try out 
the new application in a laboratory setting while in the pilot 
phase more users are involved testing the application of the 
service in their daily practice and giving input for a 
successful implementation in the deployment phase. 
The eHix thus combines the five stages in the innovation 
process (concept phase, design phase, test phase, pilot phase, 
implementation phase) with the four aspects of the business 
model (service, technology, organization, finance),  resulting 
in a matrix containing 20 (4 by 5) cells. Each cell contains 
the essential steps and choices to be made in the innovation 
process for a specific domain within the business model in a 
particular phase. For each cell keywords describe the essence 
of the cell. For each keyword checklists, tools, methods, 
approaches and examples were collected that support the 
decision making process to the next step in the innovation 
process. The content offered by the eHix cells varies. For 
example, there is a template for conducting a stakeholder 
analysis, a preparation of a business case, a template to aid  
in making a technical design and a format to evaluate a pilot.  
For the development of the eHix content a thorough 
study of factors determining the success and failure for e-
health innovations was done. The identified success and 
failure factors are assigned to the various components of the 
STOF model so the success criteria can be used for 
evaluation of the business model and also serve as building 
blocks of eHix itself. The list of success criteria was 
compiled based on a literature review and several expert 
meetings wherein insurance companies, entrepreneurs, 
researchers, health care institutions and government agencies 
participated. The results of the expert meetings and literature 
are assigned to the eHix products per fase. The eHix matrix 
structure is shown below in Fig. 2 with the main keyword in 
the cell displayed. 
 
1) Designing the Hightech@home care business model 
with the eHix method 
To guide the development of a viable business model, the 
eHix has been applied to the Hightech@home project, which 
has gone through the inventory phase and is currently in the 
middle of the design & development phase. The project’s 
aim is to realize a home care service system as outlined in 
Fig. 3. This product is at the service of the clients (care 
receivers). As Fig. 3 shows the service system can be divided 
into two parts: the left part for the client and the right part for 
the professional carers / informal carers. 
 
Figure 2.  eHix matrix structure combining business model domains with 
innovation phases 
The client’s package consists of a smartphone or tablet 
with which the client can request the assistance of a carer 
either by ‘normal’ call or by video call. The two sensors, a 
GPS and a fall detection sensor in the client’s device make it 
possible to detect the position of the client in case the client 
is in need of assistance outside of the home.  The device of 
the carer is also a tablet or smartphone; communication with 
the client is possible and the necessary sensor information 
(fall detection sensor / GPS) is displayed. So there are three 
manners to obtain the client / carer information: (a) by video 
contact: personal communication, (b) GPS: location and (c) 
by the fall detection sensor: information. The fall detection 
sensor serves as an example for the possibilities to connect 
generic sensors. In addition, functions like data mining (eg. 
filling in data on client and carer) and viewing the logged 
information are provided for. 
 
2) Service Domain 
The first part of the STOF framework describes the 
service offered, the value proposition and the possible 
market segments of the Hightech@home care service. The 
value proposition of the home care service is still 
hypothetical in this inventory phase and needs to be 
demonstrated in the experimental phase and pilot phase. The 
home care service is offered as a technical support service so 
that the elderly and persons with a chronic illness and/or 
intellectual disability are able to continue living at home 
(longer). The support service  enables the clients and their 
professional carer and informal carers to communicate with 
each other in the traditional way of using a telephone with 
voice communication, and adds an extra interface of video 
communication. This extra interface of video communication 
is expected to provide the client and carer with more 
information and reassurance.  
The GPS and fall detection sensor offer real-time and 
accurate information on the physical state of the client to the 
carer. For the client the GPS and fall detection sensor 
anticipate in a greater sense of safetly and reassurance. With 
the combination of an extra interface and sensors the home 
care system is expected to result in a more efficient and 
effective way of communicating. Making use of open 
software is anticipated to lead to lower cost of development 
and higher ease of use for the client (plug-and-play).  
Appropriately translated by the developers of the home care 
system the low costs and ease of use could result in a higher 
quality of care for the clients. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The envisioned Hightech@home care service system 
 
257
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The service also hopes to ensure that the clients will be 
able to do more themselves or with informal carers, thereby 
being more independent and requiring less care. This 
independence is expected to increase the quality of life for 
the client. The Hightech@home care service also provides 
extra information by logging the selected sensor data. 
Analysis of the logged data by the carers can ensure that care 
is better tailored to the clients’ needs.  
The Hightech@home service is expected to help 
professional carers and the informal carers to improve the 
effectiveness of their care. Expected efficiency, labor savings 
and increased service levels are all part of the value 
proposition for the professional care organization, as well as 
creating a competitive advantage compared to other care 
organizations with this home care service. The enhanced 
sense of security that the service offers through real-time 
monitoring is an important value proposition for both client 
and informal carer. The hypothetical value proposition has to 
be validated in the experimental phase and pilot phase. 
 
3) Technology Domain 
The next step in the eHix method is the description of the 
technical functionality required to realize the service. 
Relevant variables in this technology domain are: technical 
architecture, network accessibility, needed devices and 
application. The Hightech@home care service comprises a 
robust smart phone equipped with sensors (GPS and fall 
detection sensor), servers for storage and processing of 
information, and tablets or smart phones to display client 
messages and other information, see Fig 3. The technology 
used for the home care service is based on open source 
software. Even though the web application developed has 
been used in other projects, the combination with generic 
sensors has not been proven yet. Reliability is important 
because the service intents to deliver instant and stable 
communication between client and carer and real-time and 
accurate information about the movements of the client.  
Beside an impeccable reliability, the home care service 
needs to meet a number of certifications. There are a number 
of European requirements for the introduction of home care 
service [27]. Since the home care service also logs patient 
data, the law on medical health informatics must also be met 
[28]. 
 
4) Organizational Domain 
The third part of the business model contains a 
description of all the different actors in the network needed 
to deliver the service and the position of these actors in the 
value network. First we chart the actors, then we analyze 
their strategic interests to complete the stakeholder analysis. 
The central actor in the Hightech@home care service is 
the client with a mental and/or physical disability living at 
home.  The client receives care from a professional carer 
who is employed by a formal care organization and/or from 
an informal carer. The professional care organization 
provides care to people with physical and/or mental 
disabilities in their own living environment. The informal 
carer is often related to the client, either family or living in 
the neighborhood. The insurance company and/or the 
municipality finance or arrange the care and in doing so 
adhere to the laws and standards promulgated by the 
government.  
The 
Hightech@home 
project 
team acts as the 
entrepreneur in this case, developing the home care service 
and the possibilities to market.  The team consists of 
Stichting TriVici, VAC Thuistechnologie, Frion and 
Windesheim  Research group IT Innovations in Health. 
Stichting TriVici is founded on new concepts and 
innovations bringing care to people. They provide innovative 
solution to the Dutch home care market. An example is the 
development 
of 
an 
open 
source 
portal. 
VAC 
Thuistechnologie is a consultancy firm in information 
technology which excels in the home care market based on 
many years of experience. Frion is a large professional care 
organization that provides support to people with intellectual 
disabilities. The Windesheim Research group IT Innovations 
in Health Care studies the development and use of ICT in 
healthcare.  
When it comes to the interests of the various parties in 
the network, our starting point in any home care service is 
the client’s concern. The client is interested in the provision 
of a certain  degree of independent living, an effective means 
of communication, a good quality of life, better safety and 
more comfort. For the client the home care service obviously 
has to be easy to use and non-intrusive.  With uncertain 
finance prospects the costs of the service are also a concern 
for the client. The professional care organization‘s interest 
and the formal carer’s interests partly overlap with the 
client’s interests: safety, independence, communication and 
quality of life are part of their main concerns. Putting the 
clients’ welfare first at all times, Frion is looking for 
innovative ways to let their cients live their lives on their 
own terms, being in control of their own lives as much as 
possible. Efficiency, labor savings and increased service 
levels would be means to reach Frion’s innovative 
objectives. Integration and embedding the service in their 
existing offerings would also add to reach the care 
organization’s objectives. The insurance company’s interest 
are guided by support among caregivers and clients, health 
benefits like higher quality of living and self-reliance, 
reduced health care costs, workload reduction in care and 
replacement of existing care (substitution). The insurance 
companies are mostly bound to the national agreements (the 
Dutch government decides which care is included in the 
basic package of insured care), but they do look for ways to 
enhance their image to attract and retain customers. An 
innovative home care service could be a good unique selling 
proposition (USP) to them. Besides the government’s 
guidelines, the municipalities are expected to be led by 
efficiency, cost-effectiveness, necessity and practicality.  
Stichting Trivici’s interest in the Hightech@home care 
service is to develop and market a home care system which 
encourages low cost, interoperability and enables plug- and-
play home care technology. Safety, independence, increased 
service levels and quality of life are the pointers where 
Stichting Trivici works with. VAC Thuistechnologie is 
looking for unique solutions to solidify its market position in 
the Dutch home care market. The Hightech@home project is 
258
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a stable starting point for further development of open source 
home care concepts for this commercial partner. The 
Windesheim Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
aims to provide and produce knowledge on how to design 
and implement innovative health care solutions and aims to 
spread this knowledge towards other projects and 
publications. 
 
5) Financial Domain 
On the basis of an analysis of the financial domain, the 
way the service intends to generate revenues and the way 
risk, revenues and investments are divided among the 
various actors in the network, it is clear that there are various 
revenue models possible, depending on the target group and 
buyer within this target group. 
Central to the Hightech@home care service is the client 
as target group. This client can be the individual buyer of the 
home care system. In that case the service can take a revenue 
from for instance hosting, support service, extensions and 
other services as we have seen in the examples of open 
source business models. The fee can take different forms, 
ranging from subscription based on monthly / yearly fee to a 
usage fee based on actual services used. There are different 
levels of subscription possible (basic – premium) and price-
wise the client’s concern regarding price will probably be 
leading. The informal carer, another potential target group, 
can also be regarded as the potential individual buyer. In this 
case the revenue model could be quite similar to the model in 
which the client is the one who purchases the system.  
Considering the other prospects identified in the service 
domain, the professional care organization comes to the fore. 
In case this party decides to purchase the home care service 
system, the revenue model will be quite different, since we 
are dealing with an organization instead of an individual. 
Possibilities of installation / implementation fees, hosting, 
consulting 
and 
support 
service 
and 
organizational 
customizing with open license or commercial license as 
shown in the various open source business models come into 
view. Revenues can be made through various forms from 
subscriptions to lump-sum delivery with service contracts. In 
case the care organization has an in-house IT service, a once-
off implementation contract also belongs to the possibilities. 
Although the municipality and insurance companies are not 
part of the Hightech@home project, it is not unthinkable that 
they would be interested in purchasing the home care service 
as an extra facility for their citizens or customers. Since there 
are large-scale organizations too, revenue forms here could 
resemble the revenues to begotten from the professional care 
organization as buyer. The proven model of platform 
creation for shared services comes into view as a possibility 
here. 
The amount and forms of revenues vary greatly among 
the different potential target groups and their investment 
potential. The scale of the implementation and intensity of 
the use of the services will partly determine the revenue 
models and thereby the business modeling. 
 
 
 
6) Results 
Working 
out 
the 
value 
propositions 
of 
the 
Hightech@home care service in the first step to business 
modeling, brings the awareness that this intended home care 
service can add value to more than just the client and carers. 
Although the client and the carers are the primary target 
groups, the home care service also has the potential to 
deliver value for the professional care companies and even to 
the insurers and the municipality.  Straightaway there is the 
confrontation with the many parties in the home care 
landscape and with the fact that the target groups have not 
been determined yet. The intended target groups and their 
needs are central and largely determine the course of the 
development of the business model. Therefore there is the 
need to take action in this first step of the business modeling. 
Previous assessment showed how complex the Dutch home 
care landscape is and how different the routes the home care 
system can take to market. These observations call for the 
drafting of scenarios per target group to be written out at the 
outset of the project.   
The mapping of intended target groups and their 
accompanying needs in the scenarios are key to determining 
the right value proposition per target group for the 
Hightech@home care system. It is no use to hurrying to 
phase two – the design phase - of service at this very 
moment; one is simply not able to determine the user 
requirements if the target groups and their needs are not 
known. Unambiguousness at the first phase is obviously 
fundamental.  
The technology scan in the inventory phase of the 
technology domain focusses on the technical realization of 
the  value proposition of the Hightech@home care system. 
The first thoughts were on the client and care organization as 
target groups, and it is clear there has not been enough 
though on the potential target groups of municipality and 
insurers yet. All the probable value propositions in the 
service domain have not been described so far, therefore the 
technical options for realization cannot be drafted properly 
yet. For how to know what to develop if it is not clear what 
the Hightech@home innovation has to deliver? The eHix 
framework sends us straight back to the first cell of value 
proposition as a no-go and puts us to the task of charting all 
the target groups, needs and values per scenario as detailed 
as possible. 
Leaping to the organizational domain, the target groups 
are joined by the project parties in the value network of the 
Hightech@home care system. By charting the actors’ 
interests in a complete stakeholder analysis one gets clarity 
about the joint interests of the parties and is able to value the 
expertise in the project. Since the technical requirements of 
the Hightech@home care system are not known in detail yet, 
one cannot establish whether or not there is enough expertise 
in the project team. This has to be re-evaluated and may be 
in need of adjustment after the scenarios in the inventory 
phase of the service domain have been worked out. 
The stakeholder analysis of the project also makes it 
possible to specify the evidence needed to persuade the 
potential target groups for the Hightech@home care system. 
Since this evidence has to be gathered in the experiments and 
259
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

pilots, it is essential to be clear on the results before setting 
up the experiments and pilots for the Hightech@home 
project.  The evidence needed will of course vary per 
scenario. If it turns out that particular evidence needed for a 
target group – for instance labor savings for the insurer - 
cannot be established, the evidence may become a 
determining factor in the selection of scenarios for the 
Hightech@home care system.  The stakeholder analysis is 
also most useful in selecting the scenarios in the financial 
domain. The analysis shows the financial potency of the 
potential target groups within the Hightech@home network. 
The clients and informal carers obviously have a lower 
budget to spend than the care organizations, insurers and 
municipalities. If the Hightech@home project’s aimed low-
cost care service turns out to be out of reach for them, the 
other prospects come to the fore. In this manner the 
stakeholder analysis facilitates the selection of the likely 
scenarios. 
The revenue of the Hightech@home care system and its 
various forms diverge among the different potential buyers. 
Purchase and use of the home care system by the individual 
client or individual informal carer ask for a very different 
implementation / service model and use than purchase by the 
professional care organization.  When the purchase is made 
by insurers or municipalities, the scale of service and 
intensity of use even broadens. At this point in the project 
one can only make an inventory of the possible revenue 
models based on literature research of open source models.  
Only after all the scenarios of the Hightech@home care 
system are mapped, the revenue models can be identified 
efficiently and further steps can be taken towards viable 
business models. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The aim of this paper is to elaborate on the factors that 
play a role in the initial development of a feasible business 
model for open source home care technology, using the 
Hightech@home care system as an example. First of all  
literature overview pointed out the specifics of open source 
software and business models for open source software. 
Based on open source software, there are various established 
business models, from adding services and products around 
the software and creating platforms to share to hybrid models 
of open and closed licensing. Creative solutions are already 
proven according to literature. What makes open source 
software especially challenging in tailoring it to a market is 
the numerous actors in the open source software 
development. The large community of developers and testers 
of the open source software has to be kept in mind by 
building flexibility into the business model for the home care 
technology market. 
What characterizes the home care technology market?  
Literature overview describes the home care market as 
complex. Especially in the Netherlands the home care market 
is a fragmented landscape with demanding parties and 
various routes to this market. To make sure all options are 
explored, the open source business model for this scenery 
has to be developed in a thorough and methodical matter, 
making sure a solid foundation has been laid in the first 
stages of the business modeling. 
What are the particulars to be considered in the early 
stages of business model development for open source home 
care technology? As the first inventory stage of business 
modeling, 
charting 
the 
value 
proposition 
for 
the 
Hightech@home care service shows, it is most efficient to 
first work out a complete stakeholder analysis, followed by 
all possible scenarios in a consistent manner. Charting the 
value proposition of the care service brings awareness of 
other potential target groups which cannot be put aside. The 
intended target groups are central to the course of the 
business model. Absolute clarity on these groups, their needs 
and value propositions is vital before jumping into further 
development of the business model.  
Making choices in the inventory phase is not advisable. 
On the contrary, the inventory phase is best used to chart the 
full potential of the home care service. The writing out of 
scenarios 
per 
prospective 
target 
group 
ensures 
a 
comprehensive view of the potential of the home care service 
and a good foundation to develop a vital business model. The 
analysis of all the stakeholders and their interest in the 
network also provides the essential criteria for the feasibility 
of the scenarios. These criteria like income, scale of use or 
evidence needed for persuasion make it possible to make a 
preliminary selection of scenarios if necessary or preferred.  
The question what business model would be most 
feasible for the Hightech@home open source technology 
innovation cannot be answered yet in these early stages of 
development. This is logical since since not enough research 
has been done into the full potential of the service. The use 
of a structured method like the eHix method to build up the 
business model, a method where one is only allowed to 
move to the next phase if the previous phase is completed, 
ensures an efficient and effective route to business 
modeling.  
It is in the nature of business and entrepreneurs to fast 
track ahead on the road to success. However, laying 
foundation of business models by starting with an in-depth 
stakeholder analysis, working with probable scenarios and 
diligently following a business modeling method is the way 
to develop feasible business models that show the potential 
of the innovation to its full advantage. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank TechForFuture, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM (http://www.techforfuture.nl) for its 
financial support. The center is an initiative of Saxion and 
Windesheim, Universities of Applied Cciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Hettinga, E. Gyaltsen-Lohuis, A. de Keizer and J.M. 
Nauta, (2014). “Open Source Home Care Technology. 
Technical design and development, user research, cost-benefit 
260
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

analysis, and business modeling,” The Sixth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2014) IARIA, March 2014, pp. 267 – 270, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-327-8  
[2] Raad voor de Volksgezondheid (NVR), Discussienota 
thuiszorg,  Zoetermeer: NRV, 1989. 
[3] F. Hecker, “Setting up de shop: The business of open-source 
software,” Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, pp. 
45-51, Jan./Feb. 1999. 
[4] T.H.F. Broens, R. Huis in’t Veld, M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, H. 
Hermens, 
A. 
van 
Halteren 
and 
L. 
Nieuwenhuis, 
“Determinants of successful telemedicine implementations: a 
literature study,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 
13, pp. 303-309, 2007. 
[5] R. Menko, M. Hettinga, R. Janssen, S. Visser and T. Haaker, 
“Applying the STOF Business Model Framework in Ehealth 
Innovations,” The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2013) 
IARIA, March 2013, pp. 108-113, ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3 
[6] T. 
Haaker, 
“Business 
modellen 
voor 
ICT-intensieve 
zorginnovatie,” Nictiz Kennisartikel 10025, Den Hague: 
Nictiz, 2010. 
[7] H. Bouwman, H. de Vos and T. Haaker, Mobile Services 
Innovation and Business Models,  Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2008. 
[8] www.ehix.nl [10-12-2014] 
[9] J. West, “Value Capture and Value Networks in Open Source 
Vendor Strategies,” 40th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS 2007) IEEE Press, Jan. 2007 , p. 
176, doi:10.1109/HICSS.2007.600 
[10] E.J. Martin, “Open Source: is it Right for you?”  EContent,  
Jan./Feb. 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.econtentmag.com/Issues/3691-January-February-
2013.htm  
[11] S. Krishnamurthy, “An analysis of Open Source Business 
Models,” [Online]. Available from: http:/papers.ssrn.com  
[12] E. Capra and A. Wasserman,  (2008). “A framework for 
evaluating managerial styles in open source projects,” 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Open 
Source Systems (OSS 2008) Springer, pp. 1-14, ISBN: 978-
88-903120-1-4 
[13] www.opensourcematters.org [10-12-2014] 
[14] P. Korhonen, Business models and motivation of companies 
that take part in open sourse software development project, 
Oulu: University of Oulu, 2013. 
[15] D. Riehle, “The single-vendor commercial open course 
business 
Model,” 
Information 
Systems 
E-Business 
Management, vol. 10, pp.5–17, 2010. 
[16] J. West and J. Dedrick,  “Innovation and Control in Standards 
Architectures: The Rise and Fall of Japan’s PC-98,” 
Information Systems Research, vol. 11, pp. 197- 216, 2000. 
[17] R.T. Watson, M. Boudreau, P.T. York, M.E. Greiner and D. 
Wynn Jr., “The Business of Open Source,” Communications 
of the ACM, vol. 51, pp. 41-46, 2008. 
[18] K. Gary, H. Koehnemann, J. Blakley, C. Goar, J. Mann, and 
A. Kagan, “A Case Study: Open Source Community and the 
Commercial Enterprise,” Sixth International Conference on 
Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2009) 
IEEE Press , pp. 940-945,  doi: 10.1109/ITNG.2009.313. 
[19] N. Munga, T. Fogwill and Q. Williams, “The Adoption of 
Open Source Software in Business Models: a Red Hat and 
IBM Case Study,” Proceedings of the 2009 Annual Research 
Conference on the South African Institute of Computer 
Scientists and Information Technologist (SAICSIT 2009) 
ACM 
Publications, 
pp. 
112-121, 
doi: 
10.1145/1632149.1632165. 
[20] J. Kemperman, J. Geelhoed and J. Op ’t Hoog, Briljante 
Business Modellen in de Zorg. Baanbrekende benaderigen 
voor betere en betaalbare zorg, Den Hague: Academic 
Services, p. 44, 2014. 
[21] D.A.J. Dohmen, De ‘e’ van e-Health. Juiste energie voor 
optimale implementatie van moderne technologie in de zorg 
thuis 
Inspectie 
voor 
de 
gezondheidszorg, 
Enschede: 
Universiteit van Twente, 2013. 
[22] KPMG, Accelerating Innovation: The Power of the Crowd. 
Global Lessons in eHealth Implementation, Manchester: 
University of Manchester, 2012. 
[23] www.mezzo.nl/hoeveel_mantelzorgers_zijn_er_in_nederland 
[10-12-2014] 
[24] www.innovatieroutesindezorg.nl/Veranderingen-2015 [10-12-
2014] 
and 
www.zorgvisie.nl/PageFiles/80908/Jan%20Telgen.pdf 
[10-
12-2014] 
[25] S. Visser, T. Haaker, R. Menko and M. Hettinga. (2012). 
“Succesvol Innoveren in eHealth met eHix” [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ehix.nl/Documents/Overig/whitepaper_ehix.pdf 
[26] M. Hettinga, Telezorg: van Buzz naar Business? Lectorale 
rede, lectoraat ICT-innovaties in de Zorg,  Zwolle: 
Christelijke Hogeschool Windesheim, 2009. 
[27] www.dekra.nl [10-12-2014] 
[28] www.nen.nl [10-12-2014] and www.qaeh.nl 
[10-12-2014]
 
261
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

