54
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Cognitive and Behavioral Data for Decision Tree-based Diagnosis of
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Anderson Martins Silva
Graduate Program
in Electrical and Computer Engineering
Mackenzie Presbyterian University
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: 71953371@mackenzista.com.br
Luiz Renato Rodrigues Carreiro
Graduate Program
in Developmental Disorders
Mackenzie Presbyterian University
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: luizrenato.carreiro@mackenzie.br
Mayara Miyahara Moraes Silva
Graduate Program
in Developmental Disorders
Mackenzie Presbyterian University
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: 72054298@mackenzista.com.br
Maria Cristina Triguero Veloz Teixeira
Graduate Program
in Developmental Disorders
Mackenzie Presbyterian University
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: mcris@mackenzie.br
Leandro Augusto da Silva
Graduate Program
in Electrical and Computer Engineering
Mackenzie Presbyterian University
S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: leandroaugusto.silva@mackenzie.br
Abstract—Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
(ADHD)
presents in children and adolescents as a persistent pattern
of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity that interferes
with their development. Computational studies on ADHD focus
on measures of brain activity of the participants and a few
use standardized cognitive tests or behavioral inventories to
assess objective indicators for diagnosis. The paper presents
a computational proposal in which the combination of two
artiﬁcial intelligence methods is used to aid the identiﬁcation
of diagnostic indicators for ADHD. The proposal is to combine
a neural network of self-organizing maps to group factors from
standardized tests and inventories, and a decision tree to classify
the most relevant factors. The study included 127 children and
adolescents from 6 to 16 years old, 48 with ADHD diagnosis and
79 without ADHD (control group). The most relevant result of
the study was the strong contribution of the Child and Adolescent
Behavior Inventory results in the diagnosis of the disorder with
great performance in prediction when compared to real data and
reliability by Kappa statistics.
Keywords—Self-Organizing Maps (SOM); Decision Tree; Atten-
tion Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
I. INTRODUCTION
This work is complementary to and based on the published
article BRAININFO 2021 [1] and according to the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition -
DSM-5 [2]. Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
is a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-
impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.
The disorder is characterized by inattention involving, for
example, difﬁculty sustaining attention in tasks or playing
activities, a state in which the mind seems elsewhere, even
in the absence of any obvious distraction, difﬁculty to follow
through with instructions and failing to ﬁnish schoolwork,
often forgetful in daily activities, chores, or duties in the
workplace, losing things, expressing excessive activity or
restlessness, and inability to wait one’s turn, always in ways
that are excessive for one’s age or developmental level. ADHD
has its initial expressions in childhood and usually persists into
adulthood, resulting in impairments in social, academic, and
occupational functioning.
The diagnosis of ADHD is clinical, based on the individual’s
history and expression of symptoms. Because this diagnosis
is often based on reports of symptom severity and because
these symptoms are also part of other clinical conditions,
the diagnostic difﬁculty is present in the daily lives of the
interdisciplinary teams responsible for the evaluation process
[3] [4]. Because of the complexity of the diagnostic eval-
uation, the American Association of Pediatrics recommends
the use of an algorithm, both for evaluation and treatment of
children and adolescents with ADHD [5]. To support clinical
decision making, neuropsychological, behavioral, and adaptive
functioning assessment procedures have often been used in
conjunction with neurological assessments [6]. Considering
the social importance involved in properly issuing a correct
diagnosis of ADHD, in both children and adolescents, studies
must be proposed that discuss which are the best indicators
of clinical-neurological, neuropsychological, and behavioral-
adaptive diagnostic evaluation when children and adolescents
present with complaints of inattention and hyperactivity. Fur-
thermore, for appropriate assessments and interventions to
be implemented, differential criteria are needed to correctly
characterize and identify attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity among
children and adolescents. Comprehensive assessments in this
regard allow a better understanding of the complexity of
each case for appropriate guidance, design of the therapeutic
intervention, and evaluation of the need for educational and

55
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
emotional support for patients and families [6].
Computational studies can help professionals in diagnostic
assessments, especially using machine learning algorithms,
Kam et al. [8] used an artiﬁcial intelligence algorithm called
decision tree for screening ADHD, by monitoring the school
activities of 153 children using 3-axial actigraph and obtained
results consistent with previous studies. In turn, Lee et al.
[9] analyzed the classiﬁcation of ADHD in children through
brain activity measurements. In their work, they used a neural
network algorithm called self-organizing maps allowing cate-
gorizing characteristics of children with and without clinical
indicators of ADHD.
Unlike previous proposals presented in the literature, this
work aims to combine two artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. In
the ﬁrst step, standardized test results are grouped by means of
Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) and, in a second step, the groups
with a high level of overlap are analyzed using a decision tree
algorithm. This helps discover which attribute is discriminative
in the diagnosis of children and adolescents with suspected
ADHD.
Besides Section I, that aims to contextualize the work and
present the objective, the work is organized into six parts.
Section II presents the theoretical framework and justiﬁca-
tion of the study. Section III presents the proposed use of
two artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms to aid in the diagnosis.
In Section IV, the procedures for developing the study are
described, including the computational development with the
application of two artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. In Section
V, the contribution of standardized cognitive tests or behavioral
inventories is described, as well as the proposal to solve the
diagnostic doubt within the self-organizing maps and then
the classiﬁcation by the decision tree for understanding the
characteristics of the diagnosis of the disorder. Finally, in
Section VI, we present the conclusion and recommendations
for further studies.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Elements
of
Attention
Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity
Disorder
(ADHD)
ADHD is part of the group of neurodevelopmental disorders
beginning in childhood, but a substantial proportion of children
with ADHD remain relatively impaired into adulthood [9].
From a cognitive-behavioral point of view, it is characterized
by deﬁcits in several cognitive functions, such as attention, es-
pecially selective, sustained, alternating, and divided attention,
deﬁcits in inhibitory control, processing speed, organization,
ability to inhibit distracting information, deﬁcits in cognitive
ﬂexibility, hyperactivity behaviors, restlessness, and impulsiv-
ity. ADHD affects 5.29% of the world’s child population.
Of this population, 30% up to 70% maintain symptoms into
adulthood [10] [11]. According to DSM-5 [1], ADHD can
be classiﬁed according to the predominance of symptomatic
axes as predominantly inattentive, predominantly hyperactive-
impulsive, or combined presentations.
Behavioral patterns are important in the diagnosis of
ADHD. Here are some difﬁculties related by parents regarding
the children: listening, obeying, following routine rules, often
postponing and forgetting daily activities, following direct
instructions, regulating feelings of frustration, exacerbation of
motor activity, maybe impulsive in changing activities before
they are completed, having difﬁculty waiting their turn, may
have impairments in social relationships. These behaviors may
contribute to high-stress in family or school environments [12].
The inequality of symptom axes within the predominantly
inattentive subgroup compromises its validity when compared
to the combined subgroup. However, individuals considered
only inattentive, but with a subclinical level of hyperactivity-
impulsivity symptoms (4 or 5 symptoms), have their classi-
ﬁcation without intensity of the combined ADHD subtype.
However, there is still little evidence on the qualitative differ-
ence between the subtypes presented, even when inattentive
classiﬁcation is established to individuals with three or fewer
hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms [13]. At different stages
of life, ADHD can show itself at about 2:1 in the case of
children and 1.6:1 in adults. This shift in prevalence from
children to adults hypothetically occurs because children and
adolescents can create methods that suppress the disorder as
they develop, making them more functional, and hiding some
difﬁculties and symptoms [9].
According to the new classiﬁcation of the A.P.A [2], the
highlights are the changes in the various forms of symptoms,
trying to contextualize the criteria diagnosed throughout the
individual’s life; change in the age of onset of symptoms, from
7 to 12 years of age; change of the term ”subtype” for ”current
presentation”; and removal of autistic spectrum disorders as
excluding factors in the diagnosis.
Children who are usually in the preschool phase may
present high levels of motor activity, attention deﬁcit, and
poor inhibitory control that are behavioral manifestations of
ADHD. However, in clinical cases, they are more signiﬁcant
and result in considerable impairment, with high accident rates
and poor school performance that can persist into school age
in 60 to 80 percent of cases [14]. Approximately 70% of
school-age children experience worsening in school activities
and impairment in family life and relationships with other chil-
dren. Generally, inattention symptoms relative to hyperactivity
symptoms decelerate with age, i.e., decline slowly between
the passage of the child, adolescent, and adult age stages with
greater persistence [15]. About 33% of children with ADHD
in adulthood no longer have the symptoms, as opposed to
the rest who continue to have the disorder or episodes that
result in loss. Over a prolonged period, adults with ADHD
experience worsening academic and work performances, as
well as increased trafﬁc offenses, motor vehicle accidents, and

56
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sexual behavior with high risk and the concomitant onset of
various psychiatric illnesses, such as anxiety disorder, mood
disorders, and substance abuse [6].
Genetic factors and environmental conditions contribute
greatly to a complex etiology of ADHD with neurobiological
bases established by research. For example, study conducted
by Williams [16] points to unusual patterns in the central
nervous system of people with ADHD [17]. According to
Carreiro et al. [6], the study of neuropsychological endophe-
notypes is motivated by the etiological complexity and clinical
inhomogeneity of ADHD. Endophenotypes, sometimes called
”intermediate phenotypes”, are inherited and gauged traits that
can be found in the pathway linking a genotype to complex
neuropsychiatric disorders. However, individuals with ADHD
may or may not display different forms of patterns following a
complex cognitive proﬁle and multiple variations, such as loss
or low attentional focus, causing a lack of ﬂexibility, difﬁculty
dealing with distractors, difﬁculty with self-regulation, behav-
ioral impulsivity, lack of motor coordination, and shufﬂing of
mental information due to difﬁculty with organization. The
signs presented show that the child may have an impairment
in the intellectual development in different areas of the brain
and are shown by playful interactions, by observation, and
by standardization of instruments, becoming fundamental in
measuring the complaints of inattention and hyperactivity [18].
Behavioral patterns are important in diagnosing ADHD,
parents report that children have difﬁculty listening for inat-
tention when someone speaks directly, obey, and follow rules
and routines, often postpone and forget daily activities, have
difﬁculty following direct instructions, do not accept frustra-
tion, have an exacerbation of motor activity, may show some
form of impulsivity in an activity before it is completed, are
unable to wait, have impaired social relationships, have high-
stress in the family or school environments. Observation of
several people can increase the accuracy of the diagnosis,
enabling in cases of comorbidities and inconsistent symptoms,
the differentiated possibility of diagnosis. This creates the
need to report in a standardized way, to avoid bias and the
possibility of building a representative behavioral proﬁle for
evaluation. Currently, the psychology literature has several
instruments that are applied to parents and teachers, to extract
as much information as possible from the two environments
of children [18]. These instruments, which are seen in this
work as attributes, have a protocol-based direction to assess
ADHD complaints, and the attributes are analyzed by cognitive
assessment parameters used, such as the Cancel Attention
Test, Trail Making Test, Continuous Performance Test, Wis-
consin Letter Test, Wechsler Abbreviated Intelligence Scale
and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, as well as the
behavior inventories for children and adolescents (CBCL/6-18)
and for teachers (TRF/6-18).
Given the importance of collecting various pieces of infor-
mation in cognitive neuropsychology and behavior analysis,
the treatment and multivariate analysis of the data can help
us obtain relevant information in understanding ADHD com-
plaints, and the artiﬁcial intelligence techniques used become
key elements in diagnostic discrimination.
B. Self-Organizing Maps (SOM)
According to Mer´enyi et al. [19], a SOM network provides
clustering and visual representation of data in low dimensions.
This technique preserves the topological structure of the data
in a lattice of neurons. The grid can be deﬁned as a rectangular
or hexagonal grid, as in Figure 1, usually two-dimensional,
in an ordered manner such that the most similar neurons
are grouped with neurons that are close in the grid, and the
opposite is true for less similar neurons that are far apart in
the grid, providing a topological view of the data. All neurons
in the grid must undergo exposure to different realizations of
the input dataset to ensure that the self-organization process
matures. The algorithm then proceeds to choose synaptic
weights initially randomly with small values. Once the grid
has been initialized, we have the presence of three essential
processes used to construct the self-organizing map.
With the need to understand the characteristics of the com-
bined attributes and facing data with non-linear distribution, it
was chosen in this work an unsupervised model, developed by
Kohonen in 1982, called SOM, being especially suitable for
data assimilation because it has visualization properties such as
highlighting [20], but the dataset allowed the use of principal
component analysis or cluster analysis of the data. The goal
of unsupervised methods is to identify clusters in unlabeled
sets of data vectors sharing similarities. This helps to build a
cognitive model that realizes the interrelationship of the data
[21]. As proposed by Kohonen [22], capturing the features
of an input data set, with a nonlinear distribution, is effected
by building a complex neural network around a one- or two-
dimensional grid of neurons. The ordering of the input data
is structured by weight vectors of neurons called prototypes,
and is inspired by neurobiology. They were summarized by
Kohonen [22] and Kubat [23] as follows:
1) Competition: The generalist model can serve to describe
the phenomena of the initial data in a way that collectively or-
ders a complex system, which shows representative statistical
features, even with the fully disordered input space [23].
However, the SOM model is automatically associated with
the nodes of the rectangular or hexagonal grid, Figure 1,
usually two-dimensional, in an ordered fashion and in a way
to which the most similar models join closer nodes in the
grid. The opposite being true for less similar models that are
equidistant, thus this process enables a topological view of the
data [24].

57
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Topological map - rectangular and hexagonal grids
( [25, p.451] )
The synaptic weight vector is calculated for each j neuron of
the grid with the same dimension as the input dataset through
the inner product between the synaptic weight vector and the
input data vector, this function being the basis for choosing the
winning neuron. The maximization of this function has math-
ematical equivalence with the minimization of the Euclidean
distance between the synaptic weight and input data vectors.
X = [x1, x2, ..., xm]T
(1)
X is the input vector of the space m transposed.
Wj = [wj1, wj2, ..., wjm]T, j = 1, 2, ..., l
(2)
Wj is the synaptic weight vector of each neuron in the grid.
In the competition step, according to Kubat [23], an input
vector is randomly selected along with the synaptic weight
vector of the neuron j, that by making the inner product of
the two vectors, being W T
j X for j = 1, 2,..., l. Transposing
the input vector it is possible to make the selection of the
largest product. The topological neighborhood of the excited
neurons is centered and since maximizing the inner product of
the vectors X and Wj is minimizing their Euclidean distance,
by creating an index i(X) to identify the neuron that best relates
to the input vector X, one can deﬁne i(X) by:
i(X) = arg minj
X − Wj
, j = 1, 2, ..., l
(3)
i(X) is the index that summarizes the competitive process
between neurons.
This process summarizes the competition between neurons.
Equation (3) shows the i(X) is the goal of this process because
in this step the identity of the neuron i is important and the
neuron that satisﬁes the condition is called the winning neuron
for the input vector X.
2) Cooperation: The cooperation process starts when the
winning neuron is updated around a topological neighborhood
of the nearest neurons, being similar around a radius r. How-
ever, it is necessary to deﬁne the topological neighborhood so
that only adjacent neurons are updated while having a way
that the neighborhood decays smoothly with lateral distance
[23].
Given hj,i the topological neighborhood centered around
the winning neuron i that contains a set of excited neurons, one
neuron of this set being represented by j and dj,i the lateral
distance of the excited neuron j by the winning neuron i, then
one can assume that the topological neighborhood. Equation
(4) is a unimodal function of the distance dj,i, provided it
satisﬁes the symmetry conditions with respect to the maximum
point with dj,i=0, and the amplitude decreases with increasing
lateral distance dj,i [23].
The basis for cooperation between neighboring neurons is
provided by the winner neuron that shows the spatial location
of the topological neighborhood of neurons neighboring the
winner hj,i(X):
hj,i(X) = exp

−d2j,i
2σ2

(4)
dj,i is side distance and σ is the effective width of the
topological neighborhood.
Since the topological neighborhood has some dependence
with the lateral distance, as seen in Equation (4), then a one-
dimensional grid dj,i is an integer equal to |j − i|. However,
when it is two-dimensional it is deﬁned by Equation (5) where
the discrete vector rj is the position of the excited neuron j and
ri is the position of the winning neuron i, both being measured
in the discrete output space. An interesting feature of SOM is
that the size of the topological neighborhood decreases with
time and this is done by having the width σ of Equation (4)
decrease with time [26].
d2
j ,i =
rj − ri

2
(5)
σ(n) = σ0 exp

− n
τl

n = 0, 1, 2, ...,
(6)
σ0 is the value of σ when starting the SOM and τl a time
constant. Thus, we have the topological neighborhood deﬁned
as a time variable according to Equation (7):
hj,i(X)(n) = exp

− d2j,i
2σ2(n)

n = 0, 1, 2, ...,
(7)
So one can conclude that when the time n increases, the
topological neighborhood decreases exponentially, as does the

58
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
width σ(n). This topological neighborhood hj,i(X)(n) was
used in the study and will be reference from this point on.
3) Adaptation: In the adaptation phase, for the grid to be
self-organizing, the synaptic weight vector Wj of the neuron
j of the grid must be changed relative to the input vector X
[23]. However, there is a problem of saturation of the weights
at the end of the process, but it can be corrected by changing
the Hebbian assumption with a forgetting term g(yi)Wj where
Wj is the synaptic weight of the neuron j and g(yi) is the
positive scalar function of the response yi, the constant term
of the Taylor series expansion of function g(yi) being zero
[23].
Neighboring neurons to the winner increase their discrimi-
nant function values based on the input dataset, and as appro-
priate adjustments applied to their synaptic weights improve a
subsequent input dataset. As Kohonen [22], the Equation (8)
of updating is deﬁned by:
Wj(n + 1) = Wj(n) + η(n)hj,i(X)(n)(X − Wj(n))
(8)
n equals epoch, η(n) is the learning rate, and hi,j(x)(n) is
the neighborhood function.
According to Kohonen [22] there are two phases in the adap-
tive process: a sorting phase, which organizes the topology of
the weight vectors, and a convergence phase, which adjusts the
feature map, producing a statistical quantization of the input
space. In the sorting phase, the learning rate parameter eta(n)
starts with a value of 0.1 and decreases to a value close to
0.01. The neighborhood function must contain almost all the
neurons of the grid around the winning neuron i with a slow
reduction over time and may require 1000 or more iterations.
In the convergence phase the number of iterations should be
at least 500 times the number of neurons in the lattice, and for
good statistical accuracy, the learning rate parameter eta(n)
should be close to 0.01 and never zero. The neighborhood
function has only the nearest neighbors of the winning neuron,
which can be either one or zero neighboring neurons [23].
The originality of the SOM learning presented in the study
may contribute to improving the diagnosis of ADHD patients
by presenting a set of similar prototypes that represent the
combination of attributes and then using a classiﬁcation algo-
rithm, such as the decision tree, which directly and quickly
separates patients prone to the disorder. With this, the study
can help health professionals and researchers to develop more
accurate tools and reduce the cost of diagnostic tests that
currently make their application unfeasible in the public health
system.
C. Decision Tree
A decision tree is an Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithm capa-
ble of organizing attributes from a dataset in priority, so that it
can generate a path that leads to a decision for a classiﬁcatory
attribute [27] [28]. A decision tree is built using algorithms
that variously split a data set into branch-like segments. These
segments create an inverted decision tree beginning at a root
node at the top of the tree to the leaf at its end. Each object
in the study is reﬂected in the root node and is a simple, one-
dimensional display in the decision tree view. The name of
the attribute is displayed along with a spread of values that
are contained in the attribute. Its display shows all records
in the dataset, attributes, and their values are viewed on the
analysis object. The development of the decision rule for
forming branches under the root node has, in the extraction
method, a relationship between the object of analysis and one
or more attributes that are used as input attributes to create the
branches or segments, being used to estimate the likely value
of the target, or outcome attribute or dependent attribute [29].
According to Castro [30], the structure of the decision tree
is composed of internal nodes that correspond to an attribute
test, each branch represents the test result, and the classes or
class distributions are represented by the leaf nodes. The start
node represents the root node, and the path from this node to
the leaf node is called the classiﬁcation rule. The decision tree
construction can be used to classify an unknown class object,
and the estimation is done by testing the attribute values in the
tree and traversing until it reaches the leaf node. In this way,
the result of the decision tree algorithm becomes a process
that is easy to understand and visualize.
The decision tree algorithm as presented by Linoff and
Berry [31] is a hierarchical collection of rules that describes
how to divide a large collection of objects into successively
smaller groups of objects. With each successive split, the
members of the resulting followings become more similar to
each other. For the selection of attributes to be chosen for
division, one can use the information gain (Gain), which is
one of the best-known methods and has as its generating base
the entropy that is a measure of purity [32]. Thus, the gain is
the expected reduction of entropy and has as its main function
the division of attributes in the data set. Shannon entropy, on
the other hand, measures the purity of the dataset [33], being
a measure of the heterogeneity of the input data (S) relative
to its classiﬁcation (m). The expected value of the entropy of
the attribute E(A) is given by Equation (9) and the expected
information of S is given by Equation (11). Thus, the key
factor is the use of a gain function that allows the attributes
(A) to be compared to select the most relevant one. The chosen
attribute is the one that maximizes the information gain which
is calculated as being [30] [32]:
With nij being the number of objects in class Ci in a subset
Sj, then the expected attribute information can be:

59
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E(A) =
v
X
j=1
nij + ... + nmj
n
∗ I(nij, ..., nmj)
=
X
v∈values(A)
p(Av)Entropy(Av)
(9)
The entropy (Shannon’s) [33] measures the impurity of the
dataset, being a measure of the heterogeneity of the input
dataset (S) relative to its classiﬁcation (c). The Gain(S,A) is
given by the Equation (10) and the entropy of S is given by the
equation 11. Thus, the key factor is the use of a gain function
that allows the attributes (A) to be compared to select the most
relevant one. The attribute chosen is the one that maximizes
the information gain which is calculated as being [33]:
Gain(S, A) = I(S) − E(A)
(10)
S is the input dataset, A is the attributes, and Θ represents
the probability of A multiplied by its entropy.
I(S) = I(C1, C2, ..., Cm) =
m
X
k=1
−pilog2pi
(11)
The information Gain is given by the Equation (10) and
represents the expected reduction in entropy when the value
of the attribute A is known, since the process calculates the
gain for each attribute, choosing the attribute with the highest
gain to be tested in the set S. This process creates the division
of objects to form the decision tree, giving rise to the node,
labeling the attribute, and creating branches for each attribute
value.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
The work presents a proposal for an unsupervised learning
model as a method used in the identiﬁcation of the neurons
of the grid with greater diagnostic doubt of ADHD, that is,
the diagnostic doubt in the neuron shows that it is difﬁcult
for both a machine learning algorithm and an expert to make
a diagnosis. Thus, the paper brings a proposal to apply a
decision tree on the neurons that show overlap to suggest
which attributes are more discriminative. To understand this
overlapping, the entropy (of Shannon) was calculated with
the purpose of measuring the impurity of the neuron with
its dataset, that is, the closer the entropy is to one, the
greater the impurity of the neuron’s dataset. Given this fact, a
combination of SOM with the decision tree algorithm, which is
a supervised model used in data classiﬁcation to help identify
one or more attributes from standardized assessment tools,
such as cognitive tests and behavioral assessment inventories
were sought. These tools were used to test the learning of
ADHD characteristics.
Figure 2. Segmentation of neurons in the self-organizing map
The objective of this decision tree algorithm was to verify
the accuracy of the model for the conﬁrmation of cases with
ADHD diagnosis by identifying which assessment tools best
contributed to this ADHD conﬁrmation.
Figure 3. Decision tree structure
Then Kappa statistics is applied to measure the agreement
and reliability of the observed diagnostic attributes with the
expected diagnostic attribute, which is the measurement of
the agreement of an expert’s diagnosis compared to the algo-
rithm’s diagnosis. The next section will present the methodol-
ogy developed with the data set and application of the artiﬁcial
intelligence algorithms to arrive at the results of the work.
IV. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The study sample consisted of 127 children and adolescents
between 6 and 16 years old, 48 with a clinical diagnosis of
ADHD and 79 from the control group, with no diagnosis of
ADHD. The attributes that make up the neuropsychological
tests and behavioral inventories applied in this study are

60
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Attention Cancellation Test (TAC), Trail Making Test (TMT),
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III), Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IV), Wechsler Abbre-
viated Scale of Intelligence (WASI), Child Behavior Checklist
for ages 6-18 (CBCL/6-18) and Teacher’s Report Form for
ages 6-18 (TRF/6-18).
These attributes were normalized by the z-score method
[34] to standardize the different scales of the attributes. The
normalized data property is used to train the network SOM
using the package available in R language [35]. In this library,
the functions somgrid and som are used to parameterize and
train the map, respectively. According to Rubbo [36], the map
size can be described according to Equations (12) and (13),
with n being the number of objects and the constant Cm
varying from [-3,3] to generate different map sizes:
lSOM = √n/2 + Cm
(12)
Map Size = (lSOM)2
(13)
For the size of the map topology, the dimension 4x4 was
chosen. With this, the hypothesis of the study was to ﬁnd
neurons with a representative density of objects and with a
signiﬁcant class distribution.
With the trained map, the analyses made were the density
of objects in each neuron, the distance between neurons, the
quality of adjustment of the neurons, the contribution of the
attributes in the formation of neurons, and the distribution
of the label of each object in each neuron. In addition to
the outputs analyzed, the representativeness of the number
of objects contained in each neuron with the label attribute
was sought in the table generated by the SOM. In this way,
the neurons of greater relevance were identiﬁed, that is, with
larger numbers of objects generated by the SOM algorithm.
From this point on, the entropy algorithm (Shannon’s) was
used on each neuron in the network to select the neuron with
the highest class overlap along with the representativeness of
objects that are difﬁcult cases to diagnose. By identifying
neurons with overlapping classes, their objects are selected
from the database generated by the SOM network for training
and validation of the decision tree algorithm. The result of
the decision tree brought a hierarchy of attributes in order of
discrimination for cases of diagnostic doubt, and the validation
of the algorithm shows the performance of the classiﬁcation.
A. Rating Performance Evaluation
Table I shows the confusion matrix that was used to analyze
the classiﬁcation performance of the decision tree. The table
indicates the prediction of the positive and negative scenarios,
as well as current true and false scenarios [37]:
• TN is the correct number of negative predictions;
• FP is the number of false positive predictions;
• FN is the number of false negative predictions;
• TP is the correct number of positive predictions.
Table I. Confusion matrix.
Predicted Negative
Predicted Positive
Current False
TN
FP
Current True
FN
TP
From the confusion matrix, it is possible to measure the
performance of the algorithm by calculating the accuracy, as
follows:
Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP + TN + FP + FN)
(14)
Error = (FP + FN)/(TP + TN + FP + FN)
(15)
B. Kappa Statistics
The measurement of agreement or Kappa coefﬁcient (K)
was used to comparatively measure the ADHD diagnosis of
children submitted to the inventories corresponding to the
disorder by the ADHD diagnosis predicted in the decision
tree. The Kappa coefﬁcient can be calculated with the results
of the confusion matrix by Equation (16) [38], [39]:
kappa = P(O) - P(E)/1 - P(E)
(16)
Where P(O) is the observed probability of agreement (sum
of the concordant answers divided by the total); P(E) is the
expected probability of agreement (sum of the expected values
of the concordant answers divided by the total). According to
Silva [38], Kappa is a measure of interobserver agreement
that evaluates the degree of agreement, as well as whether it
is beyond what is expected given chance. It is a maximum
unit value measure that corresponds to the absolute agreement
and values close to zero or negative, indicating no or lack of
agreement between the attributes being judged.
To simplify the methodological description developed in the
study, we present a ﬂowchart that brieﬂy describes the process
through the programming created to obtain the result and can
be seen in Figure 4.

61
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Dataset modeling ﬂowchart
After this stage, it is possible to better understand the
model’s contribution to the understanding of Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder, as well as to the diagnostic evaluation
of patients. The next section presents the results obtained in
this work.
V. RESULTS
The training result of the SOM network can be seen in two
different visualizations, depicted in Figures 5 and 6. Figure 5
presents the attributes, common to the trials, graphically dis-
tributed in each neuron. The sizes indicate the contribution that
each attribute has to the formation of the neuron. Note that
neighboring neurons have similarities among the attributes. In
Figure 6, the diagnosis, an attribute that is not used in training
the SOM, is projected on the map, allowing visualization of
which neurons have the overlap of class 1 (group diagnosed
with ADHD) and 2 (control group without ADHD). The
network could not separate the diagnosed cases in neuron 4.
Table II presents for each neuron the percentage of objects
of each class. Neuron 4 is the one with the highest concen-
tration of objects (40%) and overlapping classes in the whole
dataset.
Figure 5. Contribution of the attributes in the formation of the neuron
Figure 6. Scattering of objects diagnostic within neurons
Table II. Comparative diagnosis by the neuron dimension 4X4.
Diagnostic
1
2
Total
neuron
1
3 (6.2%)
1 (1.3%)
4 (3.1%)
2
1 (2.1%)
0 (0.0%)
1 (0.8%)
3
1 (2.1%)
16 (20.3%)
17 (13.4%)
4
16 (33.3%)
35 (44.3%)
51 (40.2%)
6
0 (0.0%)
20 (25.3%)
20 (15.7%)
9
0 (0.0%)
1 (1.3%)
1 (0.8%)
11
2 (4.2%)
1 (1.3%)
3 (2.4%)
12
11 (22.9%)
1 (1.3%)
12 (9.4%)
13
6 (12.5%)
3 (3.8%)
9 (7.1%)
14
2 (4.2%)
1 (1.3%)
3 (2.4%)
15
6 (12.5%)
0 (0.0%)
6 (4.7%)
Total
48 (100.0%)
79 (100.0%)
127 (100.0%)
The result of the decision tree with the data mapped onto
neuron 4 can be seen in Figure 7. The result shows that the
Child Behavior Checklist for ages 6-18 attribute, speciﬁcally
the probability of attention problems scale (T-score) [40] [41]
neurons had the highest discrimination.
Figure 7. Decision tree of neuron 4
Finally, Figure 8 allows you to visualize all six attributes
with greater discrimination for complex cases relative to the
integration of clinical evaluation and evaluation using tests for
a conﬁrmation of the diagnosis.
The decision tree is a supervised algorithm, has as response
attribute an estimated of the class attribute and the result can

62
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8. Importance of the attributes in neuron 4 by decision tree
be seen in Table III. Based on the confusion matrix generated,
it is observed that of the 35 positive diagnoses for ADHD
collected by applying the inventories, there are 33 positive
diagnoses estimated by the algorithm. Based on the numbers
presented, one can calculate the accuracy of the algorithm,
as well as use the Kappa statistic to measure the agreement
between the observed objects and the estimated objects [39].
The result with the 4x4 grid generated an accuracy of 88%
with a good Kappa reliability of 72%, with the p-value equal
to 2.68e−7.
Table III. Confusion matrix
Predicted Negative
Predicted Positive
Current False
12
4
Current True
2
33
The results presented by the SOM and the decision tree
corroborate the three dimensions analyzed and bring a new
perspective to cases of doubt in diagnosing ADHD. However,
the next section will discuss how the study could help through
the mathematical understanding of the interpretation of neu-
rodevelopmental disorder and the possibility of future work
using newly supervised or/and unsupervised computational
approaches to improve on groups with overlapping diagnoses
of ADHD.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Data from the behavioral assessment inventory [6] can
generally be more susceptible to respondent bias because it is
based on the answers of the subject. This bias is less so when
using cognitive tests which are assessment measures applied
directly to the person. Mathematical understanding and model
generation is likely to become more difﬁcult using only behav-
ioral inventories. Since ADHD demands the use of both types
of measures, in this study both tools were used to apply the
decision tree. In the study, it was possible to group the children
with and without ADHD by SOM, which made it possible
to understand from the perspective of each grouping what
was most important in their formation. The self-organizing
map contributed especially to the formation of groups and the
understanding of clusters with class overlapping, which is the
proposal of this work. In this case of overlapping to diagnose
a disorder, the decision tree was used to classify the attributes
that contributed to the formation of the ADHD group. With
this, the predominance of characteristics that helped in the
understanding of ADHD in children and adolescents in the
study was observed.
The application of the decision tree identiﬁed six attributes,
namely two of cognitive assessment and four of behavioral
assessment, that showed relevant discrimination to make the
diagnosis. The Child Behavior Checklist for ages 6-18 attribute
the one that showed the highest discriminative power. How-
ever, the incidence of low T-scores on the attention problems
scale and attention deﬁcit scale does not necessarily imply
that the child has ADHD. The results presented showed the
difﬁculty and complexity of ﬁnding indicators that deﬁne
ADHD, as already signaled by some authors [6] [7] [9]
[42] [43]. Importantly, the diagnosis of ADHD is a clinical
diagnosis that considers the measurement of behavioral cor-
relates of attentional deﬁcits and indicators of hyperactivity
and impulsivity in more than one environment. With the
Child Behavior Checklist for ages 6-18 attribute being a
parent-reported measure, the validity of these two scales for
identifying ADHD will likely be conﬁrmed. However, when
disregarding the scales, one should consider the evaluations
made with the cognitive tests that directly make cognitive
measurements and are essential to decide the diagnosis of
ADHD. In this study, the tests that contributed the most to
this decision tree were the Attention Cancellation Test (ACT)
and the Trail Making Test (TMT).
The study presented as a relevant factor the case of over-
lapping diagnoses of neurons when using the SOM and,
in conjunction with the decision tree, was able to separate
88% of the cases. This way, future works can collaborate
with the technique addressed in the study through supervised
data procedures. These tools can help in making comparisons
between results of standardized tests aiming to reduce possible
biases of behavioral evaluations based on informants’ reports.
Future studies can test the same decision tree on larger
samples to see if the attributes that showed higher accuracy
are maintained. By doing so, the best indices of cognitive
and behavioral assessment instruments that contribute to the
increased accuracy of ADHD diagnosis may be identiﬁed.
Since this study controlled for no comorbidities in the ADHD
group, it is recommended for future studies to use sample
groups with and without ADHD comorbidities from other
psychiatric and neurodevelopmental conditions. This type of
sample may allow the testing of new and more complex
models due to the natural overlap of signs and symptoms
between ADHD and some of these comorbidities.

63
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Academic Excellence Program of the Coor-
dination for the Improvement of Higher Education Person-
nel (CAPES-PROEX), Process number 1133/2019, (CAPES-
PROSUC) in mode II, the National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq, Cases 307730/2017-4
and 307443/2019-1), the Mackenzie Research Fund (MACK-
PESQUISA) of Mackenzie Presbyterian University, and the
Foundation for Research Support of the State of S˜ao Paulo
(FAPESP, Cases 2018/01063-0 and 2019/20757-1) for ﬁnan-
cial support and this study was ﬁnanced in part by the
Academic Excellence Program of the Coordination for the
Improvement of Higher Education Personnel - Brazil (CAPES-
PROEX) - Finance Code 88887.581390/2020-00.
REFERENCES
[1] A.Silva, L.Carreiro, M. Silva, M. Teixeira and L. Silva, ”Combining
Self-Organizing Maps and Decision Tree to Explain Diagnostic Decision
Making in Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder” The Sixth Inter-
national Conference on Neuroscience and Cognitive Brain Information
BRAININFO 2021. IARIA, Jul. 2021, pp. 5-10.
[2] American Psychiatric Association, DSM-5: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. Artmed publisher, 2014.
[3] E. M. Mahone and M. B. Denckla, ”Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder: a historical neuropsychological perspective,” Journal of the
International Neuropsychological Society: JINS, Oct. 2017, vol. 23, no.
9-10, pp. 916-929, doi: 10.1017/S1355617717000807.
[4] E. Aretouli, ”How neuropsychology can inform our understanding of
preschool ADHD: Clinical and research implications,” Applied Neu-
ropsychology: Child, Apr-Jun. 2019, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 174-181, doi:
10.1080/21622965.2017.1421463.
[5] M. L. Wolraich, J. F. Jr. Hagan, C. Allan, E. Chan, D. Davison, M.
Earls, S. W. Evans, S. K. Flinn, T. Froehlich, J. Frost, J. R. Holbrook,
C. U. Lehmann, H. R. Lessin, K. Okechukwu, K. L. Pierce, J. D.
Winner and W. Zurhellen, ”Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis,
evaluation, and treatment of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder in
children and adolescents,” Pediatrics, Mar. 2020, vol. 145, no. 3, doi:
10.1542/peds.2019-2528.
[6] L. R. R. Carreiro, J. S. Schwartzman, C. N. Cantiere, A. F.
Ribeiro, N. A. Silva, M. A. F. Martin, C. M. Chiquetto, G. S.
Baraldi, M. M. C. Mariani, M. F. F. Seraceni and M. C. T. V.
Teixeira, ”Interdisciplinary neuropsychological, behavioral and clinical
assessment protocol for children and adolescents with complaints
of inattention and hyperactivity,” Psychology: theory and practice,
[online], Dec. 2014, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 155-171. Available from:
http://pepsic.bvsalud.org/scielo.php?script=sci arttext&pid=S1516-
36872014000300012&lng=pt&nrm=iso
[7] S. Chandana and K. Vijayalakshmi, ”An Approach to Measure and
Improve the Cognitive Capability of ADHD Affected Children Through
EEG Signals,” 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies (ICALT), Mumbai, India, Jul. 2018, pp. 314-318,
doi: 10.1109/ICALT.2018.00079.
[8] H. J. Kam, Y. M. Shin, S. M. Cho, S. Y. Kim, K. W. Kim and R. W. Park,
”Development of a decision support model for screening attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder with actigraph-based measurements of classroom
activity,” Applied clinical informatics, Nov. 2010, vol. 1, no. 4, p. 377,
doi: 10.4338/ACI-2010-05-RA-0033.
[9] S. H. Lee, B. Abibullaev, W. Kang, Y. Shin and, J. An, ”Analysis of
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder in EEG using wavelet transform
and self organizing maps,” ICCAS 2010, Oct. 2010, pp. 2439-2442, doi:
10.1109/ICCAS.2010.5670255.
[10] G. Polanczyk, M. S. Lima, B. L. Horta, J. Biederman and L. A. Rohde,
”The worldwide prevalence of adhd: a systematic review and metaregres-
sion analysis,” American journal of psychiatry, Am Psychiatric Assoc,
Jun. 2007, vol. 164, no.6, pp. 942–948, doi: 10.1176/ajp.2007.164.6.942.
[11] V. Simon, P. Czobor, S. B´alint, A. M´esz´aros and I. Bitter, ”Prevalence
and correlates of adult attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: meta-
analysis,” The British Journal of Psychiatry, Cambridge University Press,
Mar. 2009, vol. 194, no.3, pp. 204–211, doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.048827.
[12] E. B. P. Benczik and E. B. Casella, ”The impact of Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) on family relationships,” Journal of
Psychopedagogy, Jan-Mar. 2015, vol. 32, no. 97, pp. 93-103, 2015.
[13] E. G. Willcutt, J. T. Nigg, B. F. Pennington, M. V. Solanto, L. A.
Rohde, R. Tannock, S. K. Loo, C. L. Carlson, K. McBurnett and B.
B. Lahey, ”Validity of dsm-iv attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder-
symptom dimensions and subtypes,” Journal of abnormal psychology,
AmericanPsychological Association, Nov. 2012, vol. 121, no. 4, pp. 991-
1010, doi: 10.1037/a0027347.
[14] M. Cherkasova, E. M. Sulla, K. L. Dalena, M. P. Pond´e and L. Hecht-
man, ”Developmental course of attention deﬁcit hyperactivitydisorder
and its predictors,” Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child &
AdolescentPsychiatry, Feb. 2013, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 47-54.
[15] S. Dalsgaard, M. K. Humlum, H. S. Nielsen and M. Simonsen, ”Com-
mon danish standards in prescribing medication for childrenand adoles-
cents with adhd,” European child & adolescent psychiatry, Springer, Sep.
2014, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 841–844, doi: 10.1007/s00787-013-0508-5.
[16] N. M. Williams, I. Zaharieva, A. Martin, K. Langley, K. Mantripragada,
R. Fossdal, H. Stefansson, K. Stefansson, P. Magnusson, O. O. Gud-
mundsson, O. Gustafsson, P. Holmans, M. J. Owen, M. O’Donovan
and A. Thapar, ”Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in
attention-deﬁcithyperactivity disorder: a genome-wide analysis,” The
Lancet, Elsevier, Oct. 2010, vol. 376, no. 9750, pp. 1401–1408, doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61109-9.
[17] D. Puper-Ouakil, N. Ramoz, A. M. Lepagnol-Bestel, P. Gorwood and M.
Simonneau, ”Neurobiology of attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder,”
Pediatric research, Nature Publishing Group, May. 2011, vol. 69, no. 8,
pp. 69–76, doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318212b40f.
[18] L. R. R. Carreiro, M. C. T. V. Teixeira, M. M. M. Silva, I. T. Paes, R.
A. C. B. Novaes and A. P. R. Micieli, ”Neuropsychological Assessment
in ADHD: contributions to the identiﬁcation of cognitive difﬁculties
and school counseling,” In: C. A. H. Amato, D. Brunoni and P.
L. Boggio, (Ed.). DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS: Interdisciplinary
Studies. 1.ed. S˜ao Paulo: Memnon, 2018. vol. 1, c. 10, pp. 142–153.
ISBN 978-85-7954-146-9.
[19] E. Mer´enyi, M. J. Mendenhall, and P. O’driscoll, ”Advances in
self-organizing maps and learning vector quantization,” Advances in
Intelligent Systems & Computing, Jan. 2016, vol. 295, pp. 370,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28518-4.
[20] J. Vesanto and E. Alhoniemi, ”Clustering of the self-organizing map,”
IEEETransactions on neural networks, IEEE, May. 2000, vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 586–600, doi: 10.1109/72.846731.
[21] A. Rauber, D. Merkl and M. Dittenbach, ”The growing hierarchical self-
organizingmap: exploratory analysis of high-dimensional data,” IEEE
Transactions on NeuralNetworks, IEEE, Nov. 2002, vol. 13, no. 6, pp.
1331–1341, doi: 10.1109/TNN.2002.804221.
[22] T. Kohonen, ”Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature
maps,” Biologicalcybernetics, Springer, Jan. 1982, vol. 43, no. 1, pp.
59–69, doi: 10.1007/bf00337288.
[23] M. Kubat, ”Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation by Simon
Haykin,” Macmillan, 1994, ISBN 0-02-352781-7. The Knowledge En-
gineering Review, Feb. 1999, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 409-412.

64
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24] T. Kohonen, ”Essentials of the self-organizing map.Neural networks,”
Elsevier, 2013, vol. 37, pp. 52–65, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.09.018.
[25] C. C. Aggarwal, ”Deep Reinforcement Learning. In: Neural Net-
works and Deep Learning,” Springer, Cham, 2018, pp. 373-417, doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-94463-0.
[26] H. Ritter, ”Neural computation and self-organizing maps: an introduc-
tion,” Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1992, pp. 141-161.
[27] M. J. Berry and G. S. Linoff, ”Data mining techniques: for marketing,
sales, and customer relationship management,” John Wiley & Sons,
2004.
[28] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C.J. Pal, ”Data Mining: Practical
machine learning tools and techniques,” 2005, vol. 2, pp.4.
[29] B. D. Ville and P. Neville, ”Decision Trees for Analytics: Using SAS
Enterprise Miner,” SAS Institute Cary, NC, 2013, pp. 1-14.
[30] L. N. D. Castro and D. G.Ferrari, ”Data Mining Introduction,” Saraiva,
2016, pp. 344–360.
[31] G. S. Linoff and M. J. Berry, ”Data mining techniques: for marketing,
sales, andcustomer relationship management,” John Wiley Sons, 2011.
[32] A. Colin, ”Building decision trees with the ID3 algorithm,” Dr Dobbs
Journal, 1996, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 107-+.
[33] T. Mitchel, ”Machine learning,” mcgraw hill education (ise editions),
1997, pp. 870-877.
[34] A. E. Curtis, T. A. Smith, B. A. Ziganshin and J. A. Elefteriades, ”The
mystery of the Z-score,” AORTA Journal, Aug. 2016, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
124-130, doi:10.12945/j.aorta.2016.16.014.
[35] R. Wehrens and J. Kruisselbrink, ”Flexible self-organizing maps in
kohonen 3.0,” Journal of Statistical Software, Nov.2018, vol. 87, no.
1, pp. 1-18.
[36] M. Rubbo and L. A. Silva, ”Filtering-based instance selection method
for overlapping problem in imbalanced datasets,” J, Jul. 2021, vol. 4,
no. 3, pp. 308–327, ISSN 2571-8800, https://doi.org/10.3390/j4030024.
[37] S. Ruuska, ”Evaluation of the confusion matrix method in the vali-
dation of an automated system for measuring feeding behaviour of
cattle,” Behavioural processes, Aug. 2018, vol. 148, pp. 56-62, doi:
10.1016/j.beproc.2018.01.004.
[38] R. Silva and A. Paes, ”Inside Statistics: Kappa concordance test,”
publication/uuid/3E5F4C37-E639-43D6-89C9-96597CA6AB40,
Educ.
Contin. health Einstein, 2012, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 165–166.
[39] H. C. Kraemer, ”Kappa coefﬁcient,” Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Ref-
erence
Online,
WileyOnline
Library,
Jun.
2014,
pp.
1–4,
doi:
10.1002/9781118445112.stat00365.pub2.
[40] H. Budak, S. E. Tasabat, ”A modiﬁed t-score for feature selec-
tion,” Anadolu ¨Universitesi Bilim Ve Teknoloji Dergisi A-Uygulamalı
Bilimler ve M¨uhendislik, 2016, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 845-852, doi:
10.18038/aubtda.279853.
[41] T. M. Nolan, L. Bond, R. Adler, L. Littleﬁeld, P. Birleson, K. Marriage,
A. Mawdsley, R. Salo and B. J. Tonge, ”Child Behaviour Checklist
classiﬁcation of behaviour disorder,” Journal of paediatrics and child
health, Oct. 1996, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 405-411, doi: 10.1111/j.1440-
1754.1996.tb00939.x.
[42] R. A. Barkley and K. R. Murphy, ”Attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disor-
der: A clinical workbook,” Guilford Press, 2006.
[43] F. L. Cibrian, G. R. Hayes, and K. D. Lakes, ”Research Advances in
ADHD and Technology,” Synthesis Lectures on Assistive, Rehabilitative
and Health-Preserving Technologies, 2020, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. i-156, doi:
10.2200/S01061ED1V01Y202011ARH015.

