Becoming a Medical Device Software Supplier and Complying with Data Security 
Regulations 
Fergal McCaffery, Ronald Jabangwe, Kitija Trektere,  
Regulated Software Research Centre & Lero, 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Co.Louth, Ireland 
e-mail: {fergal.mccaffery, ronald.jabangwe, kitija.trektere 
}@dkit.ie 
Garret Coady 
BlueBridge Technologies 
3015 Lake Drive, Citywest, Dublin 24, Ireland 
e-mail: {garretcoady}@bluebridgetech.com 
 
Abstract—Today many software development companies are 
restructuring their business model to enter the medical device 
domain. The reason for this change is that significant 
opportunities exist within the healthcare industry and 
particularly in relation to the usage of software within this 
domain. However, in order to become either a medical device 
software supplier or manufacturer there are challenges to 
overcome, and data protection regulations to abide by. This 
paper describes a case study of an Irish software development 
company that in 2014 decided to change their business model 
to enable them to become a medical device software supplier, 
and engaging with clients in the United States of America. The 
paper provides an account of their journey from being an 
automotive software supplier to securing software development 
contracts from leading medical device manufacturers. This 
involved them having to re-design and re-structure their 
software development approach to meet both the demands of 
medical device standards, data security regulations and 
medical device multinational third party software selection 
criteria. 
Keywords-MDevSPICE® Framework; Software Development 
Process; Medical Device Software; Software Security; HIPAA; 
Agile Software Development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The enormous and seemingly ever-growing medical 
device market value motivated the case company presented 
in this paper to shift to a medical device software supplier 
[1].  In 2015, the medical device (MD) global market was 
“valued at $228 billion, up from $164 in 2010 and projected 
to reach $440 billion by 2018” “at approximately 4.4% 
compound annual growth rate per year” [2]. The leaders in 
the MD market are the United States of America (USA) 
having 38% of the global value of this market followed by 
China with a market valued at $48 billion with western 
Europe having almost 25% of the global market [2]. 
However, to become a MD supplier for the industry takes 
significant time and resources as there are many obstacles 
that need to be overcome. 
This paper extends the paper presented in [1], which is 
based on a case study of an Irish software development 
company BlueBridge Technologies (BBT). Their journey 
started in 2014 when BBT decided to embark upon 
becoming a MD software supplier and at that moment they 
had no regulatory requirements in place, in fact a key 
question they asked at that stage was “what are the 
standards we need to implement and in what order?”. This 
paper presents how with the help of academic MD 
researchers’ regulations were put in place through 
undergoing an MDevSPICE® assessment and outlining the 
challenges that might arise in the near future. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the background of BBT and the current situation in 
the MD industry. Section III outlines the challenges BBT 
faced in order to become a MD software supplier. Section IV 
describes the approaches followed to become a MD software 
supplier. Section V outlines given that BBT have satisfied 
the regulations they wish to further refine and improve their 
software development processes to make them more 
efficient. Section VI describes first steps taken in order to 
improve their current lifecycle process and approach to 
ensuring data security. Recommendations to the case 
company are provided in Section VII. The final section of 
the paper provides a conclusion and future work in Section 
VIII. 
II. 
BACKGROUND OF THE COMPANY  
BBT was founded in 2006 – initially formed upon the 
closure of the Irish based development operations of Magna 
Automotive, and today employs 19 people with 8 of them 
working as software developers. BBT are currently working 
on 7 different projects with 5 of them involving developing 
the software component for another organization’s product. 
Their current customers include pharmaceutical and 
multinational MD companies. 
The main reason why software development companies 
wish to enter the MD domain is because of the expansion of 
the MD industry in the past few years therefore providing 
many opportunities for others to enter into this industry. The 
MD industry is largely research and development driven.  
Software increasingly performs an essential role in the 
provision of healthcare services [3]. This is particularly 
reflected in the importance that software now plays in 
medical diagnoses and treatment [4]. The level of software 
functionality in MDs and the complexity of that software 
has substantially increased [5]. The MD regulatory 
environment has been extended to include more focus on 
software. For example, the latest amendment to the Medical 
11
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Device Directive [6] recognizes that standalone software 
can be classified as a MD in its own right. Consequently, a 
significantly increased proportion of software applications 
will now be classified as MDs and must be developed in a 
regulatory compliant manner [7].  
Medical records are increasingly being stored in 
electronic form. The use of Electronic Medical Record 
(EMR) systems in the USA by physicians increased from 
18.2% in 2001 to 48.3% in 2010 [8]. The adoption of EMR 
systems could produce efficiency and safety savings of $81 
billion annually and improve prevention of medical diseases 
[9]. Use of Mobile devices in health care is increasing. “By 
2017, mobile technology will be a key enabler of healthcare 
delivery reaching every corner of the globe” [10]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES BBT NEEDED TO OVERCOME TO 
BECOME A MD SOFTWARE SUPPLIER 
To become a MD software supplier there were 
regulations and standards that needed to be adhered to. This 
required processes to be defined in accordance with these 
standards and regulations and then for objective evidence to 
be obtained demonstrating the implementation of the 
defined processes. For BBT, the starting point was to gain 
an understanding of three main standards and data 
protection regulations in the US. The paragraph below 
briefly outlines the standards that BBT familiarized 
themselves with before starting to define their MD software 
development processes. 
A. ISO 13485:2006 
 “This International Standard specifies requirements for 
a quality management system that can be used by an 
organization for the design and development, production, 
installation and servicing of medical devices, and the 
design, development, and provision of related services” 
[11].  
ISO 13485 is in practice required by any MD company. 
It details the requirements for the Quality Management 
System (QMS) for MDs. The standard is broadly based on 
ISO 9001, although the 2015 revision of the latter departs 
significantly from the previous approach. ISO 13485 was 
recently revised in 2016, resulting in a better alignment with 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations; 
changes include explicit requirements for validation of 
software infrastructures used by the company. 
ISO 13485 is a “Harmonized Standard” for the EU and a 
“General Consensus Standard” for the FDA. 
Certification to ISO 13485 is achieved by independent 
audit by a Notified Body of the Quality System of the 
company. It involves yearly surveillance audits and re-
certification every 3 years. 
B. IEC 62304 
“This standard defines the life cycle requirements for 
MEDICAL 
DEVICE 
SOFTWARE. 
The 
set 
of 
PROCESSES, ACTIVITIES, and TASKS described in this 
standard establishes a common framework for MEDICAL 
DEVICE SOFTWARE life cycle PROCESSES” [11]. 
IEC 62304 covers the development process for medical 
device software. This standard is harmonised with the 
requirements of ISO 13485 and therefore complements it by 
adding the specifics required for MD software. 
Similarly to ISO 13485, IEC 62304 is a “Harmonized 
Standard” for the EU and a “General Consensus Standard” 
for the FDA. 
However, IEC 62304 interfaces with ISO 13485 in two 
areas: software inputs and system integration. The software 
inputs are generated from the system (or subsystem) level 
requirements, while IEC 62304 explicitly does not cover 
system level activities, in particular design validation. 
Although this is the gold standard for the development 
of MD software, there is no such thing as accreditation or 
certification to IEC 62304. Anyway company can request an 
“independent certification” by a Notified Body and this is 
particularly attractive to MD software suppliers. 
C. ISO 14971:2009 
“This International Standard was developed specifically 
for medical device/system manufacturers using established 
principles of risk management. For other manufacturers, 
e.g., in other healthcare industries, this International 
Standard could be used as informative guidance in 
developing and maintaining a risk management system and 
process”[13]. “This International Standard deals with 
processes for managing risks, primarily to the patient, but 
also to the operator, other persons, other equipment and the 
environment” [13]. 
ISO 14971 is particularly important to any MD 
manufacturer and supplier. Most decisions made during the 
whole lifecycle of a device must be risk-based. 
The area of regulatory standards and the recording of 
documentation associated with their implementation was 
new to BBT. Therefore, BBT engaged with both standards 
consultants and an academic research group (the RSRC, our 
research centre) specializing in MD software development 
research. This assisted BBT to fast-track the initial steps to 
becoming a MD software supplier. 
 
D. Data Security Regulations: Protecting Health 
Information 
In the US, the law that outlines and standardizes the 
protection of health information is HIPAA (Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) [29]. HIPAA 
refers to health information as protected health information 
(PHI) or electronic protected health information (EPHI).  
PHI or EPHI includes health information and any 
accompanying information that can be used to identify an 
individual, such as, demographical information, that is 
created, stored, transmitted or maintained when providing 
health-related services [30]. 
12
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

HIPAA mainly consists of four Rules that state what and 
how data should be protected, which are [29]: the Privacy 
Rule, Enforcement Rule and the Breach Notification Rule, 
Security Rule. The Privacy Rule outlines the standard 
expected for the protection of personal health or medical 
information. In the event of violations, for example, 
inappropriately protecting PHI, the provisions on penalties 
and related procedures are outlined in the Enforcement 
Rule. Provisions for the required course of action in case of 
any breach on protected health information is outlined in the 
Breach Notification Rule. The Security Rule outlines 
safeguards that are needed to secure EPHI/PHI that is either 
created, stored or transmitted. 
IV. 
APPROACH TO BECOME A MD SOFTWARE COMPANY 
When BBT reached out to the RSRC, we knew that this 
was an ideal company to become involved with in regards to 
performing research into how software companies could 
make the transition to becoming MD software suppliers. 
A. Embark on MDevSpice® assessment 
First of all, it was essential to understand BBT’s current 
position in regards to their software development processes. 
We decided to perform an MDevSPICE® [14] assessment. 
MDevSPICE® is a framework assessment model where all 
MD software standards and processes are brought together 
into one place with software engineering best practices. 
MDevSPICE® was developed in the RSRC. Then, this 
framework assessment model was utilized in BBT to assess 
the current situation. 
Below we describe what happened next in regards to both 
the assessment and BBT’s subsequent journey to becoming a 
MD software supplier. 
A) Assessment conducted: Given that MDevSPICE® 
consists of 23 processes we selected the most appropriate 10 
processes from the MDevSPICE® model to assess BBT 
against (see Table I). 
It was agreed upon discussion with BBT that only the 
most foundational processes would be assessed. Therefore, 
the following 10 out of the 23 MDevSPICE® processes were 
chosen to be assessed over 2 onsite days in BBT. 
The order of the processes assessed was important as it is 
important 
to 
follow 
the 
medical 
device 
software 
development lifecycle. Therefore, systems requirements 
were a very natural place to start. Below is outlined the 
process assessment schedule: we assessed 5 processes on 
each day (see Table II). 
Each process was assessed by 2 MDevSPICE® assessors 
in an interview with at least 2 members of BBT being 
present in each interview. Prior to the interviews both the 
schedule and the names of the BBT staff members that 
would be involved in each process interview was agreed. It 
was very important to ensure that access was provided to the 
most relevant staff for each interview session as otherwise 
the assessment would not have been as accurate as possible.  
 
TABLE I.  
PROCESSES OF MDEVSPICE® 
MD System 
Lifecycle Processes 
MD Software 
Lifecycle Processes 
MD Support 
Processes 
 Project Planning 
Project Assessment 
 and Control 
Risk Mgmt. 
 Stakeholder  
 Req. Definition 
System Req.  
 Analysis 
System Architectural 
 Design 
 System Integration 
System Qualification 
 Testing 
 Software Installation 
Software Acceptance 
Support 
Software Dev. 
 Planning 
Software Req. 
 Analysis 
Software 
 Architectural Design 
Software Detailed 
 Design 
Software Unit 
Implementation. and 
 Verification 
Software Integration 
and Integration 
 Testing 
Software System 
 Testing 
Software Risk Mgmt. 
Configuration 
 Management 
 Software Release 
Software 
Problem 
 Resolution 
Software Change 
Request  
 Management 
Software 
Maintenance 
 
TABLE II.  
DAY 1 AND DAY 2 OF ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
Onsite Assessment Day 1 
System Requirements Analysis 
Software Development Planning 
Software Requirements Analysis 
Software Architectural Design 
Software Detailed Design 
Onsite Assessment Day 2 
Software Unit Implementation & Verification 
Software Integration & Integration Testing 
Software System Testing 
Software Risk Management 
Software Configuration Management 
 
Each of the 10 interviews lasted approximately 1 hour 
and involved one assessor asking BBT staff a set of scripted 
questions related to that process area. The second assessor 
used a tool to record detailed responses from the 
interviewees with both assessors using the tool to enable 
each question to be scored as “Fully Achieved”, “Partially 
Achieved” or “Not Achieved”. In addition to the usage of 
predefined scripted questions additional questions were also 
asked that were specific to BBT. 
B) Findings produced: The MDevSPICE® assessors at 
the end of Day 2 returned back to the RSRC and  went 
through each process together, discusssing the observations 
and notes from the assessment. As a result of performing the 
assessment we provided BBT with a set of strengths, issues 
and recommendations to address those issues across each of 
the assessed processes. The MDevSPICE® assessment 
provided coverage over a number of different MD software 
related standards. Figure 1 shows a breakdown of the 
coverage provided for each of the different standards from 
assessing 10 of the 23 MDevSPICE® processes. As one of 
the goals of BBT Management was to gain an understanding 
13
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

in relation to the state of their current development 
processes against IEC 62304, as this is the main MD 
software process standard, processes were selected from 
MDevSPICE® that featured heavily in IEC 62304. The 
exception to this was System Requirements Analysis but 
this was deemed to be a critical process to examine as BBT 
would be performing software development for an overall 
MD system. Therefore, it is essential that they have an 
efficient process in place for System Requirements Analysis 
as otherwise everything that occurs afterwards within the 
development lifecycle will be impacted. 
From looking at Figure 1 it can be seen that the 10 
processes assessed provided: 59% coverage of IEC 62304; 
2% of ISO 80002-1 [15] (this technical report relates to how 
ISO 14971 may be applied within software); 16% of the 
FDA’s Guidance for off the shelf software [16]; 1% of the 
FDA’s Guidance for premarket submissions [17]; 20% of 
the FDA’s Guidance for validation of software [18]; 1% of 
ISO 13485 and 1% of software engineering best practice 
standards. 
 
 
C) Implementing the recommendations: In order to assist  
BBT to implement the recommendations in a timely manner 
BBT took the following steps: 
a) Brought 
in 
consultants 
to 
assist 
with 
the 
implementation of QMS 13485. 
b) Recruited an engineer from a leading MD 
manufacturer who possessed considerable experience in 
developing MD software development and in particular MD 
risk management expertise to put in place a risk 
management strategy in line with ISO 14971.  
c) Engaged with a notified body organisation to 
prepare them for an official audit in IEC 62304 and 
subsequently perform the audit. This enabled an successful 
IEC 62304 audit to be achieved in a timely manner. 
D) Actions taken by BBT: 
a) Gained Certification to ISO 13485 
b) Gained Independent Certification in IEC 62304. 
c) The IEC 62304 audit was performed against one 
project using a plan driven approach. 
d) BBT have the MD standards that MDs maufacturers 
request software suppliers to have in place. 
The main criteria MD manufacturers use for selecting a 
MD software supplier is that organizations should have IEC 
62304 in place. At this stage BBT now have not only 
satisfied this criteria but surpassed it in that they not only 
adopted IEC 62304 but were certified against it and also 
have adopted IEC 13485, ISO 14971, 21 CFR 820 and the 
FDA Guidance documentation for: Off the shelf software, 
Premarket Submissions and Validation of MD software. 
Therefore, at this stage BBT were ready to obtain contracts 
as a MD software supplier company. 
 
E) Addressing HIPAA Safeguards 
We are currently working with BBT to ensure that their 
software meets HIPAA requirements. In order to so, we are 
using the international medical device security technical 
report  IEC/TR 80001-2-8 [31] to identify security controls 
that can be implemented in order to address the HIPAA 
safeguards. 
IEC/TR 80001-2-8 provides a guidance “for the 
selection and implementation of management, operational, 
administrative and technical security controls to protect the 
confidentiality, integrity, availability and accountability of 
data and systems during development, operation and 
disposal.” [31]. 
IEC/TR 80001-2-8 extends another security standard 
IEC/TR 80001-2-2 [32], which lists 19 security capabilities 
that are needed to ensure data security. IEC/TR 80001-2-8 
extends IEC/TR 80001-2-2 by outlining a list of security 
controls for each of the security capabilities. The 
capabilities are broad and range from technical capabilities, 
e.g., “Automatic logoff” [31,32], to those that can be traced 
to documentation or policies, e.g., “Security guides” 
[31,32].  
The mapping of security controls to  security capabilities  
in IEC/TR 80001-2-8 is based on an extensive review of 
security controls outlined in the following security related 
standards and guidelines: NIST SP 800-53 (Revision 4) 
[33], ISO/IEC 15408-2:2008 [34], ISO/IEC 15408-3:2008 
[35], IEC 62443-3-3:2013 [36] and ISO IEC 27002:2013 
[37]. 
IEC/TR 80001-2-8 can be used to support the decision-
making process when selecting security controls in order to 
achieve security capabilities for medical device software. 
The standard aims to help companies with identifying and 
implementing appropriate security controls to help “protect 
the confidentiality, integrity, availability and accountability 
of data and systems during development, operation and 
disposal.” [31]. 
Figure 1. Scope of the BBT Assessment 
14
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
 CURRENT STATUS OF THE CASE COMPANY: LESSONS 
AND  CHALLENGES 
First, once BBT became a MD software supplier they 
noticed the significant attention within the MD field. MD 
software manufacturers started to get in contact and invite 
tenders for various projects. In fact, to date they have 
worked on a number of MD software development projects 
for different types and sizes of manufacturers. Therefore, 
the overhead required to implement the necessary standards 
was starting to pay dividends. However, now that the 
opportunities clearly are out there it is noticeable that BBT 
now want to move to the next phase of their MD software 
development journey and not only develop software in line 
with the MD standards but their ambition is now to increase 
the efficiency of their MD software development. Therefore, 
they wish to improve their software development processes 
even further and implement more regulatory standards in 
relation to security etc. The key driver to take a step further 
is that BBT now are undertaking challenging projects and 
are developing MD software for multinational MD 
companies they have much more to achieve in their journey. 
BBT have agreed to work with researchers from the RSRC 
to introduce MD software development best practices that 
will increase the efficiency of their MD software 
development. 
Second, BBT realized the increased attention to data 
security by the regulatory bodies and their USA clients. The 
increased awareness and value placed on data security by 
their clients means that implementing strong data protection 
mechanisms is now a competitive advantage. In addition, if 
appropriate security controls are not implemented as 
outlined by HIPAA, it can result in penalties [30, 38]. This 
can be detrimental to their business and stifle their growth 
and profits. 
 
A. Challenges for such large projects 
However, as with every new project there are associated 
challenges and this is increased when embarking upon a 
fixed price project, therefore if the project is delayed or runs 
into some other difficulties, BTT is liable in relation to the 
budget. Another challenge is the tight timeframe where 
strict milestones have to be achieved in addition to the 
achievement of appropriate documentation to satisfy 
regulatory deliverables. Additionally, BBT would also like 
to excel in being able to facilitate change during the 
lifecycle of the project as this is something that is 
challenging in traditional MD software development. A very 
positive aspect of BBT’s current approach is that they 
engage in regular interaction with their customers. 
Therefore, receiving feedback and making sure that the right 
MD software is developed from the very start of the 
development. 
B. What is the current status of BBT development process 
lifecycle? 
Currently BBT is developing software in a plan driven 
way through using the V-model [19]. When following a V-
model the testing is planned in parallel with the 
corresponding development phase and the planning for 
verification and validation of the product is emphasized 
from the very beginning. Even though V-model has been 
used by BBT successfully and it has been proven to be the 
best fit when developing MD software in compliance with 
the regulations [20]. However, in order to improve the 
efficiency of their software development new software 
practices should be explored that have proven successful in 
the development of safety-critical software in association 
with researchers from the RSRC. 
Before introducing a new lifecycle it is crucial to 
perform an assessment in order to establish how the current 
software development process should be improved/changed. 
VI. 
ASSESSMENT PROCESS AND RESULTS 
The following subsections will describe the high-level 
assessment process completed in BBT in 2016 and those in 
progress in 2017. 
A) Software Development Process Assessment  
The assessment carried out in 2016 was focused on the 
software development processes. 
The Software development process assessment was 
performed at BBT before deciding what new practices 
would be most suitable for BBT. We met up with the CEO 
of the company, project manager/developer (who had has 
experience of agile software development), and a developer 
who specialized in Android software development. The 
meeting was also attended by the R&D manager/Systems 
Risk engineer and the QMS manager. The assessment was 
based on previously scripted open-ended questions that 
related to many different areas of the company as well as the 
software development process. 
Results 
for 
the 
Software 
Development 
Process 
Assessment: 
a) Currently BBT have several standards in place, such 
as IEC 62304, ISO 13485, ISO 9001 and ISO 14971. In 
their software development process they make use of 
various tools in areas such as  project management, testing 
and integration. One of their main drivers for adopting new 
best practice software development methods is to streamline 
even further their already succcessful practices for 
interacting with customers. BBT view this as being key to 
delivering safe regulatory compliant software that fully 
meets the customer requirements and works within the 
intended environment, thereby decreasing the chances of 
expensive rework, particularly on fixed price projects.  
b) Additionally, they wish to develop metrics such as 
problem tracking, code coverage, defects found, defects 
closed etc. 
15
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

c) In the past BBT was open to changes and customers 
able to introduce them whenever they wanted without 
consequences to the overall budget, time. However, today 
the process has become more structured. BBT now ensures 
that a formal change document is in place specifying what 
happens if a change occurs within a previously signed 
project. 
d) BBT at the moment is not making use of any 
principle software design techniques however, they plan to 
introduce architecture diagrams and design patterns. 
e) BBT previously have developed software in a plan 
driven manner and lately they have decided to integrate 
some agile practices into their development process..  
f) At the moment almost 80% of a testing is automated 
and 20% is done manually. If the percentage of manual 
testing could be decreased further – the overall development 
process could be faster. Automation of tests can prove 
challenging when components such as Bluetooth or Wifi are 
involved. 
g) One of the team members mentioned that due to the 
new lifecycle approach where agile practices are introduced, 
there could be a challenges regarding integrating the QMS 
with the development process and achieving the necessary 
regulatory documentations. 
h) At present their current process incorporates only 
two agile practices, they are: short iterations (every 2 
weeks) and continuous integration. 
i) BBT is also planning to provide their team with the 
training needed in order to work in an environment where 
MD software is developed in an agile way. The team will be 
provided with training in regards to MD software, agile 
practices and mobile app development. 
j) Some team members will be provided with support 
to change towards adopting a more agile software 
development process. 
 
B) Data Protection and Regulation Assessment 
This section describes the high-level assessment process 
currently in progress at BBT in 2017.  
BBT currently implements security controls to ensure 
data security. However, they need to ensure that their 
controls are inline with the safeguards outlined by HIPAA 
in order to continue working with their clients in the US. 
Strengthening data security will have the added advantage 
of enhancing their competitive advantage, avoid any 
regulatory risks in the future, and improve longevity within 
the MD software market. We are first assessing how well 
BBT’s security controls for their software align with 
HIPAA safeguards. The focus is on the HIPAA safeguards 
outlined in the Security Rule. We are using a web-based tool 
to capture whether a particular HIPAA safeguard is either 
“fully 
implemented”, 
or 
“alternative/partial 
security 
measure implemented to achieve the same purpose” or “not 
implemented and no alternative implemented”. For each 
response further explanation will be captured to get details 
of what security control is implemented and how  it 
isimplemented, or alternatively provide an explanation as to 
why no security control is implemented for a particular 
safeguard. An example is shown in Figure 2. The HIPAA 
safeguard shown in the example in Figure 2, “Access 
Control” is from the HIPAA Security Rule, under the 
Technical Safeguards. 
 
 
Figure 2. Assessment against HIPAA Safeguards 
 
The next step will be data analysis and workshop with 
the developers at BBT to discuss gaps between the HIPAA 
safeguards and the security controls currently implemented. 
We will then use IEC/TR 80001-2-8 as a guide for selecting 
appropriate security controls for BBT to implement in order 
to address any HIPAA safeguards that are not well 
addressed. Relevant security risks will be taken into 
consideration during the process. 
VII. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
A) Agility of  Software Development Processes 
Our advice to BBT is to integrate more agile practices 
into their current MD software development so that the 
software is developed efficiently in regular iterations and 
can be presented to the customer on a regular basis and 
facilitate change. Based upon a mini-literature review 
performed, the following agile practices have been cited as 
being used to develop software successfully for safety 
critical/medical domains: 
a) Acceptance test-driven development (ATDD) [21]. 
b) Automated Tests/Automated unit testing [22]. 
c) Code Reviews / Peer Reviews [23]. 
d) Coding Standards [21], [24]. 
e) Continuous integration (CI) [21], [24], [25]. 
f) 
Open Workspace [21], [26]. 
g) Scrum [27]. 
h) Test-driven development (TDD) [21], [28] 
16
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B) Data Security: Adhering to HIPAA During Software 
Development 
The safeguards for EPHI/PHI that can be traced to 
development work are outlined within the Security Rule 
[39]. They are outlined under the Technical and Physical 
Safeguards parts of the Security Rule [39].  
The Security Rule has one other part, Administrative 
Safeguards, but this contains management processes, policies 
and planning, e.g., risk management and analysis procedures. 
The Safeguards in the Technical and Physical parts of the 
Security Rule are either labeled as ``required'' or 
``addressable'' [29, 39]. Those labeled as ``required'' must be 
implemented. They must be included within the requirement 
specification document just to make sure that they are 
considered 
during 
design, 
implementation 
and 
the 
verification and validation phases of the software. The 
safeguards labeled as ``addressable'' can be implemented 
depending on how reasonable and appropriate they are given 
a particular context, e.g., the software and how it can be 
used. 
Alternatively, 
a 
different 
safeguard 
can 
be 
implemented if there are one or more  safeguards that would 
achieve the same or better level of security, and are 
reasonable and appropriate. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the 
steps that we propose for addressing the safeguards in the 
Technical and Physical Safeguards part of the Security Rule. 
 
Figure 4. Implementing Addressable Safeguards 
 
It is important to note that each of the security 
capabilities in the international standard IEC/TR 80001-2-8 
comes with many security controls. But it is not practical or 
feasible to implement all of the security controls in a 
software product. This is because some of the security 
controls many not be relevant given the context or type of 
software security concerns for the software system. This is 
why, as suggested by the standard IEC/TR 80001-2-8, the 
selection of the controls should be based on risk or threat 
identification and assessment, and most importantly, both 
patient safety and protection of health information. It is also 
Identify Safeguards
List Required 
Safeguards
List Addressable 
Safeguards
Are all 
Required 
Safeguards in 
place?
NO
YES
Implement 
safeguards
Map each Required 
Safeguard to 
security controls in 
place
Documentation
(including reasons for not 
implementing a 
safeguard,  
implementation approach 
and rationale)
FOR EACH REQUIRED SAFEGUARD 
FOR EACH ADDRESSABLE SAFEGUARD
Map each Addressable 
Safeguard to security 
controls currently in 
place
Are all 
Addressable 
Safeguards in 
place?
FOR EACH NOT IN PLACE
NO
YES
NO
Implemented appropriate 
Safeguard(s)
Implement Alternative 
Safeguard(s)
YES
Is it Reasonable 
and appropriate?
Is Alternative 
Reasonable and 
appropriate?
YES
FOR EACH NOT IN PLACE
NO
Figure 3. Proposed Approach for Addressing Security Controls for Technical and Physical Safeguards 
17
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

worth noting that a similar consideration when implementing 
security controls is also advocated in the HIPAA Security 
Rule.  
Understanding security threats and security weaknesses 
can help make an informed judgement in relation to  the 
appropriate security controls to implement. Hence, input 
from a well detailed threat modeling approach will be very 
useful during the selection process. An overview of threat 
modeling is provided by The OWASP Foundation [40].  
After implementation, maintenance of the safeguards, 
which should include improvements, should be performed as 
necessary in order to ensure continued protection of 
EPHI/PHI. This is particularly important for evolving 
software. The addition of new features or implementation of 
defect-fixes, which is part and parcel of software evolution, 
may affect the efficacy of the implemented safeguards. 
Therefore, continuous maintenance is necessary to ensure the 
implemented safeguards keep securing EPHI/PHI. 
Our advice to BBT is to assign employees that 
continuously check compliance with HIPAA regulatory 
requirements, as well as on identifying and assessing 
relevant security threats and vulnerabilities. The employees 
responsibility will be to ensure that appropriate security 
controls are implemented, not only  to comply with data 
security regulations, but also that relevant security concerns 
are addressed. The employees should be involved early 
within the development lifecycle, ideally from requirements 
elicitation, and continue throughout the evolution of the 
product. The identification and assessment of threats and 
vulnerabilities, which is advocated in the HIPAA Security 
Rule, can be done by following a threat modeling approach. 
As an example of a threat modeling approach we show in 
Figure 5 the one proposed by Oladimeji et al. [41]. More 
details of their well detailed approach can be found in their 
paper. 
The advantage for BBT, or any other company, of 
having dedicated employees that continuously assess 
compliance with data security regulations and assess threats 
and vulnerabilities is that it ensures that there is a proactive 
rather than a reactive process to addressing security 
concerns. This significantly reduces the likelihood of costly 
rework and implementing security patches late within the 
development lifecycle. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper describes a case study of a journey taken by 
an Irish software development company, moving from 
developing automotive software to developing MD 
software. We described how through adopting and 
implementing MD standards they now have become a MD 
software supplier. Since becoming a MD software supplier 
many new opportunities have become available. However, 
BBT now wish to further improve their software 
development processes in order to become more efficient 
and to be able to satisfy new challenges that could rise from 
undertaking new multinational MD manufacturer’s projects. 
They also need to take steps to ensure that their approach to 
ensuring data security is in line with regulatory 
requirements. Taking a software engineering approach, the 
authors of this paper provide a list of agile practices that 
have been cited to be well suitable for the safety 
critical/medical domain. The authors have also outlined an 
engineering approach to help with identifying and 
implementing 
appropriate 
security 
controls 
when 
developing software. The approach will help the  company 
to develop software that is compliant  with data security 
regulations. 
In the future, we plan to investigate agile practices that 
are applicable for the MD software industry in greater detail 
by performing an extensive literature review and industry 
survey. Further, we will work with BBT to integrate the 
most applicable agile practices into their current software 
development lifecycle. We also plan to assist BBT with 
addressing data security concerns for the software that they 
develop. In addition, we will guide them through the 
process of ensuring that their software complies with 
HIPAA data regulations, and appropriate security controls 
are put in place. This is the first time that we are using a 
web-based tool for the assessment of how well the case 
company addresses HIPAA safeguards. We will use lessons 
learned from the process to refine and improve the tool. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Science Foundation 
Ireland Research Centres Programme, through Lero - the 
Irish Software Research Centre (http://www.lero.ie) grant 
10/CE/I1855 & 13/RC/2094. 
 
 
Security 
Deﬁnition
Threat 
Elicitation
Threat-SIG 
Evaluation
Threat 
Decomposition
Threat 
Prioritization
Threat 
Mitigation
Severity/Cost 
Assessment
Yes
No
No
Yes
Countermeasures
Adequate?
More threat?
Figure 5. Threat modeling approach proposed by Oladimeji 
et al. [41] 
18
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] K. Trektere, F. McCaffery, G. Coady, and M. Gubellini, 
“Case Study: Becoming a Medical Device Software 
Supplier,” 
The 
Second 
International 
Conference 
on 
Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration, 
(FASSI), 2016, pp. 24-29. 
[2] J. Cunningham, B. Dolan, D. Kelly, and C. Young, “Medical 
Device Sectoral Overview,” Galw. City Cty. Econ. Ind. 
Baseline Study, 2015. 
[3] C. Abraham, E. Nishihara, and M. Akiyama, “Transforming 
healthcare with information technology in Japan: A review of 
policy, people, and progress,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 80, 
no. 3, pp. 157–170, 2011. 
[4] S. Hanna, R. Rolf, A. Molina-Markham, P. Poosankam, K. 
Fu, and D. Song, “Take two software updates and see me in 
the morning: The Case for Software Security Evaluations of 
Medical Devices,” in The 2nd USENIX conference on Health 
security and privacy, 2011. 
[5] S. R. Rakitin, “Coping with Defective Software in Medical 
Devices,” pp. 40–45, 2006. 
[6] EC, “Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council concerning medical devices,” Official Journal 
of the European Union. Official Journal of the European 
Union, Brussels, Belgium, p. 35, 2007. 
[7] F. McCaffery, J. Burton, A. Dorling, and V. Casey, “Software 
Process Improvement in the Medical Device Industry,” in 
Software Engineering Encyclopaedia, P. Laplante, Ed. New 
York: Francis Taylor Group, 2010, pp. 528 – 540. 
[8] C.-J. Hsiao, E. Hing, T. C. Socey, and B. Cai, “NCHS Health 
E-Stat Electronic Medical Record/Electronic Health Record 
Systems of Office-based Physicians: United States, 2009 and 
Preliminary 2010 State Estimates,” Natl. Cent. Heal. Stat., 
vol. 2009, no. December, pp. 6, 2010. 
[9] G. Hillestad, R., Bigelow, J., Bower, A. and F. Girosi, “Can 
Electronic Medical Record Systems Transform Health Care? 
Potential Health Benefits, Savings, And Costs,” Health Aff., 
vol. 24, no. January, pp. 1103–17, 2016. 
[10] “Mobile to Play a Significant Role in Healthcare as GSMA 
Research Predicts mHealth Market to be Worth US$23 billion 
by 
2017,” 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-release/mobile-to-
play-a-significant-role-in-healthcare-as-gsma-research-
predicts-mhealth-market-to-be-worth-us23-billion-by-2017/. 
[Accessed: 26-Mar-2016]. 
[11] BSI, “Medical device software- Software life-cycle processes, 
62304:2006,” Bs En 62304:2006, vol. 3, 2006. 
[12] ISO, “ISO 13485: Medical Devices - Quality Management 
Systems - Requirements for Regulatory Purposes.” Geneva, 
Switzerland, p. 57, 2003. 
[13] ISO, “ISO 14971 - Medical Devices - Application of Risk 
Management to Medical Devices.” Geneva, Switzerland, p. 
82, 2009. 
[14] F. McCaffery, M. Lepmets, and P. Clarke, “Medical Device 
Software as a Subsystem of an Overall Medical Device,” in 
Proceedings of The First International Conference on 
Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration 
Medical, 2015, pp. 17–22. 
[15] IEC, “IEC TR 80002-1 - Medical Device Software - Part 1: 
Guidance on the Application of ISO 14971 to Medical Device 
Software.” Geneva, Switzerland, p. 58, 2009. 
[16] FDA, “Guidance for Industry - FDA Reviewers and 
Compliance on Off-The-Shelf Software Use in Medical 
Devices.” USA, p. 26, 1999. 
[17] FDA, “Guidance for the Content of Premarket Submissions 
for Software Contained in Medical Devices.” USA, p. 23, 
2005. 
[18] FDA, “General Principles of Software Validation ; Final 
Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff.” USA, p. 47, 2002. 
[19] K. Forsberg and H. Mooz, “The Relationship of System 
Engineering to the Project Cycle,” 12th INTERNET World 
Congr. Proj. Manag., no. June 1994, p. 12, 1994. 
[20] F. McCaffery, D. McFall, P. Donnelly, F. G. Wilkie, and R. 
Sterritt, “A Software Process Improvement Lifecycle 
Framework for the Medical Device Industry,” in IEEE 
International Conference and Workshops on the Engineering 
of Computer-Based Systems (ECBS’05) Proceedings, 2005, p. 
8. 
[21] S. Datta, P. Sarkar, S. Das, S. Sreshtha, P. Lade, and S. 
Majumder, “How many eyeballs does a bug need? An 
empirical validation of linus’ law,” in Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, 2014, vol. 179 LNBIP, pp. 
242–250. 
[22] J. Grenning, “Launching extreme programming at a process-
intensive company,” IEEE Softw., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 27–33, 
2001. 
[23] M. Bernhart, A. Mauczka, and T. Grechenig, “Adopting code 
reviews for agile software development,” in Proceedings - 
2010 Agile Conference, AGILE 2010, 2010, pp. 44–47. 
[24] K. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained. 1999. 
[25] P. Dahlem, Marc and Diebold, “Agile Practices in Practice - 
A Mapping Study Agile Practices in Practice - A Mapping 
Study -,” in 18th International Conference on Evaluation and 
Assessment in Software Engineering, 2015, no. MAY 2014. 
[26] K. Beck, “Embracing change with extreme programming,” 
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 70–77, 
1999. 
[27] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, Agile 
software development methods Review and analysis. ESPOO: 
VTT Publications 478, 2002. 
[28] J. Rasmusson, The Agile Samurai, How Agile Masers Deliver 
Great Software. Texas, 2010. 
[29] The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
19
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(HIPAA) of 1996. Pub. L. 104-191. Stat. 1936. 
[30] Brief OCR Privacy. "Summary of the HIPAA Privacy Rule." 
Washington, DC, United States Department of Health and 
Human Services, 2005. 
[31] IEC 80001-2-8 - Application of risk management for it   
networks incorporating medical devices – part 2-8: 
Application guidance – guidance on standards for establishing 
the security capabilities identified in IEC 80001-2-2. 
International Electrotechnical Committee, pages 43. 
[32] IEC 80001-2-2 - Application of risk management for it-
networks incorporating medical devices-guidance for the 
disclosure and communication of medical device security 
needs, risks and control. International Electrotechnical 
Committee, pages 48. 
[33] NIST, SP. "800-53." Recommended Security Controls for 
Federal Information Systems: 800-53, 2013. 
[34] ISO/IEC 15408-2:2008 - Information technology -- Security 
techniques -- Evaluation criteria for IT security -- Part 2: 
Security functional components. International Organization 
for 
Standardization 
/ 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Committee, pages 218. 
[35] ISO/IEC 15408-3:2008 - Information technology -- Security 
techniques -- Evaluation criteria for IT security -- Part 3: 
Security assurance components. International Organization 
for 
Standardization 
/ 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Committee, pages 174. 
 [36] IEC 62443-3-3:2013 - Industrial communication networks - 
Network and system security - Part 3-3: System security 
requirements 
and 
security 
levels. 
International 
Electrotechnical Committee, pages 80. 
[37] ISO/IEC 27002:2013 - Information technology -- Security 
techniques -- Code of practice for information security 
controls. International Organization for Standardization / 
International Electrotechnical Committee, pages 80. 
[38] S. Hoffman and A. Podgurski, "Securing the HIPAA Security 
Rule. Journal of Internet Law", Spring 2007; Case Legal 
Studies Research Paper No. 06-26.  
[39] TrueVault, HIPAA compliance developer guide. TrueVault, 
2014. Retrieved from https://github.com/truevault/hipaa-
compliance-developers-guide. Accessed on 27th Februrary 
2017. 
[40] OWASP Foundation "Threat Risk Modeling", Retrieved from 
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Threat_Risk_Modeling. 
Accessed on 27th Februrary 2017. 
[41] E. A. Oladimeji, S. Supakkul, and L. Chung. "Security threat 
modeling and analysis: A goal-oriented approach." Proc. of 
the 10th IASTED International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Applications (SEA 2006). 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

