100
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Impacts of Culture on Gesture Based Interfaces:  
A Case Study on Anglo-Celtics and Latin Americans 
 
Manolya Kavakli and Karime Nasser 
Department of Computing 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
Manolya.kavakli@mq.edu.au, Karimenasser@hotmail.com
Abstract- This paper investigates the impacts of culture in 
gesture-based interface design. The aim is to identify basic 
cultural differences in using hand gestures between two 
cultures: Anglo-Celtics and Latin Americans. We videotaped 
and analyzed 10 participants in two groups, while describing 
two chairs by using their speech and hand gestures. We 
investigated the frequency, occurrence, and the type of 
gestures used by the two cultures, as well as the words most 
frequently used by the participants. Our findings state that 
there are cultural differences in hand gestures during the 
description of the objects. This may have implications for the 
development of gesture-based multimodal interfaces. Anglo-
Celtics coming from a low context culture, describe objects 
using a larger number of gestures as well as a larger 
vocabulary in a longer period. On the other hand, Latin 
Americans coming from a high context culture, use smaller 
number of gestures more frequently in a shorter period. The 
differences in frequency of gestures may have an impact on the 
adoption of new technologies as well as adaptation to them. We 
also found that as the complexity of a task increases, so does 
the number and type of gestures used. Our conclusion is that 
the gesture vocabulary of a multimodal interface will be 
affected not only by the complexity of the task being 
performed, but also by the cultural background and the 
language skills of the user.  
Keywords- Gesture recognition; Cultural difference; Gesture 
based interface design; Gesture segmentation; Speech coding. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This study builds on and extends our previous research 
on the “Influence of culture in multimodal interfaces” [1] 
and as its predecessor, aims at defining the variances in 
gesture behavior from one culture to another. Culture can be 
defined as the shared patterns of behaviors and interactions, 
cognitive constructs, and affective understanding that are 
learned through a process of socialization. These shared 
patterns identify the members of a cultural group while also 
distinguishing those of another group [2].  Our goal in this 
paper is to identify the impacts of culture on the frequency, 
occurrence, and types of hand gestures in multimodal 
interfaces. 
Bischel et al. [3] investigated a designer describing a 
mechanical device to another designer. Similar to their 
experiments, we videotaped and analyzed the gestures of the 
participants from two different cultures describing two 
different chairs using their speech and hands. We segmented 
the video records using timestamps, and analyzed them using 
metrics such as frequency, occurrence, and the quantity of 
certain gesture types. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II provides a 
review of related literature on gesture and culture. Section III 
presents the experiment conducted. Section IV analyzes the 
data collected, and the results of frequency, occurrence and 
type of gesture amongst the samples. Finally, Section V 
discusses the experiment results and relation with culture 
studies, and Section VI presents our conclusions drawn from 
the results.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The aim of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is 
making 
interactions 
as 
natural 
as 
possible, 
as 
if 
communicating with another human [4]. Gestures are used as 
a way of expression in interaction, either with or without a 
human. There is evidence that gestures convey information 
redundant to the information conveyed in speech [5] and 
gesture is a precursor to speech. Humans have an innate need 
to use gestures; since they complement our ideas, to such an 
extent that humans are known to gesture even when talking 
on the phone [6].  
The means to communicate with computers have evolved 
from classic mouse input, to rich multimodal data [7]. 
Multimodal interfaces, that use multimodal data, have 
combined various user input modes beyond the known 
keyboard and mouse input/output [8]. They now include a 
wide range of interaction methods; such as hand gestures 
(both static and dynamic), as well as speech, and head and 
eye tracking. Most recently, Razer™, the world leader in 
high-performance gaming hardware, launched an adaptive 
tactile keyboard with a switchblade user interface, 
suggesting only the recurrent need to provide players with 
more options. Games and interactive entertainment industries 
are not, however, the only application areas for gesture based 
interfaces. More serious applications exist, such as The 
Intuitive da Vinci surgical system that is used for the capture 
of subtle motions of a surgeon, to teach novices complex 
procedures [9]. One may assume that in tasks such as the 
manipulation of objects, cultural implications might not be of 
considerable importance, but in the context of cultural and 
physical differences between surgeons, the topic calls for 
more attention [10].  

101
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE 1. GESTURE CLASSIFICATION DETAIL 
Gesture 
Atributes 
Function 
Linguistic example 
Iconic 
Resembles that which 
is being talked about 
Flapping arms like 
wings when talking about 
a bird 
Metaphoric 
Abstractly pictorial; 
loosely suggests that which 
is being talked about 
Making a box shape 
with hands when talking 
about a room. 
Beat 
Gestures with only two 
phases (up/down, in/out) 
indexing the word or phrase 
it accompanies as being 
significant 
Rhythmic arm 
movement used to add 
emphasis 
Deictic 
Gestures pointing to 
something or somebody 
either in concrete or abstract 
Pointing while giving 
directions 
Source: Michael Berry, The importance of Bodily Gesture [15] 
Gesture-based interfaces enable freer, more intuitive, and 
richer digital interactions than conventional user interfaces 
[11]. These enhanced interactions lead to better idea 
generation [12]. With the decrease in the price of sensors and 
the growth of processor capacity, an interesting step in 
multimodal interface design is the creation of natural and 
invisible interfaces that are called ambient gestures [13]. 
These invisible interfaces are designed to support ubiquitous 
interactions with everyday computing technology. Such 
examples include lowering the volume of a stereo from afar 
using a hand gesture. This way the user does not have to 
leave their original activity to perform an action adding the 
value of ubiquity. Through appropriate gestures, these 
technologies allow immersion, navigation and interaction to 
support idea generation [14]. 
A. Gesture classification and segmentation 
Many gesture recognition systems have been technology 
driven and address gesture tracking needs, rather than the 
requirements of human behavior [15].  
When developing gesture based interfaces, programmers 
and designers work together to understand what types of 
gestures are most frequently used for interaction. Therefore, 
there have been many attempts to design appropriate gesture 
classification and segmentation “dictionaries”. However, 
none of them provide a complete guide for what gestures are 
mostly used and by what group of users. 
Gestures offer versatility when representing objects, or 
qualities of these in the scientific domain. The main problem 
here is that there is no common database of gestures that can 
be used by both developers and designers. At the top level, 
they 
are 
divided 
into 
representational 
and 
non-
representational gestures. Representational gestures represent 
physical things being conceptualized by the person gesturing 
in an abstract or physical manner. Gesture also allows 
representation of movement through imitation [6]. The non-
representational gestures, accompany or stress speech, and 
also involve space relations, like pointing. In a way, they are 
culture-specific emblems, but how culture-specific are 
gestures remains as a question to explore.  
Gestures have also been classified according to their 
purpose. They could be goal oriented (change of position, 
shape), empty handed (wave, snap, point, take), for indirect 
manipulation (set, stop) or haptic exploration (touch, stoke, 
knock) [14]. The most recognized gesture classification is 
the one established by McNeill in 1992 [16]. McNeill 
classifies 4 types of gestures (See Table 1): iconic (resemble 
what is being talked about, e.g., flapping arms when 
mentioning a bird), metaphoric (abstractedly pictorial, e.g., 
drawing a box shape when referring to a room), beat 
(gestures that index a word of phrase e.g., rhythmic arm 
movement used to add emphasis), and deictic (gestures 
pointing to something, e.g., while giving directions).  
The iconic gestures are of particular interest to HCI as 
they allow accurate depiction of objects encountered by the 
user. An important issue here is the presence of transition 
movements, or junk gestures, as these are classified as 
meaningless, since they do not convey information. 
When training a model for gesture recognition, it must 
be done by segmenting the individual gestures and then 
interpreting their representation individually or as a whole, 
depending on the model. A common motion segmentation 
technique is using distance signals to determine the type of 
gesture on the basis of the contour of the gesturing person’s 
body or hand [17]. Li and Greenspan in [18] focus on how 
the endpoints are located. In order to do this, they had 
participants repeat various actions several times in order to 
document the variances. These variances, they claim, are 
useful for identifying the range of a given gesture, and 
therefore, provide a better identification. 
The most common errors in gesture segmentation are 
mainly classified as three types [18]: substitution errors, 
deletion errors and insertion errors. Substitution errors 
appear when an incorrect gesture is substituted for the 
correct one. Deletion is where a correct gesture is omitted in 
the recognized sequence. Insertion is when an extra gesture 
was added in the sequence; hence, instead of having one 
gesture. Here two gestures are segmented (Gesture A and B) 
instead of one, because the technique recognizes part of A 
as a separate individual gesture, B.   
Relatively less explored issues in gesture segmentation 
are:  
 
how to detect the differences between a dynamic 
gesture (where the path of each limb is relevant), 
and a static posture (where only one particular 
position of the limbs is relevant),  
 
distinction of feature descriptions (which features 
optimally distinguish the variety of gestures and 
postures from each other and make recognition of 
similar gestures and postures simpler), and  
 
gesture meaning identification (what do certain 
gestures mean, how can they be reliably interpreted 
so that the correct actions are undertaken).  
B. Culture 
Hooler and Beattie [19] claimed that speakers draw on 
gestures in order to fulfill particular communication 
functions. 
Sometimes, 
culture 
is 
a 
boundary 
for 
interpersonal 
communication; 
in 
the 
same 
manner 

102
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
technology may enable or even hinder a communication 
style inherent to a culture [20]. Metrically, culture could be 
reflected in the interactivity, symbol variety, rehearsability 
and pre-processability of gestures. Therefore, the cultural 
background might be an influential factor in the design of 
gesture-based interfaces. 
Technology has been conceived in ‘prosthetic’ terms, as 
an extension to the body, or support for tasks [21] and given 
the global diversity; cultures will perceive these tasks 
differently. Language and representation are critical 
elements in the study of culture, because humans are locked 
into their cultural perspectives and mindsets [22]. As 
defined by Hofstede [23] “Culture is the collective 
programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of 
one group or category of people from another”. 
1) Culture and Interfaces 
Humans communicate and exchange information with a 
system through interfaces. The more familiar or intuitive an 
interface is, the higher its usability.  Maximum usability of a 
system can be obtained through the appropriate design of 
support-focused interfaces.  
Cultural preferences determine the type of layout, 
texture, pattern and color [24] in website portals. Certain 
colors are offensive or uncomfortable for certain cultures. 
For instance, red is bad luck for Koreans, therefore, Korean 
websites might avoid the use of red. Given the example, it is 
noted that to attract a targeted market, there is a need to 
adapt interfaces to a specific culture. Culture does not exist 
as a computational term in HCI, even though, as revealed, 
there are efforts to tailor interfaces. With any use of the 
technology, the success depends on the capabilities 
embedded in a persona who is “programmed” in a specific 
way. The mental “coding” of this persona will affect the 
usability of the system as well as its interface.  
The cultural behavior is generally perceived visually, but 
it is not always evident until there is an interaction. Rehm, 
Bee, and André [25] tried to identify the culture of the user 
so that the behavior of an interactive system could be 
adapted to culture-dependent patterns of interaction. This 
was achieved via a Bayesian network model based on 
gesture expressivity and made use of metrics, such as speed, 
power or spatial parameters. 
A study comparing North Americans to Chinese [26] 
explored gesture frequency of bilinguals when speaking in 
both languages. The study demonstrated that American 
monolinguals 
used 
more 
gestures 
than 
Chinese 
monolinguals and suggested that the American culture is a 
high-gesturing one. The study also noted that Chinese 
bilinguals used more gestures than Chinese monolinguals, 
and suggested that there was possibly a transfer in gesture 
frequency. The study stated that language is a medium by 
which culture is transmitted. When speaking in a particular 
language, the speaker might display the gesture pattern 
found in the corresponding culture. This means that 
bilinguals from a lower-gesturing culture and language 
(such as Chinese) used more gestures when talking in the 
secondary high-gesturing language (English). In this 
particular scenario, the difference in gesture frequency 
might be attributed to the culturally varying attitudes 
towards body movement.  
Some research studies focused on the variation in the 
expressions between cultures as well as the influence of the 
language. Nicoladis explained that, this could be due to the 
fact that bilinguals might tend to produce more gestures, 
when speaking in a language they might feel weaker at [26]. 
In this case, the ability to express themselves via gestures 
might help the speaker to break down the preverbal, spatial-
motoric information for verbalization.  
In remote international collaboration, gesturing is also a 
concern. Here, each participant has their own symbolic, 
iconic and metaphoric influence on their gestures [28]. 
Given that the Internet is a technological, cultural, political 
and economic phenomenon, it produces an extraordinary 
volume of cultural expression [21]. There is a merge of 
culture amongst the latest generations because computers, 
interfaces and common systems increasingly assist our lives 
and have an influence on our gestures. There are studies 
stating that, since the latest generations have grown up with 
a mouse based interface, this has a more standard and global 
effect on command gestures used in their interactions [29]. 
This suggests the influence of interfaces on culture as 
opposed to the goal of having culture to influence interfaces. 
As stated by Hofstede regarding communication 
technologies, the software of the machines may be 
globalized, but the software of the minds that use them is 
not [23]. Therefore, the dominance of technology over 
culture is an illusion, and differences between cultures exist.  
2) Hofstede’s Cultural Dimensions 
 Hofstede [29] has developed a set of cultural parameters 
that describe the way in which national societies are built 
and the rules by which people think, feel and act. These 
differences are defined as five dimensions and are measured 
as indexes. The higher or lower the index, more or less the 
culture portrays this feature.  
The Hofstede model of dimensions of national culture 
has been applied predominantly in international business; 
marketing and consumer behavior works [30]. The brief 
descriptions of Hofstede’s dimensions are as follows: 
Power Distance (PDI) is the acceptance and expectation 
of power to be distributed unequally viewed from the less 
powerful members of organizations and institutions (like the 
family). The higher the index, the more a society views an 
unequal distribution of power as relatively acceptable (as in 
Malaysia, Philippines, and Mexico). A lower index indicates 
that the unequal distribution of power is relatively 
unacceptable (Austria, Denmark, NZ, Ireland). 

103
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1. Hostedes 5D Model comparing   
Anglo-Celtic and Latin American countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertainty Avoidance (UAI) indicates the extent to 
which a member of society feels uncomfortable or 
comfortable in ambiguous or abnormal situations. A low 
UAI index indicates that the society is comfortable in 
unpredictable situations and has a high tolerance for 
ambiguity (as in Denmark, Singapore, China, and Sweden). 
A higher index here means that people prefer predictable 
situations and have a lower tolerance for ambiguity, a factor 
that is normally reflected in the abundance of laws in these 
countries 
(as 
in 
Belgium, 
Salvador, 
Greece, 
and 
Guatemala).  
Individualism (IDV) is the extent to which individuals 
are merged into groups. A high IDV index means members 
in the society define themselves as individuals and form 
looser ties with their groups and immediate families (in 
USA, Anglo-Celtic, UK, and Canada). Countries with lower 
IDV have stronger bonds to their groups and extended 
families. Here a group membership forms a person’s self 
identify (in Guatemala, Ecuador, Indonesia, and China). 
Masculinity (MAS) refers to the distribution of 
emotional roles between the genders, and also serves to 
classify a culture as assertive and competitive (masculine) 
or modest and caring (feminine).  A country with a high 
MAS index, values achievement and competitiveness, as 
well as acquisition of money and other material objects (as 
in Slovakia, Japan, Austria, and Venezuela). In low MAS 
cultures people value the maintenance of good relationships, 
are more modest and people oriented, caring for the quality 
of life (like in Norway, Netherlands, Sweden, and Chile).  
Long-Term Orientation (LTO) considers  that countries 
high on this index foster pragmatic virtues oriented towards 
future rewards, in particular saving money, persistence, and 
adapting to changing circumstances (as in China and India). 
Countries with lower LTO are short-termed and give more 
importance to attitudes towards national pride, tradition, and 
fulfilling social obligations (as in United States and 
Norway).  
The cultures used in the experiments for this paper are 
Anglo-Celtic (Australian, British, Irish, New Zealanders) 
and Latin Americans (American countries where Spanish is 
primarily spoken: Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Peru, 
Uruguay, and Venezuela). Fig. 1 shows a comparison of the 
cultural dimension indexes from both samples; an average 
was taken of the indexes of the countries mentioned above. 
The Anglo-Celtic culture had a lower PDI (30 to 70), and 
UA (43 to 86). On the other hand, it had a higher IDV (82 to 
20), MAS (63 to 47) and LTO (29 to 23) than the Latin 
American one.  
Therefore, one can assume that due to the greater 
equality (Low PDI) characteristic Anglo-Celtics have, they 
are more individualistic (High IDV) and can master new 
challenges (Low UAI) better than their fellow Latin 
American 
colleagues. 
Hosftede 
developed 
a 
solid 
foundation for identifying the possible complication of 
cross-cultural interactions, as well as what creates cultural 
differences and how they would act upon this [20].  
Even though Hosftede is cited by an extensive amount 
of sociologists and anthropologists, for the analysis in this 
study, it is also beneficial to analyze the context 
classification made by the anthropologist Edward Hall [22]. 
Hall identifies a culture’s use context in routine 
communication and classifies them as High or Low. In a 
high context culture (including much of the Middle East, 
Asia, Africa, and South America), many things are left 
unsaid, letting the culture explain. There is more non-verbal 
communication, a higher use of metaphors, and more 
reading between the lines. In a lower context culture 
(including North America and much of Western Europe), 
the emphasis is on the spoken or written word. They have 
explicit messages, focus on verbal communication, and their 
reactions are visible, external and outward [31].  
 Anglo-Celtic cultures (e.g., Australian, British, Irish, 
and New Zealanders) categorize as low context cultures and 
Latin Americans (American countries where Spanish and 
Portuguese are primarily spoken) correspond to the high 
context cultures. This classification lets us make certain 
assumptions, like the Anglo-Celtic may predominantly use 
words, while the Latin Americans would use gestures.  
The characteristics identified for each of the samples 
(IDV, UAI, MAS) will be later referred to in order to 
interpret their influences on gesture behavior after the 
experimentation. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
A set of experiments, following Bischel’s experiment 
guidelines, were conducted in order to explore the influence 
of culture in gesture behavior. The participants were 
required to describe two chairs before a camera (See Fig. 2). 
Bischel’s experiments bring language and gesture together; 
both of these are important in defining a culture. From this 
moment on, the classical chair will be referred to Chair 1 
and the abstract chair will be referred to as Chair 2. 
Throughout this study, the observational task analysis 
method was used. Video analysis technique permits a 

104
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2. Classic chair (left) CHAIR1 and  
Abstract chair (right) CHAIR2  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Anvil Snapshot of Anglo-Celtic observation 
careful analysis of gestures occurring at certain timestamps. 
This is helpful in identifying individual differences in 
gesture behavior. 
A. Hypothesis 
The paper tries to prove that: “Designers’ culture may 
affect gesture recognition in multimodal interfaces because 
of variations in gesture type, gesture frequency, and gesture 
occurrence”. 
This hypothesis brings together the subjects of Section II 
(gesture, multimodal interfaces, gesture segmentation and 
culture based theories). The three metrics stated in the 
hypothesis are gesture type, frequency and occurrence.   
 
Gesture Type. The gesture type is based on 
McNeill’s classification. Certain types of gestures 
could be attributed to different cultures; therefore, it 
is important to analyze the type of gesture that is 
mostly performed.  
 
Frequency. The frequency is measured as the 
number of gestures performed by a participant 
divided by the period of the gesture of the same 
participant. This way one can obtain the gestures 
per second, which will help assess speed of gesture 
performance and point out what gestures are most 
significant for a gesture recognition system.  
 
Occurrence. Occurrence measures the appearance 
of the gestures. This helps to identify if certain 
gestures are culture-oriented or task-oriented (i.e., 
related to the task being performed).  
B. Experiment Guidelines 
Participants were encouraged to use as many gestures as 
possible, just as in Lui and Kavakli “Temporal Relation 
between speech and co-verbal iconic gestures in multimodal 
interface design” [32]. The analysis methodology is via 
video analysis using a video annotation tool called Anvil 
(Fig. 3). 
1) Procedure 
In order to obtain a detailed description, and for us to 
derive data from video recording, the participants were 
required to sit in front of a camera in an enclosed setting. 
This framework helped avoid distractions and background 
noise that will help with the proper gesture classification.  
The influence on gesture performance when holding a 
seating or standing position by the gesturer has not been 
assessed. The seating position was thought to simulate 
seating in front of a screen, where the actual interaction 
could take place if the user was using a virtual reality 
interface.  
They were instructed that this was a cultural experiment 
that required analyzing gestures they used to describe a 
given object. They were encouraged to use both hands, to 
use as many gestures as possible, and take the time they 
considered adequate.  
2) Participants 
There were a total of 8 Latin American participants and 
11 Anglo-Celtics videotaped, but only the ones with clearer 
hand gestures and comprehension of the task were chosen. 
A criterion for deselecting a video footage for analysis was 
either the lack of gestures, or the lack of iconic gestures, 
which are the focus of this study.  
The final selection was 5 participants from each sample 
group, totaling 10 participants. For the purpose of the 
experiment, two samples were needed, one with English as 
a first language (Anglo-Celtics), and one with English as a 
second language (Latin Americans). For the second sample, 
it was important that they were sufficiently proficient and 
immersed in an English speaking country (Australia) at least 
for the past 6 months. 
3) Gesture coding 
For gesture analysis, the video footages were analyzed 
and then segmented (Fig. 3). For each occurrence, the 
gesture type (repetition, beat, iconic, metaphoric, deictic, 
and junk) that was performed by the participant was 
recorded. These correspond to McNeill’s classification, but 
the repetition gesture (which is a type of deictic gesture) 
was coded separately because of the assumption made by 
Nicoladis in [27] that states that bilinguals might produce 
more gestures when speaking in a language they might feel 
weaker at. 
Therefore, repetition was considered to be a potential 
factor that reflects culture, as uncertainty in the language, or 
description, could be channeled this way. Junk gestures 

105
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE 2.      VIDEO ANALYSIS FOR CHAIR 1 AND CHAIR 2 
Chair 
Metrics 
Total  no. 
gestures 
per chair 
Sample 
Average 
gesture 
duration 
Total no. of 
gestures per 
chair per 
sample 
Percentage 
attributable 
to sample 
Average 
gestures per 
person in 
sample 
Standard 
deviation 
(SD) 
Average 
gesture time 
per person 
in sample 
Frequency of 
gesture 
performance 
per sample 
Chair 1 
124 
Anglo-Celtic 
1.84 
65 
52% 
12.8 
5.63 
22.74 
0.56 
Chair 1 
Latin 
American 
1.49 
59 
48% 
11.8 
2.16 
17.81 
0.66 
Chair 2 
108 
Anglo-Celtic 
1.73 
65 
60% 
13 
7.17 
23 
0.56 
Chair 2 
Latin 
American 
1.67 
43 
40% 
8.6 
2.88 
14.22 
0.60 
 
were identified as gestures without a particular meaning. 
This could be a gesture that the user takes the gesture back, 
(which is a “mistake”) or made some transition movements.  
Gestures are separated by pauses, and a pause is defined 
as a temporary stop in action or speech [33]. The purpose of 
this pause was to eliminate the period of inactivity at the 
beginning of a video, when the participant explains what he 
or she might do, or when the participant states that he or she 
has ended the gesture.  
4) Speech Coding 
As a result of verbal descriptions (words) used to give 
meaning to the participants’ depiction, distinctive words 
were coded accompanying the gestures. These words, which 
were also coded on Anvil, were hand written on the track 
“words”. The words coded on this track were identified as 
significant because they were especially stressed. The 
classification of words was as follows: adjectives, parts of 
the chair, verbs, positions and shapes.  
The rationale behind this structure is to identify, which 
accompanying words were used to express gestures so that 
comparisons could be drawn between the two cultures. The 
condition where a specific gesture is expressed with a word 
or not, was not investigated, as the focus was limited to 
type, frequency, and occurrence of gestures.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
Approximately 10 minutes of monologue object 
descriptions in video footage was obtained. Table 2 contains 
the metrics referred to in this section.  Seconds were used as 
the time measuring unit.  In total, there were 595.52 seconds 
of video footage captured in 17754 frames. The video 
footage was composed of 20 individual videos, 2 videos per 
each participant and a total of 231 gestures.   
A. Chair 1. 
Chair 1 was a traditional chair, with common 
characteristics that all participants were able to relate to. 
When analyzing the data, it was found that Anglo-Celtics on 
average scored higher values in the gesture duration (1.84s), 
number of gestures (65), and gesture time per person 
(22.74s). It is also noticed that the Anglo-Celtics had a 
higher share (52%) of gestures recorded. The sample shows 
a 
considerable 
variation 
from 
one 
participant’s 
representation to another’s, as the mean was 12.8 gestures 
and the standard deviation (SD) was 5.63.  
On the other hand, Latin Americans on average scored 
lower the values in the gesture duration (1.49s), number of 
gestures (59), and gesture time per person (17.81s). The 
mean was 1 gesture lower (11.8), but the variation in this 
sample was less (2.16) than that of the Anglo-Celtics, 
meaning more uniformity amongst the sample.  
Chair 1 results reveal that Anglo-Celtics produced 
higher number of gestures in a longer period. Latin 
Americans, on the other hand, produced fewer gestures that 
were faster and shorter. The gesture type that was most 
recurrent was iconic, followed by repetition, beat, 
metaphoric, junk and then deictic. Anglo-Celtics had more 
repetition, iconic, and metaphoric gestures. Latin Americans 
maintained higher deictic and junk gestures. In matters of 
occurrence, only one Anglo-Celtic performed a deictic 
gesture.  
Frequency might look to be proportional with the 
amount of gestures but in fact it was not. The overall 
frequency was higher with the Latin Americans, even 
though the amount of gestures was less when compared to 
the Anglo-Celtics (65 to 59). Taking the iconic gestures, for 
example, Anglo-Celtics on average produced more (6.2) 
gestures, but their frequency was lower (0.26), as they 
performed these in a longer time.  
In regards to verbal coding, the words used to describe 
Chair 1 were 28 in total (See Table 3). Most of them 
correspond to adjectives (See Table 4) given to the chair as 
a whole, as well as specific parts of it. From this 9 words in 
total were uniquely used by Anglo-Celtics, and 13 by Latin 
Americans. Both shared 6 specific words: horizontal, front, 
seat, legs, back and square. Therefore, it can be concluded 
that the chair was easy to describe both physically and 
qualitatively.  
B. Chair 2.  
Chair 2 was a more complex chair, with a more 
elaborate structure. To an extent it is considered as 
“abstract”. All participants mentioned some way the chair 
was different, therefore more difficult to describe. The data 
for the gesture representation for this chair is also in Table 
2. The mean of gestures for the chair 2 descriptions for both 
samples was 10.8 (Total number of gestures per chair 
divided by the 10 participants) and the SD was 5.65 

106
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE 3. WORDS DERIVED FROM ALL CHAIR RECORDINGS  
Sample 
Recorded Words 
Anglo-
Celtic 
Latin 
American 
Both 
Total 
Chair 1 
9 
13 
6 
28 
Chair 2 
13 
10 
5 
30 
 
TABLE 4. WORDS DERIVED FROM ALL CHAIR 1 RECORDINGS  
Classification 
Recorded Words 
Adjectives 
Traditional, Thin, Arched, Vertical, 
Squarish, Long, Curved, Rectangular, 
Straight, Round, Normal, Flat 
Parts  
Slats, Bottom, Front, Seat, Legs, Place, back 
Verbs  
Support 
Position  
First, left 
Shapes  
Holes, squares, sticks, stripes 
 
TABLE 5. WORDS DERIVED FROM ALL CHAIR 2 RECORDINGS  
Classification 
Recorded Words 
Adjectives  
Round, Horizontal, Perpendicular, Funny, 
Curvy, retro, stainless, steal, shortest, 
curved, symmetric 
Parts  
Back, Bottom, Down, seat  
Verbs  
Focus, Spread, Crosses, extend  
Position  
Middle  
Shapes 
Heart, Cone, Square, Circle, Wing, Stick, 
Oval, Peak, Cross, triangle  
 
 
Figure 4. Gesture Frequency of gestures by chair and sample: 
Gesture Frequency Chair 1 (a)  
Gesture Frequency Chair 2 (b) 
(Average of both SD’s). This SD is higher than Chair 1, 
showing different approaches followed by participants to 
describe the chair. 
The data reveal that Anglo-Celtics on average scored 
again higher values in gesture duration (1.73s), number of 
gestures (65), and gesture time per person (23s). Anglo-
Celtics had higher scores in the average duration of gestures 
and had a higher share (60%) of gestures recorded. Latin 
Americans on average scored lower values in gesture 
duration and number of gestures, but these values were 
significantly lower than the time required for Chair 1.  
As with gesture and frequency, the differences in chair 
descriptions are also reflected in the use of words. Chair 2 
surpasses Chair 1 with a total of 30 words (See Table 3). 
Anglo-Celtic uniquely used 13 words and Latin Americans 
10. Both samples used 5 words in common: Back, seat, 
curved, heart, and cone. This variation could be because the 
chair was more complex and needed a higher evaluation and 
explanation. It was found (Table 5) that when describing the 
back of the chair, the same word was used, and this word 
was “heart”. It was also found that there were more verbs 
and shapes in this chair description; words used to describe 
the chair metaphorically and qualitatively. 
Chair 2’s general data confirm that Anglo-Celtics again 
had higher number of gestures in a longer period. This is 
reflected in the lower frequency achieved by the Anglo-
Celtics in Fig. 4b. Latin Americans on the other hand 
performed fewer gestures that were faster and shorter. Table 
2 shows that the Anglo-Celtics used more or less the same 
amount of gestures as before. This could be because they 
are more comfortable when describing the “abstract” 
concepts in their first language.  
C. Findings 
After analyzing the performance of both samples, in this 
section, the results of the metrics stated in the hypothesis 
(gesture type, frequency and occurrence) are delivered. The 
results come as follows: 
1)  Frequency  
Gesture frequency indicates that overall the Latin 
American sample performed more gestures per second; 
however, this evidence is not enough to state which culture 
was more expressive than the other. The use of gestures 
involves various factors, such as the comfort of a person had 
in front of the camera, or the confidence with the object 
being described, as well as the language. Chair 1 had iconic 
and repetition gestures with higher frequency in both 
samples, and this is reflected in Fig. 4.a and Fig. 4.b. Chair 
2 on the other hand had an increase in junk and metaphoric 
gestures. The most significant gestures for gesture 
recognition are the iconic ones as well as repetitions, and 
subsequently they are the ones that convey the description 
of the chair more significantly. 
2)  Occurrence 
There are no junk and deictic gestures in the description 

107
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5. Gesture types by chair and sample: 
Chair 1- Anglo-Celtic (a) Chair 1- Latin American (b) 
Chair 2- Anglo-Celtic (c) Chair 2- Latin American (d) 
 
 
Figure 6. Average Gesture type by sample in  
Chair 1 (a) and Chair 2 (b) 
of Chair 1 for the Anglo-Celtic sample, but they do appear 
in Chair 2 when the number of gestures increases. This 
means that the occurrence of gestures was related to the 
task, not to the culture. This may be because Chair 2 was 
more complex and there was a need for more explanation by 
the user.  This explanation required more cognition and the 
extra gestures reflected this process.  
3) Gesture Type 
For Chair 1, the iconic gestures were close to 50% in 
both sample groups (See Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b), showing 
equality. For Chair 2, the iconic gestures diminish and 
metaphoric gestures increase for the Latin American sample 
group (See Fig. 5c and Fig. 5d). Again, this may be related 
to the relative complexity of the chairs. Regarding verbal 
depictions, each iconic and metaphoric gesture was related 
to at least one word, reflecting the participants’ cognition. 
D. Comparisons 
In this section, we summarize the important points 
described in Section C. Numerically; Anglo-Celtics did not 
display too much variation between chair descriptions, even 
though they all encountered a new and different chair that 
required a lot more extraordinary description.  
Chair 2 had more gestures on average by participant in 
the Anglo-Celtic sample. On the contrary, in Chair 2, Latin 
Americans performed fewer gestures on average by 
participant. The reason could be the degree of comfort 
Anglo-Celtics had when describing an abstract chair.  
The SD was again higher with the Anglo-Celtics. This 
made it hard to identify a pattern. On the other hand, Latin 
Americans had a smaller SD and more frequent gestures, 
meaning shorter, more concise and common gestures by 
most of the participants. 
The gesture frequency was higher in Chair 1, and it 
increased with the Latin Americans. This could be partly 
because; they scored higher values in junk gestures in the 
description of Chair 2. Latin Americans had more frequent 
gestures in both chairs. This means that they performed 
more gestures per second, even though they had fewer 
gestures in total. The smaller count of gestures by Latin 
Americans is justified by shorter time frame in which they 
performed the gestures.  
Deictic and junk gesture occurrence was significantly 
less than the other gestures. Therefore, the idea of Latin 
American‘s being more explanatory with hands is 
disproved. A potential explanation in this case, is perhaps 
the implication of having to speak in a second language.  
Given the distribution of gestures (Fig. 5 and Fig. 6), it 
is identified, that in general, iconic gestures decrease with 
Chair 2, as well as the repetition gestures. In contrast, junk 
and deictic gestures appear more; the average of these 
gestures therefore, increases from one chair to another (Fig. 
6a and Fig. 6b). 
Latin Americans used more distinctive words for Chair 1 
(13) and less in the Chair 2 (10) (Table 3). Using less 
gestures and words to describe Chair 2 could probably mean 
a better selection of words and gestures, or the lack of 
vocabulary. The higher word count for Chair 1 may refer to 
either a higher degree of confidence, or more predictable 
and well structured ideas. 

108
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE 6.      INTEGRATION OF EXPERIMENT AND CULTURE 
Sample 
Metrics 
Context 
Predominant culture trait by 
Hofstede 
Metric Evidence 
Predominant Gesture Type 
Anglo-
Celtic 
Low context  
(assertive, rely con words) 
Individualism 
Masculinity 
High SD 
Constant gestures beween chairs 
More gestures and more time 
Iconic 
Latin 
American 
High context  
(rely heavily on non verbal 
communication) 
High Uncertainty Avoidance 
Collectivism 
 
Low SD 
Fewer Gestures in the second 
Chair 
Fewer gestures in less time 
Metaphoric 
Repetition 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Now the relation between the gesture metrics and the 
cultural attributions made by both Hofstede and Hall 
(Section II b) is presented. As Anglo-Celtics are low context 
cultures, they used more words and gestures in longer time, 
since they took time to explain the chair in detail. On the 
other hand, Latin Americans, which represent the high 
context culture, performed fewer gestures, in shorter time 
and used fewer words. The element that calls for attention is 
the higher use of metaphoric gestures, a trait of a high 
context cultures. This exemplifies a characteristic of a 
society that relies on reading between the lines and letting 
nonverbal cues explain the meaning. 
The cultural analysis now continues by relating gesture 
performance with Hofstede’s cultural dimensions. A clear 
integration between the culture literature cited and the 
experiment conducted is exposed in Table 6. As mentioned 
before, the traits that are mostly reflected are IDV, UAI, and 
MAS.  
 
IDV. This trait could be related to the fact that the 
SD between samples is higher with the Anglo-Celtic 
cultures reflecting the societies high individualism 
index (IDV, 82). On the other hand, the low SD with 
the Latin Americans shows the low individualism 
index (IDV, 20).  
 
UAI. This trait could be reflected in the overall 
impression of Chair 2. The Anglo-Celtic sample did 
not vary too much in gesture means and time from 
one chair to another, showing greater comfort with 
adverse situations (UAI, 43). It is possible to say that 
Latin Americans showed their high uncertainty 
avoidance (UAI, 86) since they use less time and 
limited gestures, possibly sticking to “what they 
knew” instead of managing the abstract.  
 
MAS. This trait could be related to the fact that the 
Anglo-Celtics as a low context culture are more 
masculine and assertive (MAS, 63), in comparison to 
the Latin Americans that are more human-oriented 
and feminine. Therefore there is a higher use of 
metaphors (MAS, 47) in their descriptions. 
It is important to remark that the Latin Americans in this 
sample have more of an advantage with the language 
compared to “at home” Latin Americans, as they have been 
immersed in a different culture and language for the past 6 
months. Regardless of that, they still performed fewer 
gestures and chose different words.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of this paper was to explore if gesture-based 
interfaces could be affected by a user’s culture. The 
literature review agrees that any interaction is a result of 
user, task and input. Aside from performance or stability 
issues, gesture-based interfaces are subject to a context 
problem. In the international scene, depending on where 
participants are from, their style of communication will 
vary. This analysis arrived to the conclusion that as the 
complexity of a task increases, so does the use and type of 
gestures. The metrics stated in the hypothesis influence 
multimodal interfaces and their performance in the 
following ways: 
 
Frequency may affect the recognition rate because of 
the need for faster and more efficient algorithms. 
 
Occurrence also affects interaction due to the 
possibility of absence (zero occurrences) of certain 
gestures that may convey functionality (i.e., iconic). 
 
Gesture type, as well as occurrence, also affects the 
goal that the user wishes to attain. Identifying and 
classifying certain gestures due to their use during 
trials would permit the identification of type 
tendencies and will assist in embedding differences 
in the development of the gesture recognition tools. 
Due to the “freedom” that hand gestures provide, gesture 
based interfaces gain popularity. The aim of HCI is to have 
users adopt the new technologies for interaction because 
their usability is better. Studies have shown that culture 
influences a user’s acceptance of the technology. A more 
conservative or traditional culture, such as the Latin 
American culture, could take more time to adapt. This was 
visible with the differences in frequency rates between the 
classic and abstract chairs. The performance of a gesture 
based interface will not only be affected by the task being 
performed, but by the cultural background and language 
skills of the user. Therefore, the design of gesture-based 
interfaces not only requires a multidisciplinary approach, 
but also a culturally sensitive one. The work conducted in 
order to develop applications that are consistent with the 
perception, use, and understanding of gestures by users, still 
continues.  
It is acknowledged that future studies need a larger 
sample size. Similarly, future studies need to focus on the 
consistency of the annotations by having more than one 
coder to increase the objectivity of analysis. The results 
might have significant variations if the experiment were to 

109
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be carried out in Spanish, the native language of the Latin 
American culture. Further research studies may also attempt 
to investigate the effects of gender on gesture behavior. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Australian Research 
Council Discovery grant DP0988088 to Kavakli, titled “A 
Gesture-Based Interface for Designing in Virtual Reality”.  
Also, the experiment on which this project was based, is 
inspired by Jing Liu’s previous work titled “Temporal 
Relation between speech and co-verbal iconic gestures in 
multimodal interface design”. Authors are grateful to her for 
her support in sharing data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kavakli, M. and Nasser, K. 2012. Influence of Culture in 
Multimodal Interfaces: Differences in Gesture behavior 
between Anglo-Celtics and Latin Americans, MMEDIA 2012: 
the fourth International Conferences on Advances in 
Multimedia. Pp 148-154 ISBN: 978-1-61208-195-3 
[2] CARLA. 2012. What is Culture?. The Center for Advanced 
Research 
on 
Language 
Acquisition,   
http://www.carla.umn.edu/culture/definitions.html  
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[3] Visser, W. and Maher, M.L. 2011. The Role of gesture in 
designing. Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design, 
Analysis and Manufacturing, 25, pp. 213-220. Cambridge 
University Press, doi: 10.1017/S08900604/11 
[4] Wachs, P., Kölsch, M., Stern H., and Edan Y. 2011. Vision-
Based Hand-Gesture Applications. Communications of the 
ACM, 54 (2),  pp. 60-71, doi:10.1145/1897816.1897838 
[5] Kita, S. (ed.). 2003. Pointing and Placing. Pointing: Where 
Language, Culture and Cognition Meet, http://www-
psych.stanford.edu/~herb/2000s/Clark.Pointing.placing.03.pdf 
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[6] Bavelas, J., Gerwing, J., Sutton, Ch., and Prevost, D. 2008.  
Gesturing on the telephone: Independent effects of dialogue 
and visibility. Journal of Memory and Language, 58 (2),  pp. 
495-520 ISSN: 0749596X, doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2007.02.004 
[7] Gullberg, M. 2010. Methodological reflections on gesture 
analysis in second language acquisition and bilingualism 
research. Second Language Research, 26 (1), pp. 75–102. doi: 
10.1177/0267658309337639 
[8] Karray, F., Alemzadeh, M., Saleh, J., and Arab, N. (2008) 
Human-Computer Interaction: State of the Art. International 
journal on smart sensing and intelligent systems, 1(1),  
http://www.s2is.org/Issues/v1/n1/papers/paper9.pdf 
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[9] Lanfranco, A., Castellanos, A., Desai, J., and Meyers, W. 
2004. Robotic Surgery. A Current Perspective Ann Surg, 239 
(1), pp. 14–21. doi:  10.1097/01.sla.0000103020.19595.7d 
[10] Purdue University. 2011. Future surgeons may use robotic 
nurse, 
'gesture 
recognition'. ScienceDaily,  
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/02/11020315254
8.htm [Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[11] Van den Hoven, E. and Mazealek, A. 2010. Grasping 
Gestures: Gesturing with physical artifacts. Artificial 
Intelligence 
for 
Engineering 
Design, 
Analysis 
and 
Manufacturing, 
25, 
pp. 
255-271, 
doi:10.1017/S0890060411000072 
[12] Kim, M.J. and Maher, M.L. 2008. The impact of tangible user 
interfaces on spatial cognition during collaborative design. 
Design 
Studies, 
29 
(3), 
pp. 
222–253, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.bbr.2011.03.031 
[13] Karam, M., Hare, J., and Schraefel, M. n.d. Ambient 
Gestures, 
http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/amrk03r/AmbientGestures.pdf 
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[14] Kavakli, M., Taylor, M., and Trapeznikov, A. 2007. 
Designing in virtual reality (DesIRe): a gesture-based 
interface. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference 
on Digital interactive media in entertainment and arts 
(DIMEA '07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 131-136, 
doi:10.1145/1306813.1306842  
[15] Kavakli, M. 2008. Gesture Recognition in Virtual Reality, 
Special Issue on: "Immersive Virtual, Mixed, or Augmented 
Reality Art" of The International Journal of Arts and 
Technology 
(IJART), 
1 
(2), 
 
pp. 
215-229. 
doi: 
10.1504/IJART.2008.021928. 
[16] Berry, M. 2009. The Importance of Bodily Gesture Example 
1. McNeill’s 
classification 
of 
gesture 
types,  
http://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.09.15.5/berry_ex1.html 
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[17] Kang, H., Lee, C., and Jung, K. 2004. Recognition-based 
gesture spotting in video games. Pattern Recognition Letters, 
25 (15), pp. 1701-1714, doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2004.06.016 
[18] Li, H. ad Greenspan, M. 2011. Model-based segmentation and 
recognition of dynamic gestures in continous video streams. 
Pattern 
Recognition, 
44, 
pp. 
1614-1628, 
doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2012.12.014  
[19] Holler, J.  and Beatiie G. 2004. The interaction of iconic 
gesture and speech in talk. Gesture Based Communication in 
Human Computer Interaction, 2915,  pp. 3853-3885, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-540-24598-8_6 
[20] Massey,  A., Hung, C., Ramesh V., and Montoya-weiss, M. 
2001. 
Cultural 
perceptions 
of 
task-technology. 
Communications 
of 
the 
ACM, 
44 
(12), 
doi:10.1145/501347.501353 
[21] Murphie, A. and Potts, J. 2003. Culture and Technology. N.Y: 
Palgrave Mcmillan  
[22] Hall, 
S. 
2007. 
Review: 
Representation: 
Cultural 
Representations and Signifying Practices (Culture, Media and 
Identities Series) London: SAGE Publications Limited 
[23] Hofstede, G. H.,  Hofstede G. J., and Minkov,  M. 2010. 
Cultures and organizations: software of the mind : 
intercultural cooperation and its importance for survival. (3rd 
ed) 
McGraw-Hill 
Professional 
ISBN 
0071664181, 
9780071664189  
[24] Aaron Marcus and Associates, Inc . 2010. Cross-Cultural 
User-Interface Design for Work, Home, and On the Way: 
Accounting for Cultural Preferences, Acceptance, and 
Constraints. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2010 Courses, Doi: 
10.1145/1900520.1900525  
[25] Rehm, M., Bee, N., and André, E. 2008. Wave like an 
Egyptian — Acceleration based gesture recognition for 
culture-specific interactions. In Proceedings of HCI 2008 

110
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Culture, Creativity, Interaction, 1, pp. 13–22, ISBN: 978-1-
906124-04-5 
[26] Wing Chee, S. 2010. “Cross-cultural transfer in gesture 
frequency in Chinese–English bilinguals”. Language and 
Cognitive 
Processes, 
25 
(10), 
pp. 
1335-1353, 
doi: 
10.1080/01690961003694268 
[27] Nicoladis, E. 2007. The effect of billingualiam on the use of 
manual gestures. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, pp. 514-526. 
[28] Yammiyavar, P., Clemmensen, T., and Kumar, J. (2008). 
Influence 
of 
cultural 
background 
on 
non-verbal 
communication in a usability testing situation. International 
Journal 
of 
Design, 
2(2), 
pp. 
31-40, 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/3
13/164 [Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[29] Fikkert, W., Vna der Vet, P., Van der Ver, G., and Nijholt, A. 
2009. Gestures for large display control . Computer 
Interaction: 8th International Gesture Workshop, Revised 
Selected Papers, pp. 245-256.  Germany: Springer 
[30] Hofstede, G. 2011. Dimensions of national Cultures., 
http://www.geerthofstede.nl/dimensions-of-national-cultures 
[Accessed: December 15, 2012] 
[31] Hall, E. T. 1976. Beyond Culture. Knopf Doubleday 
Publishing Group. ISBN 0385124740, 9780385124744 
[32] Liu, J. and Kavakli, M. 2011. Temporal Relation between 
speech and co-verbal iconic gestures in multimodal interface 
design, 
http://coral2.spectrum.uni-
bielefeld.de/gespin2011/final/Liu.pdf [Accessed: December 
15, 2012] 
[33] Pause 
.2011. 
In 
Oxford 
Dictionaries,  
http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition/pause 
[Accessed: 
December 15, 2012] 

