232
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Smart Healthcare Tracking and  Monitoring System 
 
Ali Bazzi, Majd Ghareeb, Samih Abdul-Nabi 
Department of Computer and Communication Engineering, 
International University of Beirut, BIU 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{ali.bazzi; majd.ghareeb; samih.abdulnabi}@b-iu.edu.lb 
Muslem Ghamloush, Mostafa Ibrahim, Hassan 
Khachfe 
Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research and Application 
Lebanese International University, LIU 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{41030013; 41410026}@students.liu.edu.lb; 
Hassan.khachfe@liu.ed.lb
 
 
Abstract—Although technology advances cannot help in 
limiting the dreadfulness missing-in-action that occurs either 
in war or in dangerous sports, they could at least help in 
reducing its effects and casualties. One way to help in this aim 
could be by tracking and monitoring the location and health 
situation of the concerned persons. The main objective of the 
work presented in this paper is to design and implement a 
complete tracking system. The system is composed of a mini 
portable server, defined as a central unit hosted on a 
Raspberry Pi and used to monitor members’ location, state, 
and health information. This will be done through wireless 
communications to small devices equipped with the necessary 
sensors and attached to the member's arm. Moreover, the 
system provides an emergency button to request help if pressed 
when the member is facing an urgent situation. A set of test 
cases has been applied and the results achieved by our 
prototype have presented a promising accuracy and efficiency 
when applying such a system. 
Keywords-Healthcare 
monitoring; 
tracking 
system; 
Raspberry PI; Arduino; WIFI Communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 As we already stated in [1], on September 28 1951, 
Daniel Hunt, from Columbiaville was a member of the 1st 
Battalion conducting operations near an area referred to as 
Heartbreak Ridge. The Chinese launched an attack, which 
the army repelled. Prior to their attack, the Chinese launched 
a barrage of mortar fire against the Americans in which 
survivors withdrew to friendly lines. Hunt was reported 
missing in action. During an investigation by the U.S. Army 
Casualty office, three members of Hunt’s unit reported him 
been killed during the fight. The Army therefore declared 
him deceased. Today, 7780 Americans remain unaccounted 
for from the Korean War [2]. 
On the other hand, on February 13 2017, an avalanche in 
France has left four skiers dead and five missing when a 
mass of snow swept them away in the resort of Tignes. 
Resort workers reportedly witnessed the disaster, which 
struck an off-piste slope at around 10.30am local time, 
alerting emergency services. Mountain security authorities in 
nearby town Albertville said those who are unaccounted for 
are believed to be "buried under a large amount of snow" [3]. 
Thousands of cases like “Hunt” and the skiers are 
encountered around the world, showing that the issue of 
unaccounted people is a common in wars, sports and other 
even of our daily life. 
Some people believe that known communication tools 
can help to avoid problems encountered in the previously 
mentioned cases and save lives. In these cases and in all 
scenarios in this paper we define members as a group of 
people in a mission with a leader on the head of the mission. 
Monitoring members by their leader is not an easy task 
because of natural factors, lack of knowledge about the place 
of accident, loss of connection between the leader and the 
members, power failure of the tools, barrage jamming, and 
snow swept and so on, constitute obstacles limiting 
communication between members and their leaders. 
 These and many other problems have led researchers to 
think about new solutions benefiting from the evolution of 
technologies. Throughout the years, many technologies have 
been invented to solve the Missing-In-Action problem, but 
they remained weak. Most of these systems are based on 
tracking the movements of people in missions, which is not 
always an efficient way to detect threads and does not give 
the real status on the group on the ground. Navigating and 
situating are important, but need tiring activities which GPS 
(Global Positioning System) makes easier. The GPS has 
turned out to be a significant technology for the U.S. military 
and other defense forces around the world since the 1980's 
[3]. With the ability to provide accurate positioning 
continuously, day or night, in any conditions, GPS has 
helped ground troops in Iraq and Afghanistan navigate 
across expansive, barren deserts that have few markers or 
distinguishable features. Although GPS provides the position 
of skiers and hikers, it is still considered weak and far away 
from healthcare when any of health issues are faced during 
any type of missions. 
 From all the previously-mentioned issues, the objective 
of our paper is to present the design of a new “smart 
healthcare tracking and monitoring system” that would 
significantly reduce the effects of problems encountered 
through the literature review we conducted. Our system 
grants the leader the ability to track his team members on a 
map based application and monitor their health statuses in a 
continuous and real time way, even in upper mountains and 
hard conditions. This is done via a web interface installed on 
a stand-alone server or via a mobile application. This paper 
is an extension of the work presented in [1]. The rest of it is 

233
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
organized as follows. In Section II, we talk about some 
similar applications to our system. Section III gives an 
overview of the system architecture and design. Section IV 
talks about the used components and describes the 
implementation in detail, and we conclude in Section V with 
a summary about the main contribution of this paper. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Medically, health statuses of members with critical 
conditions are a great concern for leaders who seek new and 
innovative healthcare systems. In the past, sports leaders 
were monitoring their members with the aid of primitive 
communication systems, such as the walkie-talkie, until the 
technological development enabled tracking systems using 
satellites. 
A. Walkie-Talkie 
During the Second World War Donald L. Hings, radio 
designer Alfred J. Gross, and engineering teams at Motorola, 
invented a walkie-talkie. The hand-held, compact, two-way 
radio handset, utilized for field artillery and tank units. After 
the war, the basic walkie-talkie idea quickly expanded into a 
family of devices, the forbears of later citizen’s band radios 
in the 1970s and the first analog cell phones in the early 
1980s [5]. 
This 
device 
improved 
the 
leader-members 
communication during and after a mission, however, this 
technology has a limited usage because it can’t be used in a 
low-profile situation or in the case of injury. In addition, this 
device is energy consuming and sensitive to natural factors 
and man-made noises. 
B. Movement/tracking system 
The United States Army invented a Movement Tracking 
System (MTS) that is a logistics communication platform 
under the Program Executive Office for Enterprise 
Information Systems (PEO EIS) [6]. It is designed for 
commanders (leaders) to track assets (members) on the 
battlefield with encrypted text messaging. It is a satellite-
based tracking and communicating system designed to 
provide command and control between the leader and the 
soldiers. 
This device can continuously monitor the soldier’s 
location during battle, which improves the leader’s control of 
the troops without the need for primitive communication 
tools which require manual usage. MTS’s main disadvantage 
is that the health statuses of members remain absent from 
such systems. 
C. Smart systems for healthcare monitoring using 
communication means 
In recent years, health monitoring systems have rapidly 
evolved recently, and smart different systems have been 
proposed to monitor patient’s current health conditions. In a 
recent work [7], authors are proposing a “Smart real-time 
healthcare monitoring and tracking system using GSM/GPS 
technologies”, which concentrates on checking the patient’s 
blood pressure and body temperature. This system was built 
for social healthcare in the light of GSM and GPS 
innovations and as a compelling application for real time 
health monitoring and tracking. In case of emergency, a short 
message service (SMS) will be sent to the doctor’s mobile 
number along with the measured values through the GSM 
module. Moreover, the GPS gives the location data of the 
patient who is under observation all the time. While this 
system covers the issue of healthcare status provision, it 
cannot continuously track the person’s required information. 
In addition, the usage of GSM to send short messages is 
more expensive and can face some limitations, such as when 
the doctor’s phone is out of service or due to natural 
conditions in case of ski, etc. 
In another work [8], authors proposed “Patient Health 
Management System”. This system is based on smart devices 
and wireless sensor networks for real time analysis of 
various parameters of patients. This system is aimed at 
developing a set of modules which can facilitate the 
diagnosis for the doctors through tele-monitoring of patients. 
It also facilitates continuous investigation of the patient for 
emergencies looked over by attendees and caregivers. A set 
of medical and environmental sensors is used to monitor the 
health, as well as the surroundings, of the patient. This 
sensor data is then relayed to the server using a smart device 
or a base station. 
Each of the systems discussed in this section provides a 
required and specific feature needed before, during and after 
a mission. Walkie-talkie system provides the aural 
communication between leader and members but the 
tracking of members functionality is missing. MTS provides 
continuous tracking of members’ movements, but their 
health statuses are missing, “Smart real-time healthcare 
monitoring” system provides health statuses tracing, but not 
continuously, 
“Patient 
Health 
Management 
System” 
provides health monitoring using smartphones over the 
Internet or using servers to extract information. 
In our design, we try to take full advantage of existing 
systems by combining their features in one small wearable 
device. An important advantage of our system compared to 
other products is manifested in its ability to simultaneously 
keep an eye on members’ health status alongside their 
locations without the need for manual control, which 
facilitates leader-members communication, even on Upper 
Mountains and under hard conditions. Moreover, the central 
unit, unlike the systems discussed, is a small portable device 
to be held by the leader. It hosts the information locally 
without any need of larger servers or connecting devices 
between members and their leaders. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
In this section, we present a thorough description of our 
system design. This description encompasses four parts: the 
first, presents the use case and activity diagrams; the second, 
presents the system architecture; the third, shows the state 
diagram and the last one, contains the conclusion about the 
system overview. This description allows seeing the system 
from different perspectives and fosters a better understanding 
of its functionalities. 
 

234
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
A. Requirements and Specification analysis 
In this section, the overall requirements of the system are 
defined together with the use cases of members and their 
leader; it also shows a UML activity diagram of the system. 
 
Each member requires a wearable device before the 
mission.  
 
This device records the heart rate, oxygen in the 
blood and body temperature of the member and 
sends data periodically to the server component.  
 
The device has a button which may be pressed in 
an emergency situation.  
 
On the other side, there is a device held by the 
leader and wirelessly connected with this wearable 
device. 
 
The leader requires a web browser or an android 
device, which are available on the leader’s device 
to monitor his members.  
 
The system will notify the leader if any of the 
member’s status is abnormal or an emergency 
request is taking place.  
 
The leader can track his members by receiving 
their locations from their wearable devices.  
 
A suitable decision is taken by the leader or 
monitoring room depending on the faced situation.  
A use case diagram at its simplest is a representation of a 
user's interaction with the system that shows the relationship 
between the user and the different use cases in which the 
user is involved. Figure 2 shows the use case diagram of our 
proposed system by identifying each user interaction with 
the system. The device held by a member has the capability 
of testing the life signs and send all required information to 
the server, it also provides an emergency button to use it 
when needed in any encountered issue. The system allows 
the leader or the monitoring room to closely track the 
members. 
An activity diagram is another important diagram in 
UML to describe the dynamic aspects of the system. Figure 
1 shows the same idea of Figure 2 but as flow chart to 
represent the flow from an one activity to another between 
members and their leader. 
B. System Architecture 
The system architecture shows the hardware and 
software side of the system. It is explained using a figure 
showing the placement of the equipment used and the role 
of each part. The software part is related to the server and 
the website or android application that used to monitor 
persons on maps. 
Figure 3 displays the hardware part in detail by showing 
the member side as an Arduino, sensors required and the 
WIFI module. The leader side is shown as a Raspberry Pi, 
both connected to an access point to transmit and receive 
data. Note that the access point can be on the PI itself if 
members are close enough. This figure also shows the 
software part and how it obtains data from the server. 
 As depicted in Figure 3, we have two main components. 
The first one is the central unit that plays the role of a server 
and it is usually controlled by the leader. The second one 
holds the monitoring units worn by each member. 
Figure 1: Activity Diagram of the system 

235
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The central unit is portable with light weight and small 
size. For simplicity of connection, this unit could provide an 
access point to the members to make sure no intermediate 
equipment is needed. This server will host all the needed 
information, such as the database and the Web pages. 
Hence, data retrieval will be done locally and no need for 
any external connection such as GSM or Internet will be 
needed. This will help in increasing the system security, 
connection 
speed 
and 
data localization, 
since 
the 
information of the members does not need to be published 
on a large scale. This unit can be controlled via a Web 
application that could be accessed directly from the PI or via 
a mobile application that is designed to do the same 
objective.  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Use Case Diagram of the system 
 
 
Figure 3: System Architecture Diagram 
 
The other main component of our system is a small 
wearable glove that is equipped with all the sensors and 
detectors to connect members to their monitoring campaign 
or leader. This will be done by detecting body temperature, 
oxygen level in the blood, heart beat rate, speed and location 
of each member. All this information will be sent 
periodically and automatically to the central unit notifying 
the leader of any issue, injury or maybe death. Additionally, 
system provides an emergency button that gives the member 
the possibility to request help when facing a non-medical 
urgent problem. 
 
 
Figure 4: State Diagram of the system 
 
 
Figure 5: Arduino Uno 
 
C. State Diagram 
The state diagram in an additional design documentation 
needed to outlining the different stages of the system. A state 
diagram is used to model the dynamic nature of the system. 
It defines different states of an object during its life time, and 
describes the control from one state to another. In this part, 
the function of the system depends on the health status of 
members as shown in Figure 4. In addition, the leader after 
login in can either manage members or monitor them during 
the mission. 
 
D. Conclusion 
System design can be a combination of use cases, system 
architecture, and state diagram, which are useful to give an 
idea about how this system works, from its start to its end. 
Also, defining the overall requirement of the system, such as 
hardware and software is important, and where to place and 
use them is helpful to know about what the system consists 
of. State diagram used to model the dynamic overview of the 
system, describes the control from one state to another, and 

236
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
shows the starting and the ending point of the system 
lifecycle. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS AND DETAILS 
The proposed system is a smart healthcare tracking and 
monitoring system in Server-Client architecture. This system 
is collecting health status and locations of a member from 
one small wearable device to the server. The wearable device 
is Arduino UNO based and continuously sends member’s 
statuses via WIFI connection without need for manual 
controlling to the server based on a Raspberry Pi and 
controlled by the leader. This system facilitates member-
leader communication even in hard conditions. 
 
Figure 6: Pulse sensor 
A. Monitoring Unit implementation 
In our system, the monitoring unit is composed of a 
microcontroller connected to a heart pulse sensor, oxygen 
level and body temperature sensor, serial GPS, emergency 
button, and ESP8266. 
The Arduino Uno is a small, complete, and breadboard-
friendly board shown in Figure 5. It has 14 digital pins, and 
each of them can be used as an input or output. It also has 8 
analog pins, each of which provides 10 bits of resolution [9]. 
In this system, we used this type of Arduino just for 
simulation, but more practical prototype can be used to 
minimize the size of the device. 
We connected the heart pulse sensor to an analog pin of 
the microcontroller. The pulse sensor shown in Figure 6 
reads a waveform and calculates the BPM (Beats per 
Minute), as well as the IBI (Inter Beat Interval), which is the 
time between beats [10]. 
The oxygen level and body temperature are both 
measured using the MAX30100 chip shown in Figure 9. The 
only required connection to the sensor is the I2C bus (SDA, 
SCL lines, pulled up). The MAX30100 shown in Figure 9 is 
an integrated pulse oximetry, body temperature, and heart-
rate monitor sensor solution [11]. The accuracy of the pulse 
sensor was better, so we ignored the heart rate value 
measured by MAX30100 and we used it as a supporter in 
case of fault within the heart pulse sensor. 
Figure 7: NEO-6M GPS Module  
 
In addition, we used NEO-6M GPS Module shown in 
Figure 7 to measure the speed of each member beside his 
location as latitude and longitude values. 
 
Figure 8: Touchable LCD screen with Bluetooth keyboard. 
 
The serial GPS communicates serially with the 
microcontroller. This GPS Module uses the latest 
technology to give the best possible position information. 
Also, it comes with ceramic antenna. 
Figure 9: MAX30100 sensor  
 
Finally, the microcontroller sends all measured values 
using serial communication to the WIFI module, which is 
connected to digital pins. The WIFI Module (ESP8266) 
shown in Figure 10 is programmed to get values from the 
microcontroller following a specific algorithm; then, it 
sends these values through WIFI to the central unit where 
the leader monitors. The ESP8266 is a self-contained 
system on chip with integrated TCP/IP protocol stack that 
can give any microcontroller access to any WIFI network. 
The ESP8266 is capable of either hosting an application or 
offloading all WIFI networking functions from another 
application processor. 
 
Figure 10: ESP8266 WIFI Module 
 
The whole monitoring implementation board after 
connecting these components is shown in Figure 11. 
B. Central unit implementation 
Raspberry Pi with Linux operating system is the central 
unit. The leader can browse the Web page built for the 
system to track and monitor his members. In addition, we 
added a 7 Inch LCD touchable screen and a keyboard shown 
in Figure 8 to allow the leader to access the Web site directly 
from the server. 

237
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As shown in Figure 12, the central unit is a portable 
device with small dimensions (15 cm widths x 15 cm height 
and less than 10cm depth) so the leader can hold it during the 
mission. Even if hard conditions according, the metal box 
that built for this purpose is strong enough and allow the 
leader to stay connected with his team members. 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Monitoring unit implementation board 
 
Figure 12: Portable central unit based on Raspberry Pi  
 
The Raspberry Pi is a small computer with a processor, 
RAM (Random Access Memory) and graphics chip. It has 
various interfaces and connectors for external devices 
communication [12]. In our system, we configured it as a 
server. We used Raspberry Pi V3 Model B which has 512 
MB of RAM. 
C. Webpage development 
Each member in the trip held a user-friendly wearable 
device composed of the microcontroller, sensors required 
and a WIFI Module. A real prototype of the monitoring unit 
is shown in Figure 13. 
The microcontroller gathers data from all sensors and 
sends them to the central unit directly using WIFI signals 
without passing through any access point. 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Member's wearable device 
 
Each member must turn on his own device, which is 
programmed only for his unique I.D., without any need for 
any manual configuration. This device will send the 
member’s I.D., health status and location information 
continuously. In addition, any member of the team with 
normal health status can notify his leader by pressing an 
emergency button if he needs any help. The leader can track 
and monitor his team directly from the small portable access 
unit, or any other PC connected locally to this unit, by 
accessing the Web page built for the system from any 
browser. After login, the Web page displays a map showing 
all the members in the trip or wearing their devices, as shown 
in Figure 16. The members are represented by markers; on 
mouse over Marker, a window will pop-up displaying the 
member’s profile information, as shown in Figure 14. 
  
 
Figure 14: Shows a player in a normal case on mouse over icon 
 
On mouse click on Marker, a window displays the 
member’s health information, as shown in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 15: Shows a player in an abnormal case on mouse click on icon  
 
The icon of a marker changes depending on the 
health status, or in case of an emergency as follows: A red 
icon indicates an anomaly in one or more value of life signs, 

238
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a black marker indicates that no more heart beats are 
detected any longer; an emergency sign indicates that the 
soldier has a normal health status and needs help. An option 
of viewing only the Map on a full screen mode is available. 
The leader can also use the Web page to add, remove, and 
view any member of his team and their personal information 
as shown in Figure 17 and Figure 18. 
After each trip, the leader must press on End trip to clear the 
markers from the map. 
 
 
Figure 17: A page to add members to the team 
 
 
Figure 18: A page to view team members or remove them 
D. Android Application Development 
We developed an Android application to allow the 
leader to use it instead of the Web page. This application 
allows the leader be able to track and monitor his team on a 
map as well as the website does. Figure 19 shows the main 
application page and the control panel that can be used by 
the leader.  
Also, this app allows the leader to add members and 
show health statuses and personal information of members in 
trip displaying them in a list as shown in Figure 20. 
 
 
Figure 19: Maps and leader's control panel 
 
In addition, the leader can view all his team members in 
a list showing if members are in trip or not as shown in 
Figure 21. 
Figure 16: The main webpage shows the maps with markers 
 

239
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The main objective of this paper was to present the 
design and implementation of a complete system for 
monitoring and tracking people’s health information and 
location in a sport trip, battle, patients, etc. Our system 
provides a wearable device for each member and a portable 
device for the leader. This enhances the leader’s ability to 
care about the band benefiting from a Web page and an 
Android application. This system has a humanitarian impact 
since it can decrease the effects of many issues in trips 
including unaccounted for and the difficulty of health status 
monitoring. 
 
 
Figure 20: Add and show members in trip pages on Android application 
 
The system security can be addressed using encryption 
technologies, such as AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) 
for the data exchanged between the central unit and the 
members. This system could be tested on real members to 
prove its applicability.  
This system can be enhanced by providing an agreed 
upon secret code to be sent with the emergency button to 
prevent anyone from misusing this device. Moreover, the 
range of the WIFI signals is limited  
 
Figure 21: A page shows all members of team  
 
100 m, and the GSM cannot be used because its signals are 
weak in the sports area or they do not even exist. Our 
system can also be improved by introducing a new 
communication system using microwave signals with 
frequencies lower than WIFI band (around 2.4 GHz). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  A. Bazzi, M. Ghamloush, M. Ibrahim, M. Ghareeb, S. 
Abdul-Nabi, H. Khachfe, "Smart Military Healthcare 
Monitoring and Tracking System on Raspberry Pi," in 
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International 
Conference on Global Health Challenges, Barcelona, Spain, 
2017.  
[2]  D. Hunt, "Soldier Missing From Korean War Accounted For 
(Hunt)," [Online].  Retrieved May 10, 2018 from: 
http://www.dpaa.mil/News-Stories/News-
Releases/Article/1011148/soldier-missing-from-korean-war-
accounted-for-hunt/. 
[3]  S. Howes, T.  Ross, T. Hornall, "Tignes avalanche: At least 
four killed and five missing at ski resort popular with Brits," 
13 Februrary 2017. [Online]. Retrieved September 10, 2018 
from: 
https://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/tignes-
avalanche-least-four-killed-9809720. 
[4]  S. Smith, "GPS - An Important Technology to U.S. Troops," 
[Online]. 
Retrieved 
February 
13, 
2017 
from: 
https://www.thebalance.com/gps-an-important-technology-
to-u-s-troops-3345076. 
[5]  C. H. Sterling, "Military Communications: From Ancient 
Times to the 21st Century", ABC-CLIO; 1 edition (October 
16, 2007).  p. 504. 
[6]  J. J.  Hilt, R. L. Jones  "MTS: An Untold Commo Success 
Story in OIF.," Field Artillery, September-October 2004,  pp. 
30-32. 
[7]  K. Aziz, S. Tarapiah, S. H. Ismail and S. Atalla, "Smart real-
time healthcare monitoring and tracking system using 
GSM/GPS technologies," 2016 3rd MEC International 
Conference on Big Data and Smart City (ICBDSC), Muscat, 
2016, pp. 1-7. 
[8]  S. 
Mukherjee, 
K. 
Dolui, 
S.K. 
Datta, 
"Patient 
HealthManagement System using e-Health Monitoring 
Architecture," 2014 IEEE International Advance Computing 
Conference (IACC), Gurgaon, 2014, pp. 400-405. 
[9]  "Arduino Uno & Genuino Uno," Arduino, 2017. Retrieved 
February 
13, 
2017 
from:
https://www.arduino.cc/en/main/arduinoBoardUno. 
[10] J. Murphy, Y. Gitman, "Pulse Sensor Advanced," Pulse 
sensor, 2011. [Online]. Retrieved February 13, 2017 from:
https://pulsesensor.com/pages/code-and-guide. 
[11] Maxim, "Pulse Oximeter and Heart-Rate Sensor IC," Maxim 
integrated, [Online]. Retrieved February 13, 2017 from:
https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX30100.p
df.   
[12] David Thompson, "Raspberry Pi 3 Model B," [Online]. 
Retrieved 
February 
13, 
2017 
from: 
https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-
b/. 

