 
Learning Contexts as Ecologies of Resources: A Unifying Approach to the 
Interdisciplinary Development of Technology Rich Learning Activities
Rosemary Luckin 
The London Knowledge Lab 
The Institute of Education 
London, England. WC1N 3QS 
r.luckin@ioe.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract - This paper addresses the problem of how to 
develop a conceptualization of context that can support the 
development of technology-rich learning activities. The term 
technology-rich encompasses mobile, hybrid and on-line 
learning approaches and the work reported here is intended 
to bridge these different approaches. In this paper we 
suggest that a learner-specific definition of context can 
ground research across mobile, hybrid and on-line learning.  
We discuss a definition of context that is theoretically 
grounded in the socio-cultural approach to learning and that 
has been used to develop the Ecology of Resources model. 
This model is an abstraction that can be shared between 
social and technical researchers and practitioners to support 
analysis and to generate technology design.  An example 
that demonstrates the way that the Ecology of Resources 
model is empirically as well as theoretically grounded is 
presented. This example is used to support the proposal that 
the Ecology of Resources model can be used as a design 
tool to sensitize designers to the importance of each 
learner’s context. 
 
Keywords - context, zone of collaboration, ecology of 
resources model, distributed scaffolding. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The continuing increase in the range of pervasive, 
interconnected, 
and 
embedded 
technologies 
in 
our 
environment 
allows 
people 
to 
digitally 
link 
their 
experiences across, between and with multiple locations, 
multiple people and a range of subject matter. These 
technical developments have the potential to support the 
better integration of learners with their social, physical and 
digital worlds. Or in other words these developments have 
the potential to enable us to take batter account of each 
learner’s context. The aim of this paper is to discuss the 
concept of context and to evaluate a context-based model of 
learning that is intended to support the development of 
technology-rich learning activities. The model is called the 
Ecology of Resources and it offers a potentially unifying 
concept for the sub-fields of learning with technology, both 
technical and sociological. In particular, the Ecology of 
Resources model aims to engender the development of 
activities that use technology to overcome the traditional 
physical and temporal constraints that are part of many 
learning environments and that are at the heart of 
approaches within the sub-fields of mobile, hybrid and on-
line learning.   
In this paper we extend [1] and discuss the Ecology of 
Resources model to consider some of its theoretical 
grounding. We then present an empirical example of the 
model in use. This example is drawn from the Homework 
research project: a project that explored the use of multiple 
technologies to support young learners (aged 5-7 years) with 
numeracy both inside and outside school. Such a situation is 
particularly compatible with the aim of the Ecology of 
Resources to support the development of activities that use 
technology to overcome the traditional physical and 
temporal constraints. This type of empirical evaluation adds 
both to our understanding of learners’ interactions with 
technology, and to the continuing development of the 
Ecology of Resources model and design approach. 
 
II. 
CONTEXT AND LEARNING 
 
There is nothing new about the suggestion that one 
should explore the educational context in which learning 
takes place in order to understand more about learning. 
Work such as that completed by [2] suggests that the 
organization of learning resources, including the computer, 
influences the manner in which these resources are used. 
Similarly [3], when evaluating Integrated Learning Systems, 
concluded that the impact of technology upon learning was 
heavily dependent on the specifics of the educational 
environment into which the technology was introduced. 
This type of work is useful in confirming the importance of 
looking at the wider environment, but is limited by a focus 
that is mainly on specific environmental locations, such as 
school classrooms. To make the most of the possibilities 
afforded by new technologies a clearer, learning-specific 
definition of context is now required, to support the 
development 
of 
technology-rich 
learning 
activities. 
Activities that take advantage of the growing range of 
154
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
technological artefacts that can support interaction across 
multiple physical and virtual spaces, multiple knowledge 
domains, multiple time periods and with multiple 
collaborators. The provision of such a definition is not an 
easy task. Nardi, [4] states the problem clearly: ‘How can 
we confront the blooming, buzzing confusion that is 
“context” and still produce generalizable research results?’ 
 
In [5], we confront this “confusion” by looking at a range 
of ways in which context is talked about within literature 
drawn from multiple disciplines to identify common themes 
of concern that transcend disciplinary boundaries. This 
encompasses work drawn from geography and architecture, 
anthropology and psychology and from education and 
computer science.  We conclude that:  
 
“Context matters to learning; it is complex and local 
to a learner. It defines a person’s subjective and 
objective experience of the world in a spatially and 
historically contingent manner. Context is dynamic 
and associated with connections between people, 
things, locations and events in a narrative that is 
driven by people’s intentionality and motivations. 
Technology can help to make these connections in an 
operational sense. People can help to make these 
connections have meaning for a learner. 
 
A learner is not exposed to multiple contexts, but 
rather has a single context that is their lived 
experience of the world; a ‘phenomenological gestalt’ 
[6] that reflects their interactions with multiple 
people, artefacts and environments. The partial 
descriptions of the world that are offered to a learner 
through these resources act as the hooks for 
interactions in which action and meaning are built. In 
this sense, meaning is distributed amongst these 
resources. However, it is the manner in which the 
learner at the centre of their context internalizes their 
interactions that is the core activity of importance. 
These interactions are not predictable but are created 
by the people who interact, each of whom will have 
intentions about how these interactions should be. ” 
[5] 
 
This definition portrays context as something that is 
centred 
around 
an 
individual. 
This 
results 
in 
a 
conceptualization of context with a time-scale that is an 
individual’s life and boundaries that are those of the 
individual’s interactions. We suggest that this definition of 
context can be used to ground the development of 
technology rich learning activities that do not differentiate 
between the various flavours of learning that inhabit the 
growing rhetoric of descriptors that include mobile, hybrid, 
virtual, on-line, and e-learning. All are concerned with 
learning and all can be supported by such a learner centric 
definition of context. But what theory of learning is 
consistent with this view of context and capable of being 
used to develop a context-based model of learning that can 
be made operational and that can form the foundation for a 
design framework?  
There are several theoretical viewpoints that specifically 
relate to learning and context; for instance, work from the 
socio-cultural tradition, such as that of Vygotsky, activity 
theory, Michael Cole’s cultural psychology, Hutchins’ 
distributed cognition and the situated and communities of 
practice approaches. The discussion of context above 
favours an intentional role for people, a learner-centredness 
that defines context as an interactional concept, combining a 
learner’s active experience of their physical reality with 
their mediated experiences through human-made artefacts.  
The process of internalization through which an 
individual’s distributed meaning-making interactions lead 
that individual’s development is key to this enterprise. This 
narrows down the compatibility of the potential learning 
theories to those from a socio-cultural stance. The relational 
attributes of activity systems certainly make them appealing 
for this purpose. However, it is my intention to focus upon 
the learner at the centre of their interactions we therefore 
consider in more depth the socio-cultural approach of 
Vygotsky [7] [8]  
 
A. Vygotsky, Learning  and Context 
The 
socio-cultural 
approach 
of 
Vygotsky 
is 
developmental and describes an individual's mental 
development as an interaction between that individual and 
their socio-cultural environment. The nature of these 
interactions influences the nature of their resultant mental 
processes; 
the 
interpsychological 
becomes 
intrapsychological via the process of internalization [7].  
This approach offers compatibility with a context-based 
model of learning and is further focused in the Zone of 
Proximal Development (ZPD), which can be described as 
the crystallization of the internalization process. When 
Vygotsky [7] introduced the ZPD, he proposed that a child's 
ability to solve standardized problems unassisted was not 
the whole story of their development, but rather it simply 
reflected the completed part of their development. The ZPD 
was defined as: 
 
“The discrepancy between a child’s actual mental age and 
the level he reaches in solving problems with assistance 
indicates the zone of his proximal Development; … 
Experience has shown that the child with the larger zone of 
proximal development will do much better in school. ” [7] 
 
Vygotsky suggested that when instruction is aimed at 
what the child can achieve when aided by a more able 
partner then it can play a major role in the development of 
that child’s higher mental processes. The purpose of the 
ZPD is to focus the dialogue between the more able partner 
and the child, so that the learner can reflect upon this 
dialogue and reformulate it into their own thought [10].  
155
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
The ZPD has an important process element as well as a 
conceptual one. This process element can be seen more 
clearly in Vygotsky [8], in which the ZPD is described as 
something that must be created through instructional 
interactions and that can only operate when the child is 
interacting with other people in the environment.  
The ZPD could be thought of as the basis for a context 
of 
productive 
interactivity. 
However, 
the 
ZPD 
is 
underspecified; it does not, for example, specify the manner 
in which the ‘actual developmental level and the zone of 
proximal development’ [8] are to be identified. This need 
for clarification has been recognized by many researchers, 
such as [11 and 12]. Work such as the scaffolding metaphor 
of [13] and the constructs proposed by [14] have provided 
useful clarifications about how a ZPD might be created and 
have informed the interpretation of the ZPD that this paper 
discusses and that is at the heart of the Ecology of 
Resources.  
My interpretation explores the relationship between the 
identification of a learner’s collaborative capability and the 
specification of the assistance that needs to be offered to the 
learner in order for them to succeed at a particular task. We 
refer to this interpretation as the Zone of Collaboration, 
which uses two additional constructs called: 
 
 
The Zone of Available Assistance (ZAA);  
and  
The Zone of Proximal Adjustment (ZPA).  
 
The ZAA describes the variety of resources within a 
learner’s world that could provide different qualities and 
quantities of assistance and that may be available to the 
learner at a particular point in time. The ZPA represents a 
sub-set of the resources from the ZAA that are appropriate 
for a learner’s needs. Figure 1 represents these concepts 
graphically. 
B. Scaffolding 
As can be seen from the discussion so far, the ZPD 
requires assistance for the learner from a more able other. 
The nature of this assistance was, however, left 
underspecified in Vygotsky’s writing. Seminal work done 
by David Wood [9], in which he coined the term 
‘Scaffolding’ to describe tutorial assistance, is particularly 
relevant here. Effective scaffolding is presented as 
something more than the provision of hints and graded help. 
It involves simplification of the learner’s role and 
interactions in which learners and their more able partners 
work together to achieve success, but the contributions from 
each vary according to the child’s level of ability [15].  
 
 
Figure 1 The Zone of Collaboration [5] 
 
The scaffolding approach has been used to develop a 
variety of educational software, such as that of Wood, 
Shadbolt, Reichgelt, Wood & Paskiewitz [16], and has been 
used, adapted and extended to guide the development of a 
variety of  technology enhanced learning applications (see 
for example, [17, 18, 19]). A further dimension to the use of 
technology for scaffolding can be seen in the use of 
scaffolding to support the development of higher order 
thinking skills, such as metacognition [20] and help-seeking 
skill development [21]. 
The potential offered by connected technology and the 
need to focus on context as discussed in the introduction to 
this paper require that consideration is given to resources 
that are beyond those offered by a single interactive learning 
environment, which is where most of the research attention 
has been focused to date. Some consideration has however 
started to be given to the possibilities afforded by 
scaffolding in these much more complex environments. 
[22], for example, use the term ‘distributed scaffolding’ and 
explore this through classroom-based science learning. Key 
findings from their work include identification of the 
increased complexity that occurs when scaffolding is 
distributed and the potential for distributed scaffolding to 
offer learners more opportunities to notice scaffolding 
opportunities. Tabak [23] also explores complex settings 
and distributed scaffolding and also identifies this positive 
possibility of increased opportunities for scaffolding. Her 
vision for distributed scaffolding is that learners can take 
advantage of different types of support provided by different 
means in an integrated manner, in order to solve complex 
problems. This notion of distributed scaffolding is 
increasingly important when a learner’s broader context 
beyond a single learning environment is considered. 
We therefore add to the definition of context that: 
 
156
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
“it is the role of the more able participants to scaffold 
a learner’s construction of a narrative that makes 
sense of the meanings distributed amongst the 
resources with which they interact. Through this 
scaffolding the learner at the centre of their context 
internalizes their interactions and develops increased 
independent capability and self-awareness.” 
 
[5] 
 
III. 
THE ECOLOGY OF RESOURCES MODEL OF CONTEXT 
The Ecology of Resources model builds upon this 
definition and develops the ZAA and ZPA concepts into a 
characterization of a learner and the interactions that form 
that learner’s context. An earlier version of the model is 
discussed in [24] and its full detail can be found in [5]. Here 
we describe it briefly in order to ground the presentation of 
an empirical example and to support the suggestion that it 
might act as a useful mediating artefact to integrate work 
across various subfields such as mobile and hybrid learning 
(see Figure 2 for an illustration of the Ecology of Resources 
model).  
The resources that comprise a learner’s ZAA embrace a 
wide range of types, including people, technologies, 
buildings, books and knowledge. It is useful to consider the 
different types or categories of resource that might be 
available in order to help us identify them and the 
relationship they bear to the learner and to each other. One 
of the resource categories that the learner needs to interact 
with comprises the ‘stuff that is to be learnt’: the knowledge 
and skills that are the subject of their learning. A second 
category of resource is that described as ‘Tools and People’. 
This category includes books, pens and paper, technology 
and other people who know more about the knowledge or 
skill to be learnt than the learner does. The last category of 
resource is that represented by the ‘Environment’ descriptor. 
This category includes the location and surrounding 
environment with which the learner interacts: for example, a 
school classroom, a park, or a place of work. In many 
instances, there is an existing relationship between the 
resources within these three categories: Knowledge and 
Skills, Tools and People and Environment. For example, the 
book resources appropriate for learning French are located 
in the Language Learning section of the library and formal 
lessons probably take place in a particular location in 
school. Hence, in Figure 2 the categories of resource 
surrounding the learner, and with which they interact, are 
joined together. In order to support learning, the 
relationships between the different types of resource with 
which the learner interacts need to be identified and 
understood. They may need to be made explicit to the 
learner in order to build coherence into the learning 
interactions. For example, if we wish to teach French 
conversation to an evening class, which involves how to 
order a meal, we may choose to provide a menu and to 
organize the room like a restaurant. We will also need to 
ensure that the language concepts we introduce are relevant 
to meal ordering. 
 
Figure 2 The Ecology of Resources Model [5] 
 
A. The Ecology of Resources Filter Elements 
This language-learning example highlights another factor 
that needs to be taken into consideration. We mentioned that 
we might organize the room in a particular fashion. This is 
an example of the way in which a learner’s interactions with 
the available resources are often filtered by the actions of 
others — in this case, me as the teacher — rather than 
experienced directly and unimpeded by the learner. For 
example, the subject matter to be learnt is usually filtered 
through some kind of organization, such as a curriculum, that 
has been the subject of a process of validation by other 
members of the learner’s society. This resource filter is 
stronger for subjects such as mathematics and other formal 
educational disciplines than for more grounded skills such as 
farming. However, even with skills-based subjects there is, 
to some extent at least, still some formalization of what is 
recognised as the accepted view about the nature and 
components of the skills that need to be mastered. The tools 
and people that may be available to the learner are also 
organized or filtered in some way. For example, a teacher 
taking a French conversation evening class is only available 
during that class, or perhaps at some other times via email. 
Classroom technologies are not always available to learners 
whenever they want: there are school rules and protocols that 
restrict the learner’s access to resources. Finally, and again 
as reflected in the French conversation learning example, a 
learner’s access to the Environment is mediated by that 
Environment’s Organization. This resource filter is more 
obvious in formal settings such as schools, where timetables 
and regulations have a strong influence on the ways in which 
learners interact with their environment. In the same way that 
there may already exist a relationship between the different 
157
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
resource elements in the outer circle of Figure 2, there may 
also exist a relationship between the filter elements. The 
coherence of the learner’s experience can be enhanced 
through careful consideration of the existing relationships 
between the filter elements and between the individual 
resource elements and their associated filter. All of the 
elements in any Ecology of Resources bring with them a 
history that defines them, as well as the part they play in the 
wider cultural and political system. Likewise, the individual 
at the centre of the Ecology of Resources has their own 
history of experience that impacts upon their interactions 
with each of the elements in the Ecology.  
IV. 
THE ECOLOGY OF RESOURCES MODEL IN USE 
The Ecology of Resources model offers a way to talk 
about learners holistically – to sensitize us to the range of 
interactions that constitute their contexts, to frame the 
participatory design process; to explore data to understand 
more about learners’ contexts; to identify the assistance that 
could be available and the way that learners’ interactions 
with it might be filtered and supported and to identify 
situations where scaffolding might be used. The Ecology of 
resources approach has been used in a variety of projects 
that include science learning in school, informal and formal 
learning in the developing world and home education in the 
UK.  
The example we draw upon here is that of the 
Homework project through which a system called 
HOMEWORK was developed. This was an interactive 
mathematics education system for children aged 5–7 years. 
The system used a combination of interactive whiteboard 
and Tablet PC technology, plus some bespoke software, 
consisting of lesson planning, control and home use 
components. The system contained a rich set of multimedia 
and associated interactive numeracy resources drawn from 
the popular television series called the Number Crew. 
Teachers used the software to link resources into lesson 
plans. In the classroom, the interactive whiteboard was used 
for whole class activities and each child also had their own 
Tablet PC for individual and small group activities. The 
teacher could control the classroom activity from their own 
Tablet PC and could allocate new activities or send 
messages to individuals or groups of children in real time. 
When planning each lesson the teacher could also decide 
upon homework activities and allocate them to individual 
children’s Tablets as appropriate. After school, the children 
took their Tablet PC home with them and used it at home or 
elsewhere; individually or with parents. At home, in 
addition to homework activity set by the teacher, the Tablet 
provided access to the resources the learner had used in 
class that day, the resources that they had used in previous 
sessions (irrespective of whether the child was actually in 
school or not) and information for parents about the learning 
objectives to which these activities related. There were also 
links to other relevant fun activities and a messaging system 
to support parent and teacher communication. The 
HOMEWORK system was developed incrementally and 
interactively with learners, teachers and parents. Each 
iteration gave the design team a clearer understanding of the 
interactions that made up the learning contexts of the 
children who the system was developed to support. It is 
described in some detail in [24]. Here, we use the example 
of the system that was the product of this development and 
its empirical evaluation to demonstrate its use of mobile, 
classroom and e-learning technologies and the manner in 
which the Ecology of Resources model of context can be 
used to model learner interactions and design technology 
use. 
Evaluations 
of 
the 
HOMEWORK 
system 
were 
conducted in different schools and classes throughout the 
system’s development. The evaluation on which we draw in 
this paper was conducted with a class of 32 children aged 5–
7 years. The research was exploratory and was concerned 
with understanding the nature of the learning interactions 
that learners, teachers and parents were able to engage in 
supported by the HOMEWORK system. There was no 
intention to set up a comparative control group trial.  
Multiple data sources were collected which included: 
logs maintained by the system; diaries maintained by 
parents; interviews with parents; and questionnaires 
completed by parents. In this example we focus upon the 
data that illustrate how the Tablets were used by children 
and their families outside the classroom. It is these data that 
can offer valuable information about the child’s wider 
learning experience across multiple locations, tools and with 
a variety of other people. 
The HOMEWORK system was used for three, hour-long 
mathematics lessons per week in school. The log data 
indicate that the Tablets were used at home, on average, 
slightly less than once a day for the equivalent of 25 
minutes a day. However, there was great variability in both 
session length and in the total time children spent using the 
Tablets during the research period. The diaries maintained 
by parents indicate that the most common time for the 
Tablet to be used was weekday evenings (after 5.30 pm) and 
during the daytime at weekends. These diaries also reveal 
that the Tablet was most often used at a table located in a 
communal space such as a lounge, and that mum was the 
person who most frequently helped children with their 
Tablet activities.  
There was also evidence of learning gains during the 
time the HOMEWORK system was in use. These can be 
seen in the changes in children’s scores in a pre-test and 
post-test set by the teacher. The mean scores for the 
youngest children (5–6 years of age) increased by 17 per 
cent between the start of the study (T1) and the end of the 
study (T2); and for the older children (6–7 years of age) by 
26 per cent, as illustrated in Figure 3.  
In addition to these test scores, parents’ comments in the 
diaries they maintained and during interviews also suggest 
that children’s learning may have benefited during the 
158
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Homework project studies. For example, a parent 
commented about her daughter Jane: 
 
“Jane wanted to go through the videos of the number 
crew.  Jane has definitely found having the PC a 
more interesting way of doing maths, as with most 
things, seeing and having an active part to play 
means more than just listening. Jane said that she had 
learnt a lot this weekend and showed me ½s and = 
and 10s and 100s counting on and backwards and 
you could tell how pleased she was with herself.  
Jane cleaned the PC and is taking great care of it.” 
 
In the interviews with the class teacher there are also reports 
that reflect the teacher’s belief that children are benefiting 
from their use of the HOMEWORK system. The findings 
from the interviews, both with parents and teachers, provide 
confirmation of the pre-test/post-test data. 
 
Figure 3 Average test scores pre and post system use  
 
A. Family Case Study 
In addition to this data about learning gains and how, 
when and where the tablets where used, the project team also 
wanted to explore more about the nature of the way in which 
the system may have supported learning, and the range of 
interactions that the HOMEWORK system was able to 
support. The multiple data sources were therefore pulled 
together to produce narrative family case studies. We discuss 
an excerpt from one such case study here to illustrate one 
family’s use of the system in more depth. This narrative is 
about a learner — Robert, and his family — and the way that 
they used the HOMEWORK system through the Homework 
Tablet. The narrative is constructed from the data logged by 
the Homework Tablets and the entries made in the diary kept 
by the family. The timings for the length spent on activities 
are rounded down to the nearest minute. The ‘…’ symbol 
indicates where there is a day’s entry in the full narrative that 
is not part of this extract.  
 
1) Robert’s Story (an excerpt) 
Robert is 5 years old and lives at home with his parents 
and two brothers.  
 
It’s Wednesday and Robert has used his Tablet PC in 
school this morning, from 11.20am, working on an 
activity about estimating a number of objects.  He 
watched a video to begin with and then worked 
through activity number 7. He completed activity 
number 7 at level 1 for 5 minutes, skill number 7 at 
level 1 for 3 minutes, activity number 7 at level 2 for 
2 minutes, skill number 7 at level 2 for 3 minutes and 
activity number 7 at level 3 for a little over 2 
minutes. He finished at 11.45am. 
 
Robert takes his computer home this evening and 
uses it at 6.10pm.  He works in the lounge, sitting on 
the floor with his Tablet PC on the coffee table, with 
his grandmother and brother.  He works on the 
‘Number Themes’ digital camera homework for 
about 15 minutes (6.10pm – 6.25pm). This asked 
him to look for numbers in his home and to take 
photographs using the camera integrated into the 
Tablet PC. He takes 2 photos, which do not come out 
very well.  Mum says there was not enough light to 
take photos (in diary).  He then has a look at the 
other homework activity called ‘Number Bags’ at 
about 6.35pm. 
… 
 
Friday - Robert’s teacher uses the HOMEWORK 
system for the maths lesson today and starts the 
session with the whole class together sitting on the 
floor in front of the interactive whiteboard singing 
the Number Crew song, watching a video and 
completing a numeracy activity. Each child then 
returns to their seat and uses their individual Tablet 
PC. Robert uses his Tablet PC this morning at 
11.45am for about 20 minutes. The teacher has set 
some homework and Robert looks at this while the 
teacher explains it to the class. The homework 
activities for this week are called  ‘Numbers are 
everywhere’, which involves using the Tablet PC 
camera to take pictures out of school of numbers up 
to 100 around the house and then complete a 
worksheet; an interactive activity called ‘Ten Down’; 
and a video called ‘Storm and Seasickness 1’. Robert 
has a practice with the camera, for about 10 minutes, 
and takes and looks at some pictures.  
 
Robert takes his Tablet PC home for the weekend 
today. He uses it when he arrives home from school 
at 3.45pm.  He works at the kitchen table with his 
brother.  He looks at the fun activities and the 
homework.  He then spends 25 minutes doing the 
‘Ten Down’ homework activity (see Figure 4), from 
about 3.50pm – 4.15pm and briefly looks at the 
‘Numbers are everywhere’ camera homework sheet.  
He turns on his PC again at 5.20pm and once again 
159
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
works at the kitchen table, this time with Mum.  He 
looks at the ‘Numbers are everywhere’ homework 
again, has a 2-minute go with the camera, during 
which he records a video and then has another little 
play with the ‘Ten Down’ activity for 10 minutes.  
This involves a lot of exploration as Robert looks at a 
number of different activities for a few minutes each.  
He keeps coming back to the Tablet PC: he plays for 
about 20 minutes at 5.35pm, then 10 minutes at 
6.10pm, then again for about 10 minutes at 6.50pm. 
Mum says he really enjoyed the ‘Ten Down’ activity 
and grasped it quickly.  The day’s session finally 
ends at 7pm. 
 
 
Saturday Robert uses his PC again on Saturday 
morning, turning it on briefly at 8.40am when he 
returns to the ‘Ten Down’ exercise for 5 minutes, 
working in the lounge. At 10.30 am he works at the 
kitchen table with his Nanny and wants to repeat the 
‘Ten Down’ activity as he had enjoyed it.  He also 
explores a little more and looks at the fun activities 
and the activities that he did at school yesterday. He 
has another look at the ‘Numbers are everywhere’ 
worksheet, and takes a picture with the Tablet PC 
camera.  
 
 
 
Figure 4 Ten Down activity 
 
Robert’s story offers an unusual and valuable insight 
into technology use out of school. It illustrates that he made 
use of the flexibility offered by the technology and used his 
Homework Tablet in a variety of locations, and at different 
times throughout the day. He could choose when and where 
to work on his numeracy within the constraints negotiated 
with his family. Sometimes he worked on an activity for a 
minute or two and on other occasions for longer. Robert 
worked on the homework activities set by the teacher, but 
did more besides and was able to choose what he wanted to 
work on, could show it to his other family members and, in 
so doing, behaved independently. He used the Tablet PC 
review activities completed in the past, both at school and at 
home: these activities might be whole class, small group or 
individually based and might use the fixed whiteboard 
technology or the mobile Tablet PC technology.  
 
The nature of the technology is not the 
differentiating factor of Robert’s learning experience. The 
homework system, with its combination of technologies, 
linked each learner’s experiences at school with their 
experiences outside school, and helped provide conceptual 
coherence, so that the knowledge learnt at school was made 
relevant for home, too, and not seen as something that was 
only for formal school education. The empirical analysis 
also highlighted the fact that the experience that a learner 
has, when using a particular piece of content, is part of its 
personalization for that learner. So whilst two learners may 
both watch the same video clip or complete the same 
worksheet in their homes, their experience of this will be 
different owing to the interactions that surround their 
experience, such as the conversations they have with their 
sibling about the video clip or the comment that Mum 
makes whilst they are completing the worksheet. There can 
be no assumptions made about content that works well in 
school working equally well, or in the same way, when this 
same content is used outside school. The content needs to be 
adapted if the learning interactions we want learners to 
engage in are to be integrated both inside and outside 
school.  
 
One of the important possibilities afforded by new 
technology is that it can also link together the people who 
are acting as MAPs in the different locations that comprise a 
learner’s context. In the Homework project example this 
would mean linking parents and family members with the 
teacher and assistant, for instance. In fact this was achieved 
through various mechanisms: for example, there was a 
messaging service available with the tablet PC through 
which staff and parents could communicate; those at home 
could view the material seen by the child at school and look 
at the activities that they had completed, and vice versa for 
the teacher, who could view what the child had done at 
home. To make the most of this potential to link MAPs 
together across locations it is also necessary to increase our 
understanding of these MAPs and how learners engage them 
in their learning. 
For example, at the end of the study, Robert’s mother 
reported that he very much enjoyed his numeracy work. She 
also reported that the amount that Robert talked about 
numeracy had increased from that before he had the Tablet 
PC and that his requests for help and her provision of 
assistance had also increased. 
All parents whose children took part in the study were 
asked to complete a numeracy attitude questionnaire at the 
beginning of the study.  Those that returned a completed 
questionnaire (n= 29) were sent a second, identical post-
study questionnaire.  Nineteen parents also completed both 
questionnaires and their post-study answers were compared 
 
160
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
against their pre-study answers. Each question was asked 
against a 5 point Likert scale ranging from ‘Not at all’ to 
‘Very much / All the time’. One of the questions parents 
were asked was concerned with their child’s requests for 
help. This is an important element of the learner’ 
interactions with their more able partners, such as parents 
and other family members. These interactions are key to the 
Zone of Collaboration and to the Ecology of Resources 
model of context. This question was: 
 
Q6. My child asks for help with their numeracy homework 
 
The average parental answer to Q6 about help changed 
from pre to post study more than any other question and in a 
positive direction, indicating that children were asking for 
more help when doing their numeracy work with the 
HOMEWORK system than they had done previously. 
Parents also reported that children were choosing to work 
on their numeracy more without parents asking them, and in 
preference to other subjects. They reported that their 
children’s interest had increased and that their children 
enjoyed their numeracy work. 
One of the major aims of the HOMEWORK system 
development process was to build a model of the learner’s 
interactions that could take into account their interactions 
across multiple locations and with multiple other people. In 
particular, the technology was developed to help link each 
learner’s experiences at school with their experiences 
outside school, and to help provide conceptual coherence, so 
that the knowledge learnt at school was made relevant for 
home, too, and not seen as something that was only for 
formal school education. The system also extended the 
application of the scaffolding concept beyond the learner to 
explore the possibility of scaffolding parental interactions 
with their children, and to help family engagement and 
communication with the school.  
The HOMEWORK system interface on the Tablet PC 
mapped out some of the resources that could be accessed 
through the Tablet PC by a learner and those helping that 
learner. Figure 5 illustrates this and shows that the resources 
available are categorized as those that arise from the child’s 
interactions when at school, those that represent the history 
of that child’s interactions inside and outside school, 
activities that are part of the Homework set by the teacher 
and fun activities. There is also a messaging facility for 
communications with the teacher. These represent the ZAA 
resources offered by the HOMEWORK system software 
through the Tablet PC. Interactions between the learner and 
other resources, such as the learner’s family, and features of 
their environment can also be supported through the Tablet 
PC, as illustrated in the description of Robert’s interactions. 
 
 
Figure 5 The HOMEWORK system interface when the 
tablet is out of range of the classroom network 
 
As we stressed in earlier discussions about the role of 
the More Able Partner, the process of selecting resources to 
enable the construction of a ZPA is a negotiation between 
learners and More Able Partners. In a situation such as that 
described by the Homework case study, it is clear that in the 
out-of-school environment there may be various people who 
play the role of the More Able Partner at different points 
during the learner’s interactions. Likewise, in the school 
environment, there will be the teacher, classroom assistant, 
peers, other teachers and parent helpers, each of whom may 
also fulfill the role of the More Able Partner at different 
points in time. The HOMEWORK system was designed to 
support both the child’s learning and to support those in the 
position of the child’s More Able Partner. It also had a part 
to play in the negotiation of the learner’s ZPA with, and 
between, those playing the role of the child’s More Able 
Partner, through, for example, the provision of information 
for parents and teachers about what each had done with the 
learner at home and at school. The ability to replay and 
review completed activities also offers each person acting as 
the learner’s More Able Partner the ability to see what the 
child has done when either working alone or with another.  
This emphasis upon the interactions between the 
different resources that a learner encounters is at the heart of 
the Ecology of Resources model that was used in the 
analysis of the data. Figure 6 illustrates the Ecology of 
Resources model for an extract of Robert’s experience with 
the HOMEWORK system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The Homework project has been used in this article as 
an example case study to demonstrate the empirical 
grounding of the Ecology of Resources model. The data 
from the project was also used to develop guidelines for the 
use of technology to support parental engagement. In 
161
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
particular, the data and findings was combined with findings 
from another large study in the UK and reported in [25]. 
These includes, for example, highlighting the need for: 
 
“- Carefully designed, parent focused support. 
- Understanding what parents really need in order to help 
them get involved. 
- Ensuring that continuity between in school and outside 
school is built, e.g. through carefully designed activities that 
aim to make work done at school relevant to the home 
context.” 
[25] 
The findings presented in this paper draw upon fresh 
data examples and extend the discussions previously 
published in [26]. 
The definition of context that is discussed in this paper 
recognizes the interconnectedness of all the elements with 
which learners interact and the way in which these 
interactions shape our understanding of the world. Context 
should be considered as something that is defined with 
respect to an individual person:  
“it spans their life. A person’s context is made up of 
the billions of interactions that they have with the 
resources of the world: other people, artefacts and 
their environment. These resources provide ‘partial 
descriptions of the world’ with which the learner can 
build connections through their interactions. These 
interactions 
help 
the 
learner 
to 
build 
an 
understanding of the world that is distributed across 
both resources and interactions: a distributed 
understanding that is crystallized with respect to a 
particular 
individual 
through 
a 
process 
of 
internalization.” 
[5] 
The Ecology of Resources model is offered as an 
abstraction that represents part of this reality for a learner, 
an abstraction that can be shared between social and 
technical researchers and practitioners to support analysis 
and to generate system design. It is concerned with learning 
and considers the resources with which an individual 
interacts as potential forms of assistance that can help that 
individual to learn. These forms of assistance are 
categorized as being to do with Knowledge and Skills, 
Tools and People and the Environment. These categories are 
not fixed, but rather offer a useful way of thinking about the 
resources with which a learner may interact and the 
potential assistance that these resources may offer. This 
emphasis upon the potential assistance that resources might 
offer highlights that it is the role that a particular resource 
element plays that is important, rather than its particularity. 
This emphasis upon context and the roles played by 
resources elements, including technologies, and upon the 
interactions between these resource elements means that the 
Ecology of Resources model could act as an integrative 
approach for Mobile Hybrid and On-line Learning. In this 
way the focus of the design process highlights the manner in 
which the resources and the relationships between them can 
be scaffolded and adjusted in order to meet the needs of the 
learner and to form their Zone of Available Assistance 
(ZAA).  
The Ecology of Resources model is the basis for a 
design framework that offers a structured process through 
which educators and technologists can develop technologies 
and technology-rich learning activities that take a learner’s 
wider context into account. This offers a basis upon which 
Distributed Scaffolding can be built. The process is 
participatory and iterative (for full detail see [5]).  
 
 
 
162
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 6 An example of an Ecology of Resources model of Robert’s interactions with the HOMEWORK system. 
VI. 
 
VII. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The Ecology of Resources has been developed 
through a number of empirical studies to which many 
others have contributed. In particular, we thank Joshua 
Underwood, Wilma Clark and Fred Garnett for their 
insightful and constructive thoughts and comments. 
The Homework project used in the example in this 
paper is indebted to the teachers, parents and children 
for their help with this study that was funded by an 
EPSRC/ESRC/DTI PACCIT grant number RES-328-
25-0027. We would also like to thank Joshua 
Underwood, Benedict du Boulay, Joe Holmberg, 
Lucinda Kerawalla, Jeanette O’Connor, Hilary Smith, 
Hilary Tunley and Catherine Luckin for their work on 
this project. Please note that children’s names have 
been changed in order to protect their anonymity. 
VIII. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Luckin, 2010. The Ecology of Resources Model of 
Context: A Unifying Representation for the 
Development of Learning-oriented Technologies. Paper 
presented Paper presented at eKNOW 2010, The 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-
line Learning. February 2010, Sint Maarten. 
[2] Mercer, N. (1992). Culture, context and the 
construction of knowledge in the classroom. In: Light, 
P. & Butterworth, G. (eds.) Context and Cognition: 
Ways of Learning and Knowing, Mahwah, NJ, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 28-46. 
[3] Wood, D., Underwood, J. & Avis, P. (1999) 
Integrated learning Systems in the Classroom. 
Computers and Education, 33 (2/3), 91-108. 
[4] Nardi, B. (1996) Studying Context: A Comparison 
of Activity Theory, Situated Action Models and 
Distributed Cognition. In: B. A. Nardi (ed.) Context 
and Consciousness. Activity Theory and Human-
computer Interaction. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, pp. 
69-102. 
[5] Luckin, R. (2010) Re-designing Learning Contexts: 
technology rich, learner-centered ecologies. London, 
Routledge. 
[6] Manovich, L. (2006) The Poetics of Augmented 
Space. Visual Communication, 5 (2), 219-240. 
[7] Vygotsky, L. S. (1986) Thought and Language. 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
[8] Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The 
Development of Higher Psychological Processes. 
Trans. Cole, M., John-Steiner, V., Scribner, S. & 
163
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Souberman, E. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University 
Press.  
[9] Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S. & Ross, G. (1976) The 
Role of Tutoring in Problem Solving. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 17 (2), 89-100. 
[10] Bruner, J. (1984) Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal 
Development: The Hidden Agenda. In: Rogoff, B. & 
Wertsch, J. V. (eds.), Children's Learning in the ‘Zone 
of Proximal Development’. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 
pp. 93-97. 
[11] Saxe, G. B., Gearhart, M. & Guberman, S. R. 
(1984). The social Organisation of early Number 
Development. In: Rogoff, B. & Wertsch, J. V. (eds.) 
Children's Learning in the ‘Zone of Proximal 
Development’. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, pp. 19-30. 
[12] Valsiner, J. (1984) Construction of the Zone of 
Proximal Development in adult-child joint Action: The 
Socialisation of Meals. In: Rogoff, B. & Wertsch, J. V. 
(eds.) Children's Learning in the ‘Zone of Proximal 
Development’. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, pp. 65-76. 
[13] Wood, D. J., Bruner, J. S. & Ross, G. (1976) The 
Role of Tutoring in Problem Solving. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 17 (2), 89-100. 
[14] Wertsch, J. V. (1984) The Zone of Proximal 
Development: Some conceptual Issues. In: Rogoff, B. 
& Wertsch, J. V. (eds.) Children's Learning in the 
‘Zone of Proximal Development’. San Francisco, 
Jossey-Bass, pp. 7-18. 
[15] Wood, D. J. (1980) Teaching the young Child: 
Some Relationships between social Interaction, 
Language and Thought. In: Olson, D. (ed) Social 
Foundations of language and cognition: Essays in 
Honor of J.S. Bruner. New York, Norton. 
[16] Wood, D., Shadbolt, N., Reichgelt, H., Wood, H. 
& Paskiewitz, T. (1992) EXPLAIN: Experiments in 
planning and instruction. Society for the Study of 
Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour 
Quarterly Newsletter, 81, 13-16. 
[17] Koedinger, K. R., Anderson, J. R., Hadley, W. H. 
& Mark, M. A. (1997) Intelligent tutoring goes to 
school in the big city. International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 8, 30-43  
[18] Li, D. & Lim, C. (2008) Scaffolding online 
historical inquiry tasks: A case study of two secondary 
school classrooms. Computers and Education, 50, (4), 
1394-1410 
[19] Nussbaum M., Alvarez, C., McFarlane, A., 
Gomez, F., Claro, S. & Radovic, D. (2009) Technology 
as small group face-to-face Collaborative Scaffolding, 
Computers & Education, 52, 147-53 
[20] Azevedo, R., Moos, D.C., Winters, F.W., Greene, 
J.A., Cromley, J.G., Olson, E.D. & Godbole-
Chaudhuri, P. (2005) Why is externally-regulated 
learning more effective than self-regulated learning 
with hypermedia? In: Looi, C-K. McCalla, G. 
Bredeweg, B. & Breuker, J. (eds.) Artificial 
Intelligence in Education: Supporting Learning 
through intelligent and socially informed Technology. 
Amsterdam, Netherlands, IOS Press, pp. 41-48.  
[21] Wood, H.A. & Wood, D. (1999) Help seeking, 
learning and contingent tutoring. Computers and 
Education, 33, 2–3, 153-69. 
[22] Puntambekar, S. & Kolodner, J. L. (2005). 
Distributed scaffolding: Helping students learn science 
by design. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
42, (2), 185-217 
[23] Tabak, I. (2004) Synergy: A complement to 
emerging patterns. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 
13, (3), 305-35. 
[24] Luckin, R., du Boulay, B., Underwood, J., 
Holmberg, J., Kerawalla, L., O’Connor, J., Smith, H. 
and Tunley, H. (2006) Designing Educational Systems 
Fit for Use: A Case Study in the Application of Human 
Centred Design for AIED. International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 16, 353-80. 
[25] Lewin, C. & Luckin, R. (2010) Technology to 
support parental engagement in elementary education: 
Lessons learned from the UK . Computers and 
Education Vol 54, Issue 3, Pages 749-758 
[26] Luckin, R. (2008) The learner-centric Ecology of 
Resources: A Framework for 
using Technology to scaffold Learning. Computers & 
Education, 50, 449-62. 
164
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 2 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

