32
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Rule-Based Detection of Health-related Problems of People with Dementia from 
Lifestyle Wearables: The support2LIVE Approach 
Lampros Mpaltadoros, Vasilis Alepopoulos, Antonios Pliatsios, Angelos V. Vasileiadis,  
Thanos G. Stavropoulos, Spiros Nikolopoulos, and Ioannis Kompatsiaris 
Information Technologies Institute (ITI) 
Centre for Research & Technology Hellas (CERTH) 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
{lamprosmpalt, valep, apliatsios, angelvasileiad, athstavr, nikolopo, ikom}@iti.gr
Abstract— In this paper we describe a rule-based framework for 
the detection of Health-related Problems of people with 
dementia, developed in the support2LIVE project. The 
framework combines a novel ontology for lifestyle data (steps, 
sleep duration and heart rate measurements) and Health-
related Problem representation, a framework for IoT data 
collection from sensors, a Knowledge Ingestion component that 
links the data through meaningful relationships and a novel set 
of SPARQL Inferencing Notation (SPIN) Rules to infer 
problems from these data. Both the ontology and the rule set are 
designed based on clinical expert knowledge in the field of 
dementia. More specifically, lifestyle data is acquired from 
wearable devices available in the market, making the system 
affordable and convenient. A model based on Semantic Web 
technology, OWL (Web Ontology Language), is used to 
formally represent and integrate sensor measurements, 
promoting interoperability with other models and data 
exchange. SPIN rules offer the benefit of simplicity and 
flexibility as opposed to other rule representations in the 
domain. Our framework handles the incoming IoT data from 
the sensors with the use of suitable APIs and contains a 
Knowledge Ingestion component that transforms the received 
data to semantic knowledge in the form of RDFs. Finally, a 
clinician dashboard visualizes results to allow decision making, 
as shown in proof-of-concept scenarios from real participants in 
the support2LIVE pilots. 
Keywords- Ontology; Event Detection; Semantic Web; SPIN; 
Reasoning; Rule-Based Systems; Dementia. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As the world population is rapidly aging, people living 
with dementia globally amount to 50 million in 2019 and are 
expected to triple to 150 million by 2050 [2]. Yet there is no 
silver bullet for dementia, such as a pharmacological 
solution. Only holistic and objective information about a 
patient’s health status can drive tailored interventions to 
alleviate the ailments and slow down the progression of the 
disease. However, this imposes a huge burden to informal 
caregivers and healthcare professionals to manually monitor 
lifestyle, and Health-related Problems such as movement, 
sleep and stress. 
Lifestyle sensors are a promising and affordable solution 
to objectively, continuously and affordably monitor patients, 
but a framework to map and extract clinical Health-related 
problems is needed. The acquisition of knowledge from 
continuous and heterogeneous data flows is a prerequisite for 
Internet of Things (IoT) applications [2][3][4]. Semantic 
technologies provide integrated tools and methods for 
representing data and producing new Knowledge from them. 
Smart environments are increasingly encountering in 
healthcare technologies at home in actions that create better 
living conditions for older people by using IoT technologies, 
such as Active and Healthy Ageing (AHA) and Ambient 
Assisted Living (AAL). In this context, human activity 
recognition plays a main role [4], because it could be 
considered as a starting point to facilitate assistance and care 
for people with dementia. Due to the nature of human 
behavior, it is necessary to manage the time and adhere to the 
spatial restrictions.  In doing so, semantic technologies enable 
expressive reasoning over health data, allowing clinical 
decision support to be realized. Ontologies are used to 
describe the context elements of interest (e.g., persons, 
events, activities, location, time), their pertinent logical 
associations [6], as well as the background knowledge 
required to infer additional context information. 
In this paper, we propose a Semantic framework for 
Health-related Problem detection that combines ontologies 
and SPARQL Inferencing Notation (SPIN) Rules [7]. 
Ontologies are used to provide the common vocabulary for 
representing activity related contextual information, whereas 
SPIN rules derive high-level activity interpretations. SPIN is 
used as a standardized declarative language able to address 
the limitations of the standard OWL Semantic Web 
technologies mentioned previously. More specifically, the 
temporal relations among activities are handled by SPARQL 
functions, whereas the derivation of new composite activities 
exploits the native capabilities of SPARQL to update the 
underlying activity model. 
The SPIN language was chosen to implement this system 
because 
it 
combines 
concepts 
from 
object-oriented 
languages, query languages, and rule-based systems to 
describe the behavior of objects on the web of data and the 
Internet of Things [8]. In addition, it makes the rules 
accessible and easy to maintain, extend and share. A suitable 
Reasoner tool, such as the SPIN Application Programming 
Interface (API), can extract the extra information generated 
by the rules and reuse it, for example, in executing a 
SPARQL query, thus generating new knowledge. These rules 
apply using SPARQL CONSTRUCT or SPARQL UPDATE 
requests (INSERT and DELETE). SPIN standards also make 
it possible to define such rules in higher level domain specific 
languages, so that rule designers do not have to work directly 
with SPARQL. 

33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In [1], we presented our SPIN/SPARQL rules for health 
problem detection and tested them in real data coming from 
sensors. In this paper, we expand our framework to include 
components such as the IoT data collection, which collects 
the data coming from various sensors with the use of APIS, 
the Knowledge Ingestion component, which “translates” the 
collected data to RDF triples and the visualization dashboard, 
which can be used by clinicians to monitor their patients 
The approach is employed in support2LIVE [9], a project 
which aims to integrate wearable devices and smartphone 
apps to support timely assessment and intervention of elders 
in the spectrum of dementia. A proof-of-concept scenario on 
how visualizations of the detected problems aids clinical 
decision making is demonstrated using real-world data from 
the project’s pilot deployments in Thessaloniki, Greece. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents related work in the domain of ontology-based 
reasoning architectures in the Healthcare field. Section III 
describes the proposed System architecture that combines 
OWL ontologies and SPARQL rules in order to derive high-
level activity interpretations. Section IV presents the use case 
scenario that evaluates the proposed architecture. Finally, 
Section V provides our conclusions and proposed future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In previous related studies, Semantic Web technologies 
have been used to represent knowledge from home healthcare 
systems. Related projects incorporating these technologies 
are KnowSense [10], COSAR [11], ACTIVAGE [12], 
Dem@Care [13], Faber [6], and FallRisk [14]. Table 1 
summarizes the Aim of these Projects and the Methodology 
of semantic technology used respectively. 
 
Table 1 - Related Work 
Project 
Year 
Aim 
Methodology 
KnowSense 
2015 
Activity 
Recognition in 
Healthcare 
system 
Description Logic 
Reasoning, (DL) for 
activity detection and 
SPARQL queries to 
extract clinical 
problems 
COSAR 
2011 
Activity 
Recognition in 
in context-
aware 
environments 
Ontological reasoning 
is also combined with 
statistics 
ACTIVAGE 
2017 
Development 
of Smart Living 
solutions for 
active and 
healthy aging 
Interoperable 
Ontologies, rule-based 
reasoning 
Dem@Care 
2015 
Supporting 
independent 
life for elderly 
Interoperable 
Ontologies, Rules, 
Reasoning 
people with 
dementia 
FABER 
2015 
Detect 
abnormal 
behaviors for 
medical 
applications 
Simple reasoning on an 
ontology 
FallRisk 
2015 
Detect falls of 
elderly in smart 
homes 
Semantic Reasoning 
techniques 
 
KnowSense supports monitoring of the activities of 
elderly people with dementia in controlled and diffused 
environments. Semantic Web technologies, such as OWL 2, 
are widely used in KnowSense in order to display sensor and 
specific application observations, as well as to implement 
solutions for identifying activities and identifying problems 
in everyday life activities (Instrumental Activities of Daily 
Living, IADLs) with the aim of clinical evaluation, in various 
stages of dementia. Description (Logic Reasoning, DL) 
reasoning for activity detection and SPARQL questions are 
used to extract clinical problems. On the other hand, the 
semantic techniques that KnowSense uses cannot be easily 
extended and re-used. 
COSAR provides a solution based on the use of 
ontologies and ontological reasoning combined with 
statistical conclusions. Simple patient activities are identified 
by statistical methods, such as selecting the most likely 
method compared to others. Ontological reasoning is also 
combined with statistics to identify complex activities that 
cannot be apparent only by statistical methods.  
ACTIVAGE is a large-scale pilot project, which aims to 
develop Smart Living solutions that positively affect active 
and healthy aging. The ACTIVAGE IoT Ecosystem Suite 
(AIOTES) project, is a set of techniques, tools and 
methodologies 
(rule-based 
reasoning, 
interoperable 
ontologies, etc.) that increases semantic interoperability at 
different levels between heterogeneous IoT platforms. The 
approach uses different mechanisms of reasoning that can 
improve the understanding of patients' heterogeneous data 
and help generate new knowledge by providing services to 
end users. 
Dem@Care provides a complete system consisting of 
heterogeneous sensors, designed to support independent 
living for the elderly with dementia or similar health 
problems. This approach incorporates a heterogeneous set of 
detection methods and technologies, including video, audio, 
in 
addition 
to 
normal, 
environmental 
and 
other 
measurements. Semantic technologies (e.g., rule-based 
reasoning) are used to process and analyze sensor data 
according to user requirements. This leads to feedback and 
decision support, which is communicated to end users 
through appropriately designed user interfaces. A variety of 
clinical scenarios and environments are supported, from 
short-term trials in hospital settings to long-term monitoring 
and support of daily living at home, for independent living. 

34
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
FABER is a pervasive system designed to detect 
abnormal behaviors for medical applications. It first 
computes events and actions from the available context data 
by using simple reasoning on an ontology. Computed 
boundaries, actions and events are sent to the knowledge-
based inference engine.  
In FallRisk, the main objective is to detect falls of elderly 
in smart homes. It relies on a platform that uses multiple 
learning-based fall detection systems. The results of these 
systems are filtered and put into an ontology that carries the 
context knowledge. The knowledge, including contextual 
information about the user, is then used to refine the fall 
detection. The strength of this approach, besides the 
combination of both techniques, is the compatibility with any 
fall detection technique. However, it solely deals with fall 
detection. 
Τhe above-mentioned systems use semantic rule-based 
mechanisms and provide solutions for activity and event 
recognition based on the use of ontologies and ontological 
reasoning. However, most methods are quite sophisticated 
and complex to express and to maintain due to rich logic 
support. For this reason, the SPIN language was selected for 
this study to create semantic rules. SPIN offers multiple 
advantages [6] [7]. SPIN rules offer the benefit of simplicity 
and flexibility as opposed to other rule representations. 
Moreover, SPIN is based on SPARQL, a well-established 
query language and protocol, which is supported by 
numerous engines and databases. Therefore, SPIN rules can 
be directly executed on the databases and no intermediate 
engines with communication overhead need to be introduced. 
Moreover, it has an object-oriented model that leads to better 
maintainable solutions. Specifically, the SPIN rule engine 
does not have to check all rules at all times, but instead rules 
are checked incrementally when new instances of a certain 
class are inserted (or modified) in the ontology. This leads to 
better rule execution performance. Furthermore, SPIN is a 
more promising de-facto industrial standard for the future of 
combining ontologies and rules, as it builds upon the 
widespread use of SPARQL.  
III. 
SEMANTIC REASONING APPROACH FOR  
HEALTH-RELATED PROBLEM DETECTION 
This section presents the proposed Semantic System for 
Health-related Problem detection with the aim of recognizing 
the activities of people with dementia through the use of 
different sensors and producing new knowledge by offering 
new services to end users of the system such as doctors, 
health professionals and patients. As shown in Figure 2, the 
raw data are collected by users (i.e., the patients with 
dementia) using various wearable sensors and smart home 
sensors. Afterwards, raw data are modeled on Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) ontologies and stored in the 
Knowledge Database (GraphDB) for the purpose of creating 
the System Knowledge Base. Then, the semantic analysis, 
which will be presented in the next section (Spin Rule 
Engine, Ontology and Rule reasoner, etc.), processes and 
interprets the data, enriching the Knowledge Base of the 
system. 
A. IoT Data Collection 
The data are collected from sensors installed in smart 
homes as well as from wearables. The sensors track the 
activities of the users unobtrusively. In that way, participants 
were able to perform their daily tasks without any external 
interference. Thus, acquiring data that correspond to 
everyday tasks without introducing bias in the behavior of the 
user due to the presence of sensors, our framework would 
simulate the everyday tasks of the participant at the highest 
possible level.  
The data collected through the available sensors can be 
classified into three distinct categories. These categories are:  
1. Activity of the patient/participant 
2. Sleeping behavior  
3. Cardiac activity  
 
As far as the activity of the user is concerned, the 
available sensors can provide measurements listed in Table 
2. 
 
Table 2 - Activity Metrics 
Metric 
Unit 
Steps 
Amount of steps 
Calories 
Amount of calories 
Distance Covered 
Amount of meters covered 
Elevation 
Amount of meters in height 
climb 
Sedentary Active State 
Minutes 
Light Active State 
Minutes 
Fairly Active State 
Minutes 
Very Active State 
Minutes 
 
Regarding the sleep pattern of the user, the data acquired 
provide records and deliver information listed in Table 3. 
 
Table 3 - Sleep Metrics 
Metric 
Unit 
Duration of sleep 
Minutes 
Efficiency of sleep 
Percentage 
Asleep Stage 
Minutes 
Time to Fall Asleep 
Minutes 
Awake Stage 
Minutes in stage 
Light Stage 
Minutes in stage 
Deep Stage 
Minutes in stage 
REM Stage 
Minutes in stage 
Awake Stage Count 
Count of stage in session 
Light Stage Count 
Count of stage in session 
Deep Stage Count 
Count of stage in session 
REM Stage Count 
Count of stage in session 
 

35
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Regarding the cardiac activity of the user, the data 
collected from the available sensors provide the metrics 
shown in  Table 4. 
 
Table 4 - Cardiac Activity Metrics 
Metric 
Unit 
Heart rate  
Beats Per Minute 
Fat Burn Zone 
Minutes in this Zone 
Cardio Zone 
Minutes in this Zone 
Peak Zone 
Minutes in this Zone 
Out of Range Zone 
Minutes in this Zone 
 
The sensor data are communicated on our databases 
through APIs, in order to be collected and processed properly. 
In that way, the data are grouped together and can be further 
processed in order to have sanity checks run on them, 
assuring the validity of their values before proceeding into 
the next steps. This procedure ensures that the data process 
pipeline produces reliable results in each step. 
 
B. Knowledge Ingestion 
Having acquired all the necessary raw information from 
all the available sensors, it is imperative to translate the raw 
data into meaningful representations. This procedure is called 
Knowledge Ingestion (KI) and is of crucial importance 
because it links the data through meaningful relationships, 
that are human understandable. These representations will act 
as a knowledge base, upon which more sophisticated and 
complicated relations will be built, thus providing semantic 
data logical relationships as well as acting as a logic base for 
further reasoning. 
The translation process from raw information to linked 
data representations, i.e., representations that provide 
“meaning”, is realized through the creation of RDF (Resource 
Description Framework) statements. An RDF statement is 
composed of three elements, often called a triplet. Through 
the use of a well-defined syntax, the relation between two 
different data segments is determined, via the use of a subject, 
a predicate and an object. The subject and the object elements 
represent the two different data segments that are going to be 
linked together, while the predicate element defines robustly 
the relationship between the two. Thus, each RDF Statement 
that is created, by using the proper subject, predicate and 
object, supplies the Knowledge Base (KB) with the correct 
relationship between the provided data. 
 The creation of multiple RDF statements that 
characterize the relationships between the data, leads to an 
extensive graph that describes all the possible relations 
between all the available data. Each data segment is 
represented by a node, and the relationship between two data 
segments (i.e., nodes) is represented by a node-linking line. 
An example of an RDF statement that exists in our 
Knowledge Base is shown in the block of code below.  
 
 
<rdf:Description 
rdf:about="http://www.semanticweb.org/ITI/ontologies/2021/2/CARL 
#Sleep_2020-05-237"><awake_minutes 
xmlns="http://www.semanticweb.org/ITI/ontologies/2021/2/CARL#" 
rdf:datatype="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#decimal">9 
</awake_minutes> 
</rdf:Description> 
 
 
The aforementioned example illustrates the way an RDF 
statement 
is 
structured 
in 
the 
Knowledge 
Base.  
This representation, written in an XML format, is robustly 
structured and well-defined, for each of the elements of the 
triplet that constitute an RDF statement. It can be seen from 
the input “Sleep_2020_05-237” that the participant has been 
awake for 9 minutes. The relationship between the subject 
and the object, that is the integer number 9, is defined by the 
predicate “awake_minutes”, that signifies the relationship 
between these two data segments. 
The corresponding graph of the aforementioned statement 
is shown in Figure 1 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 - Graph of an RDF statement in our Knowledge 
Base 
 
C. Ontology and Knowledge Base 
The proposed approach is built on top of emerging 
Semantic Web technologies. We started with the definition of 
system ontology for representing different elements of a 
healthcare system.  The goal of the ontology creation is the 
semantic visualization of all concepts related to activity 
recognition in the healthcare system, as well as the ability to 
act as a semantic information integration model derived from 
the system's sensors. A common practice in the development 
of ontologies is the reuse of existing models, so we relied on 
already developed and valid ontologies for developing a part 
of the supporting ontology. The following are an overview of 
the existing entities used: 
● 
Dem@Care [12]: An ontology to represent 
experimental protocols of diagnostic support and 
dementia diagnosis in a controlled environment. 
● 
SSN (Semantic Sensor Network) [14]: Contains 
the ontology SOSA (Sensor, Observation, Sampler 
and Actuator). These ontologies describe semantic 
sensors, actuators, sampling and their actions. It is a 
W3C recommendation and OGC application. 

36
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
● 
SmartHome [15]: This ontology is an extension of 
SSN ontology and focuses on the representation of 
spatial and time aspects of entities included in 
spaces with devices belonging to the smart home 
category. 
 
The system's ontology (Figure 3) is expressed in OWL 2 
(W3C, 2012), which is a representation language commonly 
used in the semantic community for entity development 
shows the hierarchy of entity classes and the hierarchy of its 
properties. Object attributes are relationships that link classes 
together, and data attributes link classes to simple values 
(such as integers, alphanumeric, dates, etc.). 
The main classes of ontology are Device, Event, 
HealthProblem, Person, and Profile. The Device represents 
the devices of the system. Event is a parent class for different 
Event-related classes. It has two subclasses Activity and 
Measurement. Activity contains the information of activities. 
Measurement 
includes 
instances, 
which 
represent 
information of measurements (Calories, Distance, Floor, 
HeartRate, Movement, Sleep, Steps). The HealthProblem is 
a parent class for different Health Problem - related classes. 
It consists of subclasses HeartProblem, MovementProblem, 
MultiProblem and SleepProblem. The class Person includes 
instances, which represents the type of Person of the system 
(Doctor, Patient). Finally, the class Profile includes 
information from users’ profile (Age, Gender, etc.). 
After adding Semantic Web technologies to the raw data 
and modeling them based on the system ontology, “Semantic 
Data” are stored in a semantic Graph Database, which 
constitutes the Knowledge Base of our system. For this 
purpose, we have chosen GraphDB, an enterprise ready 
Semantic Graph Database, compliant with W3C Standards. 
Semantic Graph Databases (also called RDF triplestores) 
provide the core infrastructure for solutions where modelling 
agility, data integration, relationship exploration and cross-
enterprise data publishing and consumption are important. 
Querying and reasoning are performed over stored RDF 
graphs with SPARQL language.  
 
Table 5 - A Priori Rule Base of the different semantic 
rules that describe the modeled activities 
 
 
Variables (number) 
Rule 
Problem 
1 
Duration in minutes 
Time to fall asleep 
in a day > 180 
Insomnia 
 
2 
Count of sleep 
interruptions 
Number of 
interruptions in a 
day > 10 
Restlessness 
 
3 
Duration in minutes 
Sleep total duration 
in a day> 480 
Too much 
sleep 
4 
Duration in minutes 
Sleep total duration 
in a day < 300 
Lack of 
sleep 
5 
Duration of “Nap” 
state in minutes 
Asleep in Naps > 
100 in a day 
Increased 
Napping 
6 
Occurrence of “Nap” 
State, Occurance of 
“Night Sleep” state 
Asleep in Naps end 
time < 2 hours from 
Sleep start time 
Nap close to 
bedtime 
 
7 
Time Asleep / Time in 
bed 
Sleep Efficiency < 
85 
Bad Quality 
Sleep 
8 
Step count, 
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps < 50 & Heart 
Rate > 90 (Fat Burn 
Zone) for duration 
> 300 
Stress or 
Pain 
9 
Heart Rate measure 
HR < 60 
Low Heart 
Rate 
10 
Step count, 
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps <1000 & 
Heart Rate < 80 for 
duration > 300 
Inactivity 
11 
Step count, 
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps < 500 & Heart 
Rate < 100 for 
duration > 800 
Lack of 
Movement 
12 
Step count 
Steps < 80 
Lack of 
Exercise 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 - Architecture of the proposed system 
 

37
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
D.  Analysis & Interpretation with SPIN 
We used the TopBraid composer [16], a tool for modeling 
and developing semantic data applications, to present the 
SPIN rules. TopBraid allows us to easily develop SPIN rules 
in the form of SPARQL queries, which is more readable than 
regular SPIN syntax. In practice, the following three code 
blocks act as examples in order to present in SPIN language 
three simple semantic rules that were applied to the system 
ontology.  
The following code block shows the implementation of 
SPIN rule for Sleep problem “Lack of Sleep”. Applying this 
rule produces the addition of a new property that represents 
the type of sleep problem “Lack of Sleep” in the objects of 
the ontology (users of a support system). If the patient's sleep 
duration is less than 300 minutes, then it is considered that 
there is a sleep problem (lack of sleep). 
 
SPIN rule for sleep problem “Lack of Sleep”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasSleepProblem "Lack of Sleep "} 
WHERE { 
    ?p a :Person . 
 
?p :duration ?d. 
 
FILTER (?d <300 )} 
 
The following rule in SPARQL and SPIN adds new 
knowledge to the system Ontology. If the sleep duration of 
the patient with dementia is greater than 480 minutes then we 
conclude that there is a sleep problem (too much sleep). 
 
SPIN rule for sleep problem “Too much Sleep”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasSleepProblem "Too much sleep "} 
WHERE { 
    ?p a :Person . 
 
?p :duration ?d. 
 
FILTER (?d >480 )} 
 
The following code block shows the implementation of 
the simple semantic rule “Lack of Exercise”. If the steps of 
the participant with dementia are less than 80 and we 
conclude that there is a lack of exercise. 
 
SPIN rule for problem “Lack of Exercise”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasProblem "Lack Of Exercise" } 
WHERE {  
?p a :Person . 
 
?p :steps ?st1. 
 
FILTER (?st1<80)} 
 
E. Visualization on Clinician Dashboard 
The final step and ultimate purpose of our developed 
Semantics system, is to provide to the clinician experts the 
appropriate tools in order to monitor the patients and allow 
them, through the information that our framework provides, 
to make the proper decision regarding the treatment course of 
each patient. In order to give the clinicians the ability to have 
an overview of the activities or their derived problems, we 
created a visualization dashboard, where all the necessary 
analytical metrics are provided in a coherent, robust and user-
friendly manner. As shown in Figure 4, the information about 
the patient’s activities are depicted through eye-friendly 
tables and charts. Our implementation tried to evade complex 
and tiresome tables with numbers, and translated all the raw 
information into visualizations that are easy to understand. 
     
Figure 3 - Classes of the proposed ontology 

38
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4 - Dashboard of Steps, Sleep and Problems generated 

39
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
USE CASE 
For the evaluation of the proposed architecture we 
consider the following use case scenario performed on real-
world data from participants recruited in the framework of 
the support2LIVE project. There were two patients with 
Dementia that were measured and evaluated. The duration 
of the first participant is for the full length of October 2020, 
while the measurements for the second participant is 
January 2021. The initial sensor data was modeled by using 
the system ontology and stored in the Knowledge Base. 
Then, the proposed semantic techniques were applied and 
in particular the semantic rules of the system were checked.  
Figure 5 shows the measurement of sleep minutes of 
Patient 1. Likewise, Figure 6 shows the measurement of 
sleep minutes of Patient 2, while Figure 7 presents their 
measurements of steps per day. All data are processed, and 
results are shown, in the form of health-related problems 
that the patient experiences during this time. 
Specifically, as shown in Figure 5 the first patient with 
dementia slept below the limit of 300 minutes (Table 5, 
Rule 4) on October 26. The results of these measurements 
are shown in Figure 8 with the creation and visualization 
of the "Lack of Sleep" problem. In addition, the patient 
slept above the limit set by Rule 3 (Table 5, 480 minutes) 
on October 3, and this resulted in the creation of the 
problem “Too Much Sleep”. This shows on example of 
how highlighting health-related problems from a dataseries 
would help the clinicians to efficiently and effectively 
detect issues that would otherwise take more time and 
examination. 
Regarding the second patient, as shown in Figure 6, the 
user slept below the limit of 300 minutes (Table 5, Rule 4) 
on January 3 and 7. The problems generated by the system 
for these measurements are shown in Figure 9 with the 
creation and visualization of the "Lack of Sleep" problem. 
In addition, the patient slept above the limit set by Rule 3 
(Table 5, 480 minutes) on January 2, and this resulted in 
the creation of the problem “Too Much Sleep”. Similarly 
to the previous case, our framework efficiently detects the 
underlying health-related problems in both activity and 
sleep. 
 
Figure 5 - Patient 1 Sleep 
 
Figure 6 - Patient 2 Sleep 

40
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Finally, in Figure 7, it is observed that on January 8 and 
20 the patient took a low number of steps. As a result, this 
measurement generates the problem (Rule 11) “Lack of 
Movement”, is shown in Figure 9. 
This example showcases the ability of the system to 
highlight problems of relatively high importance to the 
users. Specifically, this user’s steps are generally low 
everyday, but detected problem occurs and emphasizes 
only on the days of exceptionally low activity (as shown in 
Figure 7 and Figure 9), something that the human eye 
would not that easily and efficiently detect. 
 
 
      
 
 
 
Figure 8 - Patient 1, Problems Generated by the System 
 
Figure 9 - Patient 2, Problems Generated by the System 
 
 
Figure 7 - Patient 2 Steps 

41
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this paper, we presented our approach towards the 
definition of a semantic system for Health-related Problem 
detection that combines ontologies and SPIN Rules. 
Architectures related to the proposed framework are listed, 
and the advantages of using the SPIN language to create 
semantic rules are presented. The main purpose of the 
proposed architecture is to generate new knowledge from 
the original raw data, especially recognition of healthcare 
problems for people with dementia. The system is 
validated through a proof-of-concept use case scenario 
where a wearable sensor gathers data from a real 
participant, and the framework extracts the expected 
Health-related Problems. 
 
As future work, we plan to evaluate the framework in 
a formal clinical trial with real participants. Participants 
will be recruited in the spectrum of dementia, as well as 
healthy controls, and use the wearables for several months. 
The framework will be used to extract problems and 
clinical experts will evaluate its accuracy, usability and 
usefulness for the disease. In the long run, the system will 
be able to support decision making of the clinicians and 
facilitate 
them 
in 
adjusting 
non-pharmaceutical 
interventions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was co-financed by the European Union and 
Greek national funds through the Operational Program 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under 
the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE, project 
code: T1EDK-02668. 
 REFERENCES 
[1]  
A. Pliatsios, T. G. Stavropoulos, D. Strantsalis, V. 
Kassiano, S. Nikolopoulos, I. Kompatsiaris, “Detection of 
Health-Related Problems of People with Dementia from 
Lifestyle Wearables: A Rule-Based Approach”, The 12th 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, eTELEMED 2020, 21-25 November 2020, 
Valencia, Spain 
[2]  
A. Pliatsios, C. Goumopoulos, and K. Kotis, 
“Interoperability in IoT: A Vital Key Factor to Create the 
‘Social Network’ of Things,” in UBICOMM 2019, pp. 63–69, 
2019.  
[3]  
A. I. Maarala, X. Su, and J. Riekki, “Semantic 
Reasoning 
for 
Context-Aware 
Internet 
of 
Things 
Applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., 2017. 
[4]  
A. Pliatsios, C. Goumopoulos, and K. Kotis, “A Review 
on IoT Frameworks Supporting Multi-Level Interoperability. 
The Semantic Social Network of Things Framework,” Int. J. 
Adv. Internet Technol., vol. 13, pp. 46–64, 2020. 
[5]  
M. Ziaeefard and R. Bergevin, “Semantic human 
activity recognition: A literature review,” Pattern Recognit., 
2015,. 48(8), 2329-2345 
[6]  
K. L. Skillen et al., “Ontological user modelling and 
semantic rule-based reasoning for personalisation of Help-
On-Demand services in pervasive environments,” Futur. 
Gener. Comput. Syst., 2014, 34, 97-109. 
[7]  
H. Knublauch, J. A. Hendler, and K. Idehen, “SPIN: 
SPARQL Inferencing Notation,” W3C Member Submission, 
2011.  
[8]  
C. Fürber, & M. Hepp (2010, May). Using SPARQL 
and SPIN for data quality management on the semantic web. 
In International Conference on Business Information Systems 
(pp. 35-46). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
[9]  
The support2LIVE project: https://www.ypostirizo-
project.gr 
[10] 
G. Meditskos, T. G. Stavropoulos, S. Andreadis, and I. 
Kompatsiaris, 
“KnowSense: 
A 
semantically-enabled 
pervasive framework to assist clinical autonomy assessment,” 
in CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2015. 
[11] 
D. Riboni and C. Bettini, “COSAR: Hybrid Reasoning 
for Context-aware Activity Recognition,” Pers. Ubiquitous 
Comput., vol. 15, pp. 271–289, 2011. 
[12] 
G. Fico et al., “Co-creating with consumers and 
stakeholders to understand the benefit of internet of things in 
smart living environments for ageing well,” in IFMBE 
Proceedings, 2017. 
 [13] 
T. G. Stavropoulos, G. Meditskos, S. Andreadis, and I. 
Kompatsiaris, “Dem@Care: Ambient sensing and intelligent 
decision support for the care of dementia,” in CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, 2015. 
[14] 
F. De Backere et al., “Towards a social and context-
aware multi-sensor fall detection and risk assessment 
platform,” Comput. Biol. Med., 2015, 64, 307-320. 
[15] 
M. Compton et al., “The SSN ontology of the W3C 
semantic sensor network incubator group,” J. Web Semant., 
2012, 17, 25-32. 
[16] 
The TopBraid Composer Tool: 
https://www.topquadrant.com/products/topbraid-composer/ 
 

