24
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Leveraging Statistical Methods and AI Tools for Analysis of Demographic Factors 
of Opioid Overdose Deaths             
 
Amna Alalawi  
DMgmt in Strategic Leadership Program  
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
amna.alalawi@jefferson.edu 
Les Sztandera  
Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce  
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
les.sztandera@jefferson.edu
 
 
Abstract – AI is a machine learning approach that is 
applied to evaluate data, makes assumptions, and facilitates a 
predication at different scales. It plays a key role in data 
science to evaluate a range of past data through statistical 
analysis. In similar way, big data analysis is termed as a 
combination of various structured, unstructured data collected 
by companies that would support companies to evaluate future 
predictions and machine learning. Deaths from drug overdose 
including opioid overdose have been increasing at an alarming 
rate, and authorities still find tackling this problem an acute 
challenge. This paper applies Artificial Intelligence and 
statistical techniques to big data to identify the demographic 
and socio-economic factors that have led to the increasing 
number of drug overdose deaths in Allegheny County, 
Pennsylvania, United States. Using Artificial Intelligence 
software, we analyzed a dataset of over 3,500 patients 
alongside demographic and socio-economic variables to gain 
detailed insights into the issue, insights that we can generalize 
to craft solutions to this problem in both domestic and global 
communities. Our findings revealed patterns ranging from 
possible psychological and behavioral factors and drug use on 
weekends, a direct market supply effect on the number of 
deaths, age as a factor in most overdose incidences, the 
majority of the population are uninsured or unemployed, and 
live on the outskirts of Pittsburgh. These findings imply the 
need for authorities to offer educational workshops to 
individuals and their families about the dangers of the current 
drug epidemic and to design an effective policy for the 
oversight of drug market supply that includes taking firm 
action against violators. The research also showed that 
incidences of drug overdose by age is the least among Indian, 
but highest among White or African American people. The 
study further revealed that the habit and trend of drug 
consumption are very common among the White and African 
American communities. The importance different approaches 
of data analytics has enhanced on significant manner to 
evaluate the different aspects of Drug overdose and death 
cases.  
 
Keywords – data analytics; big data; opioids; drug overdose  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This extended research is based on the critical global 
healthcare issue of examining the opioid crisis, which was 
presented at the Eight Data Analytics 2019 Conference in 
Porto, Portugal [1]. Responding to the major interests from 
the public discussion in Porto, this research includes more 
statistical analysis of the relationship between socio-
demographic factors and opioid deaths in Allegheny 
County. Deaths caused by the opioid crisis have reached 
epidemic levels in the US, with more people dying from 
opioid overdose than by motor vehicle incidents, gun 
violence, or HIV [3]. In 2016, more than 42,000 Americans 
lost their lives as the result of a drug overdose, including 
613 Allegheny County residents, a rise in deaths of over 44 
percent as compared to previous year. This has largely been 
attributed to the presence of newer, stronger drugs such as 
fentanyl in US communities [10]. Local health officials have 
found it difficult to keep pace with the new drugs being 
introduced into common usage, especially the presence of 
fentanyl in most of the heroin sold on the streets. Fentanyl is 
extremely potent and can cause a fatal overdose on the first 
try for some users [10]. Today, drug abuse is indeed a major 
problem in the US. A study by the Center for Disease 
Control (CDC) clearly evidences the existence of this crisis, 
stating that in 2017, more than 47,000 people died of a drug 
overdose in the country [9]. It was found that more than 
2,000,000 Americans live with drug addiction, such as 
opioid addiction [10]. 
This study uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning techniques to explore a dataset containing 
information on 3,551 fatal incidents of opioid overdose in 
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, with the aim of finding 
ways to minimize the consequences of the opioid crisis in 
communities in the US and globally.  
Opioid overdose has become an epidemic in the US as 
well as Allegheny County [10]. In 2015, the country 
experienced more than 400 deaths, and from then, the trend 
continued to increase. Data showed that individuals affected 
were within the age range of 25 to 54 years old. It was 
found that there are plenty of opportunities that have not 
been taken full advantage of in terms of intervention for 
opioid users [17]. The authors recommended that screening 
for opioid and other drugs among adults involved in child 
welfare should be improved. Further, enhancing the ability 
of the direct care staff to identify opioid use and risk of 
overdose, as well as access to expert consultants should be 
increased to improve the effectiveness of the care 
mechanism.   

25
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In Section II of this paper, we discuss and highlight 
different statistical tools and methods used to carry out the 
investigation to study several demographic factors of those 
affected in Allegheny County. While Section III focuses on 
providing a thorough analysis of the data collected through 
various sources, Section IV highlights key findings of the 
study as well as trends in relation to the subject matter. 
Section V provides conclusion and recommendations 
pertaining to drug overdose in the community that can be 
used for prevention intervention. Drug overdose has 
continually exhibited an escalating trend in the US over the 
past years. From the year 1999 to 2017, an approximated 
number of 702,000 persons perished from drug overdose. In 
the year 2017 alone, about 70,000 people succumbed to 
death following drug overdose, making drug overdose one 
of the biggest causes of injury-related deaths in the US [12]. 
Out of these deaths, about 68% encompassed illicit opioid 
or prescription. The United States Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) is determined to addressing the 
challenges revolving around overdose, dependence and 
opioid and has developed five-point concrete strategy to 
address these issues namely; better pain management, better 
data, better treatment and recovery services, increased 
production of overdose reversers, and informed research. 
Based on this determination, various agencies within HHS 
have joined the effort. This study intends to discover how 
consumption of opioids and consequential deaths caused by 
the same are distributed amongst different demography, 
using Artificial Intelligence tools like data analytics and 
descriptive statistics. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
To gain greater insight into the social and economic 
factors that have increased the risk of fatal opioid overdose 
in Allegheny County, PA, we used multiple approaches 
utilizing AI and statistical software and programming 
languages, including IBM SPSS Analytics which is 
addressed as powerful statistical platform and it offers a 
great support in predictive analysis; IBM Watson Analytics 
that is a cloud-based smart data discovery solution that 
provides significant assistance in automates predictive 
analytics; Microsoft Power BI that is termed as a great tool 
to visualize a variety of data and provides more insights 
about different variables in data sets; Python that is 
identified 
high 
level 
general-purpose 
programming 
language; and IBM Cognos Analytics to explore the dataset, 
which contained information on 3,551 fatal incidents of 
opioid overdose in Allegheny County. 
The dataset, which covers opioid overdose deaths from 
the year 2008 to 2017, includes fatal accidental overdoses in 
the county and contains information on the date of death, the 
time of death, the manner of death, the age, gender, and race 
of the decedent, the seven most prevalent drugs found in 
overdose victims, the zip code of the overdose incident, and 
the zip code of the decedent’s residence [2]. To look further 
into this issue, we searched for other variables that may 
have a relationship with opioid overdose rates. These other 
variables can be divided into two general categories: climate 
and economic.  
The climate variables we examined were monthly 
average temperature and temperature departure from mean 
levels for the 2008-2017 base periods. This data was 
retrieved using the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration “Climate at a Glance” tool [4]. However, 
there were no findings that revealed a correlation between 
temperature and drug overdose, thus, these graphs were 
eliminated from the study. 
The economic indicators we examined were county 
unemployment rate and income inequality in the county 
(measured as a ratio of the mean income of the highest 
quintile of earners divided by the mean income of the lowest 
quintile of earners in the county). These two datasets were 
collected through the FRED Economic Data service of the 
St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank. The final variable 
examined in this category was the uninsured rate, data on 
which was sourced using the U.S. Census Bureau’s Small 
Area Health Insurance Estimates program [16]. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
It has proven valuable to first observe the overdose 
dataset by itself to get a full understanding of the situation 
and to provide a baseline against which to compare the 
climate and economic variables examined.  
The timespan of this dataset is from 01/03/08 to 
12/31/17, a total of 9 years, 11 months and 28 days. The key 
takeaway from the data is the age range of those affected by 
fatal drug overdose, which is an astonishing 1 to 91. The n 
for this dataset is 3,460. 
 
Figure 1. Overdose deaths in Allegheny Country, PA (2008-2017) 
 
Figure 1 indicates overdose deaths over the past several 
years have been increasing at an exponential rate. This 
cannot be explained simply by an increase in population as 
the population of Allegheny County has fluctuated over the 
past decade and has, in fact, not grown at all. The graph uses 
data from 2008 (the earliest year in which reliable data was 
collected) to 2017, to illustrate the rising trend in overdose 
deaths. 

26
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Across all ten years covered by the dataset, it becomes 
clear that the crisis appears to have two distinct peaks in 
terms of age: one among those in their 20s and 30s and 
another among those in their 50s.  
 
 
Number of Deaths by Age Category 
 
 
Figure 2. Number of deaths due to drug overdose by age  
 
Figure 2 shows the number of deaths due to drug 
overdose by age. The most common age for someone in the 
county to die of an overdose is 51, indicating that there is a 
slight skew toward the older of the two age peaks. 
Moreover, the standard deviation is 12.5, showing that most 
deaths occur within an approximately 24-year timeframe in 
mid-life. 
It is interesting to observe how age distribution across 
drug overdose deaths changes over time. The double peaks 
are not initially pronounced, but develop over time until 
2017, when they seem to disappear. It is also interesting to 
see how age range widens over the years as well, and how 
age distribution starts to skew toward younger people.  
Nonetheless, the opioid epidemic is more prevalent among 
men than women given that women accounted for a 
comparably low 31 percent of fatal drug overdoses in this 
timeframe.  
It is also clear that the overdose deaths in this county 
occur overwhelmingly among White Americans. However, 
it is worth looking at the demographics of the county overall 
to identify any major disparities. In Table I, we compare 
overdose deaths with county population data that closely 
aligns with U.S. Census data. While there may be some 
disparities in the total percentages due to non-matching 
categories, for the purposes of a “sanity check” on the 
proportions of overdose deaths in the dataset, the table 
serves its purpose.  
It appears that Asian and Hispanic ethnic groups are 
comparatively less affected by overdose deaths to a small 
degree and African Americans are more affected, again by a 
small 
amount. 
Meanwhile, 
White 
American 
are 
overrepresented as victims of overdose deaths by a larger 
difference than any other, although still not by a significant 
degree.  
TABLE I. PERCENTAGE OVERDOSE DEATHS BY 
RACE WITH COUNTY POPULATION DATA  
Race 
Percent of 
County 
Population 
Percent of 
Overdose 
Deaths 
Difference 
Asian 
4.0 
.2 
3.8% 
Black or 
African 
American 
13.4 
14 
-.06% 
Hispanic 
2.1 
.2 
1.9% 
White 
78.6 
85.5 
-6.9% 
 
 
Number of Deaths by Month 
 
 
Figure 3. Number of deaths due to drug overdose by month 
Figure 3 shows that April and August are the most 
common months when overdose deaths occur. The reasons 
for this are not obvious and warrant further investigation. 
However, other than August, there is a decline in deaths 
during the summer months, which may suggest a possible 
seasonal element in overdose deaths.  
Figure 4 shows the number of deaths by day of the week, 
the results collected here are perhaps unsurprising. Friday, 
Saturday, and Sunday see the highest number of overdose 
deaths. People are less likely to be working on these days 
and will thus have more leisure time and can cause them 
boredom and will think of think of things to fill their time. 
leisure time sedentary behavior is highly associated with 
alcohol, tobacco, and drug use among adolescents. Saturday 
and Sunday are also the days when people are most social, 
which, depending on the person, can involve alcohol or 
recreational drug use.  
The spike in overdose deaths that occurs at around 5 pm 
is also of interest and is portrayed in figure 5. This is when 
many people get out of work and there may be a connection 
here. The fact that most overdose deaths occur in the middle 
of the day is interesting as well, particularly the spike 
observed at 1 pm.  
 

27
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Number of Deaths by Days of Week 
 
Figure 4. Number of deaths due to drug overdose by day of week 
 
 
 
 
Number of Deaths by Time of Day 
 
Figure 5. Number of deaths due to drug overdose by time of day 
 
 
Frequency 
 
Figure 6. Top five zip codes for the locations of overdose deaths in the 
county during the period examined 
 
Figure 6 shows the top five zip codes for the locations of 
overdose deaths in the county during the period examined. 
They account for a substantial proportion of all overdose 
deaths, but overall distribution remains quite wide and 
dispersed.   
 
 
Frequency 
 
 
Figure 7. Top five zip codes for the residences of people who suffered a 
fatal drug overdose in Allegheny County during the period examined 
Figure 7 shows the top five zip codes for the residences 
of people who suffered a fatal drug overdose in Allegheny 
County during the period examined. They are the same as 
the zip codes identified as the top five locations of fatal 
overdoses. This overlap indicates that people tend to 
overdose in the zip code in which they live, which seems 
reasonable. Nonetheless, there are some differences in 
frequency and a far larger range of zip codes cover the 
residences of the decedents. So, some people do travel and 
then overdose, including from as far away as West Virginia 
and even Minnesota.  
 
Geographical Distribution of Uninsured Persons 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Map depicting the regions of the most uninsured in dark blue 
color verses the light blue color which shows insured people 
Figure 8 shows that most uninsured people live on the 
outskirts of Pittsburgh. The reason behind this could be so 
that they can easily avoid the law and thus ensure that they 

28
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
do not get caught buying and consuming drugs. In addition, 
since these areas are situated near the border areas, getting 
access to different types of opioid drugs and other such 
substances becomes simpler and easier for them. The dark 
blue color highlights the number of uninsured people. 
Herein it may also be said that majority of these individuals, 
living an uninsured life on the outskirts of Pittsburgh are 
also unemployed. They prefer living in this region, so that 
they do not have to perform any job, and so that they can 
gain easy access to drugs and other substances. A study 
released in 2017 on the lessons on the opioid epidemic 
states 
that 
misuse 
and 
use 
disorders were 
most 
common among those who were uninsured or unemployed, 
were low-income individuals, or had behavioral health 
problems [8]. 
IV. 
FINDINGS AND TRENDS 
This section highlights key findings of the study, as well 
as trends in relation to the subject matter as per the 
demographic variables tested. 
A. 
Gender and Race in Allegheny County and 
Overdose Deaths 
 
 
Drug Overdose Deaths by Gender 
 
Figure 9. A chart showing the number of deaths by gender in 
Allegheny County, PA 
Figure 9 analyzes the distribution between male and 
female in overdose deaths in Allegheny County. The study 
revalidates that overdose deaths are more amongst men, 
which make up around 69 percent of the total deaths. 
Women account for 31 percent of the total deaths. One can 
argue that the likelihood of good health or the prevalence of 
certain disorders is, in part, a product of gender. Certain 
health issues are unique to men; others affect men 
disproportionately compared to women; and still others have 
a different effect on men than on women. Examining gender 
differences is important in a study like this to help 
researchers in the future determine the overall co-factors 
that cause the development of drug overdose, and then 
death, and can shed the light on new insights. 
Drug Overdose Deaths by Race 
 
 
Figure 10. A pie chart showing number of deaths by race in Allegheny 
County, PA 
Figure 10 identifies the number of deaths by race. It is 
seen that White Americans represent the highest segment of 
the population that is affected among drug users and number 
of fatalities due to the opioid crisis. Racial groups usually 
have unique features that further influence their engagement 
in overdose drugs. This analysis can also give a general 
racial background of the county of Allegheny in 
Pennsylvania which is known for its high White American 
population, and this can infer on the socio-economic and 
demographic status of the county, that it is mostly populated 
by White Americans. This analysis can create a limitation to 
the research.  
 
Drug Overdose by Age & Race Distribution 
Figure 11. A bar graph showing drug overdose by age and race distribution 
in Allegheny County on four races 
Figure 11 shows that incidences of drug overdose by age 
is the least among Asians, but highest among White 
American and African American people. The average age of 
these individuals is 45 years. On this basis, it can be said 
that 45 years old White or Black Americans who live in 
Allegheny County are high-risk individuals for drug 

29
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
overdose, and even though Allegheny County is a developed 
region, there are a considerable number of people who still 
are taking excessive amounts of drugs. Similarly, the 
average age of Middle Eastern people is also 40 years. 
Cases of drug overdose among the Middle Eastern people is 
considerably high, and it is also considered one of the major 
markets for drug consumption. From the above information 
it can also be observed that these individuals start taking 
drugs from a very young age.  
 
Race Distribution by Unemployment Rate 
 
Figure 12. A bar graph showing drug overdose by unemployment rate 
 
 
Race Distribution by Uninsured Rate 
 
Figure 13. A bar graph showing drug overdose by uninsured rate 
Figures 12 and 13 show how the drug overdose death 
rate is influenced by the uninsured rate and unemployment. 
The unemployment rate determines the percentage of total 
labor force that is unemployed but actively seeking 
employment. From the above images, it can be observed 
that the uninsured and unemployment rates are considerably 
high among White Americans. This resulted in a significant 
increase in the death rate. At the highest level of uninsured 
rate, i.e. 10%, the number of deaths was very low.  
However, at the lowest uninsured rate, the rate of 
unemployment is very high. On this basis, it can be said that 
there is a direct relationship between uninsured and 
unemployment rate. Unemployed individuals are not able to 
afford to insure themselves. This creates a significant gap in 
the number of people who have an insurance cover and the 
ones who do not.  
A. B. Month to Month Fluctuations 
Looking at every year separately on IBM Watson, a cloud 
system for data analytics, another pattern emerges whereby 
months with abnormally high death counts are followed by 
months with abnormally low death counts, and vice versa. 
This may be related to the availability of drugs in the market 
so as the high level of addiction to drugs related to fentanyl 
and heroin has identified. The authorities have successfully 
taken down various platforms that were previously used to 
sell and buy drugs, but not a lot of information has been 
gathered in terms of the effects of such an action [5].   
Number of Deaths in Year 2017 
 
Figure 14. A visualization of the death rates of each month of the year 
2017 
In 2017, the aforementioned pattern was most visible in 
the months of August and September. August saw a high 
number of deaths and was followed by September, a month 
with lower deaths, which is the pattern we recognized 
through IBM Watson which we concluded that this could be 
related to market supply. When one particular month has a 
high death number, the following month is much lower, 
suggesting that the supply is lower in the market. As per the 
above chart, the month of August has higher number of 
death rate as compared to September. The year ended with 
relatively low death rates in comparison with previous 
months. As indicated above, this pattern was seen most 
visible in the months of August and September, even though 
we can see similar patterns in January and February, and 
then April and May. The conclusion is that drug addiction is 
so high that when drugs are available in the market, they are 
all consumed, which causes a shorter supply the following 
month, where drug overdose deaths slightly decrease. 
 

30
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Number of Deaths in Year 2013 
 
Figure 15. A visualization of the death rates of each month of the year 
2013 
As per the visualization in Figure 15, the year 2013 is a 
very good example of the potential oscillating trend, in 
which months with very high fatal drug overdose rates are 
followed by months with significantly lower overdose death 
rates.  
Number of Deaths by Month (2008-2017) 
 
Figure 16. A visualization of the number of deaths for each month of all 
the years of observation 
Looking at all the years examined together in Figure 16, 
we can confirm the pattern that shows that it may be due to 
the supply of drugs in the market, which causes fluctuation 
in deaths by months. Looking at August, for example, we 
see a peak in deaths, of which then September shows much 
lower deaths. As previously mentioned, this was also 
apparent when we studied each year separately on IBM 
Watson. There was a high indication that after a month of 
high deaths, the following month sees much lower deaths. 
The visualization in Figure 16 was generated using 
Microsoft Power BI.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumption of Drug Category OD1 by Race 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. A word cloud of the drug names consumed in the first 
category which was labeled as OD1. 
Figure 17 shows the consumption of one of the drug 
categories which was tested as part of the data analysis, and 
labeled as OD1, OD which stands for overdose, and had 
listed the names of the drugs which the patient consumed. 
We tested the drug names by race consumption. In the 
above image, which is a word cloud generated from IBM 
Cognos Analytics, it can be noted that White American 
people consume the most amounts of drugs.  A word cloud 
is a technology to visualize language or text data, which has 
recently gained increasing attention and more application 
opportunities in big data analysis [7]. It includes the likes of 
Fentanyl, Heroin, Alprazolam, Alcohol, Cocaine, and many 
more. A recent study confirms that Fentanyl-related 
overdose is on the rise nationwide and is a particularly 
pressing problem in the eastern part of the United States. 
The eastern U.S. heroin market consists largely of white 
powder heroin, which is easier to cut with fentanyl due to its 
color and consistency compared to western black tar heroin. 
In addition, Fentanyl is easier to produce than heroin, and 
can be smuggled in small batches, and offers high profit 
margins for sellers. Thus, these characteristics have 
contributed to its increased prevalence in U.S. drug markets 
[12]. Consuming drug has almost become a common 
practice among White people. Due to this reason, it may not 
be wrong to say that these individuals are the most exposed 

31
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to different health-related issues and deaths due to drug 
addiction and abuse. Consuming drug is also fairly common 
among people from Black or African American race. 
However, on the other hand, Asian people consume the least 
amount of OD1 drugs, as seen in the figure above. 
Similarly, consuming OD1 drugs is almost non-existent in 
Indian, and Middle Eastern people. People from other races 
that were not included in the current study also consumed 
the OD1 drug in a significant number. 
 
Consumption of Drug Category OD2 by Race 
 
 
Figure 18. A word cloud of the drug names consumed in the first 
category which was labeled as OD2 
Figure 18 shows the consumption of OD2, another 
category which was listed and labeled for drug names, and 
has been leveraged through IBM Cognos Analytics to 
analyze drug name by race, to reveal whether there is a 
pattern that is recognized. Herein it can be observed that 
although White Americans do not consume OD2 drugs as 
they consume OD1 drugs, the drugs they intake are 
considered among the most lethal drugs. Due to this reason, 
they are most exposed to deaths and other health issues from 
OD2 drugs. The pattern of consuming drugs such as Heroin, 
Cocaine, and others among White American people is 
increasing at a very fast pace. There are more individuals 
consuming such drugs than people from any other of the 
races. However, similar to the consumption pattern for OD1 
drugs, individuals from other races, not included in the 
current study, also consume a wide variety of OD2 drugs, 
which puts their life at great risks.  
 
Moreover, more people from Black or African 
American community consume OD2 drugs as opposed to 
OD1 drugs. On this basis, it can be observed that different 
races have developed different preferences for the drugs that 
they aim at consuming. This is weakening these 
communities and is putting their lives in danger. 
Consumption of OD2 category drugs in Asian, Indian and 
Middle Eastern people is again very low.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
This data analytics study provides an expanded 
exploration of the problem of opioid drug overdoses in 
Allegheny County. Applying several statistical techniques, 
including pattern recognition, and generating other data 
visualizations, we were able to validate previously identified 
findings about overdose deaths, such as the age range and 
general demographics of affected populations [6][17]. We 
found the tools we used to be very useful in helping us to 
gain a better understanding of our sample set and to 
generate informative and understandable visuals.  
Data Analytics also allowed us to find new 
information about our sample, particularly when combined 
with the additional variables added to the base dataset. We 
were able to generate highly practical visuals and illustrate 
clear trends from a large dataset with many variables, 
indicating that there is a possible relationship between drug 
addiction 
and 
lower 
temperatures 
and 
between 
psychological and behavioral factors and weekend drug use 
as well as a direct market supply effect on the number of 
deaths. These findings imply the need for authorities to offer 
educational workshops to individuals and their families, as 
well as health practitioners, about the dangers of the current 
drug epidemic and to design an effective policy for the 
oversight of drug market supply that includes taking firm 
action against violators.  
The above analysis can be concluded that majority of 
the people, who are uninsured and unemployed, live on the 
outskirts of Pittsburgh so that they can get easy access to 
drugs. The study further revealed that the habit and trend of 
drug consumption are very common among Black or 
African American people. The average age of such 
individuals is 45 years meaning that they continue to 
consume drugs for a considerable period of their lives. 
During the study it was further noted that that uninsured rate 
has a direct relation with the rate of unemployment. This 
means that most of the unemployed people tend to avoid 
taking an insurance cover for the fear of paying money that 
they are not earning. In addition, they know that drug 
consumption will result in them being unable to take full 
advantage of their insurance cover if they had one.  
We recommend that the authorities spend more time 
and funds on advertisements to educate individuals and 
families about the problem as well as investing in 

32
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approaches to oversee market supply to drug users. Creation 
of awareness is one of the most comprehensive approaches 
to sensitize communities concerning the consequences of 
opioid overdoses, but also one of the avenues to equip 
dependents, addicts and the general public with knowledge, 
skills and correct attitudes towards opioid-free and 
dependence-free lifestyles. The relevant governmental 
departments such as the Human and Health Services and 
other relevant institutions should vest time and resources in 
the creation of awareness to induce more information to the 
general public about the negative impacts associated with 
drug dependencies and also provide necessary information 
which can guarantee abstinence from opioid overdoses. The 
awareness will extend further to create an understanding 
about how to efficiently deal with opioid use disorder and 
how to deal with it effectively and comprehensively.  
Besides creation of awareness, this study also 
recommends community empowerment programs to keep 
the vulnerable groups (especially the youths) occupied and 
attached to meaningful economic and social constructs, to 
help them deviate away from indulgence in opioid reliance 
and 
from 
engaging 
in 
other 
malpractices. 
Such 
empowerment programs should be tailored to alleviate 
laxity amongst the youths in an urbanized setting, to deviate 
their attention ways from any engagements in substance 
abuse. By so doing, this will yield more multiplier effects 
such as employment creation, reduced deaths and increased 
productivity within the existing population. 
The third and last recommendation is to consider 
sending the victims of opioid dependence to rehabilitation 
centers to permanently ensure individuals undergoing 
detoxification do not relapse back into opioids. Opioids may 
rewire the brain, inducing forth substantial cravings which 
may trigger irresistible urges to fall back and use these 
drugs. The role of the rehabilitation centers will be geared to 
ensure persons are keenly guided and monitored towards 
permanent emancipation from the wants and chains of 
opioids and related effects. 
The issue of drug overdose deaths is so pressing that 
more research by data and population scientists is needed to 
gain further insight into this epidemic, so that impactful 
solutions can be found to reduce its harmful effects on 
communities both in the United States and around the globe. 
This study cognizes a limited study in the field of drug 
overdose, especially pertaining to the causes leading to 
overdoses. There is need for a more systematic review and 
primary studies unraveling this important field which is 
otherwise claiming the lives of the most productive ages in a 
population. More study in this field will provide useful 
insights to policy makers, planners and the government on 
the way forward.    
Results of the current study supported results of the 
past studies. Thus, the limitation of this research was that 
there were minimal new findings obtained. The tools used in 
this study helped in enabling us to recognize patterns 
through data visualizations, and we encourage future 
researchers to leverage the use of multi-dimensional data to 
find factors that could possibly correlate to the drug 
addiction epidemic to explore new findings within regional 
and global communities. It is the hope that this information 
will be used in enhancing understanding of readers, policy 
makers, health professionals regarding the subject matter.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alalawi, D. Fooks, L. Sztandera and S. Zakrzewski, 
“Leveraging Statistical Methods for an 
Analysis of 
Demographic Factors of Opioid Overdose Deaths,” The 
Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics, IARIA, 
Proceedings of 2019. pp. 49-52. 
[2] “Allegheny County Fatal Accidental Overdoses,” 2018. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/allegheny-
county-fatal-accidental-overdoses [accessed: 2019-04-01]. 
[3] D. Ciccarone, “Fentanyl in the US Heroin Supply: A Rapidly 
Changing Risk Environment”, The International Journal on 
Drug Policy, vol. 46, pp. 107-111, 2017.  
[4] “Climate 
at 
a 
Glance,” 
[Online]. 
URL: 
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/county/time-series/PA-
003/tavg/all/1/20082017?base_prd=true&firstbaseyear=2008
&lastbaseyear=2017&trend=true&trend_base=10&firsttrendy
ear=1895&lasttrendyear=2019 [accessed: 2019-04-01]. 
[5] B. Edlin, “Access to Treatment for Hepatitis C Virus 
Infection: Time to Put Patients First”, The Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, vol. 16(9). doi:10.1016/s1473-3099(16)30005-6, 
2016. 
[6] “Income Inequality in Allegheny County, PA”. 2018. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/2020RATIO042003 
[accessed: 2019-04-01]. 
[7] Jin, Y. “Development of Word Cloud Generator Software 
Based on Python,” Procedia Engineering, 174, 788-792, 
2017. 
[8] H. Koh, “Community-Based Prevention and Strategies for the 
Opioid 
Crisis,” 
2017. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-
abstract/2654370 [accessed: 2019-12-01]. 
[9] G. Lopez, “A new study shows America's drug overdose 
crisis is by far the worst among wealthy countries,” 2019. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://www.vox.com/science-and-
health/2019/2/26/18234863/drug-overdose-death-america-
international-study [accessed: 2019-04-01]. 
[10] R. Lord. “Allegheny County drug overdose deaths surge to 
613 in 2016, breaking record,” 2017. [Online]. URL: 
http://www.post-
gazette.com/news/overdosed/2017/04/06/Allegheny-County-
drug-overdoses-610-deaths-break-
record/stories/201704060199. [accessed: 2019-05-01]. 
[11] “Percent Without Health Insurance Data for Allegheny 
County,” 
[Online]. 
URL: 
http://www.opendatanetwork.com/entity/0500000US42003/A
llegheny_County_PA/health.health_insurance.pctui?year=201
4&age=18 to 64&race=All races & gender=Both genderes & 
income=All income levels [accessed: 2019-05-01]. 

33
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[12] B. Rhodes, B. Costenbader, L. Wilson, R. Hershow, J. 
Carroll, W. Zule, and L. Brinkley-Rubinstein, “Urban, 
individuals of color are impacted by fentanyl-contaminated 
heroin”. International Journal of Drug Policy, 73, 1-6, 2019. 
[13] B. Saloner, “A public health strategy for the opioid crisis,” 
Public Health Reports, vol. 133, pp. 24S-34S, 2018.  
[14] L. Sederer, “Take Action Against Addiction,” [Online]. URL: 
https://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/policy-
dose/articles/2016-02-01/10-ways-to-combat-americas-drug-
abuse-problem [accessed: 2019-05-01]. 
[15] “Unemployment Rate in Allegheny County, PA,” 2019. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/seri 
[accessed: 
2019-05-05]. 
[16] “U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Area Health Insurance 
Estimates 
Program,” 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://www.opendatanetwork.com/entity/0500000US42003/
Allegheny_County_PA/health.health_insurance.nui?ref=entit
yquestion&year=2014&age=18%20to%2064&race=All%20r
aces&gender=Both%20genderes&income=All%20income%2
0levels [accessed: 2019-04-01]. 
[17] E. Hulsey, and et. al., “Opiate-Related Overdose Deaths in 
Allegheny County – Risks and Opportunities,” 2019. 
[Online]. 
URL: 
https://alleghenycounty.us/uploadedFiles/Allegheny_Home/H
ealth_Department/Programs/Special_Initiatives/Overdose_Pre
vention/Opiate-
Related_Overdose_Deaths_in_Allegheny_County.pdf 
[accessed: 
2019-08-01].
 
 
 

