Evaluation of Biomedical Signals Data from Moviegoers 
 
Sang-Tae Lee 
National Center for Standard Reference Data 
Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science 
Daejeon, Korea 
stlee@kriss.re.kr 
Hyoung-Min Choi, Wuon-Shik Kim 
Center for Medical Measurements 
Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science 
Daejeon, Korea 
Hmchoi78@gmail.com, wskim@kriss.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Moviemakers must be able to estimate moviegoer’s 
level of engagement while watching the movie. Thus far, 
however, most studies have focused on the story itself from the 
viewpoints of subjective reviewers. In this study, we tried to 
estimate the engagement of moviegoers objectively by 
measuring their physiological signals. The physiological signals 
include 
electroencephalogram 
and 
photoplethysmogram. 
However, it is difficult to measure biomedical signals 
compared to subjective review questions. Therefore, many 
researchers want to share the biomedical signal data. For this 
reason, it is important to evaluate the reliability of the 
biomedical signal data. In this research, we invented a new 
formula for engagement and evaluated the reliability of the 
biomedical signals measured from moviegoers as participants. 
The reliability of our data is verified by its consistency between 
electroencephalogram and photoplethysmogram as well as by 
comparison to subjective review results. 
Keywords- biomedical signals; moviegoers; reference data; 
reliability; consistency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
For the movie industry to be successful, movies must 
fully engage moviegoers. The engagement appears to emerge 
from the interaction between message structure and content 
[1]. Although the moviegoer engagement may have 
observable behavioral correlates such as the direction of gaze, 
it is not itself directly observable by others. As a result, 
judgments about whether, or how much, a movie succeeds in 
engaging the moviegoer are typically inferred by indirect or 
post hoc measures such as subjective ratings [2]. Standard 
marketing techniques employed so far have involved the use 
of interviews and the compilation of questionnaires for the 
subjects after viewing the movie. Nowadays, however, the 
focusing of attention can be monitored by measuring 
associated changes in brain electrical activity with the 
electroencephalogram (EEG). Thus, in principle, EEG 
measures have the potential to provide a more direct and 
objective method for gauging the intensity and nature of 
moviegoer engagement [3].  
Because the EEG is mainly due to the activity generated 
on the cortical structures of the brain, it is almost impossible 
to precisely infer the moviegoer’s emotions being processed 
in the deep brain [4]. Hence, it is practical to infer the 
internal emotional state of the moviegoer by using indirect 
signs, such as the activity of the sweat glands on the hands 
and/or the variation of the heart rate [5]. Therefore, when we 
evaluate the reliability of the biomedical signals data, the 
biomedical signals of the autonomic nervous system as well 
as the EEG of the central nervous system are considered 
together. If we measure and evaluate the EEG alone, it is a 
one-dimensional assessment of the data because it focuses on 
the replication of a single observation. According to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), higher-
dimensional assessments, yielding correspondingly higher 
levels of confidence, may be constructed using correlations 
with other measurements and theoretical models. In the 
NIST approach, multiple independent observations of related 
properties are used together to assess the reliability of any 
one of them. Since each property represents a different 
measurement perspective, a higher level of confidence may 
be ascribed to these data collectively, owing to the 
consistency of the observations across the multiple properties, 
than could be ascribed to any one of the properties 
individually. The dataset is viewed through its relations to 
other data, particularly through trends, correlations, and 
known material property relations. The central focus of this 
evaluation is on consistency [6].  
In this study, we analyzed the brain activity as well as the 
autonomic nervous activity of the moviegoer while watching 
the movie. To measure both the brain activity and the 
emotional engagement of the 38 healthy participants, we 
used simultaneous EEG and photoplethysmogram (PPG) 
measurements during the entire experiment. We hope to link 
significant variations of EEG and PPG measurements with 
the subject’s review results. Previous studies have shown 
that the moviegoer is in an engaged state when pleasure 
accompanies the moviegoer’s concentration on the movie. 
As an index for concentration, the power of the ‘low beta’ 
frequency band, 13 to 20 Hz, of EEG is increased while that 
of the ‘theta’ frequency band, 4 to 8 Hz, is decreased [7]. By 
the Wendy Heller model [8], when the moviegoer feels 
pleasure, the left frontal cortex is more activated compared to 
that of the right, i.e., the power of the ‘alpha’ band, 8 to 13 
Hz, of the EEG on the right side of the frontal cortex is larger 
than that on the left side of the frontal cortex. This study 
examines whether changes in the biomedical signals of the 
peripheral nervous system as well as the spectral 
composition and regional cortical distribution of the EEG 
might be systematically related to the degree of a 
moviegoer’s engagement in the movie. In this study, we 
defined the engagement index which is the sum of the 
concentration index and the pleasure index.  
8
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

II. 
METHOD 
A. Experimental Design 
Thirty-eight healthy volunteers (range = 18 to 38 years 
old, mean age 23.3 ± 4.7 years; 14 women) living in Orlando, 
Florida in the USA were recruited for this study. When the 
participants arrived at the University of Central Florida 
Center for Emerging Media (UCF CEM), they were fully 
informed of the purpose of the experiment and its procedure 
and subscribed on the consent form, which was approved by 
the institutional review board (IRB) of UCF. Next, they were 
guided to an audio-video room (AV room) for the 
experiment. The AV room was an electrically-shielded, 
dimly-lit room. As an AV system, a Sony 1,000 Watt, 5.1 
Surround Sound, Blue Ray Home Theater System 
(BDVE580) was used. 
The procedure of the experiment consisted of two parts. 
The first part was to measure biomedical signals from 
participants during watching the 112-minute American film, 
Iron Man. During this first part, subjects were requested to 
pay attention to the movie and not move their fingers, etc., if 
possible. The second part, after watching the movie, was to 
evaluate how the participant felt while watching the movie. 
In this second part, subjects were asked to recall when and 
why they felt the most pleasure, most anger, most engaged, 
etc., in the film. The experiments were carried out three 
times a day: the first session was from 8 am to 12 pm, the 
second session was from 1 to 5 pm, and the last session was 
from 6 to 10 pm. In each session, three or four participants 
attended simultaneously (refer to Fig. 1).  
After the participants sat down on the comfortable chairs 
in the AV room, the electrodes of the biomedical signals 
were attached to the participants. To measure two channels 
of the EEG, the AgCl electrodes were attached at Fp1 and 
Fp2 for active signals, at A1 and A2 linked for reference, and 
at Fz for a ground according to the international 10-20 
electrode placement system. EEG conduction cream was 
applied to attach the electrodes and kept the impedance 
below 5 kΩ. To measure one channel of the PPG, its sensor 
was attached on the index finger. A strap was used to attach 
the PPG sensor. The conduction gel was used to enhance the 
conduction. After attachment of the electrodes, the 
participants took a 10-minute baseline state. Then, the main 
experiment of measuring biomedical signals was begun. The 
biomedical signals, two channels of EEG and one channel of 
PPG, were recorded for each participant. Therefore, 12 
channels of biomedical signals from four participants were 
recorded during 112 minutes by means of MP150 and 
AcqKnowledge software version 4.2 (Biopac, USA, [9]). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The audio- video room for the movie engagement experiment. 
To minimize any contributions from offset effects and 
any uncertainty about the temporal alignment of the movie 
presentation with the biomedical signals’ time series, the first 
1 minute of each signal was eliminated. After that, the 
starting points of each of the 38 signals were aligned for the 
EEG and for the PPG, respectively. Finally, the power 
spectrum was analyzed over equal length to the shortest 
length of 38 signals for the EEG and for the PPG, 
respectively. 
B. Recordings for Central Nervous System 
Raw EEG traces were first band pass filtered (high pass = 
0.5 Hz; low pass = 30 Hz). We collected the EEG activity to 
a personal computer at a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz. The 
EEG traces were then segmented with 30-second windows to 
remove the segments containing severe noises due to eye 
movements, blinks, and muscular artifacts. The criteria of 
rejection was larger than + 80 μV or less than - 80 μV. Fast 
Fourier transforms (FFT) were then computed on 50%-
overlapped groups of 512 sample (0.5 second) Hanning 
windows for all artifact-free data segments, providing 
estimates of spectral power with 0.125 Hz frequency 
resolution. Then, the FFT was applied to obtain the power 
spectral density (PSD) for each segment of a good signal-to-
noise ratio. The PSD for a 30-second window moving with a 
10-second interval was calculated for the entire 112 min. 
C. Recordings for Autonomic Nervous System 
Autonomic activity, the variations of the peak intervals of 
PPG, was recorded with an MP150 system and Acquisition 
software version 4 (Biopac, USA) with a sampling rate of 
1,000 Hz. The PPG sensor was attached to the palmar side of 
the second finger of the participant’s non dominant hand by 
means of a velcro fastener. Before applying the sensors, the 
subjects’ skin was cleaned. The PPG signals were 
continuously acquired for the entire duration of the movie, 
and its PSD was calculated. In this way, we obtained a signal 
in the frequency domain for the biomedical signals from 
moviegoers. In particular, the whole interval was spanned 
with a series of time windows of 5 min each.  
Spectral components were identified and then assigned, 
on the basis of their frequency, to one of two bands: Low 
Frequency (LF), 0.04 to 0.15 Hz, or High Frequency (HF), 
0.15 to 0.4 Hz. These components were obtained in absolute 
values of power (ms2). The Very Low Frequency (VLF) 
band, 0.01 to 0.04 Hz, was excluded from the present 
analysis since it is not of interest for our purpose. Several 
studies indicate that the LF band corresponds to baroflex 
control of the heart rate and reflects mixed sympathetic and 
parasympathetic modulation of Heart Rate Variability 
(HRV); instead, the HF band corresponds to the vagally 
mediated modulation of HRV associated with respiration. 
The ratio LF/HF was used as the index of the balance 
between the sympathetic and vagal activity [10]. For emotion, 
previous study showed that the ratio MF/(LF+HF) reflects 
positive emotion while the ratio LF/HF reflects negative 
emotion, where the MF is a Middle Frequency band of 0.08 
to 0.15 Hz [11].   
9
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A subjective review result of when and why the 
participant was most engaged is shown in Table 1 for five 
representative participants among 38 participants, and the 
corresponding scenes are shown in Fig. 2. In this study, we 
invented a new formula evaluating the participant’s 
engagement as follows: 
  
                                      (1) 
where the 
: index of engagement, 
 : index of 
concentration, 
 : index of pleasure, 
 and 
 are the 
weighting factors. In this research, the  and  are set to 1.  
 
                     
 ,               (2) 
where,  
 : EEG power of low beta band, 13 to 20 Hz, at  
 
 : EEG power of low beta band, 13 to 20 Hz, at 
 
 : EEG power of the theta band, 4 to 8 Hz, at  
 
 : EEG power of the theta band, 4 to 8 Hz, at  
 
 
         
 ,           (3) 
 
where,  
 : EEG power of the alpha band, 8 to 13 Hz, at  
 
 : EEG power of the alpha band, 8 to 13 Hz, at  
 
 
                        
 ,                        (4) 
 
where, 
MF : PPG power of 0.08 to 0.15 Hz 
LF : PPG power of 0.04 to 0.08 Hz  
HF : PPG power of 0.15 to 0.4 Hz 
 
By using from (1) to (4), the concentration from EEG and 
the pleasure from EEG and PPG were calculated, averaged 
over 38 participants, and shown in Fig. 3. Between 70 and 75 
minutes, the concentration index of EEG as shown in the 
upper part, the pleasure index of EEG as shown in the 
middle part, and the pleasure index of PPG as shown in the 
lower part are relatively very high. These peaks are shown in 
red rectangular boxes in Fig. 3. Moreover, most of subjective 
review results in Table 1 also showed the strongest 
engagement during this time interval. The EEG and PPG 
measured from 38 participants showed consistency from the 
viewpoint of engagement. Therefore, the reliability of our 
dataset as well as the new formula for engagement is verified. 
To represent the participant’s emotion precisely, it is 
necessary to measure the biomedical signals from the 
peripheral nervous system as well as from the central 
nervous system. Our results also support the previous 
hypothesis that if the participant is in the engagement state 
while watching the movie, the pleasure accompanies the 
concentration on the movie.  
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF REVIEW QUESTIONAIRE FOR IRON MAN 
Partici
pants 
Time period 
of maximum 
engagement 
Subject evaluation: 
(The reason why the  
most engaged ) 
Physiological 
signals 
1 
72 m 07 s  
~ 
81 m 01 s 
This is the scene where the 
newly 
finished/painted 
Mark 2 suit is first being 
used. Tony uses it to 
destroy the terrorist village 
and save innocent people. 
In Fig. 3 between 
70 
and 
75 
minutes, 
the 
concentration 
from EEG (upper 
part) 
and 
the 
pleasure 
from 
EEG 
(middle 
part) and from 
PPG (lower part) 
averaged over 38 
participants 
are 
relatively 
very 
high. 
2 
72 m 50 s 
~ 
72 m 51 s 
Iron man suit with new 
color scheme. 
3 
74 m 13 s 
~ 
80 m 48 s 
Iron man was cool to see 
fighting. 
4 
73 m 00 s 
~ 
78 m 00 s 
This was an action scene. 
5 
74 m 14 s 
~ 
79 m 12 s 
It makes me happy that 
Tony perfected his project 
and he can help others and 
fly anywhere he likes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 m 22 s 
72 m 53 s 
 
 
74 m 23 s 
74 m 25 s 
 
 
74 m 27 s 
75 m 20 s 
 
 
75 m 43 s 
75 m 59 s 
Figure 2.  Corresponding scenes of Iron Man, selected  from each time 
intervals in Table 1, when the participants were most strongly engaged. 
10
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
Figure 3.  Change of participant’s concentration (upper) evaluated from 
EEG, pleasure evaluated from EEG (middle) and from PPG (lower).  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
For the same time interval, the concentration from  EEG 
and the pleasure from EEG and PPG calculated from the 
new formula were relatively very high. This show that not 
only the pleasures calculated from the EEG and the PPG 
separately are consist but also it accompanies the 
concentration simultaneously. Moreover, most of subjective 
review results also showed the strongest engagement during 
this time interval. Therefore, the validity of our dataset as 
well as our formula are verified. Our results also support the 
previous hypothesis that if the participant is engaged in 
watching 
the 
movie, 
pleasure 
accompanies 
this 
concentration on the movie. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Hye-Rim Oh and Bona Rho for their 
enormous support in measuring and analyzing biomedical 
signals from American participants during our visiting 
research this February. The authors also thank Mr. Brian 
Tortorelli and Mr. Rashaad Rosalle for their support in 
participant recruiting and explaining the experiment 
procedure to the participants and to Prof. Si Jung Kim and 
Prof. Phillip Peters for their support in experiment design 
and supervision of the entire experiment. This research was 
supported by the project ‘A Technical Development of the 
Global Code Based on the Story,’ sponsored by the Korea 
Creative Content Agency and the Ministry of Culture, Sports 
and Tourism. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Geiger and B. Reeves, “The effects of scene changes and 
relatedness on attention to television”, Communications 
Research, vol. 20, pp. 155-175, 1993. 
[2] M. E. Smith and A. Gevins, “Attention and brain activity 
while 
watching 
television: 
components 
of 
viewer 
engagement”, MEDIA PSYCHOLOGY, vol. 6, pp. 285-305, 
2009.  
[3] G. Vecchito, et al., “Changes in brain activity during the 
observation of TV commercials by using EEG, GSR and HR 
measurements”, Brain Topogr, vol. 23, pp. 165-179, 2010, 
doi: 10.1007/s10548-009-0127-0.  
[4] A. Urbano, C. Babiloni, F. Carducci, L. Fattorini, P. Onorati, 
and F. Babiloni, “Dynamic functional coupling of high 
resolution EEG potentials related to unilateral internally 
triggered one-digit movements”, Electroenthephalogr Clin 
Neurophysiol, vol. 106, pp. 477-487, 1998. 
[5] T. Baumgartner, M. Esslen, and L. Jancke, “From emotion 
perception to emotion experience: emotions evoked by 
pictures and classical music,” Int J Psychophysiol, vol. 60, pp. 
34-43, 2006. 
[6] R. G. Munro, “Data Evaluation Theory and Practice for 
Materials Properties”, NIST Recommended Practice Guide, 
Special Publication 960-11, 2003. 
[7] J. F. Lubar, “Discourse on the development of EEG 
diagnostics and biofeedback for attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorders”, Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, vol. 16, pp. 
201-205, 1991.  
[8] J. I. Schmidtke and W. Heller, “Personality, affect and EEG: 
predicting patterns of regional brain activity related to 
extraversion and neuroticism”, Personality and Individual 
Differences, vol. 36, pp. 717-732, 2004. 
[9] http://www.biopac.com/ 
[10] S. Kreibig, F. Wilhelm, W. Roth, and J. Gross, 
“Cardiovascular electrodermal and respiratory response 
patterns 
to 
fear- 
and 
sadness-inducing 
films, 
Psychophysiology, vol 44(5), pp. 787-806, 2007. 
[11] R. McCraty, M. Atkinson, W. A. Tiller, G. Rein, and A. D. 
Watkins, “The effects of emotions on short-term power 
spectrum analysis of heart rate variability”, The American 
Journal of Cardiology, vol. 76(14), pp. 1089-1093, 1995. 
11
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

