IQRF Street Lighting - A Case Study
Rostislav Spinar | Martin Spiller | Petra Seflova | Vladimir Sulc
MICRORISC s.r.o.
Jicin, Czech Republic
spinar | spiller | seflova | sulc @microrisc.com
Radek Kuchta | Radimir Vrba
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication 
Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic
kuchtar | vrbar @feec.vutbr.cz
Abstract— In this paper, we present main features of IQRF, 
new  communication  framework  specifically  developed  for 
wireless sensor mesh networks and its applications such as 
intelligent lighting systems. Basic components and functions of 
IQRF are  described.  The case study  evaluates the  existing 
work on wireless sensor mesh networks for a street lighting 
scenario and shows number of key mesh network parameters 
having influence on overall performance of a deployed system. 
The  key  parameters  were  also  practically  and  successfully 
verified in a test experiment.
Keywords- frameworks; wireless mesh; intelligent lighting 
systems; sensors network
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Street lighting control systems are centralized systems 
which control and monitor the status of street lamps installed 
along a  road.  Lights  are  switched  on/off by the  system 
control  commands,  or,  if  equipped  by  light  sensitive 
photocell, then lights are being automatically turned on at 
dusk and off at dawn. Its local status information is also 
monitored by control system and reported back to municipal 
control centre via a communication channel. Among many 
information being monitored, there might  be light  status 
information  (on/off),  energy  saving  status  (dimming 
percentage),  lifetime  period  of  key  lamp  elements 
(maintenance  purposes)  and  safety  related  information 
(failures at pedestrian crossing), etc.
To  convey  control  commands  and  status  information 
between  street  lighting  control  system  and  remote  light 
control terminal installed at each light pole, various types of 
communication  medium  and  protocols  are  being  used. 
Regarding  the  communication  media,  Power  Line 
Communication  PLC  or  Radio  Frequency  RF  is  used 
commonly [2].
The  rationale  for  these  communication  media  being 
widely used is their easy installation and low maintenance 
procedures.  In  both  cases,  there  is  no  need  to  install 
additional wiring and therefore they are more economically 
viable than other type of communication media.
Comparing PLC lines with RF channels, both have their 
own pros and cons. PLC type of communication suffers from 
an  interference  from  nearby  electrical  systems,  signal 
attenuation by transformers and DC-DC converters and short 
circuit problem. On the other hand,  RF communication 
channel  parameters tend to deteriorate with worsen weather 
conditions  such  as  heavy  rain  or  snowfall.  Longer 
communication  ranges  along  with  support  for  dynamic 
WSMN are essential key factors to maintain certain degree 
of  redundancy in RF communication and thus deliver high 
reliability of the control lighting system.
Figure 1. Towards a service-oriented IQRF architecture – 
street lighting scenario
Maintenance is another important factor. With automatic 
lights monitoring in place, the system is able to predict lamps 
failures before they actual happen. This enables to develop 
more efficient maintenance scheduling  plans. In order to 
further reduce  cost and number  of maintenance  persons, 
lighting  control  systems  should  have  high  stability  and 
provide  required  information  when  needed.  For  these 
reasons, reliable communication technique is essential. In 
this paper, the technology which lays solid foundation for 
intelligent lighting systems is being further discussed.
The focus of this paper is more on RF communication for 
our ability to show already gained experience with  available 
RF technology relevant to the selected scenario.
The paper is outlined as follows: First, we present related 
work  in  the  area  of  wireless  sensors  frameworks.  We 
describe  new features of IQRF framework  in Section 3. 
Simple  implementation  of  on/off  control  with  status 
monitoring, a partial task in many street lighting systems, is 
presented and discussed in Section 4. We conclude with 
remarks and plans for future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many solutions supporting low power communication 
and advanced network topologies are available on the market 
33
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

nowadays. Many of them are based on Low-Rate Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (LR-WPAN) 802.15.4 [3], Zigbee 
[4], and 6LoWPAN [5] standards. Following are described 
platforms based on the mentioned standards. 
Arduino [6] is an open-source electronics prototyping 
platform  based  on  flexible,  easy-to-use  hardware  and 
software. The platform was designed for artists, designers, 
hobbyists,  and  anyone  interested  in  creating  interactive 
objects or environments.
Jennic  [7]  is  a  commercial  platform  which  offers  a 
complete set of wireless microcontrollers, modules, design 
and development tools. This is complemented by a suite of 
software that includes network protocol stacks, profiles and 
APIs as well as application reference examples.
Epic [8] is a open mote platform for application-driven 
design. A key goal  of the Epic project  is to develop a 
composable hardware architecture for WSMN modules that 
specifically supports prototyping, measurement, and reuse. 
Epic facilitates prototyping through componentized hardware 
with flexible interconnections between both the components 
themselves and third-party hardware.
SuRF [9] is type of module which is based on principles 
of open-source model and brings the state-of-the-art IPv6 
implementation into possibly any electronic device. It is also 
among first modules which takes advantage of single chip 
solution (MCU and RF combined together) working in sub 
GHz band.
IQRF [10] communication framework introduced in this 
paper takes similar approach as the platforms mentioned 
above, however IQRF explores more the space of  sub GHz 
bands (868 MHz and 915 MHz) and is equipped by routing 
mechanism supporting unique 240 routing hops. Further, it 
brings with itself the merit of simplicity to be applied and as 
a result of it very fast prototyping and final wireless design. 
It is a purpose of this case study to also pinpoint and analyze 
the key parameters of IQRF communication framework and 
show their influence on the selected scenario.
III.
IQRF FRAMEWORK
IQRF is the communication framework. The name IQRF 
stands  for  an  Intelligent  Radio  Frequency.  IQRF  is  the 
framework integrating variety of components for building 
LR-WPAN  in  an  easy  way,  simplifying  and  shortening 
design phase of a wireless communication system. Basic 
system components and functions will be described in next 
sections.
A.
Transceiver modules
A transceiver module (TR) is the basic communication 
component  of  the  IQRF  framework.  The  TR  is  a  tiny 
intelligent electronic board with complete circuitry needed 
for  realization  of  wireless  RF  connectivity.  A  micro-
controller with a built-in operating system  having debug 
functionality  enabled  together  with  an  integrated  LDO 
regulator and temperature sensor dramatically reduce a time 
of an application development. The low power consumption 
in receive mode (XLP 35uA) predetermines these modules to 
be used in battery powered applications. Complete set of 
modules parameters are shown in Figure 2.
A highly integrated design in the SIM card format (25 x 
14.9 mm) requires no external RF components and provides 
efficient  way for application firmware  development. The 
modules can be easily integrated into any electronic device 
via inexpensive and commonly used SIM card connector. An 
electronic  device  printed  circuit  board  (PCB)  would  be 
populated by the SIM connector and optionally equipped 
with the TR module. This approach enables manufacturers 
utilizing  the  TR  modules  to  sell  both  either  non-
communicating  versions  of  the  electronic  products  or 
optionally  equip  them  with  wireless  connectivity.  The 
versions with an integrated antenna perfectly support this 
option.
Solderable versions of the TR modules (TR-53B) fully 
compatible  with  their  SIM  versions  would  address  the 
applications facing higher mechanical stress. A compatibility 
with  their  SIM  versions  enables  easy  application 
development  and  final  seamless  migration  to  solderable 
versions. 
Figure 2. Key parameters of  the TR modules
The TR modules are available in several families, each 
utilizing different peripherals and functions, to fit different 
user’s requirements. Different frequencies in the license-free 
ISM bands would be utilized: 868 MHz in EU, 915 MHz in 
US.
Overall  parameters  for  every  TR  module,  specific 
datasheets and cross-table parameters overview, are  shown 
in Figure 2.
B.
IQRF Operating System 
Every TR module is equipped with the operating system 
(IQRF OS) implementing basic functionality. IQRF OS is 
buffer oriented and its block scheme is shown in Figure 3.
IQRF OS controls a radio frequency integrated circuit 
(RFIC)  and  supports  all  communication  processes: 
transmitting (TX), receiving (RX), network bonding, routing, 
etc. 
Data  processing  (encoding,  encryption,  check-sums, 
adding headers, etc.) is made automatically by IQRF OS 
during communication processes, parameters affecting such 
34
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

processing would be setup before calling communication 
function. Setting, e.g., variable DLEN (data length in the 
packet) to be equal to 16 and a consequent call of a RF 
transmit  function  would  result  that  the  first  16B  from 
bufferRF  would  be  encapsulated  to  the  packet  and 
transmitted.
All RF parameters are software tunable and their setting 
depends solely on the application requirements. Options of 
having: 868MHz/916MHz bands; 62/189 channels; 1,2 kb/s 
up to 86,2 kb/s rates and transmit power up to 3,5 mW. 
Receiver sensitivity is also adjustable and allows to filter 
incoming signal according to application need for particular 
environment. The signal strength can be also periodically 
checked even while TR being in a receive mode and thus 
enabling to use clever techniques to increase communication 
reliability and at the same time to lower power consumption.
In current version of IQRF OS [11], set of addressing and 
routing options was extended yet simplified for an end user. 
There  might  be up to 65000 active  devices  in a single 
IQMESH network [13] with routing capability up to 240 
hops (700m/hop). The addressing and routing schemes are 
separated from each other. The addressing is fully under the 
control of an application developer and on the other hand 
routing is fully transparent (no need to select routing path) 
and operating in real-time.
Another  new  feature  of  IQRF  OS  is  a  discovery 
mechanism. The discovery allows a network to be logically 
reconfigured in optimal way for a particular routing option. 
This further enables to deploy devices without consideration 
of placing devices in certain way from network coordinator. 
The discovery mechanism itself is also transparent and very 
fast. IQRF OS implements support for general mesh network 
(full  MESH)  but  also  supports  different  set  of  routing 
algorithms according to specified topology (Reduced MESH, 
Optimized MESH, Tree, etc.).
A flexible power management is crucial factor for battery 
operated devices. There are two important elements which 
influence power consumption of the TR module. Firstly, it is 
power consumption in sleep mode and secondly in receive 
mode.  Well  designed  TR  has  in  sleep  mode  power 
consumption  of  a  few  uA  which  yields  battery  lifetime 
around 10 years. In most WSN applications, there is a big 
disproportion in time the transceiver is RX compare to TX 
during an application life cycle. Thus power consumption in 
RX mode contributes the most to overall power consumption 
of the TR. IQRF OS allows the application developer to 
select among 3 options for receiving modes: standard (STD), 
low power (LP) and extra low power (XLP). Each of the 
receiving mode has a corresponding transmitting mode to 
match  up  to.  Mode  selection  is  driven  by  application 
requirements and depends on many factors such as: network 
throughput, response, length of the packets , use of battery, 
etc. TR modules consume 2 uA in sleep mode and unique 35 
uA in XLP mode. The sleep mode is implemented by turning 
off all the TR components and then enabling interrupt on 
change on the  MCU input.
There is no special buffer strategy implemented in IQRF 
OS. There are dedicated buffers for each communication 
channel (RF, SPI, EEPROM) as shown in Figure 3. It is up 
to an application to handle correctly these buffers.
In a nutshell, IQRF OS substantially simplifies the design 
phase and allows a programmer to fully focus on application 
logic. Besides its basic functionality, IQRF OS provides also 
a mechanism for application upload when an application is 
compiled. The programmer will set the TR module into the 
programming mode and via SPI interface the application 
code  is uploaded  to  the  module  as  shown  in  Figure  5. 
Another method for application upload is via RF and called 
ICWP  (In-Circuit  Wireless  Programming).  ICWP  allows 
multiple TR modules to be programmed simultaneously.
An additional layer on top of IQRF OS so-called plug-ins 
[13]. An idea of the plug-ins concept is to tailor IQRF OS 
functionality  according  to  user’s  requirements  instead  of 
exposing complete set of functions implemented by IQRF 
OS. A user would not be able to use both UART or I2C and 
SPI at the same time since these microcontroller (MCU) pins 
are  multiplexed.  Therefore,  the  only one  communication 
plug-in will  be  used  at  a time  to avoid wasting of the 
program memory by having all protocols included in the OS 
built.
Figure 3. IQRF OS structure
A complete set of functions can be found in [1].
C.
Gateways
An  external  access  to  the  IQRF  WSMN  is  enabled 
through the gateways. Generic and static types of gateways 
are distinguished in the IQRF framework [12].
The static gateways provide external connectivity to the 
IQRF  WSMN  based  on  defined  fixed  protocols.  The 
gateway  consists  of  the  TR  module  providing  wireless 
connectivity together with a dedicated MCU implementing a 
specific  protocol. An Ethernet  gateway GW-ETH-01 has 
Ethernet interface supporting TCP and UDP communication. 
Based on the gateway’s configuration the packets coming 
from IQRF WSMN can be stored in a round buffer of the 
gateway and later picked up by an external server application 
35
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

or directly sent via Ethernet. In opposite direction, data is 
encapsulated to the IQRF packets and sent directly to the 
IQRF WSMN. An application layer  and function of TR 
module might be fully customized.
The generic gateways would be customized completely. 
Both the application layer of the TR module and gateway's 
MCU  would  be  fully  programmed.  Based  on  this 
mechanism,  the  generic  gateways  can  provide  custom 
specific functions. Advantages would be seen in the GW-
QVGE-01,  a human interface device implementation. The 
objects such as menus, buttons or texts and their specific 
events  will  be  usually  different  for  every  customer’s 
application. 
D.
Development tools
As it was mentioned, the TR modules have built-in OS 
therefore the only application layer needs to be developed. 
The simpler applications and examples for the TR modules 
can be directly downloaded from  the website [1], while 
specific and customized functionality should be developed 
and programmed. A typical development process based on 
this concept is shown at figure Figure 5.
To effectively develop, program and debug applications 
for the TR modules, wide range of hardware and software 
development  tools  has  been  introduced  -  programmers, 
development kits and development sets.
The programmers such as CK-USB-04 [1] used in the 
case study are dedicated to upload compiled application into 
the modules and also to provide debugging interface during 
the application development. The development kits such as 
DK-EVAL-04 [1] used in the case study are modular ready-
to-use pieces of HW which would be used for debugging and 
communication or range testing.
IQRF integrated development environment (IDE) should 
be  mentioned  as  a  basic  tool  providing  complete 
functionality  for  the  application  development  -  system 
debug, SPI debug Terminal and Programming/Upload.
E.
Function Specific Components
 Next IQRF  components with specific  function were 
added to the IQRF portfolio to help with maintenance task 
on a site. 
The solution is being prepared and is going to be based 
on graphical IQVCP type of device [14] which is able to join 
street lighting IQRF network and send diagnostic requests to 
each lamp. For the field operations, an IQVCP device is able 
to run from the battery. Shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. IQVCP scanner
Figure 5. The development process and tools
IV.
THE CASE STUDY
Radio waves are affected by the same phenomena like 
light waves: reflections, absorptions, diffraction, etc. These 
phenomena  strongly  influence  signal  propagation.  Radio 
waves on the frequencies used nowadays in LR-WPAN (sub 
GHz ISM bands and 2.4GHz band) are influenced by many 
factors such as the height above ground the modules are 
deployed, noisy environments usually found in cities (public 
transport systems, wireless door bells, etc.) and also outside 
weather conditions (fog, heavy rain, snow). The purpose of 
the  case  study  is  to  prove  on  a  simple  example  the 
convenient use of WSMN for street lighting systems and 
show key mesh network parameters along with techniques 
that  influence  overall  system  performance.  For  the 
demonstration purposes, the only standard IQRF components 
and development tools have been used.
A.  SIMULATION SCENARIO
The simulations of the signal propagation were made for 
free space which is relevant to street lighting scenario. The 
TR-52BA-868 [1] modules at 868MHz band were availed 
and following conditions were applied for the test scenario: 
1.60m over the ground, TX on maximum power 3.5 mW, 
antennas with gain 1.10dBi used both on TX and RX module 
and  ground  reflections  45%.  The  simulated  graph  is 
presented in Figure 6. Only near field is shown since far field 
linearly declines with distance.  Based on the simulations 
and  receiver  sensitivity  for  19.2  kb/s  data  rate, 
communication range was calculated as 470 m for a free 
space.
Figure 6. Near field simulation for 868 MHz free space with 
parameters relevant to the TR-52BA 
36
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

B.  EXPERIMENTS
A) Free space communication range measurement was 
realized with two new TR-52BA-868 modules each placed 
separately  in  the  evaluation  board  DK-EVAL-03.  An 
example E03-TR.c available from the website [1] was used, 
sending repeatedly packets with set data rate 19.2 kb/s and 
with maximum transmitting power 3.5 mW from one device 
to the other and back. The communication range was noted 
down when losing the packets were detected by a LED – 450 
m communication range was measured.
TR-52BA-868 with its on-board mini PCB antenna has 
same radiating pattern as a usual whip antenna. The omni-
directional radiating pattern is depicted on Figure 7 (right 
side).
       Figure 7. TR-52BA with its omni-directional antenna
B)  A  wireless  network  was  built-up  in  the  airport 
environment consisting of 20 modules TR-868-52BA placed 
to the evaluation boards DK-EVAL-04 and one CK-USB-04 
establishing IQRF connection to PC running IQRF IDE.
An  example  E11-IQMESH-N.c  available  from  the 
website [1] was tailored for the test scenario and used in the 
modules N1 - N20 simulating 20 street lamps. All modules 
were spread in two rows, having 10 of them in a row as 
depicted  on  Figure  8.  For  a  network  coordinator,  E11-
IQMESH-C.c was used and loaded into TR module placed in 
CK-USB-04.
Figure 8. The experimental network
C)
Installation phase: a real-life network  was setup in 
the airport environment with a topology shown in Figure 8. 
The sensitivity of all receivers (all devices) was adjusted to 
10th of normal value. Doing that, the RF range was lowered 
to 45m, along with an assumption that all devices transmit at 
maximum power. To lower RF selectivity was decided based 
on  a  fact  that  it  has  much  more  fine-grained  scale  in 
comparison with output RF power. That resulted in better 
control over the network topology. Next is being discussed 
all necessary steps to setup and operate the network.
Firstly before actual deployment, all nodes simulating the 
lamps must be BONDED to the coordinator using standard 
bonding procedure which is well documented in an user 
guide to IQRF OS [1]. In our case, the coordinator is TR 
module  placed  in  CK-USB-04.  The  bonding  procedure 
assigns addresses to the bonded devices (N1-N20) and is 
fully under the user control. Bonding must be done within a 
direct RF range of  the devices. It is a recommended practice 
to label each device with its assigned address.
Secondly, actual DEPLOYMENT of devices takes place. 
Since recommending to use routing algorithm Discovered 
Full Mesh (RTDEF = 2) there is no need to place the devices 
in specific order such as in Figure 8. They might be placed in 
random  fashion.  However,  keep  a  map  of  the  deployed 
devices (N1-N20) and its locations.
Thirdly, a DISCOVERY procedure is initiated by the 
network coordinator. Complete network is discovered and a 
virtual  routing number VRN (D1-D20) is assigned to each 
device. D1-D20 are shown here only for an illustration and 
are not needed to be known for the routing purposes. To 
address a street lamp, the addresses N1-N20 are used and the 
routing itself is completely transparent for the user. It is a 
recommended practice to run the discovery procedure  at 
lower TX power to avoid having same of the devices close to 
communication edge. It is also recommended to keep track 
of RSSI traces from the deployed devices at the coordinator 
and have them available for a comparison during the course 
of the year. If there is a change in physical network topology 
(replacement, adding new device, etc.) it is advised to initiate 
the discovery procedure again.
Finally, after the discovery procedure is finished it is 
recommended to POLL each device in the network in order 
to confirm that there is a RF link to every device. If succeed 
the network is ready to be used. 
D)
Routing: having full mesh routing supported brings 
the advantage of multiple redundant paths being available 
and thus lowering a likelihood of a packet not reaching its set 
destination. If the topology shown in Figure 8 is considered 
then  the  routing  mechanism  performs  as  follows.  A 
command is transmitted from the network coordinator and in 
a first step is received by the devices N1, N2, N11 and N12. 
In order to avoid collisions to each device is assigned a time 
slot  in  which  retransmits  received  command.  Since  the 
retransmission is also by broadcast, all devices in RF vicinity 
receive this retransmission. Next device to retransmit after 
the  coordinator  is  N1  followed  by  N2  and  so  on.  The 
command is being forwarded to its destination in described 
fashion. It  is also important to mention that if a device 
receives same command twice it just simply discards the last 
one and keeps the original which to be retransmitted once 
there is a device's turn. A length of the time slot is set by the 
coordinator in a parameter RTDT1 (units of OS ticks) and 
might be variable depending on the length of the commands 
and expected responses. It is also worth mentioning that 
37
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

RTDT1 is inherited by all devices in the network once set by 
the coordinator.
Another important parameter is RTDEF which specifies 
type  of  routing  mechanism.  It  is  recommended  to  pick 
Discovered Full Mesh (RTDEF = 2) routing  for the street 
lighting scenario. As described in the installation phase, once 
the network is discovered VRNs (D1-D20) are assigned. The 
sequence, in which the command is being forwarded in  type 
of routing, is derived from VRNs (D1-D20) and not from 
bonded addresses (N1-N20). This allows the network to be 
further optimized in a sense of routing topology.
The  last  important  parameter  is  RTDT0  specifying 
number of hops the command should be forwarded. It is 
possible to select RTDT0 according to number of bonded 
devices  in  the  network.  However,  this  would  be  only 
necessary in a case of having a chain mesh network. In other 
types of network, certain optimization techniques might be 
applied.  More on the optimization might  be found in a 
reference guide to IQRF OS [1]. There is always a trade-off 
being  present  between  the  level  of  redundancy  and  the 
command latency for the particular network topology.
E)  For the field deployment as shown in Figure 8., the 
band 868 MHz and data rate 19,2 kb/s were configured. STD 
transmitting/receiving mode was used since there is no real 
emphasis on any power saving mechanism for the street 
lighting networks but rather maximum number of hops along 
with the packet latency is being considered. As described in 
previous paragraph, there are two routing parameters directly 
proportional to maximum configured hops and overall packet 
latency. In the field deployment, RTDT0 is equal to 20 and 
RTDT1  is  equal  to  1.  With  this  setup  in  place,  the 
coordinator is able to send short packets (up to 24B) and 
receive acknowledgment back from N20 within 0.5 s time 
frame. Further, the coordinator was configured to contact 
each  node (N1-N20) in regular fashion. A pulling cycle was 
repeated every 5 min for 4 hours. During this run only HW 
related  issue  on  N15  was  encountered,  which  had  no 
influence on correct performance of network primitives. The 
coordinator was able to collect all valid responses for the 
sent requests except for N15.
 
F)  General  recommendations  for  the  street  lighting 
networks are shown in Tab. 1. It is recommended to run a 
street lighting network in STD mode. Other modes such as 
LP and XLP are more suitable for battery operated devices. 
Others parameters are described in the table. 
Table 1. IQRF street lighting recommendations
V.
FUTURE WORK
The future work within this project will be aiming at 
elaborating more on the idea of service-oriented architecture 
for IQRF and eventually for modern cities as shown  in 
Figure 1. More specifically, the design of a smart gateway 
with RESTful interface [15] to IQRF will be further pursued 
along with practical verification of its usability in common 
cities environment.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The  main  features  and  components  of  the  IQRF 
communication framework  were  presented. Based  on the 
standard IQRF components the IQRF-based WSMN was 
built to demonstrate basic operations in the street lighting 
systems and to experimentally verify the convenient use of 
WSMN in this application domain.
This network was used for the experiments presented in 
the  case  study.  On  this  network,  key  mesh  network 
parameters  were  shown  and  practically  discussed.  The 
recommendations  for  the  key  parameters  were  given  to 
application  designers  in  order  to  easy  their  task  of 
developing WSMN network.
The experiments have proved WSMN topology to be also 
at best convenience for the street lighting applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research has been supported and co-financed by the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic under 
a contract  FR—TI3/27, project Open Platform for Modern 
Cities.
Many thanks to Jaroslav Spicka and Jaromir Mastik for 
their practical insights.
REFERENCES
[1]
Datasheets and examples from http://www.iqrf.org [March  31, 2011]
[2]
J. D. Lee, K.Y. Nam, S.H. Jeong, S.B. Choi, H.S. Ryoo, D.K. Kim, 
“Development  of  Zigbee  based  Street  Light  Control  System”  IEEE, 
Atlanta, 2006
[3]
IEEE  802.15.4,  http://ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html  [March   31, 
2011]
[4]
Zigbee Alliance, http://zigbee.org/ [March  31, 2011]
[5]
IETF 6lowpan, http://6lowpan.org/ [March  31, 2011]
[6]
Arduino platform,  http://www.arduino.cc/  [March  31, 2011]
[7]
Jennic platform,  http://www.jennic.com/
 
   [March  31, 2011]
[8]
Epic  platform,  http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~prabal/projects/epic/ 
[March  31, 2011]
[9]
SuRF  platform,   http://www.peoplepowerco.com/surf_module.html 
[March  31, 2011]
[10] R.  Kuchta, R.  Vrba, and V.  Sulc, “Smart  platform  for  wireless 
communication  -  case  study",  Seventh  International  Conference  on 
Networking, Cancun, 2008
[11] J. Pos, "Mesh  wireless networks", Sdelovaci technika 3/2011, Czech 
Republic, 2011
[12] J.  Pos,  "Communication  gateways  of  IQRF  network",  Sdelovaci 
technika 5/2009, Czech Republic, 2009
[13] V. Sulc, R. Kuchta, and R. Vrba, “IQMESH implementation in IQRF 
Wireless  Communication  Platform",  2nd  International  Conference  on 
Advances in Mesh Networks, Glyfada, Greece, 2009
[14] IQVCP platform, http://iqvcp.org/iqvcp/index.php [March 31, 2011]
[15] R. T.  Fielding, Phd dissertation, 2000, 
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm 
38
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

