A Density Based Clustering Algorithm for Efﬁcient Channel Allocation in
Multi-radio Multi-channel Wireless Mesh Networks
Sana Ghannay, Sonia Mettali Gammar
National School of Computer Sciences
CRISTAL Laboratory, Tunisia
Email: sana.ghannay@cristal.rnu.tn, sonia.gammar@ensi.rnu.tn
Fethi Filali
QU Wireless Innovations Center
Doha, Qatar
Email: ﬁlali@quwic.com
Abstract—Efﬁcient channel selection is essential in 802.11
mesh deployments, for minimizing contention and interference
among co-channel devices. The IEEE 802.11 standard provides
at least three non-overlapping channels and thus its possible
for a node equipped with more than one network interface
card (NIC) to operate on different channels simultaneously.
This may increase the aggregate bandwidth available. In
this work, we propose a density based clustering algorithm
for channel allocation (DCCA) for multi-radio multi-channel
mesh networks. DCCA manages the network topology by
partitioning the mesh network into balanced cluster and affects
a ﬁxed and static channel to each cluster to be used mainly
for control trafﬁc. DCCA reduces intra- and inter-clusters
interference and can be used in conjunction with a dynamic
channel assignment strategy. Simulation results show that our
solution gives balanced clusters and reduces broadcast time.
Keywords-mesh networks; multi-channel; multi-rate; cluster-
ing; DCCA.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) [1] have recently
gained increasing attention and have emerged as a technol-
ogy with great potential for a wide range of applications.
WMN are composed of static wireless node which form
the backbone. One or several nodes which belong to the
mesh infrastructure can be conﬁgured as gateway to allow
access to external network such as Internet. Moreover, some
of mesh nodes can play the role of access point to allow
mesh network access to client station. In mesh network,
nodes are either stationary or minimally mobile and have
ample energy supply. For wireless local area networks, an
extension named IEEE 802.11s is being standardized. The
essential motivation for the 802.11s standard is to provide a
means by which a wireless backbone can be realised with
minimal conﬁguration effort useful in scenarios such as of-
ﬁce buildings, home networking, and apartment blocks. The
IEEE 802.11s working group speciﬁes a new architecture
deﬁning three network components: Mesh Point (MP), Mesh
Portal Point (MPP) and Mesh Access Point (MAP) [2]. The
MP determines how to route packets through the mesh. The
MPP is a particular MP connected to a wired gateway and it
allows MP to access external network such as Internet. The
MAP is a particular MP that allows client stations to access
to the mesh network.
Each node in WMN can be equipped with multiple
radios and each node interface can be conﬁgured to a
different channel. Allowing multiple channels use in the
same network is often presented as a possible way to
improve the network capacity. In fact, with proper design,
leveraging multiple channels available today has several
beneﬁts, including increasing system throughput, decreasing
end-to-end delay, and achieving better load balancing.
Several multi-channel researchers [3] use a dedicated
control channel and one interface is statically tuned to
the control channels. This interface will be used to ensure
connectivity and to send broadcast and control messages.
In these solutions, control channel can become a bottleneck
under heavy loads. In addition, in IEEE 802.11, there are
only three orthogonal channels. Thus, 33% of the channel
resource is consumed exclusively for control purposes.
In this work, we propose a clustering algorithm based
on a density metric to manage the mesh network topology.
Our algorithm is called DCCA for Density based Clus-
tering algorithm for Channel Allocation. DCCA constructs
balanced clusters, ensures that neighbor clusters doesn’t
interfere with each other and provides connectivity between
nodes. In fact, the intra-cluster connectivity is guaranteed
by affecting a ﬁxed channel FC to each cluster accord-
ing to a coloration algorithm. In addition, the inter-cluster
connectivity is ensured by an efﬁcient inter-cluster channel
assignment. DCCA allows conﬁguring one interface on FC
used to exchange control and data trafﬁc and it can be used
in conjunction with a dynamic channel assignment solution
to assign channels to pending radio interfaces.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:
in Section 2, we present multi-channel related works and
challenges. Section 3 reviews and compares load balancing
clustering algorithm. In Section 4, we detail our clustering
algorithm and inter and intra-cluster channel assignment. A
Simulation-based performance study is presented in Section
5. Section 6 concludes this paper.
1
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

II. MULTI-CHANNEL IN WMN
The main goal of channel assignment approaches is to
allocate the available channels to network interfaces of nodes
in a way that minimizes interference and maximizes the
average throughput [3]. Severals works was proposed in
litterature to achieve this goal. Before developping these
works, we ﬁrst present multichannel challenges.
A. Multichannel Challenges in WMN
1) Ensure connectivity: The wireless mesh network may
be split due to channel assignment. This can happen if a node
doesn’t share a common channel with any of its neighbor. In
this context, channel assignment must guarantee connectivity
between nodes in wireless network.
2) Support of broadcast: There are two methods to
broadcast messages in multichannel mesh network. The
ﬁrst one is the use of a dedicated control interface tuned
statically to a ﬁxed control channel to isolate control packets
from data packets. The second method is to use different
channels and broadcasted messages will be sent over all
radio interfaces. Both of methods have drawbacks. In fact, in
the ﬁrst method the dedicated interface can be overloaded,
whereas in the second method, a huge number of control
messages is observed in the network.
3) Balance load: Utilizing multiple channels allows par-
allel transmissions on non-overlapping channels. However,
without accounting for the channel load in terms of the
contention group size (the number of nodes using the same
channel in the vicinity) some channels may become over-
loaded which increases interference and degrades network
capacity
4) Minimize the overall interferences: The interference
generated by neighboring nodes to send control trafﬁc should
be minimized to decrease the packet loss probability and
improve thereby the overall performance of the network. To
reduce interference a node should minimize the number of
neighbors who use with him a common channel.
B. Related work
Several researchers proposed to manage the network
topology by using clustering in dynamic multi-channel so-
lutions such as [4] and [5] or tree architecture such as [7].
Nevertheless, clustering algorithms used by these solutions
are not adapted for multichannel. For example, Liu et al. [4]
uses Max-Min D-cluster algorithm which clustering result
depends mainly on the distribution of nodes identiﬁant in
the network. Max-Min D-cluster may lead to some small
clusters (clusters with radius equal to one or clusters with
small number of members). Small cluster may cause inter
cluster interference. Thus, the clustering algorithm must be
topology based. Makram et al. [5] requires a clustering at
the beginning, wherein the MPs nodes are grouped into
subsets of nearby nodes. It deploys the Highest Connectivity
Cluster (HCC) [6] algorithm, where a node is elected as a
clusterhead if it is the most highly connected node (having
the highest number of neighbor nodes). The HCC can
construct unbalanced one hop clusters. Raniwala et al. [7]
deﬁnes a multi-channel WMN tree architecture based. Each
MPP is the root of a spanning tree and each node attempts
to participate in one or multiple such spanning tree. The
solution of Raniwala et al. [7] has a drawback of providing
path to wired network only. Besides, it uses a dedicated
control interface to broadcast control messages. This inter-
face can become overloaded which increases collisions and
interference.
III. CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS FOR LOAD BALANCING
Our ﬁrst objective when forming clusters is to limit
the number of mobile nodes in each cluster to reduce
intra- and inter-cluster interference. As regard clustering
schemes, they can be classiﬁed according to their objectives
into six categories [8]. Dominating-Set based clustering,
low-maintenance clustering schemes, mobility-aware clus-
tering, energy-efﬁcient clustering, load balancing clustering
schemes and combined-metrics based clustering. In our
work, we opted for load balancing clustering. In fact, this
category attempts to limit the number of mobile nodes in
each cluster to a speciﬁed range so clusters are of similar
size. Obtained cluster sizes have signiﬁcant importance.
Indeed, a too-large cluster may has several nodes using the
same FC channel causing to heavy of interference in intra-
cluster and reducing system throughput. A too-small cluster
however may produce a large number of clusters and thus
increases the inter-cluster interference.
A. Load-balancing clustering schemes
1) AMC (Adaptive Multi-hop Clustering): AMC
[9]
maintains a multihop cluster structure based on load-
balancing clustering. For cluster maintenance each mo-
bile node periodically broadcasts its information, includ-
ing its ID, CID (Clusterhead ID), and status (cluster-
head/member/gateway) to others within the same cluster.
By such message exchange, each mobile node obtains the
topology information of its cluster. Each gateway also peri-
odically exchanges information with neighboring gateways
in different clusters and reports to its clusterhead. Thus,
a clusterhead can recognize the number of mobile nodes
of each neighboring cluster. AMC sets upper and lower
bounds (U and L) on the number of cluster members that
a clusterhead can handle. When the number of cluster
members in a cluster is less than the lower bound, the cluster
needs to merge with one of the neighboring clusters. On the
contrary, if the number of cluster members in a cluster is
greater than the upper bound, the cluster is divided into two
clusters.
2) DLBC (Degree-Load-Balancing Clustering): Periodi-
cally, DLBC [10] runs the clustering scheme in order to
keep the number of mobile nodes in each cluster around
2
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

A
I
D
F
C
B
H
1.5
1.5
1.25
1,25
1
J
1
1,25
1,33
Relay node
Clusterhead 
Ordinary node
Figure 1.
An example of DBC algorithm
a system parameter, ED (Eledted Degre), which indicates
the optimum number of mobile nodes that a clusterhead
can handle. A clusterhead degrades to an ordinary member
node if the difference between ED and the number of mobile
nodes that it currently serves exceeds some value, MaxDelta.
3) ACLB (Adaptive Cluster Load Balance method): A
new approach in
[11] is given. In hello message format,
an ”Option” item exists. If a sender node is a clusterhead,
it will set the number of its dominated member nodes as
”Option” value. When a sender node is not a clusterhead or
it is undecided (H or non-CH), ”Option” item will be reset to
0. When a clusterhead’s Hello message shows its dominated
nodes’ number exceeds a threshold (the maximum number
one clusterhead can manage), no new node will participate
in this cluster.
4) DBC (Density Based Clustering): DBC
[12] adopts
an approach based on a density metric to build clusters and
to elect clusterhead. The density aims to characterize the
node’s importance inside the wireless network and in its
neighborhood. The metric of density is the ratio between
the number of edges between a node U and its neighbors,
the number of edges between U’s neighbors and the number
of nodes inside U’s neighborhood. Each node broadcast its
density and the clusterhead will be the node having the
highest density value. To elect a clusterhead, each node
computes its density value and broadcasts it locally to all its
neighbors. By receiving this value, each node is able to know
which node will be the clusterhead. Once a cluster head
is elected, the cluster head MAC Address and its density
are locally broadcast by all nodes that decided to join that
cluster. A cluster can then extend itself until it reaches a
cluster frontier of another clusterhead. Let ’s consider an
example of DBC algorithm in Fig. 1. Before partitioning
the network, it is necessary to evaluate the density for each
node. The density of node H is 1.33 (1.33 = (2 + 1)/2)
because H has 2 edges with its neighbors (links (H, B) and
(H, I)), 1 egde between its neighbors (link (B, I) and 2
neighbors (B and I).
B. Comparison of Load-balancing Clustering
Table I
COMPARISON OF LOAD BALANCING CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS
AMC
DLBC
ACLB
DBC
Clustering
2-hop
2-hop
1-hop
2-hop
Multi-hops
Metric
NA
Degree
Degree
Density
Nono-verlapping
Yes
No
No
Yes
Clusters
Balanced
Depend
Yes
Yes
In dense
Clusters
on U and L
Network
Clusterhead
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
in the middle
Distance
More then
More then
Less then
More then
between
three hops
three hops
three hops
three hops
Clusterheads
Direct
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
connectivity
to clusterhead
Table. I presents a summary of the load-balancing cluster-
ing schemes addressed before. We have ﬁxed criterions re-
lated to multichannel to compare these clustering algorithms.
The aim of this comparison is the selection of the most
suitable clustering algorithm to manage network topology.
The ﬁrst criterion that we have considered is clustering
multi-hop. In fact, multi-hop clustering is preferred than
one-hop clustering and especially 2-hop clustering. In fact,
if the radius of clusters is set to 1 then two non neighbor
clusters may still interfere with each other. In contrast, if
the radius of the clusters is 2 then non-neighbor cluster
interference can only occur when the intermediate cluster is
small enough, which reduces the possibility of non-neighbor
cluster interference to a very small extent. If the radius of
clusters is larger than 2, the efﬁciency of clustering algorithm
will be reduced sharply and the intra-cluster interference
on the Fc channel will increase. AMC, DLBC and DBC
keep a multi-hop cluster structure while ACLB is 1-hop
clustering algorithm. To have balanced clusters, a metric
that consider topology is required. DLBC and ACLB use
the metric of degree while DBC uses the metric of density.
The density metric permits to obtain balanced clusters as it
consider neighbor and links between neighbors. To reduce
interference, clusters must be non-overlapping. AMC and
DBC gives nonoverlapping clusters. The third criterion is
the size of obtained clusters. In fact, The resulting clusters
obtained from AMC are balanced if U (Upper bound) is
closer to L (Lower bound). DLBC and ACLB give balanced
cluster and DBC gives balanced cluster in dense network.
The next criterion is the position of the clusterhead in the
cluster. The ideal position is in the middle of the cluster
to have a direct connectivity with major node members
to minimize the number of exchanged message. In DLCB,
ACLB and DBC clusterheads are in the middle while in
AMC, clusterheads can be in the periphery of clusters.
Finally, the last criterion is the distance between cluster-
3
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

heads. A distance of 3 hops and more is suitable. In fact,
clusterheads will disseminate information on channel FC.
Therefore, clusterheads must be distant to avoid interference
between their transmissions. DLBC, ACLB and DBC require
that neighboring clusterheads should be at least three hops
away.
IV. DCCA: DENSITY BASED CLUSTERING ALGORITHM
FOR CHANNEL ALLOCATION
We present environment features and constraints before
decribing our solution DCCA.
A. Assumptions
1) Initially, every node set one of its interfaces to a
Default Channel.
2) The available non-overlapping channels are limited (3
at least for IEEE 802.11 standard).
3) Every node has at least two network interfaces but we
don’t require the same number of interfaces by node.
4) We consider that the mesh network is composed of
static MP.
5) We assume that our network includes one MPP. How-
ever, if multiple MPP exist only one of them will be
designated to unroll DCCA protocol. This MPP could
be chosen based on the MAC address.
From Table I, we observe that the density algorithm is
the more appropriate clustering algorithm to manage the
network topology in a multichannel solution. We opted for
DBC because it provides balancing and non-overlapping
clusters and each cluster has at least a diameter of 2 which
reduces the possibility of non-neighbor clusters interference.
Moreover, the distance between neighboring clusterheads in
DBC is 3 hops to avoid contention between clusterheads
transmissions. Finally, clusterhead are closer to the middle
of the cluster which implies less control exchanges into a
cluster. However, DBC may construct unbalanced clusters
in low density networks [12]. For this reason, we propose
an improvement of DBC named DCCA (Density based
Clustering algorithm for Channel Allocation) in order to
obtain balanced clusters.
B. Clustering mechanism
DCCA is based on DBC. DBC computed the density of
each node then it partitions network topology into clusters
(see Sec. III-A4). In order to balance clusters sizes, each
clusterhead in DCCA broadcast its MAC address and its
cluster size. A relay node which is the node on the periphery
of cluster such as node A receives messages from adjacent
clusterheads and then knows the total number of nodes
in each cluster. If this node ﬁnds that there is unbalance
between the size of its cluster and one of its neighbor clusters
(difference between node numbers in each cluster greater
than 2), and if this node is 2 hops away from its clusterhead,
it tries to migrate. Therefore, it sends an ATTACH message
A
I
D
F
C
B
H
1
1
1
1,25
1
J
1
1,25
1,33
(1)Attach
(2)Accept
(1)Detach
(2)Accept
(3)Confirm
(3)Confirm
Relay node
Clusterhead 
Ordinary node
Figure 2.
DCCA Algorithm
to the neighbor clusterhead (J) and DETACH to its ap-
propriate clusterhead (H). The ATTACH message contains
the relay MAC address, the neighbor clusterhead MAC
address and the number of nodes in its cluster. The DETACH
message contains the relay MAC address, its clusterhead
MAC address and the neighbor cluster size. J accepts this
migration only if the number of nodes in the ATTACH
request is greater than the number of J’s cluster. In this
case, it sends an ACCEPT message. Moreover, H accepts
this migration only if the number of nodes in the DETACH
request is lower than the number of H’s cluster. In this case,
it also sends an ACCEPT message. If the relay node receives
ACCEPT messages from J and H, it sends a CONFIRM
message to H and J. Finally, this relay node will update its
information about its new clusterhead. As a result of DCCA,
the obtained clusters have approximately the same size (4
in this example).
C. Inter- and intra-cluster channel assignment
The purpose of the inter-cluster channel assignment is to
distribute the available channels between clusters in a way
that two neighboring clusters get different channels. In order
to reach this objective, a modiﬁed DSATUR coloration
algorithm [13] is deployed. In modiﬁed DSATUR, the MPP
sends a declaration message PDEC (Portal DEClaration)
in the mesh network (we can use the PANN (Portal
ANNouncement) message deﬁned in IEEE 802.11s draft
[2]). Upon reception of PDEC, each clusterhead sends a
unicast PREG (Portal REGistration) to the MPP via the
MP from which it received the PDEC. The registration
message contains several information such as neighbor
clusterhead addresses and a hop count ﬁeld which calculate
the number of hops between the MPP and the clusterhead.
The MPP establishes a clusterheads table and a cluster
connectivity matrix. The Clusterheads Table gives the level
of each clusterhead which is obtained by dividing the
distance between the clusterhead and the MPP by 3 (3 is
the minimum distance between clusterheads)(example in
(Fig. 3) the Clusterheads Table is given by Table. IV-C).
4
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

A
I
D
F
C
B
H
J
CH1
CH2
External Network
MPP
G
K
M
L
E
CH3
Relay node
Clusterhead 
Ordinary node
Figure 3.
Inter-cluster channel assignement
In addition, the Connectivity Matrix permits to obtain the
degree of a clusterhead which is the number of neighbor
clusters (example in (Fig. 3) the Connectivity Matrix is
given by (Table. IV-C)). For example in Fig. 3, the degree
of clusterhead H is 2 as its cluster has two neighbor clusters.
Table II
CLUSTERHEADS TABLE
Id Clusterhead
Level
H
0
J
0
L
1
Table III
CONNECTIVITY MATRIX
H
J
L
H
0
1
1
J
1
0
0
L
1
0
0
After a ﬁxed timer (the necessary delay to receive all
PREG messages from clusterheads), the MPP node affects to
each clusterhead a ﬁxed channel FC according to a modiﬁed
DSATUR coloration algorithm. Indeed, this problem can be
considered as a classical graph k-coloring problem: each
clusterhead is a vertex in the graph. Two clusterheads are
neighbor means that there are relay nodes between the
two clusters. The Inter-cluster channel assignment algorithm
(Algorithm 2) colors all vertices with k colors (k is the
number of channels) so that neighbor vertices have different
colors or the number of conﬂicts is as small as possible.
The MPP broadcasts a channel list message containing
all clusters and affected ﬁxed channels. Each node that
receives this message conﬁgures one of its interfaces on the
corresponding FC. A relay node has already an interface on
FC of its cluster and affects its pending interfaces according
to the algorithm (Algorithm 3).
In this way, intra- and inter-cluster connectivity are
assured. Moreover, broadcast can be done efﬁciently. In fact,
Algorithm 1 DSAT
1: if If no neighbor of v is colored Then then
2:
DSAT (v) = degree (v)
3: else
4:
DSAT (v) = the number of different colors used in
the ﬁrst neighborhood of v
5: end if
Algorithm 2 Inter-cluster Channel Assignement
1: Order the vertices in descending order of degree
2: Color the vertex having the maximum degree with color
1
3: Choose an uncolored vertex x having the maximum
value of DSAT (Algo. 1)
4: if conﬂict then
5:
Choose the vertex with the minimum level
// vertices having same DSAT
6: else
7:
if conﬂict then
8:
Choose the vertex with the minimum ID
// vertices having same Levels
9:
end if
10: end if
11: Let FREE(x) a set of colors unused by the neighbors of
x
12: if FREE(x) ⊂ {1, 2, ..., k} is not empty then
13:
Color the vertex x with the smallest color in FREE(x)
14: else
15:
Choose a color unused by the cluster of the MPP
among the least used colors
16: end if
17: if all vertices are colored then
18:
Stop
19: else
20:
Go to 3
21: end if
relay nodes dessiminate messages on all interfaces whereas
other nodes dessiminate messages on the interface conﬁg-
ured on FC. Therefore, our proposal reduces interference
involved by broadcast messages.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We studied the performance gains of the proposed mul-
tichannel WMN architecture based on clustering through
extensive Qualnet simulations. The following are the default
settings for the simulations. We consider only the mesh
network infrastructure. Nodes are uniformly distributed in
1500m∗ 1500m simulation network. Each node is equipped
with 2 NICs and the number of channels is set to 3. The
ratio between the communication range and the interference
range is set to 2. One of nodes is designated as the MPP
node and is connected to the wired network. A random
5
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cluster size (nodes)
Number of nodes
(min cluster size)
(max cluster size)
(a) DBC
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cluster size (nodes)
Number of nodes
(min cluster size)
(max cluster size)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cluster size (nodes)
Number of nodes
(min cluster size)
(max cluster size)
(b) DCCA
Figure 4.
Obtained clusters size with: (a) DBC algorithm, (b) DCCA algorithm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
Average broadcast time
Number of nodes
(Dedicated control interface)
(Control interface per cluster)
(a) Number of nodes
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Average broadcast time
Number of hops
(Dedicated control interface)
(Control interface per cluster)
(b) Number of hops
Figure 5.
Average broadcast time as a fuction of: (a) the number of nodes, (b) the number of n hops
Algorithm 3 Relay Interfaces Conﬁguration
1: if it is a relay to a single cluster (case of node B) then
2:
It sets up one of its interfaces on the channel of the
FC of the neighbor cluster
3: else
4:
if the number of neighbor clusters exceeds the number
of its interfaces then
5:
It lefts one of its interfaces on the Default Channel.
6:
else
7:
It conﬁgures its interfaces on the channels of neigh-
boring clusters
8:
end if
9: end if
selected node sends a broadcast message on n hops away
(n is a simulation parameter). Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show
the maximum and minimum cluster sizes in terms of node
members using the DBC and DCCA clustering algorithms
respectively. DCCA gives more balanced clusters than DBC
thanks to relay nodes migration if there is an unbalance
between neighbor cluster sizes. That’s way the difference
between the maximum and minimum cluster sizes given by
DCCA is smaller than the difference expressed by DBC. In
dense network (about 100 nodes), there is a constant and
low difference between obtained cluster sizes using DCCA
and DBC.
Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show the average broadcast time
using a dedicated control interface and a control interface
per cluster by varying the number of nodes and the number
of broadcast hops (n). We observe that DCCA minimize
the average broadcast time. In fact, DCCA uses different
channels for neighbor clusters. Therefore, nodes broadcast
messages using non overlapping channels which minimize
interference and collision. The channel used by the dedicated
control interface becomes overloaded which induces more
time to propagate the broadcast message.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we proposed a Density based Clustering
algorithm for Channel Allocation (DCCA) in multi-radio and
multi-channel wireless mesh network. DCCA uses a density
metric and partitions the mesh network infrastructure into
balanced clusters. Each cluster is affected a ﬁxed channel FC
using a coloration algorithm executed by the MPP. Obtained
clusters have different ﬁxed channels to minimize intra-
and inter-cluster interference. Performance evaluation has
shown that our proposal gives balanced clusters. DCCA also
6
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

minimize the average time of broadcast messages.
DCCA can be considered as a ﬁrst step in a dynamic
load aware channel assignment mechanism as it assigns a
ﬁxed channel per cluster; nodes can conﬁgure their pending
interfaces according to a dynamic channel allocation. In
future, we will use the obtained network topology from
DCCA in a joint routing and channel allocation protocol.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented in this paper has been partially funded
by Qatar Telecom (Qtel).
REFERENCES
[1] I.F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, Wireless mesh networks:
a survey, Computer Networks, Vol. 47, Iss. 4, pp. 445-487,
March 2005.
[2] IEEE P802.11s/D8.0, Draft STANDARD, March 2009.
[3] J. Crichigno, M.Y. Wub, and W. Shu, Protocols and architec-
tures for channel assignment in wireless mesh networks, Ad
hoc Networks, Vol. 6, pp. 1051-1077, September 2008.
[4] C. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Zhao, T. Zhao, and Wei Yan, A
Clustering Based Channel Assignment Algorithm and Routing
Metric for Multichannel Wireless Mesh Networks, In Proc of
ISPA, pp. 832-843, August 2007.
[5] S. A. Makram, M. Gunes A. Kchiche, and M. Krebs, Dynamic
Channel Assignment for Wireless Mesh Networks using Clus-
tering, In Proc of ICN, pp. 539-544, April 2008.
[6] M. Gerla and J.T.C. Tsai, Multicluster, mobile, multimedia
radio network. Wireless Networks, Vol. 1, N. 3, pp. 255-265,
1995.
[7] A. Raniwala and P. Chiueh, Architecture and Algorithms for
an IEEE 802.11-based Multi-channel Wireless Mesh Network,
in Proc of IEEE Infcom, pp. 2223-2234, March 2005.
[8] Y. Jane and P. Chong, A survey of clustering schemes for
mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Communications Surveys, Vol.
7, pp. 32-48, 2005.
[9] T. Ohta, S. Inoue, and Y. Kakuda, An Adaptive Multihop
Clustering Scheme for Highly Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, in
Proc ISADS, pp. 293-300, April, 2003.
[10] A. D. Amis and R. Prakash, Load-Balancing Clusters in
Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, in Proc of IEEE ASSET, pp. 25–
32, March 2000.
[11] F. Li, S. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Xue, and H. Shen, Vote-Based
Clustering Algorithm in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, In Proc of
ICNIT, pp. 13-23, February 2004.
[12] N. Mitton and E. Fleury. Self-organization in multi-hop wire-
less networks, In Proc of MedHocNet, June 2004.
[13] M. Kubale, Graph Colorings, American Mathematical Soci-
ety, 2004.
7
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

