Connecting the Unconnected 
Bluetooth and 802.11 in harmony 
 
Curtis Sahd 
Department of Computer Science 
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
curtissahd@gmail.com 
Hannah Thinyane 
Department of Computer Science 
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
h.thinyane@ru.ac.za
 
 
Abstract—Many new cell phones on the market come with 
802.11 enabled, along with standard Bluetooth functionality. A 
large percentage of working class people in South Africa 
typically cannot afford 802.11 enabled cell phones, and thus 
the most applicable form of wireless data transfer is achieved 
through the Bluetooth protocol. This paper investigates 
bridging Bluetooth and 802.11 protocols on low cost wireless 
routers equipped with a Broadcom chip and a USB port, as 
well as bridging on high end cell phones. For the router 
component of this research, the BlueZ protocol stack will be 
implemented on top of the OpenWrt platform and experiments 
relating to the feasibility and scalability of SIP voice calls 
between clients on the Bluetooth network and clients on the 
wireless mesh network will be investigated. For the cell phone 
component of this bridging, Java Mobile will be used as the 
development platform of choice, and a comparison between 
bridging on the cell phone and on the wireless router will be 
conducted, with metrics such as latency, scalability, and 
minimum throughput will be considered. This paper proposes 
a low cost solution to building community telephone networks 
in rural South Africa, through the bridging of 802.11 and 
Bluetooth interfaces. 
Keywords – Wireless; SIP; Community telephone networks; 
BlueZ. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Bluetooth protocol has been around since 1994, and 
its primary function is to replace wires and serve as 
lightweight wireless implementation for data transfer. Even 
though most high end cell phones are equipped with 802.11, 
Bluetooth still serves as the primary data transfer protocol 
between cell phones in South Africa. Based on a survey 
conducted on the streets of Grahamstown, South Africa, it 
was discovered that most people called someone in 
Grahamstown or in the surrounding region on a daily basis. 
Currently, the only way to make phone calls, whether local 
or inter-town, is to make use of a fixed landline, which the 
vast majority of the underprivileged do not have access to, or 
to make use of the ever increasingly expensive mobile 
service providers. Paying sky high cellular network rates to 
make local phone calls places an enormous burden on 
already financially constrained rural communities. Bluetooth 
alone cannot be used in a full scale implementation which 
would enable free local phone calls. However, the 
combination of Bluetooth and 802.11 mesh networks could, 
in the context of South African rural communities, create a 
system which saves rural communities millions of Rand each 
year. Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) are dynamic, self-
configuring networks which are design to span large 
geographical areas. WMNs could therefore be used to span 
the geographical area of the rural community, and possibly 
even connect remote rural communities to one another. 
This paper aims to explore inexpensive means to creating 
low cost community telephone networks with existing 
technology in rural areas. We propose a system which 
enables the seamless integration of Bluetooth and 802.11 on 
the OpenWrt and Java Mobile (JME) platforms. We begin 
with an introduction to Bluetooth and in particular, Bluetooth 
networking with piconets and scatternets. We then provide a 
brief overview of the OpenWrt platform and focus on mesh 
networking, as well as reviewing related work in this area. 
Section IV then describes the Mesh Potato, and the 
possibilities it presents in rural areas. This overview is then 
followed by an in depth analysis of the proposed 
infrastructure of the Blue Bridge, and the associated 
advantages and disadvantages of various implementations. 
Section VI describes the context of this paper and how the 
proposed technology can be beneficial to rural communities 
and 
coincides 
with 
objectives 
of 
various 
social 
reconstruction programmes. Section VII then concludes this 
paper.  
II. 
BLUETOOTH PERSONAL AREA NETWORKS 
A. Overview 
At initial conception Bluetooth was considered the future 
of Personal Area Networks (PANs), due to it being a 
lightweight protocol and the inexpensive manufacturing of 
Bluetooth chips [1]. The Bluetooth specification clearly 
defines PANs and associated roles of the nodes in the PAN 
in the case where two devices are communicating directly. 
The Bluetooth specification also defines the roles of nodes in 
multi-hop environments, but less research has been 
conducted in this field [1]. Asthana and Kalofonos [2] have 
developed a custom protocol which enables the seamless 
communication of existing Piconets within a Scatternet. 
Specifically, their research allows for the creation of 
Ethernet and IP local links on top of scatternets through the 
51
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

use of a standard PAN profile implementation, without the 
need for ad hoc forwarding protocols [2]. 
Plenty of research has been done in the field of providing 
Internet Access to rural communities. There has been little to 
no research in the field of making use of low cost hardware 
infrastructure to bridge Bluetooth and 802.11 which enables 
large scale service provision to local and remote rural 
communities. Bluetooth Piconets and Scatternets are an 
important component of bridging Bluetooth and 802.11 mesh 
networks, as in some cases devices will be able to 
communicate directly with one another (Piconets) and in 
other cases devices may only be able to communicate by 
sending traffic through a number of other nodes before 
reaching the desired node (more applicable to Scatternets). 
With that said, many researchers have investigated the 
formation and limitations of Mobile Ad-hoc Networks 
(MANETs) with the Bluetooth protocol [1]. 
 
B. Piconets and Scatternets 
According to Bisdikian [3] a piconet is simply defined as 
a collection of Bluetooth devices which can communicate 
with one another. A piconet consists of one master node and 
one or more slave nodes, and exists for as long as the master 
communicates with the slaves. Piconets are formed in an ad-
hoc manner, and need a minimum of one master node and 
maximum of seven active slave nodes. Although only seven 
active nodes are able to transmit based on coordination of the 
master node, other nodes are able to connect to the piconet, 
and are said to be in a parked state [3].  
Scatternets are based on piconets and are said to exist 
when one device is a member of multiple piconets. In the 
case of scatternets, a node can only serve as the master node 
for one piconet. 
For the purposes of this research it is important to 
understand the functioning of piconets and scatternets in 
order to handle the association of clients to the Bluetooth 
access point. 
III. 
OPENWRT 
OpenWrt is defined as Linux for embedded devices [4]. 
OpenWrt provides a plethora of opportunities for robust 
application development and service provision on embedded 
devices, and for the purposes of this research, specifically on 
wireless routers. In order to grasp the functioning of 
OpenWrt it is necessary to understand the various 
components of the software which manages wireless routers 
and for that matter any embedded device. The software 
which runs on computer chips or on embedded device chips 
is known as firmware [5]. The following are a few of the 
many types of chips which have firmware installed on them: 
read-only 
memory 
(ROM); 
programmable 
read-only 
memory 
(PROM); 
erasable 
programmable 
read-only 
memory (EPROM). PROMs and EPROMs are designed to 
allow firmware updates through a software update [5]. In 
order to compile custom Linux firmwares on embedded 
devices, a technique known as cross compiling is used, 
where a new compiler is produced, which is capable of 
generating code for a particular platform, and this compiler is 
then able to compile a linux distribution customized for a 
particular device [6]. Generally, the cross-compiling process 
begins with a binary copy of a compiler and basic libraries, 
rather than the daunting task of creating a compiler from 
scratch [6]. The remainder of this section describes mesh 
networking principles and practices on the OpenWrt 
platform, as well as the state of the art in rural mesh 
networks. 
OpenWrt contains a number of packages which assist 
with the implementation of mesh networks. Optimized Link 
State Routing Protocol (OLSR) is an example of a routing 
protocol developed by Andreas Tønnesen which has been 
implemented in the form of a package for OpenWrt [7]. 
Another Open Source mesh networking implementation 
known as ROBIN (ROuting Batman Inside) has been 
developed on top of  OpenWrt Kamikaze [8]. ROBIN is self-
configuring and self-maintaining, which enables the 
seamless creation of wireless mesh networks. ROBIN 
requires a minimum of one Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) 
connection, a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) 
enabled router which is connected to the DSL line and serves 
as the gateway node [4]. Client repeater nodes simply have 
to be powered on and a mesh network is dynamically 
configured [4]. With that said, open mesh networking 
protocols, which simplify the creation and extension of mesh 
networks, can be utilized in rural communities. Mesh 
networks thus serve as a low cost alternative to information 
technology service provision in rural areas, providing 
significantly more benefits than drawbacks.  The benefits of 
mesh networks in rural communities have been extensively 
discussed [8] [9]. Reguart et al. [8] suggest that mesh 
networking technologies in urban areas are often unsuited to 
rural areas due to the high cost of equipment and 
maintenance. 
They 
proposed 
and 
tested 
Wireless 
Distribution System (WDS) by making use inexpensive 
wireless hardware (Linksys WRT54AG and Linksys 
WRT54G). Through a prototype deployment of their 
infrastructure 
they 
found 
that 
inexpensive 
wireless 
equipment is capable of providing fourty people with internet 
access, and at any one point in time there are between fifteen 
and 
thirty 
active 
clients 
[8]. 
The 
aforementioned 
implementation performs surprisingly well for sparsely 
situated rural communities, but would not suffice for the 
purposes of South African rural communities for the 
following reasons: Rural communities in South Africa are 
densely populated; laptops are seldom found in rural areas, 
as most of the people are living below the breadline and 
cannot afford such equipment; even if everyone had access 
to laptops, the use of inexpensive wireless equipment as used 
above would be overloaded and the end result would most 
likely be malfunction; also the use of secured outdoor 
equipment is imperative in the context of South Africa due to 
crime levels. 
IV. 
THE MESH POTATO 
The Mesh Potato is a new device which merges the ideas 
of current telephony (analog phones) and future technology 
(reliable wireless communications). The Mesh Potato 
52
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

combines a wireless access point (AP) with an Analog 
Telephony Adapter (ATA), and thus enables cheap 
communications using existing technology [17]. Routers by 
Meraki [18] and OpenMesh [19] are gaining popularity due 
to their low cost and robustness, but they however lack the 
functionality contained within the Mesh Potato in terms of 
integration with existing telephonic infrastructure.  
Although rural areas in South Africa are often on the 
outskirts of town, plenty of remote and isolated settlements 
exist, and more often than not, these settlements lack 
infrastructure such as running water, sewage and waste 
removal, and electricity. In such cases where electricity is 
scarce or non-existent, the Mesh Potato is ideal since it can 
be powered by a 10w solar panel [17].  
The Mesh Potato is powered by Open Source firmware 
(Linux, OpenWrt, B.A.T.M.A.N and Asterisk) which 
removes vendor lock in and makes the Mesh Potato cost 
effective and highly configurable [17]. The Mesh Potato 
enables the seamless connection of analog telephones, as 
well as wired and wireless IP phones. Cellular technology is 
the primary form of communication in rural areas in South 
Africa, and although analog phones are inexpensive and 
could be subsidized by the government, the Mesh Potato is 
currently unable to cater for the existing needs of people in 
rural areas.  
V. 
PROPOSED BRIDGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
After extensive literature reviews we found that there is a 
lack of knowledge in the field of Bluetooth and 802.11 
bridging in the context of rural communities in Africa, and as 
such we propose a system (Blue Bridge) which not only 
deals with remote access to such communities, but also 
enables service provision through the use of inexpensive and 
readily 
available 
technology 
thus 
connecting 
the 
unconnected. The system will be centered around the 
OpenWrt firmware, which is to be installed on the Ubiquiti 
AirRouter [10]. The AirRouter will not only serve as an 
interface for 802.11 connections, but will also become a 
Bluetooth access point through the use of the BlueZ protocol 
stack which controls the functioning of the Bluetooth dongle 
inserted into the USB port of the AirRouter. Asterisk [11] 
will be installed as a package on the OpenWrt platform, and 
will serve as the SIP controller. A package will be developed 
for the OpenWrt platform which will bridge the connections 
between the 802.11 and Bluetooth interfaces. Fig. 1 shows 
the proposed infrastructure involving one AirRouter: 
 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed OpenWrt infrastructure for low cost community 
telephone network. 
 
Any cell phone on the Bluetooth interface of the Blue 
Bridge should be able to place SIP calls to any other phone 
on the Bluetooth interface, as well as to any phone on the 
802.11 interface. Of course as mentioned in Section B a 
maximum of seven active connections can exist on the 
Bluetooth interface, which clearly places limitations on the 
scalability of the proposed system.  
With the aforementioned, the components of the 
proposed system include the AirRouter (running OpenWrt); 
the USB Bluetooth dongle; and a JavaME enabled cell 
phone, which the majority of the surveyed population 
possesses. The aim of this research is  to provide Bluetooth 
access (via the connected Bluetooth USB dongle) as well as 
802.11 access to multiple geographically dispersed routers 
which in turn enables the creation of community telephone 
networks, thus connecting the unconnected, and significantly 
decreasing the burden of expensive cellular calls. 
The ideal scenario is the use of minimal equipment, 
while still maintaining an acceptable level of service 
provision. This translates to decent quality voice calls, with 
minimal 
downtime. 
In 
order 
to 
achieve 
this, 
an 
understanding of the Bluetooth protocol and its scalability 
limitations is vitally important. Sahd [12] conducted a study 
which investigated the real throughput achieved by the 
Bluetooth protocol on mobile devices. Sahd [12] found that  
the average transfer speed of the Logical Link Control and 
Adaptation Protocol (L2CAP) when transferring a 6.6 MB 
M4A audio file twice between two cell phones is 136.39 
KBps [12]. If a maximum of seven clients are connected to 
the Bluetooth interface each client would be allocated a 
bandwidth of 19.48 KBps. Based on the assumption that 
seven simultaneous connections are active on the Bluetooth 
interface, the minimum accumulated bandwidth for these 
connections is 27.35 KBps, which would allow a theoretical 
number of thirty five clients to be connected [13]. 
This research will also investigate the differences in 
performance of Blue Bridge implementations on the JME 
platform and on the OpenWrt platform. Of course the most 
prominent difference between implementations on the two 
platforms is the class of Bluetooth device. The OpenWrt 
platform implementation of the Blue Bridge will make use of 
a class one Bluetooth device which is capable of a distance 
of 100m, whereas cell phones typically contain class two 
Bluetooth chips which enables transmission at distances of 
10m. Sahd [12] found that even though the Bluetooth 
specification states a distance of 10m, transmission is 
possible at distances as high as 15m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

Fig. 2 shows the proposed Blue Bridge infrastructure on 
the cell phone: 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed cell phone based infrastructure for low cost 
community telephone network. 
From Fig. 2 it can be seen that an external asterisk server 
would have to substitute the asterisk server contained within 
the OpenWrt packages. The scalability of the internal 
asterisk server would have to be researched and compared to 
that of the external asterisk server. On the other hand, the 
Nokia N95 8GB could pose to be a severe bottleneck under 
load.  
In order to determine which platform will serve as the 
basis for a community telephone network, a number of 
metrics would have to be compared. These metrics can be 
seen in Table I:  
 
TABLE I.  
KNOWN METRICS OF PROPOSED BLUE BRIDGE PLATFORMS 
Metrics 
OpenWrt 
Blue Bridge on cell 
phone 
Cost 
Cheap 
More expensive 
Compactness 
Average 
Very compact 
Complexity 
High 
Medium 
Platform 
Linux 
Java Mobile 
 
Based 
on 
the 
information 
currently 
available, 
assumptions from the data in Table I could lead one to 
believe that the Blue Bridge on the cell phone would be the 
better alternative as a whole. However, metrics such as 
performance under load, scalability, and multi-hop capability 
can only be determined once the implementation and 
necessary research has been completed. 
With the above overview of the equipment needed for the 
implementation of the Blue Bridge, subsection A provides 
information regarding the costs involved, and a means for 
funding the Blue Bridge. 
A. Costs and implementation considerations 
There are two important factors to consider when 
determining the cost, and the number of units necessary for 
the implementation of community telephone networks: the 
geographical area and the proposed number of connected 
clients. The geographical area plays a large role in 
determining the strength of the devices needed to transmit a 
good quality signal. Mountains, trees, buildings, and other 
obstructions have to be considered. The number of 
connected clients dictates the scalability of the system, and 
thus the overall cost of implementation. Table II provides an 
overview of the costs involved:  
TABLE II.  
KNOWN METRICS OF PROPOSED BLUE BRIDGE PLATFORMS 
Device 
Cost 
Means of funding 
AirRouter 150Mbps WiFi Router 
R313.50 
Government 
Mecer Class 1 USB Bluetooth 
(ENUBT-C1EM) 
R169.00 
Government 
Basic machine for Asterisk server 
(1.8 GHz, 2GB RAM, 500GB HD) 
R2700.00 
Government 
 
       
      Based on the costs in Table II, the maximum total cost 
for a prototype system catering for seven connected nodes 
will come to a total of R3182.50. This value is of course 
inclusive of the Asterisk server machine, which would not 
be necessary if the Asterisk server were to be implemented 
on the AirRouter itself.  
      The average voice call from the Vodacom cellular 
network to another network costs R2.75 per minute [20]. 
Based on the assumption that seven people spend five 
minutes on the phone each day for one month, the total cost 
incurred is R2983.75. Even though the Bluetooth protocol 
only permits seven active clients, more than seven people 
could connect to one AirRouter, due to the unlikeliness of 
everyone placing calls simultaneously. With that said, it can 
be seen that in just one month, the costs incurred by 
impoverished communities can be drastically reduced. This 
rate is the highest rate per minute rate on the Vodacom 
prepaid plan, and was chosen to estimate the maximum 
amount of money spent on cell phone calls.  
      Section VI provides an overview of government 
initiatives to introduce equality in impoverished areas, as 
such all equipment and implementation costs would be 
government subsidized.  
VI. 
CONTEXT 
The reconstruction and development program (RDP) of 
South Africa is a program implemented by the African 
National Congress (ANC) which addresses socioeconomic 
problems which exist as a result of the Apartheid regime 
[14]. The RDP program is of great benefit to all South 
Africans and in particular, South Africans living in rural 
areas without basic necessities such as adequate housing, 
water and electricity. Traditionally RDP housing was built 
on plots of 250m2 which placed tremendous strain on the fair 
land distribution due to special constraints [15]. Recently, 
54
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

there has been a movement from traditional RDP housing to 
more cost effective multi-storey RDP housing which reduces 
plot sizes from 250m2 to 80m2 [15][16]. With that said this 
poses as an ideal situation for the successful implementation 
of the Blue Bridge, as signal penetration will be higher and 
this type of RDP housing would prove more effective from a 
point of view of device mounting as well as line of sight 
access for surrounding residents. The Blue Bridge will 
benefit such communities immensely in terms of cost 
savings, and possible expansions could include educational 
resources and Internet access. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed an inexpensive means to 
creating a community telephone network, which utilizes 
existing technology and infrastructure. We demonstrated an 
innovative 
approach 
to 
merging 
two 
independent 
technologies to achieve maximum penetration in all spheres 
of society. We proposed an infrastructure for the 
implementation of the Blue Bridge on the OpenWrt platform, 
as well as on the JME platform, and determined the metrics 
necessary for large scale implementation. This paper 
demonstrated an understanding of the social inequality and 
the effects of overpriced communications on impoverished 
communities. 
The Mesh Potato lacks functionality which caters for the 
existing needs of people in rural areas. Similarly, the Blue 
Bridge lacks the functionality of providing an analog 
telephony interface, which is still widely used. As such, 
future work which adds functionality to the OpenWrt 
component of the Blue Bridge could involve connecting the 
Mesh Potato to the AirRouter via cable, and ensuring that 
both devices are on the same subnet, thus enabling the 
utilization of the analog interface of the Mesh Potato. In 
terms of the cell phone component of the Blue Bridge, the 
Mesh Potato could be connected to the cell phone via the 
wireless interface. 
Another proposal for future work regarding this research 
could involve the use of low cost, high powered wireless 
equipment which could solve the need for large numbers of 
AirRouters or similar devices, since one device could 
provide access to a larger area. Future implementations of 
the aforementioned could involve connecting powerful 
wireless equipment to the AirRouter via the LAN interface, 
and in the case of the cell phone based Blue Bridge, via the 
wireless interface. The proposed expansion of the original 
infrastructure can be seen in Fig. 3.  
Fig. 3(a) shows the expansion of the OpenWrt based 
infrastructure through the use of an external high powered 
wireless device, which is connected to the AirRouter via 
cable. This device then expands the wireless network, which 
then enables a larger number of clients to connect to the 
mesh and reap the benefits of a community telephone 
network. Of course the AirRouter will still serve as an access 
point for nearby 802.11 and Bluetooth clients.  
Fig. 3(b) depicts the expansion of the cell phone based 
infrastructure for the Blue Bridge. Since the cell phone is 
unable to connect to the external wireless device via LAN 
cable, a connection needs to be made wirelessly. As such, the 
external high powered wireless device will transmit signal 
over a greater distance accomplished by the cell phone and 
will serve as the primary AP for 802.11 based clients. 
    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    I would like to thank my sponsors, the Telkom Centre of 
Excellence at Rhodes University, funded by Telkom SA, 
Business Connexion, Verso Technologies, THRIP, Stortech, 
Tellabs and the National Research Foundation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Zaruba, G.V., Basagni, S., and Chlamtac, I., “Bluetrees-
Scatternet formation to enable Bluetooth-based ad hoc 
networks,” 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communications, ICC 2001, vol. 1, 2001,  pp. 273-277. 
[2] Asthana, S. and Kalofonos, D., “Secure ad-hoc group 
collaboration over bluetooth scatternets,” Applications and 
Services in Wireless Networks, 2004. ASWN 2004. 2004 4th 
Workshop,  pp. 199-124. 
[3] Bisdikian, C., “An overview of the Bluetooth wireless 
technology,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 39, 2001, 
pp. 86–94. 
[4] OpenWrt. Available at: http://openwrt.org, 2011. [Accessed 
04-04-2011]. 
[5] Apple. 
What 
is 
Firmware?. 
Available 
at: 
http://support.apple.com/kb/ht1471, 2008. [Accessed 01-04-
2011]. 
[6] Fainelli, 
F., 
“The 
OpenWrt 
embedded 
development 
framework,”  2008. 
[7] OpenWrt. 
Available 
at: 
http://wiki.openwrt.org/inbox/mesh.olsr, 2011. [Accessed 06-
04-2011]. 
[8] Reguart, A., Cano, J.C., Calafate, C.T., and Manzoni, P., 
“Providing Internet Access in Rural Areas: A Practical Case 
Based on Wireless Networks,” The 2006 IFIP WG 6.9 
Workshop on Wireless Communications and Information 
Technology in Developing Countries (WCIT 2006), 20-25 
August 2006, Santiago, Chile. 
[9] Parikh, T.S., and Lazowska, E.D., “an architecture for 
delivering mobile information services to the rural developing 
world,” Proceedings of the 15th international conference on 
World Wide Web, 2006, pp. 791-800. 
[10] UBNT. Available at: http://ubnt.com, 2011. [Accessed 04-04-
2011]. 
[11] Asterisk. Available at: http://asterisk.org, 2011. [Accessed 07-
04-2011]. 
[12] Sahd, C., “Bluetooth Audio and Video Streaming on the 
J2ME Platform,” 2010. 
[13] AsteriskGuru. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.asteriskguru.com/tools/bandwidth_calculator.php, 
2011. [Accessed 09-04-2011]. 
[14] Metagora. Reconstruction and Development Programme 
(RDP) 
of 
South 
Africa. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.metagora.org/training/encyclopedia/rdp.html, 
2006. [Accessed 10-04-2011]. 
[15] Alexandra. Another RDP first from the Alexandra Renewal 
Project. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.alexandra.co.za/05_housing/article_0610_rdp_ho
using.htm, 2006. [Accessed 09-04-2011]. 
[16] Joshco. 
Sol 
Plaatje. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.joshco.co.za/solplaatje.html, 2011. [Accessed 10-
04-2011]. 
55
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

[17] VillageTelco. 
Mesh 
Potato. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.villagetelco.org/mesh-potato/, 2011. [Accessed 
11-04-2011]. 
[18] Meraki. Meraki. Available at: http://meraki.com/, 2011. 
[Accessed 11-04-2011]. 
[19] Open-Mesh. Open-Mesh. Available at: http://www.open-
mesh.com/, 2011. [Accessed 11-04-2011]. 
[20] Vodacom. 
4U 
Prepaid. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.vodacom.co.za/vodacom/Deals/Prepaid/Prepaid+
Price+Plans/4U+Prepaid, 2011. [Accessed 23-05-2011]. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 3.  (a) Proposed wireless expansion of OpenWrt based Blue Bridge (b) Proposed wireless expansion of cell phone based Blue Bridge 
56
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

