Design and Implementation of a Cooperative Protocol 
for Extending Coverage in Wireless Mesh Networks  
 
Andres Cabrera-Lozoya, Fernando Cerdan, Sergio Lujan, Diego Garcia-Sanchez 
Department of Information and Communications Technologies 
Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena, UPCT 
Plaza del Hospital, 1, 30202, Cartagena, SPAIN 
{andres.cabrera, fernando.cerdan, sergio.lujan, diego.gsanchez}@upct.es
 
 
Abstract—Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) have attracted 
great attention in the last few years because of their advantages 
over traditional wireless networks. WMNs can be seen as a 
mixture of ad hoc and infrastructure networks, with all the 
underlying benefits of such hybrid architecture. Mesh 
architecture sustains signal strength by breaking long 
distances into a series of shorter hops through intermediate 
nodes which not only boost the signal, but cooperatively act 
extending the network coverage and even forwarding decisions 
based on their knowledge about the network itself. This paper 
presents the main design and implementation aspects of a 
cooperative protocol that allows the coverage extension in these 
WMNs. It also provides a power saving mechanism for nodes 
which mainly operate as gateways by simply relaying data 
from or to neighbouring nodes. Simulation results show that 
the introduction of the protocol drastically increases the 
volume of carried traffic on the network due to its coverage 
extension capabilities. They also show that the power saving 
mechanism 
works 
properly, 
thus 
introducing 
key 
configuration parameters in the design of WMNs. 
Keywords - wireless mesh network; coverage extension; 
power saving mechanism; performance evaluation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent economic emergence of wireless communication 
and portable computing devices together with the advances 
in communication infrastructures have produced the rapid 
growth of today mobile wireless networks. This has led to an 
exponential growth of cellular networks based on a 
combination of wired and wireless technologies. 
However, the interest of scientific and industrial 
communities in the telecommunications field has recently 
changed towards the development of mobile networks with 
no fixed infrastructure. In this sense, ad hoc networks have 
become 
the 
cutting-edge 
technology 
in 
wireless 
communications. Indeed, these networks constitute the first 
step towards providing cost effective and dynamic high-
bandwidth solutions over specific coverage areas. They 
allow the interconnection of the network nodes directly using 
wireless transceivers (usually through multihop paths) 
without the existence of a fixed infrastructure. This is a very 
distinctive feature of ad hoc networks compared to 
traditional wireless networks like cellular or wireless local 
area networks (WLANs), where nodes communicate with 
each other only through fixed stations. 
On the other hand, WMNs have attracted great attention 
in the last few years since they can be seen as a mixture of ad 
hoc and infrastructure networks. Basically, they are 
infrastructure networks which allow the connection of 
devices out of the range of the access points (APs) through a 
direct connection with any node or device that is directly or 
indirectly within the coverage range of one of those APs. 
However, it seems that nowadays one of the main 
bottlenecks of this technology deals with the power 
consumption of the nodes and the communication’s energetic 
efficiency. In this sense, every effort to develop energy-
efficient protocols should be considered as an important 
contribution to the whole technology development. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II presents 
some related work in the area, enumerating several 
interesting experiences and investigations conducted in the 
last years in this field. In this regard, they will be classified 
depending on their scope and main aims, giving in turn a 
brief overview of the state of the art in this area of research. 
Next, Section III presents the proposed application 
scenario for the protocol itself. Assumptions referring to the 
hardware involved and its mode of operation will be 
presented here. Advantages of using an ad hoc / 
infrastructure hybrid network will also be discussed. 
Section IV deals with the formal specification of the 
protocol, where the key aspects of its operation will be 
explained from a qualitative point of view. 
Section V presents the simulation’s scenario and shows 
the results obtained during this process. In this section, the 
highlights of the protocol and its main advantages will be 
discussed from a quantitative point of view. 
Finally, conclusions and future work are presented. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the last few years, mesh networks have become an 
area of ongoing research due to its nature and potential 
applications. Nowadays, it is extremely easy to find mesh 
applications in many different scenarios [1, 2]. 
Thus, although mesh technology depends on other 
underlying technologies for the establishment of the network 
backhaul, these networks can indeed be deployed over 
almost any existing wireless technology, e.g. WiFi (for LAN 
environments), WiMAX (for MAN environments), etc. and 
once done, even coexist [3]. That said, it certainly seems that 
26
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

wireless mesh networks are going to be ubiquitous and a line 
of intense research in a very near future. 
Moreover, although the concept of hybrid cellular / ad 
hoc network is not new [4, 5], it represents an interesting line 
of action at present due to its nice features. 
Indeed, we are steadily witnessing progress in routing 
techniques and protocols based on channel allocation and 
transfer rates in wireless mesh networks such as [6, 7], 
amongst many others. We are also witnessing that the 
implementation of proactive, reactive and hybrid protocols 
for optimizing these network traffics is also attracting great 
attention, like in [8], but despite of all, there are several 
aspects dealing with the optimization of the available 
resources in terms of power saving and energy consumption 
in these WMNs which currently pose a challenge to the 
researchers. 
Thus, although even the most complex problems of mesh 
topology such as those related to the conduct of the nodes [9] 
or the network security itself [10] are progressively being 
addressed, energy consumption issues constitute a bottleneck 
for this technology at the moment. 
The work presented in this paper attempts to shed some 
light on the development of coverage extension mesh 
protocols with power saving features which, in fact, is an 
area of intense research at the moment. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED SCENARIO 
This section describes the network which has been used 
to extensively test the protocol. In this sense, every hardware 
aspect relevant to the protocol implementation will be 
explained below. 
A. Initial scenario 
In this initial stage we will define the server as a single 
computer or access point that will continuously monitor all 
the network performance. This topology clearly corresponds 
to a centrally managed network scheme. This single device 
will count on a wireless interface and will be responsible for 
creating and maintaining a point to multipoint network in 
infrastructure mode to connect the various nodes in the 
network. All traffic generated by the nodes will always be 
directed to this server machine, making it possible to count 
and therefore process all data transactions between every 
node in the network. 
Also, we will define the nodes or mobile terminals as 
portable devices powered, in any case, by batteries. 
Therefore, they will feature low processing power and 
limited energy resources. Each node will have two pre-
configured wireless interfaces, using one for direct 
connection to the server (in infrastructure mode) and the 
other for direct communication with the rest of nodes 
through a multi-node topology, also called ad hoc network. 
By default, all nodes will try to communicate through the 
network in infrastructure mode, using the ad hoc network 
only for communication with terminals outside the coverage 
area of the network server (see Fig. 1 below). 
In this specific scenario, covered nodes (nodes within the 
coverage area of the server) will use the network in 
infrastructure mode to send / receive data, and virtually-
covered nodes (nodes within the coverage range of another 
node which in turn has direct or indirect access (through 
another node) to the server) will use their ad hoc interface to 
communicate with their accessible nodes in each case. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schema of the application scenario.  
Obviously, if a covered node had to communicate with a 
virtually-covered one, it would use its ad hoc interface since 
the virtually-covered node is not directly connected to the 
server and thus not accessible through the former’s 
infrastructure mode interface. 
Now, if we see Fig. 1 again, we can make a nice 
graphical analogy with Set Theory to give an idea of the 
extended coverage of the network using this protocol. Thus, 
if we considered each circular coverage range of Fig. 1 as a 
set, we could say that the network coverage corresponds to 
the size of the union set of them all (excepting, of course, the 
range of the uncovered nodes). 
Finally, for this scenario to be implemented correctly, it 
will be assumed that all nodes will be motivated to act 
selflessly [9], so users are deemed to cooperate with the 
proper working of the protocol. 
B. Advantages of a mixed network (ad hoc / infrastructure) 
The main reason for testing the protocol over a mixed 
network is that infrastructure and ad hoc networks are 
complementary. 
Ad hoc networks are almost always exclusively 
composed of mobile devices while infrastructure networks 
have at least one device which is not battery-powered. This 
simple fact makes the nature and operation of both types of 
networks 
very 
different, 
each 
one 
with 
its 
own 
characteristics. With this idea in mind, we can emphasize 
once again that the fact of using a mixed architecture brings 
several advantages: 
On the one hand, the base station (in infrastructure 
networks) is usually powered from the mains. This fact 
allows that the server itself has a greater processing capacity, 
very powerful wireless interfaces (for signal transmission) 
27
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

and increased sensitivity at reception. In addition, 
infrastructure 
mode 
networks 
avoid 
the 
massive 
transmissions of data that usually take place in multihopping 
networks, which can even saturate them when various 
peripheral nodes generate a large amount of traffic. This 
advantage comes out from having a really extensive 
coverage area provided by the base station. In such a 
situation, connections are made directly to the server, thus 
obtaining a satisfactory communication between nodes with 
only two hops in the majority of generated traffic (with the 
server acting as the only gateway). 
On the other hand, the integration of an ad hoc network 
with the previous infrastructure network can provide several 
interesting 
advantages 
too. 
For 
example, 
multihop 
functionality provided by ad hoc networks can be used to 
increase the operating range of a conventional infrastructure 
network when it is not possible to make a direct connection 
to the base station through adjacent nodes, i.e., instead of 
requiring a direct connection between the nodes and the base 
station, it is possible to reach the server through different 
paths using multihop compatible wireless devices. In this 
way, we get to cover “black spots” which would be 
inaccessible in a common infrastructure mode network. 
 
IV. 
PROTOCOL BASELINE 
After having highlighted the advantages of using a mixed 
network, we will proceed to define the main features of the 
protocol from a formal point of view. 
A. Protocol specification 
When a mobile terminal generates a message to any other 
node of the network there are two possibilities to send data: 
• If the source node is within the coverage range of 
the server, the mobile terminal will send the message directly 
to the server in infrastructure mode, with the subsequent 
receipt confirmation by the latter. 
• However, if the mobile terminal has no direct 
connection to the server, it will broadcast the message 
through its ad hoc interface. 
Any message generated and sent by a mobile terminal 
will always reach the server: when a node receives any 
message from any other node, it will act as a gateway in any 
case, so it will not parse the data. Then, it will simply 
broadcast the message to make it reach the server. This fact 
has several relevant consequences: on the one hand, we can 
guarantee that all data messages will be properly quantified 
and monitored by the server since they reach it. We can also 
assure that nodes will not incur any overhead because of this 
ad hoc operation: every data transmission through this 
network will be broadcasted without any processing since 
the server is the only device capable of delivering data to 
nodes. On the other hand, we find that broadcasting will 
cause nodes to use a greater amount of resources than nodes 
which might analyze and accept the message as their own, 
preventing its spread towards the server. 
There may be a multitude of mobile terminals acting as 
gateways between the server and the source and destination 
nodes, not only one. 
When the server has a message to some node, the former 
will broadcast a test message to see if the desired node is 
within its coverage area (in both networks, if necessary): 
• If so, it will selectively send the message to the 
recipient node, the latter replying with a receipt confirmation 
message. 
• On the contrary, if the destination node is not within 
the coverage area, the server will search the recipient using 
the ad hoc network created by the nodes through multihop 
technique. There are two possibilities: 
• 
If the recipient is located, the server will selectively 
send data using multihop mechanism. 
• 
If the recipient is not located, the server will store 
data for a later retry. 
 
Two approaches can be taken to send messages when the 
server needs to use the multihop network to reach nodes that 
are inaccessible through direct connection: 
• When locating the mobile terminal, its routing path 
could be refreshed and stored inside the data message as it 
goes through the network towards the server. Then, the 
server could send the data message using that very route. 
This option allows further optimization of energy resources, 
but communications turn unstable because, e.g., if any of the 
gateway nodes used to route the message moves 
significantly, the transaction will be unsuccessful. This 
situation would cause the delivery mechanism of the 
protocol to perform all the steps above to try to transmit the 
message again. This is a common problem in networks with 
high mobility, e.g., when mobile terminals are inside 
vehicles. 
• Another option consists of ignoring the route path 
to the recipient node when locating the mobile terminal. In 
this case, the reply message will only indicate the presence 
or absence of connectivity with the destination node. This 
broadcasting option results in a waste of energy by the nodes 
because the message delivery mechanism will affect a larger 
number of devices. However, we can ensure with a very high 
probability that recipient nodes will receive the messages, 
regardless of the type of network we are working with, since 
it is a more flexible protocol to network changes (due to its 
broadcasting nature). The cooperative protocol presented in 
this paper uses this type of location because in this case the 
reliability 
takes 
precedence 
over 
energy 
efficiency. 
Furthermore, in such mesh network environments reliability, 
self-reconfiguration and self-healing features must be 
predominant. 
Moreover, the protocol includes a power saving 
mechanism to limit the energy consumption of the nodes 
which consistently act as gateways relaying messages from 
other nodes to / from the server (indirect messages) due to its 
possible location near the border of the coverage area of the 
fixed network. This mechanism leaves them in idle state 
during a time interval which is proportional to a tiredness 
index parameter (described in Section V below), that consists 
of a counter which increases each time the node relays an 
indirect message. 
28
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

The interaction between the server and the destination 
node in each case will be independent of the emission 
mechanism used by the source node. 
Fig. 2 below presents the protocol’s high-level flowchart. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Protocol’s high-level flowchart. 
Finally, two mechanisms are used to prevent the network 
collapse: 
• Each message will carry a hop counter which will 
limit the number of hops that a given message can perform. 
• Each message will carry a unique identifier (ID) 
that will prevent the same message to be relayed more than 
once by any mobile terminal, thus avoiding infinite loops. 
B. Message definitions 
After having described the protocol behaviour, we now 
proceed to define the various messages to be used along with 
their features. 
We could initially make a clear division towards their 
classification: on the one hand, we can find those messages 
that are transmitted directly between any node and the server. 
They will be called direct messages. On the other hand, we 
find those messages that are propagated through the network 
using multihopping techniques, for communication between 
terminals. They will be then called indirect messages. At this 
point, it is obvious that every time a terminal receives one of 
these messages, it will relay it using broadcasting except 
when the node itself is the destination terminal. 
There are different types of messages within each family, 
and we can differentiate them through the various functions 
they perform, namely: 
• Data transmission 
• Receipt confirmation  
• Node search 
Direct messages (DM) can be sent by the server and the 
nodes. They count, at best, on the next fields: type of 
message (ToM), source address (Src), destination address 
(Dst), unique identifier (ID), data length (Len) and the data 
itself (Data). Table I below presents each message subtype 
along with it specific fields: 
 
TABLE I.  
DIRECT MESSAGES FIELDS 
Message subtype 
ToM 
Src 
Dst 
ID 
Len 
Data 
Data Transmission 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Receipt Confirmation 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
 
Node search 
* 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
Indirect messages (IM) are only used for communication 
between terminals. IMs will only be sent by the server, 
through multihopping techniques. Thus, if the server receives 
one of these messages, it will delete it immediately. The 
fields present in IMs are the same as those of DMs, plus one: 
the number of hops (nHop), indicating in each case the 
maximum number of hops remaining for a message before it 
is discarded by the nodes, as a saturation control action. In 
this way, this mechanism is very similar to the well-known 
TTL (Time To Live) field to be found on many 
communications systems an protocols. Table II below 
presents each IM subtype along with it specific fields: 
 
TABLE II.  
INDIRECT MESSAGES FIELDS 
Message subtype 
ToM 
Src 
Dst 
ID 
Len 
Data 
nHop 
Data Transmission 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Receipt Confirmation 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
Node search 
* 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
 
29
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

In such a scenario, null signalling overhead is always 
guaranteed since nodes communicate with each other 
through a flooding mechanism, as explained above in 
Section IV.A, i.e., using broadcasted messages. Thus, 
datagrams (see Fig.3 below) do not need extra fields for 
nodes to know the routing path in each case (which would 
cause a signalling overhead, affecting the whole system’s 
performance) since they do not even need to process any 
special headers to transmit or receive messages within the ad 
hoc network: they simply broadcast every message just as it 
arrives. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Detailed datagram structure (numbers in parentheses represent 
the lenght in bytes of each field). 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The protocol was developed, implemented and validated 
using the Specification and Description Language (SDL) and 
the SDL Tools branch (including SDL Simulator and SDL 
Validator). The proposed simulation scenario is described in 
Section III above. 
A. Simulation Parameters 
Some 
representative 
environment 
variables 
were 
externally declared from the outset in order to analyze the 
protocol behaviour and its efficiency. They were used to 
launch parametric simulations in which the variation of one 
or more of them made possible to obtain interesting 
simulation results. Below are presented each of the variables 
of the simulation environment along with its meaning and 
function: 
 
• nNodes. It indicates the number of nodes present in 
a given simulation. 
• nConnec. It sets the maximum number of 
connections between nodes, and therefore, in the boundary 
case, the maximum number of nodes that would be within 
the coverage area of every single node. 
• PG. It represents the probability of a node to 
generate a message to another at a given point in time. 
• PC. It represents the probability of a direct 
connection between the nodes and the server. 
• maxHop. It defines the maximum number of hops 
that a message can perform when using multihopping 
technique. 
• indTired. It indicates the increment of the tiredness 
rate of each node each time an indirect message is relayed. 
• Sleep. It indicates how long a node will remain 
inactive / idle due to its tiredness. 
 
(These two last variables are related to the power saving 
mechanism implemented in the protocol for the nodes). 
B. Simulation Results 
All the results shown in this section arise from the 
execution of a number of simulations with the same 
parameters, so that every result is consistent with the average 
of those simulations in each case.  
We performed the following simulations: 
 
• Traffic Evolution with a variable PG parameter: 
 
Table III below shows a specific simulation scenario to 
study the network traffic evolution when the probability of 
generating messages by nodes, PG, varies from 0 to 1. 
 
TABLE III.  
PARAMETER VALUES FOR SIMULATION 1 
Parameter 
Value 
Parameter 
Value 
nNodes 
15 
nConnec 
3 
PC 
0.3 
maxHop 
4 
PG 
Variable 
indTired 
Disabled 
 
 
Figure 4.  Network traffic evolution based on PG parameter 
As can be seen in Fig. 4, obviously all types of traffic 
increase linearly with traffic generation. Furthermore, in this 
case all generated traffic is successfully carried since it has 
direct or indirect access to all nodes. However, the only 
traffic that could have been carried without the addition of 
the coverage extension protocol corresponds to the black line 
(direct traffic) on the figure. In this sense, it is very 
noteworthy that the addition of the protocol with this specific 
simulation resulted in a constant increment of around 350% 
of carried traffic volume coming to a maximum of 383% for 
PG = 0.2, as can be seen in Fig. 5 below. 
30
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

 
Figure 5.  Increment of carried traffic volume when using the protocol 
compared to a normal situation (without the protocol) (%) 
• Traffic Evolution with a variable nConnec parameter: 
 
In this case, the simulation parameters shown in Table IV 
are focused on the study of the network traffic evolution 
when the maximum number of connections between nodes, 
nConnec, varies from 0 to 10. 
 
TABLE IV.  
PARAMETER VALUES FOR SIMULATION 2 
Parameter 
Value 
Parameter 
Value 
nNodes 
15 
nConnec 
Variable 
PC 
0.125, 0.25 
maxHop 
10 
PG 
0.5 
indTired 
Disabled 
 
 
Figure 6.  Network traffic evolution based on nConnec parameter with   
PC = 0.125 and 0.25, respectively 
Fig. 6 shows the traffic evolution based on nConnec 
parameter. This simulation aimed to quantitatively analyze 
the effect of increasing the number of connections between 
nodes. Conclusions are simple but very meaningful: almost 
all of generated traffic is carried with an average of 3 
connections between nodes although there is a low 
connectivity to the server in all these simulations (20 and 
40% respectively). 
 
• Traffic Evolution with a variable indTired parameter: 
 
This third simulation was carried out to test the 
usefulness and efficiency of the power saving mechanism 
developed for the protocol. Table V below shows the list of 
parameters used in this simulation. 
 
TABLE V.  
PARAMETER VALUES FOR SIMULATION 3 
Parameter 
Value 
Parameter 
Value 
nNodes 
15 
nConnec 
3 
PC 
0.4 
maxHop 
3 
PG 
0.8 
indTired 
Variable 
 
 
Figure 7.  Network traffic evolution based on indTired parameter 
Fig. 7 shows the effect of the power saving mechanism 
implemented for the protocol in the network traffic 
evolution. Here, as the tiredness rate of nodes grows, so does 
loss rate, slowing down from 0.01 for this specific tiredness 
index. As already discussed earlier in this paper, losses are 
due to the existence of nodes that have not direct 
connectivity to the server. Then, when they transmit data and 
relay nodes near them are idle, traffic is lost. 
From these simulations, we could say that a value 
between 0 and 0.01 for the tiredness index parameter would 
be acceptable in terms of traffic losses. In this sense, the 
selection of a greater or lesser value is a pure design decision 
depending on every single network deployment and its 
requirements. Therefore, when designing a network using 
this cooperative protocol, indTired parameter should be 
carefully chosen to reach a compromise between network 
losses and energy saving in nodes. 
31
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have presented the main design and 
implementation aspects of a cooperative protocol that allows 
the coverage extension in wireless mesh networks. This 
protocol also includes power saving features for terminals 
which mainly operate as gateways by simply relaying data 
from or to neighbouring nodes. Simulation results show that 
the introduction of the protocol drastically increases the 
volume of carried traffic on the network due to its coverage 
extension capabilities. Moreover, they show that the 
implemented power saving mechanism works as expected, 
introducing a series of configuration parameters to be taken 
into account in the design process of wireless mesh networks 
using this protocol. 
Its design has been as generic as possible, so it can be 
applied to any client-server communication system, from a 
conventional wireless local area network (WLAN, WiFi) to a 
mobile phone network or even a WiMAX link. In this sense, 
although radio technology is not part of the protocol itself, 
tests and simulations present in the article were conducted 
using WiFi technology. 
Several important advantages arise from its flooding 
nature (already explained in Section IV.A, e.g., an increased 
reliability or better self-reconfiguration and self-healing 
features, etc.), but the extensive use of these techniques 
could incur excessive energy consumption for the nodes’ 
batteries, which would be compromised. For this reason, the 
implementation of an efficient power saving mechanism in 
the protocol itself is of vital importance to minimize the 
impact of its potentially energy-consuming nature. In this 
way, the main idea consists of reaching a compromise 
between energy savings derived from neither having to route 
nor to process data packets by the nodes, and the extra 
number of (re)transmissions derived from using such a 
flooding mechanism. 
Keeping all this in mind, it is obvious that this protocol 
would not be suitable for every possible application since its 
battery requirements are quite high, but there are many 
scenarios (where batteries are not the network’s bottleneck) 
in which this protocol could be perfectly used to exploit all 
its potential advantages over a normal WMN’s protocol, 
e.g., in terms of carried traffic improvements, increased 
robustness or coverage extension, amongst many others. For 
example, this protocol could be very useful for mobile 
phone companies since although it is common for their 
networks to reach 80% of coverage quite easily, increasing 
that coverage area to 95% becomes a very difficult and 
expensive task. In this sense, it is very common to find 
small specific locations in urban areas with no coverage 
(due to signal fading effects when propagating through 
irregular metropolitan areas); however, a short distance 
from these areas is excellently covered. In these cases, the 
perceived quality of service of users (QoE, Quality of 
Experience) near that area could be very low. The fact of 
using the protocol described in this paper could provide a 
“virtual coverage” to users in a totally transparent way, 
avoiding such unwanted situations. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by project grants CALM 
TEC2010-21405-C02-02 (TCM subprogram) and it was also 
developed under the framework of “programa de becas 
asociadas a la realización de proyectos en I+D, innovación y 
transferencia de tecnología 2009, de la Fundación Séneca, 
Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología de la RM, (exp. No 
10621/BPS/09)”, and “Programa de Ayudas a Grupos de 
Excelencia de la Región de Murcia, Fundación Seneca”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F.-M. Zou, T.-S. Wang, X.-H. Jiang, and Z.-X. Lin, “A 
banyan-tree topology based railway wireless mesh network 
architecture,” Tiedao Xuebao/Journal of the China Railway 
Society, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 47-54, April 2010. 
[2] Z. Yu, X. Xu, and X. Wu, “Application of wireless mesh 
network 
in 
campus 
network,” 
2nd 
Int. 
Conf. 
on 
Communication 
Systems, 
Networks 
and 
Applications, 
ICCSNA’10, vol. 1, pp. 245-247, 2010. 
[3] N. Ghazisaidi, K. Hossein, and M. S. Bohlooli, “Integration of 
WiFi and WiMAX-mesh networks,” 2nd Int. Conf. on 
Advances in Mesh Networks, MESH 2009, pp. 1-6, 2009. 
[4] H. Wu, C. Qiao, S. De, and O. Tonguz, “Integrated cellular 
and ad hoc relaying systems: iCAR,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 19, no. 
10, 2001. 
[5] H. Luo, R. Ramjee, P. Sinha, L. E. Li, and S. Lu, “UCAN: a 
unified cellular and ad-hoc network architecture,” in ACM 
MOBICOM, 2003. 
[6] S.-H. Kim, D.-W. Kim, and Y.-J. Suh, “A cooperative 
channel assignment protocol for multi-channel multi-rate 
wireless mesh networks,” Ad hoc Networks Journal, vol. 9, 
no. 5, pp. 893-910, Jul. 2011.  
[7] S. Pediaditaki, P. Arrieta, and K. M. Mahesh, “A learning-
based approach for distributed multi-radio channel allocation 
in wireless mesh networks,” Int. Conf. on Network Protocols, 
ICNP’09, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 31-41, 2009. 
[8] D.-W. Kum, J.-S. Park, Y.-Z. Cho, B.-Y. Cheon, and D. Cho, 
“Mobility-aware hybrid routing approach for wireless mesh 
networks,” Proceedings, 3rd Int. Conf. on Advances in Mesh 
Networks, MESH 2010, pp. 59-62, 2010. 
[9] F. Martignon, S. Paris, and A. Capone, “A framework for 
detecting selfish misbehavior in wireless mesh community 
networks,”  Proceedings, 5th ACM Int. Symp. on QoS and 
Security for Wireless and Mobile Networks, Q2SWINET’09, 
pp. 65-72, 2009. 
[10] K.-H. Lee and C. S. Hong, “A PKI based mesh router 
authentication scheme to protect from malicious node in 
wireless mesh network,” Management Enabling the Future 
Internet for Changing Business and New Computing Services, 
pp. 405-413, 2009. 
 
32
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

