 
Energy Saving For Wireless Mesh Network 
State of the art  
 
Sarra Mamechaoui  
STIC Laboratory 
Abou Bekr Belkaid University 
Tlemcen, Algeria  
sarra.mamechaoui@mail.univ-
tlemcen.dz 
Fedoua Didi 
Dept of Computer engineering  
 Abou Bekr Belkaid University 
Tlemcen, Algeria  
f_didi@mail.univ-tlemcen.dz 
 
Guy Pujolle 
Pierre et Marie Curie University  
Paris 6, FRANCE 
Guy.Pujolle@lip6.fr 
 
 
Abstract— Energy consumption of communication systems is 
becoming a fundamental issue and among all the sectors, 
wireless access networks are largely responsible for the 
increase in consumption. With this increasing demand for 
energy in wireless field related with the increase in carbon 
dioxide levels in the environment produced by wireless devices 
in the idle mode, it is very essential to develop the technology 
that reduce energy consumption. In this context, Wireless 
Mesh Networks (WMNs) are commonly considered as the most 
suitable architecture because of their versatility that allows 
flexible configurations. Different studies have proposed 
number of protocols in different layers of TCP/IP model to 
enhance transmission of data. Very few of these protocols 
envisage node energy. This paper mainly focuses on 
classification layer of the largest existing approaches dedicated 
to energy conservation.  
Keywords-WMN; 802.11s; Energy consumption; TCP/IP layers, 
Topology control; Power control; Sleep.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
As various wireless networks evolve into the next 
generation to provide better services, a key technology, 
wireless mesh networks (WMNs) has emerged recently [1, 
2]. A WMN is dynamically self-organized and self-
configured, with the nodes in the network automatically 
establishing and maintaining mesh connectivity among 
themselves. The components of the IEEE 802.11s mesh 
architecture comprise of the following as shown in Fig. 1 [3]. 
A mesh point (MP) is a node that has also mesh routing 
capabilities. Mesh points that also have capability to act as 
access points are called mesh access points (MAPs). IEEE 
802.11 mobile clients are called stations (STA) that do not 
have mesh capabilities and can connect to MAPs to send 
their data. An MP that is connected to the wired network is 
called a mesh portal (MPP) or gateway which enables the 
integration of WMNs with various existing wireless 
networks such as cellular systems, wireless sensor networks, 
wireless-fidelity (Wi-Fi) [4] systems, worldwide inter-
operability for microwave access (WiMAX) [5]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Network architecture of Wireless Mesh Network  
Energy consumption is increasing at an exponential rate 
with heavy growth in the number of access devices. Power 
management for networks from a perspective that has 
recently begun to receive attention is targeting the 
conservation of energy for operating and environmental 
reasons [6]. Different studies [6, 7] have proposed a 
rethinking of the way networks are built and operated so that 
not only costs and performance are taken into account but 
also their energy consumption and carbon footprint. 
Significant additional power savings may result by 
incorporating low-power strategies into the design of 
network protocols used for data communication. 
To reduce energy lost, there are researches that addressed 
the mechanisms of the Physical Layer to promote energy 
conservation [9, 10, 12, 13 and 14]. Others work in Data 
Link Layer is based on IEEE 802.11 standard [15, 16, 17, 18 
and 19] that considers energy efficiency. In the Network 
Layer, studies [30, 31 and 32] have proposed solutions that 
provide energy saving by using standard routing algorithms 
with some enhancements. 
This paper investigates the state of the art of approaches 
that reduce energy consumption in different layers of the 
TCP / IP model. The remainder of this paper is organized as 
following. Section II explores approaches to energy 
conservation in Physical Layer. Section III describes 
different approaches to reduce energy consumption in Data 
Link Layer. Section IV presents power saving protocols and 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

routing protocols within the Network Layer. Finally, the 
paper is concluded in Section V. 
II. 
APPROACHES TO ENERGY CONSERVATION 
IN PHYSICAL LAYER 
Physical 
Layer 
(PHY) 
implements 
a 
network 
communication hardware, which transmits and receives 
messages one bit or symbol at a time. In practice, the PHY 
receives analog symbols from medium and converts them to 
digital bits for further processing in the higher layers of 
protocol stack. The PHY functions available in most 
transceivers are the selection of a frequency channel and a 
transmit 
power, 
the 
modulation 
transmitted 
and 
demodulation of received data, symbol synchronization and 
clock generation for received data [8]. The researches that 
involve the Physical Layer of WMNs are pointed out in this 
Section. 
A. The LM-SPT (Local Minimum Shortest Path-Tree)  
LM-SPT is a fully scalable power-efficient localized 
distributed topology control algorithm [9], proposed to 
effectively construct for a meshed backbone network of 
access points. The approach taken in this work is to construct 
an overlay graph topology of the WMN this concept is based 
on information of the local neighborhood that is confined to 
one hop from the logical visible neighborhood for calculating 
the minimum power transmission. The LM-SPT algorithm is 
shown to lead desirable features as reduced physical node 
degree, increased throughput, increased network lifetime and 
maintenance of connectivity by varying the transmission 
power at each node. The main contribution of this work 
consists in the ability of the algorithm to balance energy 
efficiency and throughput in WMNs and without loss of 
connectivity. In this approach Aron et al.[9] proposed to 
calculate minimum transmission power and require only an 
optimal value to maintain an optimal connectivity and 
decrease the interference and collision which save energy 
and achieve a good throughput. 
B. CNN (Critical Number of Neighbors) 
Santi [10] used CNN refers to the minimum number of 
neighbors that should be maintained by each node in order 
for the network to be asymptotically connected. This 
approach to maintain connectivity is adopted for use in the 
proposed scheme because only knowledge of the network 
size is required to determine the CNN. This information can 
be easily obtained from a proactive routing protocol such as 
OLSR [11]. The CNN may also result in heterogeneous 
transceiver power outputs, potentially maximizing power 
savings and interference gains. The CNN is also less affected 
by the distribution and position of the network nodes and 
there is no need to assume a GPS enabled router. It’s also 
increases gradually with network size and is thus able to 
tolerate delays in the propagation of topology updates and 
network size (if a proactive routing protocol is used). Thus, 
maintaining connectivity via a CNN will reduce human 
intervention (if a proactive routing protocol is employed). 
The same idea like Aron et al. [9] approach, Santi [10] 
proposed to calculate minimum number of neighbors that 
should be maintained to be connected to conserve energy.  
C. Minimum-energy topology 
Aron et al. [12], considered the problem of topology 
control in a hybrid WMN of heterogeneous and presented a 
localized distributed topology control which pointed to 
calculate the optimal transmission power to maintain 
connectivity and reduce the transmission power to cover 
only nearest neighbors and save energy and extend lifetimes 
of the networks. In this work, the main objective is to 
generate a minimum-energy topology G graph. Taking an 
arbitrary node u ∈ V in the network G, a three phased 
topology control algorithm that runs in each node. In the first 
stage, node u broadcasts a ―hello‖ message using its full 
power, Pmax
u. The nodes that receive the ―hello‖ message 
form the set of accessible neighborhood of node u. The 
―hello‖ message contains the id of u, the location information 
of u, (x (u), y (u)) and the value of the Pmax
u. After there exist 
a weighted directed graph topology G, u∈V. Node u has 
knowledge of the edge weights and path weights, where path 
weight of a directed path. Finally, in this phase, node u 
determines its own transmission power and the powers on 
the accessible edges of all the nodes in the accessible 
neighborhood. Node u takes as its power, the largest one-hop 
edge weight among the edges obtained in the minimum-
energy local topology view G, after node u adopts its 
minimum-energy level; it propagates this minimum power 
value to the other neighbors in the accessible neighborhood 
with the current Transmission power. Aron et al. [12] 
developed a minimum-energy distributed topology control 
that ensures a reduction in the amount of energy consumed 
per node during transmissions and without loss of 
connectivity. 
D. PlainTC 
Mudali et al. [13] investigate the feasibility of power 
control in a popular WMN backbone device and design and 
evaluate an autonomous, light-weight TC scheme called 
PlainTC. Two main approaches may be used in this regard, 
either maintaining the Critical Transmission Range (CTR) or 
the Critical Neighbor Number (CNN). In this work, Mudali 
et al. [13] presented a TC scheme for a WMN backbone 
comprising of commercially available Linksys WRT54GL 
routers (which are popular WMN backbone devices). The 
proposed scheme is designed to maintain network 
connectivity by relying on data collected by a proactive 
routing protocol. Three types of information can be collected 
and used as the basis of a TC scheme: location information, 
direction information and neighbor information. The Linksys 
WRT54GL device contains neither a GPS nor the native 
ability to determine the relative direction of incoming and 
outgoing transmissions. The device does however possess 
the ability to collect low-quality, neighbor-based information 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

by inspecting the routing table built by the proactive routing 
protocol being employed. Determining the logical node 
degree is easier because the number of HELLO messages 
received from unique sources can be determined if a reactive 
routing protocol is employed. If a proactive routing protocol 
is employed, then the routing table can be inspected for the 
number of one-hop (or n-hop) neighbors. The approach 
proposed by Mudali et al. [13], is designed for a specific 
device (Linksys WRT54GL) and it contains a GPS to define 
the direction. Unfortunately, generally the devices are not 
specific and they are not equipped with a GPS generally. 
E. Virtual WLAN 
Coskun et al. [14], proposed the switching scheme 
which aims to powering on the minimum number of devices 
(or the combination of devices that consume the least 
energy) that can jointly provide full coverage and enough 
capacity. Basically, this approach corresponds to having a 
minimum set of devices that provide coverage and an 
additional set of devices that are powered on to provide 
additional 
capacity 
when 
needed. 
By 
consolidating 
hardware, some hardware can be put in low-power mode and 
energy consumption can be reduced, saving the difference in 
energy consumption per low-power node when compared to 
an active node and adding the amount of energy consumed 
by hosting more networking processes just on fewer network 
nodes. Depending on the type of device, different amounts 
can be saved. Using virtual 802.11 interfaces to connect to 
multiple networks simultaneously, instead of using multiple 
network interface cards, enables savings in energy costs, 
minimizes the physical space, and provides the capability to 
build large and small wireless mesh networks. 
Summary 
Topology control algorithms have largely been proven to 
be one way of achieving energy efficiency in MWNs. The 
main goal of a topology control algorithm is to select 
appropriate logical neighbors of a node (from a given 
physical topology network) according to some specified 
rules (average node degree, throughput, energy consume, 
network lifetimes). Each node should be able to apply the 
rules to adjust its transmission power accordingly so that 
only the necessary logical neighbors are covered. Several 
contributions have been tailored towards studying power 
control problems in energy-constrained conventional IEEE 
802.11 wireless network standards; little attention has been 
drawn to the power control problems in WMNs. 
Control of topology and control of power transmission 
are a good ideas, simple but very effective for saving energy, 
while keeping maximum connectivity and the extending of 
network lifetime. Some of these studies are summarized in 
the previous Section. Another trend in research is the 
mechanisms of the Data Link Layer that promote energy 
conservation will be present in the next Section. 
III. 
APPROACHES TO ENERGY CONSERVATION 
IN DATA LINK LAYER 
In the previous section, we showed approaches that 
conserve energy in Physical Layer. We now discuss some of 
the key issues relating to the implementation of power saving 
at MAC Layer sub layer of Data Link Layer, which provide 
a fair mechanism to share access to medium among other 
nodes. The MAC sub layer determines how and when to 
utilize PHY functions. Hence, MAC plays a key role in the 
maximization of node’s energy efficiency. We first briefly 
review power saving in conventional IEEE 802.11and 
discussion of recent work that has started to address them. 
A. PSM (Power Saving Mode) IEEE 802.11 Protocol 
The MAC layer specification in IEEE 802.11 [15], 
defines two diverse power management modes a station can 
operate in one of them: active mode and Power Saving Mode 
(PSM). In active mode, a station is fully powered and is able 
to exchange frames at any time. While in Power Saving 
mode, a station is permitted to be in one of two different 
power states, either in awake state or doze state. An AP in a 
wireless network observes the mode of each station. A 
station must first inform its AP about changing its power 
management mode using Power Management bits within the 
Frame Control field of the frame used as a power saving 
request. A station should not enter PSM before it receives an 
acknowledgement from the AP. During the association 
procedure, a station informs the AP about its listen interval, 
which is used to indicate a period of time for which a station 
in PSM may choose to sleep. Its aim is to reduce energy 
consumption in conventional IEEE 802.11 standard. 
The IEEE 802.11 standard defines power saving for 
clients devices, by allowing the nodes to switch between the 
Awake and Doze states. But the standard does not provide 
mechanism for placing APs into power saving mode and 
requires that the access point be continuously powered, and 
this requirement can lead to lost energy. 
B. APSD (Automatic Power Save Delivery) 
Various enhancements to the above scheme have been 
included in some of the follow-on standards. For example, 
IEEE 802.11e defines Automatic Power Save Delivery 
(APSD) [16]. This includes both contention-based operation 
(referred to as EDCA) and a polling-based option (called 
HCCA). In the latter case, the AP functions as a hybrid 
coordinator (HC), and defines periodic service intervals that 
allow the synchronous delivery of traffic using Scheduled 
Automatic Power Save Delivery (S-APSD). In the former 
case the unscheduled APSD (U-APSD) mechanism permits 
the station to initiate communication activity by transmitting 
trigger frames on the uplink in EDCA contention mode. 
These mechanisms provide for improved flexibility and 
power saving compared to the original procedures.  
C. PSMP (Power Save MultiPoll) 
IEEE 802.11n has introduced further enhancements to 
the U-APSD and S-APSD protocols, referred to as power 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

save multipoll (PSMP) [17]. As in its predecessors, there are 
scheduled (i.e., S-PSMP) and unscheduled (i.e., U-PSMP) 
versions. S-PSMP provides tighter control over the 
AP/station timeline by having the AP define a PSMP 
sequence that includes scheduled times for downlink and 
uplink transmissions. The ability to do this allows (non-AP) 
stations to remain in Doze mode during the times when other 
stations are scheduled to be using the channel and reduces 
AP/station interaction overheads. U-PSMP is similar to U-
APSD in that it supports both triggered and delivery enabled 
modes. 
D. NAV (Network Allocation Vector) And NAM ( Network 
Allocation Map) 
The AP uses network allocation vector blocking to 
prevent channel access to the AP when it is in Doze mode 
[18]. In conventional IEEE 802.11, a NAV is used at each 
station to implement a virtual carrier sense mechanism and to 
block stations from transmitting in cases where the channel 
has been reserved for some other purpose.  
The IEEE 802.11 NAV mechanism is generalized, and a 
power saving AP includes a network allocation map (NAM) 
in its beacon broadcasts [19]. The NAM specifies periods of 
time within the super frame when the AP is unavailable, and 
during these periods the AP is assumed to be inactive and 
conserving power. 
E. PAMAS (Power-aware Multi Access Protocol with 
Signaling) 
Singh et al. [20], proposed to conserve battery energy by 
turning off nodes not transmitting or not receiving. It is a 
combination of original MAC protocol [21], and using a 
separate channel for a busy signal. By using the busy signal, 
the terminals are able to determine when and how long they 
should turn off their radio interfaces. In this protocol, if a 
node has no packet to transmit, then it should turn off its 
radio interface if one of its neighboring nodes begins 
transmitting. Similarly, if at least one neighboring node 
transmits and another receives, the node should also turn off 
power because it cannot transmit or receive packets (even if 
its transmission queue is not empty). This approach uses a 
separate channel for a busy signal. Each node listens to 
channel to see when it becomes free to transmit (idle-
listening). So it leads to important energy consumption. 
F.  STEM (Sparse Topology and Energy Management) 
Schurgers et al. [22], used a separate control channel to 
avoid clock synchronization required by IEEE 802.11 PSM. 
STEM is based on asynchronous beacon packets in a second 
control channel set to wake receivers. After finishing a 
transmission, the node turns off its radio interfaces in the 
data channel. STEM does not provide mechanisms to 
indicate the status of energy management of a node. Instead, 
the power management state is only maintained on a 
database by linking the nodes participating in data 
communication. Therefore, it is possible that a third source 
node experiences a significant delay to wake up a receiver 
node, while the receiver is already awake to the recent 
communication with other nodes. In this approach Schurgers 
et al. [22] have used a separate control channel to send 
packets, asynchronous beacon receivers to wake up. Then 
the use of these control packets (control overhead) can 
achieve crucial consumption of energy. 
G. S-MAC 
S-MAC [23] is an energy efficient MAC protocol for 
wireless sensor networks. Unlike PAMAS, S-MAC uses the 
model of periodic listen and sleep to reduce energy 
consumption by avoiding listening to empty. However, this 
requires 
synchronization 
between 
neighboring 
nodes. 
Latency is increased since a sender must wait for the receiver 
that it is wake up before starting transmission. But SMAC 
uses synchronization to form virtual groups of nodes on the 
same list of sleep. This technique coordinates the nodes to 
minimize additional latency. In [23], nodes lose some of 
their energies during the exchange by diffusion of SYNC 
packets. 
H.  Admission Control in Power Constrained 
OFDM/TDMA 
Niyato and Hossain [24]  proposed an analytical model is 
developed to investigate the packet-level and the connection-
level performances as well as the energy-efficiency in a 
solar-powered wireless mesh network using OFDM/TDMA 
transmission. The energy-saving mechanism is implemented 
through a sleep and wakeup process and is integrated with a 
round-robin scheduling and an admission control mechanism 
in the mesh routers. Without an admission control 
mechanism at a mesh router, packet-level performances as 
well as the energy saving performances may degrade. Again, 
if a mesh router spends too much time in the sleep mode, 
packet-level performances will degrade. 
I. 
 Virtualization of NICs 
Al-Hazmi and Hermann [25], suggest one of the possible 
ways to save energy is to shutdown some of the APs, which 
serve a specific area of interest, if the number of the served 
stations are decreased in off-peak hours (e.g. at night, 
weekend, holidays). This could lead to the fact that some 
locations in the interested area are not covered, and stations 
located within these locations will not have connections. 
These can get connectivity by using Network coverage 
extension/ Relaying capability. In addition to the energy 
saved by shutting down some APs, NIC virtualization plays 
a role in reducing energy consumption. But the usage of 
multiple network interface cards (NICs) demands higher 
cost, large physical space and more energy consumption. 
J. 
 LEACH(Low-Energy Adaptive clustering Hierarchy) 
LEACH is scheduled MAC protocol with clustered 
topology [26]. The nodes organize themselves into local 
clusters with one node acting as the local cluster head. The 
cluster heads are chosen randomly according to a specific 
algorithm based election a probability function which takes 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

into account various criteria such as energy available nodes. 
To distribute energy consumption evenly, LEACH propose 
to rotate cluster heads randomly. Each node determines a 
cluster to associate with by choosing the cluster head that 
requires minimum communication energy. Once all the 
nodes are organized into clusters each cluster head creates a 
schedule for the nodes in the cluster. This allows that each 
cluster member node can switch to sleep mode at all times 
except during it transmit time; thus, minimizing its energy 
consumption. The disadvantage of this protocol [26] is that 
some nodes operate much more than other nodes and 
especially the Cluster Head the disadvantage is that these 
nodes die much faster than other. 
Summary 
The power saving protocols of MAC sublayer presented 
in this section is summarized in this Table I.  
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF MAC PROTOCOLS 
Protocol 
Network 
Topology 
Chan
nel 
Synchro
nization 
Contribution 
Admissio
n Control 
in Power 
802.11s 
Flat 
1 
No  
a round-robin 
scheduling and 
sleep/wakeup 
mechanism 
APSD 
802.11e 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
Active/sleep 
schedules 
LAECH 
802.15.4 
Clustered 
1 
Yes 
Low energy 
clustering 
NAM 
802.11 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
Map of active/sleep 
period 
NAV 
802.11 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
Active/sleep with 
blockage of 
transmission when 
channel is  reserved 
PAMAS 
Ad hoc 
Flat 
2 
No 
Wake up radio 
scheme 
PSM 
802.11 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
Active/sleep period 
PSMP 
802.11n 
Flat 
2 
Yes 
Active/sleep 
schedules with 
reducing overheads 
SMAC 
802.15.4 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
Active/sleep 
schedules 
STEM 
802.11 
Flat 
2 
NO 
Wake up radio with 
periodic sleep 
Virtualiza
tion of 
NIC 
802.11 
Flat 
1 
Yes 
NIC virtualization 
Different mechanisms of MAC sub layer have been 
presented that allow substantial energy savings in this 
Section. We have noted that a large majority of work in Mac 
layer, was based on the proposal of the 802.11 standard, in 
this case the protocol PSM (Power saving mode) and 
extended it to improve the functioning. The next Section we 
will discuss approaches that conserves energy in the 
Network Layer. 
IV. 
APPROACHES TO ENERGY CONSERVATION 
IN NETWORK LAYER 
Different technique of power saving for multi-hop ad hoc 
wireless networks that reduces energy consumption have 
been proposed without diminishing of the capacity or 
connectivity of the network. As WMNs share many common 
features with ad hoc networks. Thus, the approaches of 
energy conservation for ad hoc networks can usually be 
applied to WMNs. In the Network Layer, power 
management can benefit from information on the topology; 
we find essentially the following approaches:  
A. The CDS (Connected Dominating Set) 
The CSD use information of neighborhood or topology to 
determine the set of nodes which form a connected 
dominating set (CDS) for the network where all nodes are 
either a member of the CDS or a direct neighbor of at least 
one member [27]. Nodes in the CDS are considered the 
pivotal routing and remain active all the time in order to 
maintain global connectivity. All other nodes can choose to 
sleep if necessary. 
B. The SPAN 
SPAN is distributed algorithm, each node in the network 
running Span makes periodic, local decisions on whether to 
sleep or stay awake as a coordinator and participates in the 
forwarding backbone topology [28]. Each node decides to be 
a coordinator may have two criterions. The first is selection 
of the nodes with the higher energy to be a coordinator. The 
second criterion is the value that a node adds to the overall 
network connectivity. A node connecting more nodes will be 
more likely to be chosen as coordinator. Span uses broadcast 
messages to discover and react to changes in the network 
topology. Finally span integrates with 802.11 power saving 
mode nicely, non-coordinate can still receive packets when 
operating in power saving mode. This algorithm can be 
applied to WLAN mesh network with changes in selection of 
coordinator in the criterion of energy for example we can 
choose the access points which are connected with power in 
the place of those are powered with battery. 
C. The GAF 
The GAF scheme of Xu et al. [29] has similar goals to 
Span. In GAF, nodes use geographic location information to 
divide area to cover into fixed square grids. The size of each 
grid stays constant, regardless of node density. Nodes within 
a grid switch between sleeping and listening, with the 
guarantee that one node in each grid stays up to route 
packets. 
One main disadvantage of the three previous approaches 
[27, 28 and 29] is that it is inherently dependent on node 
density for energy savings. The basic premise is that there 
are enough nodes that only a small number of them are 
needed at any one time. In low density networks, almost no 
power can be saved using these approaches because almost 
every node must stay active. Another main disadvantage of 
these approaches is the overhead required to maintain an 
effective subset. Since nodes are mobile, the subset must be 
continually updated in order to provide complete coverage. 
Even if nodes were not mobile, the subset must be rotated in 
order to avoid completely draining the resources of a few 
nodes. Since coordination is required every time the subset 
changes, 
this 
can 
cause 
significant 
amounts 
of 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

communication traffic which both limits scalability and 
reduces good-put by cutting into available medium time. 
D. The Pulse  
The Pulse protocol design is centered on a flood we refer 
to as a pulse, which is periodically sent at a fixed pulse 
interval [30]. This pulse flood originates from infrastructure 
access nodes (pulse sources) and propagates through the 
entire component of the network. This rhythmic pulse serves 
two functions simultaneously. It serves as the primary 
routing mechanism by periodically updating each node in the 
networks route to the nearest pulse source. Each node tracks 
the best route to the pulse source by remembering only the 
node from which it received a flood packet with the lowest 
metric. If a node needs to send and receive packets, it 
responds to the flood with a reservation packet. This 
reservation packet is sent to the pulse source. The reservation 
packet contains the address of the node making the 
reservation, and is used to setup reverse routes at all nodes 
on the path between the pulse source and the sending node. 
A node that does not send or forward a reservation packet 
will have no packet forwarding responsibilities until the next 
pulse occurs, it may place its radio in sleep mode until the 
next pulse period begins. This node deactivation is what 
allows the Pulse protocol to conserve power. This protocol 
[30] has significant disadvantages in the routing information 
that is essentially the problem of flooding packets and the 
problem of Overlap delay or it can result in a significant 
consumption of energy. 
E. EMM-DSR protocol 
Bouyedou et al. [31], suggest a new mechanism that 
allows making a trade-off between energy efficiency and the 
shortness of a selected path for forwarding data packets. In 
other word, this mechanism tries to minimize the energy 
consumption and, at the same time, maintain a good end-to-
end delay and throughput performance. The solution 
proposed by Bouyedou et al. consists in extending the Max-
Min algorithm to support the cited trade-off. Thus, they 
incorporate this extension, among other options, to the 
existing on-demand dynamic source routing protocol (DSR), 
and the resultant version takes the name of EMM-DSR 
(Extended Max-Min DSR). 
F. Power-Aware Routing 
Lin et al. [32], present a power-aware routing algorithm 
for wireless networks with renewable energy sources. The 
proposed algorithm is shown to be asymptotically optimal 
when compared to the full knowledge case. No information 
is assumed regarding the arrival process and it is assumed 
that the node has full knowledge of the energy it will receive 
until the next renewal point by looking at previous data. The 
proposed routing algorithm uses a composite cost metric that 
includes 
power 
for 
transmission 
and 
reception, 
replenishment rate, and residual energy. The work also 
includes non-uniform energy replenishment rates and 
introduces a battery energy threshold scheme to decrease 
overhead. 
G. The green-clustering 
The green-clustering algorithm was developed to enable 
the central controller in a WLAN to make certain decisions 
to power on and off portions of it based on certain pre-
defined criteria like deployment, location of access points, 
and locally derived information. Hence, this algorithm was 
designed 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
centralized 
network 
infrastructure and its devices [33]. The basic idea was that if 
access points are close enough in the cluster, a single one 
would fulfill the needs of users, even those in the vicinity of 
other APs in the same cluster. This clustering concept was 
designed with respect to large organizations with high-
density WLANs because access points are placed very close 
to each other to provide overlapping coverage and high 
bandwidth. 
Summary 
The discussed routing protocols are summarized and 
classified in Table II. As routing protocols may use hybrid 
techniques to achieve their intended target application, some 
of the protocols are classified to several categories. 
Mobility support is evaluated according to the amount of 
the nodes that can move and the effort required for route 
reconstruction.  
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF ROUTING PROTOCOLS 
Routing 
Protocol 
Network 
Topology 
Classification 
Mobility 
CDS 
Ad hoc 
Flat 
Node centric 
routing 
--- 
EMM-DSR 
Ad hoc 
Flat 
Node centric 
--- 
GAF 
Ad hoc 
Grid 
Location based 
Partial 
Green-
clustering 
WLAN 
infrastructure 
Clustered 
Node centric 
--- 
Power-
Aware 
routing 
Multi-hop 
Wireless 
Flat 
Cost field based 
Partial 
Pulse 
multi-hop 
wireless 
infrastructure 
Tree 
Cost field based 
--- 
SPAN 
Ad hoc 
Grid 
Location based 
Partial 
In the network layer, we think that the tendency of 
clustering is a good approach because it has already proven 
itself in the MANET as shown in the large numbers of items. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Reducing power consumption can be achieved on a 
larger scale by introducing intelligence into the network 
infrastructure at various levels by employing different kinds 
of algorithms. This research tends to discuss the best designs 
for maximum efficiency in terms of power while retaining 
the best user experience. This paper has reviewed recent 
work on energy saving in networks WMN, who treated both 
routing algorithms energy saver, the mechanisms of energy 
conservation in the MAC layer and finally some topology 
control methods and the means developed to put in to sleep 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

some routers at certain times. After studying of these works, 
we reached some conclusions. First, if we want to optimize 
the problem of energy conservation in WMN, we can 
intervene on the three lower layers of the OSI model, trying 
to combine the advantages of the proposed solutions in the 
state of the art in each layer using the proposal most 
advantageous in terms of energy savings. In terms of routing, 
we think that the tendency of clustering is a good approach 
because it has already proven itself in the MANET as shown 
in the large numbers of items. We have noted that a large 
majority of work in Mac layer, was based on the proposal of 
the 802.11 standard, in this case the protocol PSM (Power 
saving mode) and extended it to improve the functioning. 
The works done in the physical layer, all have either used the 
notion of CNN (Critical Number of Neighbors), or CTR 
(Critical Transmitting Range), to control the topology of 
WMN network, in order to optimize consumption of energy. 
Another trend plays on optimizing the transmission power of 
nodes, which must be sufficient, and never maximal to keep 
connectivity without interferences. So we can try to verify if 
the use of these three ideas together can improve the 
performance of network, and also saving power, with 
simulation in future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I.F. Akyildiz,  X. Wang and W. Wang, ―Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey‖. Computer Networks Journal (Elsevier) 47(4), pp 445–487, 
2005.  
[2] I.F. Akyildiz and X. Wang., ―A survey on wireless mesh networks‖. 
IEEE Communications Magazine 43(9), s23–s30, 2005.  
[3] I.F. Akyildiz and X. Wang., ―Wireless Mesh Networks‖. John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd, 2009.  
[4] The Wi-Fi Alliance. http://www.wi-fi.org/  
[5] The WiMAX Forum. http://www.wimaxforum.org/home  
[6] S. Nedevschi, L. Popa, G. Iannaccone, ―Reducing Network Energy 
Consumption via Sleeping and Rate-Adaptation‖, Proceedings of the 
5th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and 
Implementation (2008), pp. 323-336  . 
[7] Amit P. Jardosh, G. Iannaccone, K. Papagiannaki, B. Vinnakota. 
―Towards an Energy-Star WLAN Infrastructure‖ HOTMOBILE '07 
Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing 
Systems and Applications pp 85-90.2007. 
[8] M. Kuorilehto, M. Kohvakka, J. Suhonen, ―Ultra-low energy wireless 
sensor networks in practice‖, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2007. 
[9] F.O. Aron, A. Kurien and Y.  Hamam, ― Topology Control Algorithm 
for Effective Power Efficiency and Throughput for Wireless Mesh 
Networks‖, 
Third 
International 
Conf.e 
on 
Broadband 
Communications, 
Information 
Technology 
& 
Biomedical 
Applications, 2008.  
[10] P.Santi, ―Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor 
Networks‖,  Wiley : Chichester, 2005.   
[11] T. Clausen, P. Jacquet, ― Optimized Link State Routing Protocol‖, 
IETF Internet draft; draft-ietf-manet-olsr-11.txt; July 2003. 
[12] F. O. Aron, T. O. Olwal, A. Kurien, and M. O. Odhiambo, ―A 
Distributed Topology Control Algorithm to Conserve Energy in 
Heterogeneous Wireless Mesh Networks‖, World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology 40, 2008. 
[13] P. Mudali, T.C. Nyandeni, N. Ntlatlapay, and M.O. Adigun, ―Design 
and Implementation of a Topology Control Scheme for Wireless 
Mesh Networks‖, IEEE AFRICON 2009. 
[14] H. Coskun, I. Schieferdecker and Y. Al-Hazmi, ‖Virtual WLAN: 
Going beyond Virtual Access Points,‖ ECEASST, vol. 17, March 
2009. 
[15] Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical layer 
(PHY) specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11, June 2007. 
[16] IEEE Stds. Dept.. ―Part 11: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) 
and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Medium Access Control 
(MAC) Quality of Service (QoS) Enhancements,‖ IEEE Press, 2005. 
[17] IEEE Stds. Dept., ―Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Amendment 4: 
Enhancements for Higher Throughput,‖ IEEE P802.11n/D3.00. IEEE 
Press, 2007. 
[18] F. Zhang et al., ―Power Saving Access Points for IEEE 802.11 
Wireless Network Infrastructure‖,  IEEE Wireless Commun. and 
Networking Conf. 2004, March 2004. 
[19] Y. Li, T. D. Todd, and D. Zhao. ―Access Point Power Saving in 
Solar/Battery Powered IEEE 802.11 ESS Mesh Networks‖, 2nd Int’l. 
Conf. Quality of Service in Heterogeneous Wired/Wireless Networks, 
Augst 2005. 
[20] S.Singh and C.S.Raghavendra, ―Power aware multi-access protocol 
with signaling for ad hoc networks‖, ACM Computer Communication 
Review, Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 5-26, July 1998. 
[21] K. Chen, ―Medium Access Control of Wireless LANs for Mobile 
Computing‖, IEEE Network, vol. 8, no. 5. Sept.-Oct. 1994. 
[22] C. Schurgers, V. Tsiatsis, M. B. Srivastava, ―STEM: Topology 
Management for Energy Efficient Sensor Networks‖, IEEEAC paper 
#260, Updated Sept 24, 2001. 
[23] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, ―An Energy- Efficient MAC 
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks‖, IEEE INFOCOM 2002. 
[24] D. Niyato, E. Hossain, ―Admission Control in Power Constrained 
OFDM/TDMA Wireless Mesh Networks‖, Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada. 2006 IEEE. 
[25] Y. Al-Hazmi and Hermann, ―Virtualization of 802.11 Interfaces for 
Wireless Mesh Networks, Wireless On-Demand Network Systems 
and Services (WONS)‖, 2011 Eighth International Conference on 26-
28 Jan 2011. 
[26] W.R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan. Energy-
Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless Micro Sensor 
Networks. In IEEE Proceedings of the Hawaii international 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS ’00), 2002. 
[27] M. Cardei, M.X. Cheng, X. Cheng, Du D.-Z., ―Connected 
Domination in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks‖, Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Conference on Computer Science and Informatics (CSI), 
2002. 
[28] B.Chen, K. Jamieson, H. Balakrishnan and R. Morris, ―Span: An 
Energy-Efficient Coordination Algorithm for Topology Maintenance 
in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks‖, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Manufactured in The Netherlands, 2002. 
[29] Y. Xu, J. Heidemann and D. Estrin, ―Geography-informed energy 
conservation for ad hoc routing‖, Proceedings of the Seventh Annual 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking (MobiCom), 2001. 
[30] B. Awerbuch, D. Holmer, and H. Rubens, ―The Pulse Protocol: 
Energy Efficient Infrastructure Access‖, IEEE INFOCOM, 2004. 
[31] B. Bouyedou , M.FEHAM, F. Didi, H. Labiod,  ―Improvement of 
DSR Performances in Mobile Ad hoc Networks with Trade-off 
between Energy Efficiency and Path Shortness‖, IEEE International 
workshop on ITS for an Ubiquitous Roads UBIROADS 2009, 
Hammamet , Tunisia, June 2009. 
[32] L. Lin, N.B. Shroff, and R. Srikant. ―Asymptotically Optimal Power- 
Aware Routing for Multihop Wireless Networks with Renewable 
Energy Sources‖. Networking, IEEE/ACM Transactions, Oct. 2007. 
[33] Iannaccone, Jardosh, Papagiannaki and Vinnakota, ―Towards an 
Energy-Star WLAN infrastructure‖, Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications, Hotmobile., Eighth IEEE Workshop., pp. 85-90,  2007. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

