Throughput Improvement of a Range-aware WiFi network  
by Minimizing Signal Interference 
 
Jie Zhang 
HwaJong Kim 
GooYeon Lee 
Yong Lee 
Dept. Computer Engineering 
Kangwon National University,  
ChunCheon, Korea 
zarg_1982@hotmail.com 
hjkim3@gmail.com 
leegyeon@kangwon.ac.kr 
yleehyun@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—In the smart-phone era, many WiFi devices around 
us need higher throughput and larger signal coverage which 
also generate unwanted signal interference among the devices. 
Signal interference is inevitable problem because of the 
broadcast nature of wireless transmissions. However, the 
interference could be minimized by reducing signal coverage of 
nearby wireless devices. But, smaller signal coverage means 
low transmission power and low data throughput. In the paper, 
we analyze the relationship among signal strength, coverage 
and interference of WiFi networks, and as a tradeoff between 
transmission power and data throughput, we propose a range-
aware WiFi network scheme which controls transmission 
power according to locations and RSSI of WiFi devices. We 
analyze the efficiency of the proposed scheme by simulation. 
Keywords- 
signal 
interference; 
range-aware; 
data 
throughput; WiFi network,;signal coverage 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many WiFi networks have been introduced these days, 
and they usually need high power for larger transmit range 
and data throughput. However, with rapid increasing number 
of wireless devices such as smart phones, large signal 
coverage of WiFi causes high signal interference especially 
in densely populated area.  
Signal interference is inevitable problem in wireless 
network, which may decrease throughput and cause security 
problems. The signal interference could be reduced by 
controlling network configuration. [1] and [2] suggested 
topology control method with changes transmission power in 
order to reduce signal interference in wireless ad-hoc 
network.  
In WiFi networks, the interference can be managed by 
controlling the sender's transmission power. However, small 
signal power results in low throughput. There is a trade-off 
between signal interference and network throughput [5] [6]. 
In the paper, we analyze the relationship among signal 
transmission power, interference and network throughput. 
We propose a range-aware WiFi Network, which can adjust 
transmission power depending on the locations and Received 
Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) of the devices. We also 
showed the efficiency of the proposed scheme by 
simulations. 
Section II is about interference problems in wireless 
network and related researches. In section III, we extract the 
relationship between signal strength, signal coverage and 
data throughput with experiments. Section IV proposes the 
Range-aware WiFi network and analyzes the efficiency with 
simulations. Conclusion followed.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance 
(CSMA/CA) is IEEE 802.11 wireless protocol designed to 
avoid signal collision in local area network. CSMA/CA 
operates in the process: 
 
1) Before sending data, listen the channel to be IDLE 
2) When channel is IDLE, send a Request To Send 
(RTS) to the receiver, and wait for a Clear To Send (CTS). 
After receiving CTS, the sender starts transmission, and 
broadcast a NAV(Network Allocation Vector) message to its 
neighbors to announce the transmission activity. 
3) After successful data receiving, the receiver sends an 
ACK (acknowledgement) to the sender. 
 
Giuseppe Bianchi [3] analyzed the network performance 
of CSMA/CA, including network throughput with RTS/CTS 
handshake. Long distance communication with CSMA/CA 
suffers tough signal interference due to many interfering 
devices in between the sender and receiver.  
Signal interference deteriorates network throughput and 
also wastes power. Reducing signal interference is widely 
researched in wireless ad-hoc network in order to minimize 
power consumption. Martin Burkhart et al. compared several 
topology 
control 
methods 
which 
claim 
to 
resolve 
interference, and proposed an interference-minimal method 
in wireless ad-hoc network with connectivity-preserving and 
spanner construction [1]. N. M. Karagiorgas introduced a 
multicost routing that constructs route with variable 
transmission power to reduce interference in ad-hoc network 
[2]. Sutep Tongngam [4] proposed a reducible transmission 
range approach for wireless network, which optimizes 
broadcasting latency. Ilenia Tinnirello and Giuseppe Bianchi 
analyzed the interference effects in WiFi networks [5]. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Anand Kashyap et al. presented a passive monitoring of 
wireless traffic to estimate interference in WiFi networks [6].  
Above researches show that in any of wireless network 
like ad-hoc network or broadcasting network, performance in 
data throughput takes high influence from signal interference. 
Wireless interference cannot be removed because of 
broadcasting properties but can be optimized by routing 
algorithms or topology control algorithms. 
III. 
WIFI SIGNAL STRENGTH AND TRANSMISSION RATE 
A. Signal strength and data transmission rate 
The IEEE 802.11 WiFi network is composed of Basic 
Station Set (BSS), which contains an Access Point (AP) as a 
relay station to the Internet for the wireless local area 
network (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  A WiFi network is composed of BSS (Basic Station Set), which 
contains AP(Access Point) and wireless devices 
The most widely used scheme for a WiFi station to 
choose the appropriate AP is measuring the received signal 
strength from AP, known as RSSI. However, many 
researches showed that AP selection scheme based on the 
RSSI does not show good efficiency in optimizing 
throughput 
[7-9]. 
This 
is 
because 
the 
wireless 
communication quality depends on signal interference, 
fading and many other effect besides the signal strength itself. 
In the paper, we first simulate an interference-free 
environment and measure data throughput with different 
signal strength to find out the relationship between RSSI 
level and network throughput. Then, we extend the 
experiment with various signal interferences. 
B. Throughput under interference-free conditions 
Table 1 shows the specifications of the wireless device 
we used in the experiment to measure the RSSI and 
throughput under interference-free conditions. 
 
TABLE I.  
EXPERIMENT DEVICE PARAMETERS USED TO MEASURE THE 
RSSI AND THROUGHPUT 
Wireless protocol 
802.11g 
Transmission power(AP) 
18dBm 
Antenna gain(AP) 
4dBi 
Receive sensitivity 
-74dBm 
Maximum signal range 
70m 
Maximum throughput 
54Mbps 
We measured the upload and download throughput for 
every 5dBm of RSSI from -35dBm to -70dBm, and the result 
is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Throughput in a WiFi network without signal interference as a 
function of RSSI 
Maximum bandwidth of the WiFi channel was 54Mbps, 
as a common throughput of WiFi network in 2.4GHz, 
however, the actual maximum throughput was 20Mbps 
because of the protocol overhead, such as control traffic and 
Ack frames etc. 
C. Signal transmission range and throughput 
In order to analyze interference effects in wireless 
network, we estimate the number of active WiFi networks in 
the signal range and evaluate the average throughput. Signal 
range is expressed by the path loss model as [10]. 
 
PL = PL1Meter + 10log(dn) + s 
(1) 
 
RSSI = TxPower + AntennaGain - PL 
(2) 
Variables used in the formula are: 
· 
PL: Total path loss experienced between the receiver 
and sender in dB 
· 
PL1Meter: Reference path loss in dB for the desired 
frequency when the receiver- to-transmitter distance 
is 1 meter 
· 
d: Distance between the transmitter and receiver in 
meters 
· 
n: Path loss exponent for the environment, 2 in free 
space, 3.5 – 4.5 in indoor environment 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

· 
s: Standard deviation associated with the degree of 
shadow fading in dB (3 ~ 7 dB) 
 
From (1) and (2), signal distance between transmitter and 
receiver is given by 
 
d = 10 (TxPower + AntennaGain – RSSI – PL1Meter – s)/10n 
(3) 
Signal distance between AP and client devices obtained 
from the experiment of Section 3.2 and (3) is shown in Table 
2. Distance and throughput is measured in each RSSI levels. 
TABLE II.  
NETWORK THROUGHPUT AND SIGNAL TRANSMISSION 
DISTANCE FOR DIFFERENT RSSI VALUES 
RSSI  
Distance  
Throughput (Downlink)  
-35dB 
1 m 
21.49Mbps 
-40dB 
1.778279m 
21.03Mbp 
-45dB 
3.162278m 
20.94Mbp 
-50dB 
5.623413m 
19.25Mbp 
-55dB 
10m 
18.42Mbp 
-60dB 
17.78279m 
13.04Mbp 
-65dB 
31.62278m 
11.47Mbp 
-70dB 
56.23413m 
5.79Mbp 
 
In (1), PL1Meter is set to be 54dB, path loss exponent n is 2 
assuming free space, and shadow fading s is 3dB.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Signal transmission coverage for various RSSI values 
Figure 3 shows the signal range variations for various 
RSSI levels, which may explain the relationship between 
distance of wireless nodes and related signal degrees. 
IV. 
RANGE-AWARE WIRELESS WIFI NETWORK 
High transmission power gives high signal interference. 
Low transmission power may increase throughput because of 
low interference, but small signal power would make shadow 
areas. We proposed a range-aware WiFi network in order to 
find optimum value of transmission power and signal 
interference. Figure 4 shows an instance of the proposed 
network scheme where APs have different signal coverage in 
order to minimize signal interference. 
 
Figure 4.  An example of range-aware wireless WiFi networks where APs 
have different signal coverage in order to minimize signal interference 
The range-aware WiFi network can increase network 
efficiency by minimizing signal interference. The rationale 
of the range-aware wireless WiFi networks is controlling 
AP’s transmission power considering the locations of the 
wireless devices. There are three steps in configuring a 
range-aware WiFi Network. 
1) Measuring clients ’  RSSI periodically, calculate 
distances to the devices 
2) Set AP's transmission power to reach the farthest 
client device 
3) Announce the transmission power set at 2) to client 
devices 
Clients’transmission power control is set based on AP's 
transmission power. When client moves, the transmission 
power of AP and client are adjusted (see Figure 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
Figure 5.  Transmission coverage changes as a client wireless device 
moves 
The steps in Figure 5 are described as follows. 
1) Initial state of AP and client device 
2) AP sets signal coverage considering clients' location, 
transmission power and announce it 
3) Client device sets transmission power based on the 
announced AP's transmission power 
4) The client device moves away from its AP 
5) Client device uses default transmission power  
6) AP recalculates distance between client and adjusts 
signal coverage 
We performed simulations to investigate the proposed 
method. Simulation topology is illustrated in Figure 6. A 
120m x 120m area is divided into 9 cells, each cell contains 
one AP at the center and 6 randomly located devices. 
Network throughput for downlink (from AP to clients) is 
measured for different transmission powers of 18dBm, 
13dBm and 8dBm. In the simulation, we assumed all clients 
use same channel and channel access time is equally shared 
by all client devices no matter how the actual throughput is. 
The simulation program is written by Java language, UDP 
unicast is used with maximum throughput of 54Mbps. 
 
Figure 6.  Simulation topology with 9 cells and 54 devices 
First, we considered a conventional WiFi network 
without range-aware WiFi scheme. Figure 7 shows the 
simulation result with 18dBm (high) transmission power. All 
client devices show similar network throughput, however the 
throughput is quite low because of the high signal 
interference. Figure 8 shows the case with transmission 
power of 8dBm, where the network throughput is much 
higher than the case of Figure 7 (i.e., 18dBm) because of low 
signal interference. However, in this case, the AP's signal 
coverage is not long enough to cover all clients in the 
network that may cause shadow zone.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with 18dBm 
transmission power 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
Figure 8.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with 8dBm 
transmission power 
Figure 9 shows the simulation result of the proposed 
range-aware WiFi network. AP's transmission power is 
adjusted depending on the clients' location to be 18dBm, 
13dBm and 8dBm, respectively. As shown in Figure 9, 
shadow zone does not exist and network throughput is much 
better than that of Figures 7 and 8. By choosing optimum 
transmission power associated with client's distance, we can 
minimize signal interference and maximize network 
throughput. 
 
Figure 9.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with range-aware 
WiFi network scheme 
Table III compares average network throughput of 
conventional WiFi network and range-aware WiFi network 
with transmission power 8dBm, 13dBm and 18dBm. It also 
compares the cases with 6 client devices in every cell (6x9 
clients) and 9 client devices in every cell (9x9 clients). 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
AVERAGE 
THROUGHPUT(MBPS) 
COMPARISON 
OF 
A 
RANGE-WARE AND CONVENTIONAL WIFI NETWORK 
 
Range-Aware 
8dBm 
13dBm 
18dBm 
6 x 6 
2.09 
1.58 
1.09 
0.64 
9 x 9 
1.30 
1.07 
0.78 
0.42 
 
 
Figure 10.  Average throughput comparison of a range-ware and 
conventional WiFi network (with different transmission powers)  
Figure 10 shows that the proposed range-aware WiFi 
network gives much higher throughput from clients than 
conventional WiFi network. Throughput with the case of 9 
client devices in each cell shows lower throughput than the 
case of 6 client devices in a cell, because 9 clients in a cell 
will use small amount of bandwidth than 6 clients in average. 
In [7], Yutaka Fukuda et al. presented an AP selection 
scheme based on measurement of signal interference and 
showed a throughput improvement of 100% around. 
Controlling client to reach interference-minimum AP might 
improve certain node’s throughput however should show few 
efficiency in improving whole network performance; the 
scheme should show similar result of Figure 9 with our 
simulation model. Today’s WiFi environment has a very 
high density of wireless client due to rapid increase of WiFi 
devices, typically Smartphones. The most efficient way to 
optimize WiFi network should be controlling network 
topology, proposed Range-aware WiFi network presents one 
example. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Performance of a WiFi network does not only depend on 
signal strength but also on the interference from neighbor 
wireless devices. Higher transmission power from AP gives 
higher signal interference to other WiFi network. On other 
hand, if transmission power is too small it can reduce signal 
interference but may cause shadow zones where client 
devices could not connect to the network. 
In the paper, we analyze the relationship between signal 
power, signal interference, and network throughput. We 
proposed a range-aware WiFi network that may increase 
network efficiency by minimizing signal interference with 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

controlled transmission power. Simulation results show that 
the range-aware WiFi network gives higher network 
throughput than conventional WiFi network.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MSIP(Ministry of 
Science, ICT&Future Planning), Korea, under the C-
ITRC(Convergence 
Information 
Technology 
Research 
Center) support program (NIPA-2013-H0401-13-1002) 
supervised by the NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion 
Agency) and Basic Science Research Program through the 
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the 
Ministry of Education(No. NRF-2011-0013951). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Martin Burkhart, Pascal von Rickenbach, Roger Wattenhofer, 
and Aaron Zollinger, “Does topology control reduce 
interference?”, Proceedings of the 5th ACM international 
symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing, 
2004, pp.9-19 
[2] Karagiorgas, N.M., Kokkinos, P.C., Papageorgiou, C.A., and 
Varvarigos, E.A, “Multicost Routing in Wireless AD-HOC 
Networks with Variable Transmission Power”, Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, IEEE 18th 
International Symposium,  2007, pp. 1 – 5 
[3] Giuseppe Bianchi, “Performance analysis of the IEEE 802.11 
Distributed Coordination Function”, Selected Areas in 
Communications, Vol. 18,  2000,  pp. 535 – 547 
[4] Sutep Tongngam, “A Reducible Transmission Range 
Approach for Interference-Aware Broadcasting in Wireless 
Networks”, International Conference on Future Information 
Technology, 2011, pp. 144 – 148 
[5] Tinnirello, I. and Bianchi, G., “Interference Estimation in 
IEEE 802.11 Networks”, Control Systems, vol. 30, 2010, pp. 
30-43, 
[6] Anand 
Kashyap, 
Utpal 
Paul, 
and 
Samir 
R. 
Das, 
“Deconstructing Interference Relations in WiFi Networks”, 
Sensor Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 7th 
Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference, 2010, pp. 
1 – 9 
[7] Yutaka 
Fukuda, 
Masanori 
Honjo, 
and 
Yuji 
Oie, 
“Development of Access Point Selection Architecture with 
Avoiding Interference For WLANs”, Personal, Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications, IEEE 17th International 
Symposium, 2006, pp.1-5  
[8] Heeyoung Lee, Seongkwan Kim, Okhwan Lee, Sunghyun 
Choi, and Sung-Ju Lee, “Available Bandwidth-Based 
Association in IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs”, Proceedings of 
the 11th international symposium on Modeling, analysis and 
simulation of wireless and mobile systems, 2008, pp.132-139 
[9] Daniel 
Wu, 
Petar 
Djukic, 
and 
Prasant 
Mohapatra, 
“Determining 
802.11 
Link 
Quality 
with 
Passive 
Measurements”, Wireless Communication Systems, IEEE 
International Symposium, 2008, pp. 728 – 732 
[10] Cisco, “WiFi Location-Based Services 4.1 Design Guide - 
Location Tracking Approaches”, 2008 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

