Performance Evaluation of Handover Policies in Mobile Heterogenous Networks 
 
Mircea Axente-Stan 
Telecommunication Department  
Universitatea Politehnica Bucuresti (UPB) 
Bucharest, Romania 
mastan@elcom.pub.ro 
Eugen Bocorci 
Telecommunication Department  
Universitatea Politehnica Bucuresti (UPB) 
Bucharest, Romania 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro
 
 
Abstract— The increasingly ubiquitous deployment of wireless 
networks together with efforts to complete the standardization 
of Media Independent Handover (MIH) will support the 4G 
(Fourth Generation) vision in offering seamless access and an 
integrated network-of-networks (i.e. all IP network). In the 
same time, the handover process complexity will increase in 
next generations of wireless networks, creating the need for 
augmented knowledge about context, as well as more flexibility 
in managing the resources. The last two objectives cannot be 
addressed using the current static (hardcoded) mechanisms for 
handover initialization, decision and execution; therefore, a 
new policy-based architecture is proposed to assure the 
required level of adaptability and flexibility and to respond to 
user and network dynamics. 
Keywords-mobile heterogenous networks, vertical handover, 
MIH, context aware, policy-based management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Next generation of mobile wireless technologies, defined 
in cellular terminology as fourth generation (4G),  must 
support targets peak data rates of about 100 Mb/s for highly 
mobile access (at speeds of up to 250 km/h), and 1 Gb/s for 
low mobility (pedestrian speeds or fixed) access. 
Besides meeting the above date rates, the 4G networks 
will consist of heterogeneous access networks providing a 
broad range of services to subscribers. In such an 
environment, vertical handover between various access 
technologies will be a common operation; therefore finding 
ways to handle optimally the network dynamics and 
complexity will be a challenging task requiring a great level 
of flexibility, scalability and adaptability. 
Currently, 
there 
are 
many 
efforts 
devoted 
to 
interworking, seamless mobility techniques on integrated all-
IP network and on self-managing virtual resource overlay 
that can span across heterogeneous networks, support service 
mobility, quality of service and reliability. In Europe, as part 
of ICT FP7 (Information & Communication Technologies 
Seventh Framework Programme), the relevant studies have 
been carried out in several projects such as WINNER 
(Wireless World Initiative New Radio) [12], HURRICANE 
(Handovers 
for 
ubiquitous 
and 
optimal 
broadband 
connectivity among Cooperative networking environments) 
[11] and AUTOI (Autonomic Internet) [10]. 
Moreover, System Architecture Evolution (SAE) in 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) [1] dedicates itself to 
cope with interworking and handover signalling, which aim 
at solving seamless mobility between different packet 
switched domains belonging to existing and evolving 3GPP 
access networks and non-3GPP access networks. 
One-step in offering seamless handover is made by the 
standardization of Media Independent Handover Services 
(MIH) [13].  This standard tries to provide link layer 
intelligence and other related information to upper layers to 
optimize the handovers between heterogeneous media. The 
standard focuses primarily on the decision (or pre-execution) 
phase of handovers, but only reducing the handover latency 
is aiming to have little or no perceptible disruption of the 
users’ applications, is not enough. However, there still exist 
several limitations in MIH architecture as follows: 
• 
In MIH, the handover process typically based on 
measurements and triggers supplied from link layers, 
which disregards the influence of the application and 
user context information on mobility management. 
• 
The network information provided by MIH lacks of 
flexibility since only less dynamic and static 
information derived.  
 
To cope with network complexity and to be able to offer 
service 
continuity 
(e.g., 
context 
transfer, 
resource 
reservation), only using the facilities offer by MIH is not 
enough, therefore an aggregated view of user, network, 
mobility and service context should be taking in account 
during handover process. This augmented knowledge about 
context, as well as flexibility in managing the resources 
cannot be achieved without a certain level of automation and 
abstraction. To achieve above-mentioned requirements the 
solution proposed in this paper combines the use of policy-
based 
management 
framework 
and 
context 
aware 
information to manage the handover process. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II gives an overview of policy-based handover 
systems and shows possible network architectures. Section 
III gives a brief description of the proposed policy-based 
management architecture. Section IV describe the primary 
scenarios, validate the policies and evaluate the solution 
through simulation. Finally, in Section V we conclude our 
work and discuss possible directions of future work.   
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
The idea of handover control, which is not based only on 
the received signal strength (RSS), has been heavily studied 
in the past years. Most of the papers propose either a 
20
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

framework or taxonomy, but they are lack on implementing 
the framework in a simulation or testbed environment. 
Paper written by Kassar et al. [16] make a summary of 
the policy-based handover solutions as follows: 
• Decision function-based strategies (DF) [7, 8]; 
• User-centric strategies (UC) [2, 20]; 
• Multiple attributes decision strategies (MAD) [6] 
•Fuzzy logic and neural networks based strategies 
(FL/NN) [21] 
• Context-aware strategies (CA) [17, 22]. 
The solutions using DF strategies seem to be more 
flexible for the use of vertical handover policies but less 
efficient on this aspect for real-time applications. The use of 
FL and MAD algorithms gives the best and accurate solution 
with regrouping all the decision factors, but they are weak in 
flexibility. CA strategies try to ensure a high flexibility as 
important as a high efficiency facing a heterogeneous 
environment, but this comes with a drawback related to 
reactivity in case of real time applications. 
To overcome the limitations of the above-mentioned 
solutions and to be able to validate the results in a simulation 
environment, we define a new policy-based architecture to 
assure the required level of adaptability and flexibility and to 
respond to user and network dynamics. Our solution 
combines the context-aware (CA) and multiple attribute 
decision strategies (MAD) using the MIH protocol to convey 
the policies and context information.  
III. 
CONTEX-AWARE HANDOVER MANAGEMENT 
In this section, we describe the proposed high-level 
architecture to manage handover process using policy-based 
management framework and context aware information.  
Policy-based management defines high-level objectives 
of network, and system management based on a set of 
policies that can be enforced in the network. The policies are 
a set of pre-defined rules (when a set of conditions are 
fulfilled then some defined actions will be triggered) that 
determine allocation and control of network resources. These 
conditions and actions can be established by the network 
administration with parameters that determine when the 
policies are to be implemented in the network.  
Policy-based management provides a high-abstraction 
view of a network to its operator, as it does not need to 
consider details concerning the size or complexity of the 
network [18]. 
The architecture combines the design principles of MIH 
and PBM (Policy-Based Management) frameworks. On one 
hand, it uses the services of MIH to exchange the policy 
information and to facilitate a distributed way of taking the 
handover decision and on other hand makes use of PCIM 
framework [3] to offer a high level of flexibility and 
adaptability of the system.  
 
 
   
 
MM 
HM 
MIHF 
Access/Core Network 
MM 
HM 
MIHF 
CAHC 
Mobile Node 
LPR 
NRM 
MIHF 
GPR 
Home/Visited Network 
MM 
CAHC 
HM 
CI 
SM 
UP 
CI 
SM 
UP 
 
Figure 1.  System architecture 
As seen in fig. 1 the main functional entities of handover 
management architecture are Context Aware Handover 
Controller (CAHC) and Handover Manager (HM). These 
two functional entities are either assisted or makes use of the 
services offered by mobility management protocols (L3MP – 
e.g. MIP or SIP), context information (CI) triggers and 
policies stored in policy repository (PR) which are either 
local (MN side) or global (network side). 
A. Context Aware Handover Controller 
Context Aware Handover Controller (CAHC) plays the 
role of Policy Decision Point (PDP) in policy-based 
management framework and MIH User (MIHU) in MIH 
framework. It uses the rules stored in Policy Repository (PR) 
to take decisions and to enforce the required actions further 
to HM. Policy Repository can be located at MN level using 
local rules stored in Local Policy Repository (LPR) or at 
network level and in that case the repository store the global 
rules, therefore is called Global Policy Repository (GPR). 
CAHC it is able to extract relevant information from 
received triggers and if need, to query for additional 
information from external entities, aggregate the information 
and then take decision. In order to receive triggers the CAHC 
must first register to external entities specifying the type and 
number of events that should be received. The context 
information (CI) can convey user, service, and network or 
mobility information. 
In this paper, we will not develop further the protocol 
used to convey the context information or the message 
exchange between CAHC and external functional entities. 
We will try to summarize the requirements for such kind of 
protocol. First, the protocol must support a registering 
mechanism, which will allow specifying types and numbers 
of the events that CAHC it is willing to receive later. 
Secondly, the protocol must support on-demand query for 
context information without prior registration. This will 
facilitate a better usage of the network resources and will 
increase the scalability of the solution.  Last but not least the 
protocol should convey context information to/from remote 
entities (e.g. terminal to network) in order to allow 
distributed decision (e.g. network controlled and terminal 
assisted). 
For an integrated approach and to achieve the above-
mentioned requirements the MIH protocol can be re-used, 
extending the Media Independent Event Service (MIES) and 
Media Independent Information Service (MIIS). 
21
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

B. Handover Manager 
Handover 
Manager 
(HM) 
identifies 
the 
Policy 
Enforcement Point (PEP) in policy-based management 
framework and MIHU in MIH framework. HM implements 
decisions coming for CAHC execute the proper handover 
procedure and release the right resources. 
C. Policy information exchange 
In general, the policy information exchange is decoupled 
from the handover management process. As presented in the 
fig. 2, depending on capabilities of the CAHC, policy 
information can be pulled by the MN or can be pushed by 
the CAHC from the network side. In the second case prior to 
any interrogation, the MN must first register to CAHC.  
 
MIH_Get_Info.confirm 
MIH_Get_Info.response 
CAHC MIHF 
Mobile Node 
MIHF CAHC 
Policy Enabled 
Network Node 
MIH_Register.request 
MIH_Register.indication 
MIH_Register.response 
MIH_Register.confim 
MIH_Push_Information.request 
MIH_Push_Information.indication 
MIH_Get_Info.request 
MIH_Get_Info.indication 
Policy Pull 
Policy Push 
 
Registration 
 
Figure 2.  Registration process 
From the architecture point of view, it is possible to 
coordinate the decision-making on network side or on the 
terminal side, but the later one can lead to scalability issues 
[9]. 
In this section we will present the main steps encountered 
during handover process from initialization to execution in 
case of network controlled handover.  
The handover process may be conditioned by the 
measurements and triggers offered by different sources, such 
as the link layer or application layer, or network context 
from network side. There are two methods to obtain the 
required trigger events and the related information for MIH 
users (CAHC or upper layers). 
The first method is registration mechanism. The 
registration mechanism enables an endpoint to register its 
interest in particular event type. After registration, the MIH 
users may specify a list of events for which they wish to 
receive notifications from the MIH Function. MIH users may 
specify additional parameters during the registration process 
in order to control the behaviour of the Event Service. 
The second method is query/response mechanism. The 
query/response mechanism is to retrieve the available 
information. CAHC may send a request to Mobility Manager 
(MM), Service Manager (SM), Network Resource Manager 
(NRM) or User Profile (UP) server with additional 
parameters. In this case, the prior registration is unnecessary. 
The corresponding response includes either application/user 
information in client side or the static or dynamic 
information in network side. 
There are four categories of context information (CI) that 
can be received or queried: 
• 
User Context (UC) – user context information 
identify, either static user information (billing 
preferences, energy, security level) or dynamic user 
information 
(location). 
User 
Context 
(UC) 
information can be triggered or queried from User 
Profile server (UP) placed on network side or can be 
stored at MN level.    
• 
Service Context (SC) – service context information 
can be triggered or queried from Service Manager 
(SM), see the Fig. 1. The SM controls and authorizes 
the requests coming from local applications in case 
of SM placed on Mobile Node (MN) or globally for 
application requests managed at the network level. 
When a new service request is received by the SM, 
or there is a change of an already establish service, 
the SM can generate a trigger to notify the CAHC 
with regard service characteristics (QoS parameters, 
service type).  The SM performs service level 
management: planning, provisioning, offering and 
fulfilment of the services required for end-to-end 
QoS-enabled content deliver.  
• 
Network 
Context 
(NC) 
– 
network 
context 
information is provided by Network Resource 
Manager (NRM) and can specify static (cost, 
throughput, network type, power consumption, 
topology information) or dynamic (network load, 
latency, packet loss, jitter, and congestion level) 
network related information. The NRM it is a 
functional entity placed on the network side, which 
is responsible for managing the resources at network 
level (see the Fig. 1).  
• 
Mobility 
Context 
(MC) 
– 
mobility 
context 
information is provided by Mobility Manager (MM), 
see the Fig. 1. Mobility Manager stores the current 
status provided by MIH protocol and higher-level 
mobility protocols (L3MP), such as MIP (Mobile IP) 
[4, 5] or SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) [15, 16]. 
The vertical handover can be divided in three steps: 
handover initiation, decision and execution. During the 
handover initiation step, the mobile nodes equipped with 
multiple interfaces have to determine which networks can be 
used and the services available in each network. In the 
handover decision step, the mobile node determines which 
network it should connect. The decision may depend on 
various parameters, which define the aggregated user 
context. Finally, during the handover execution step, the 
connections need to be re-routed from the existing network 
to the new network in a seamless manner. This step also 
includes the authentication and authorization, and the 
transfer of user’s context information. 
D. Handover Initialisation 
In this phase, the CAHC is starting to gather more 
information about the current context: 
22
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

• 
query MM for available networks and mobility 
protocols supported; 
• 
query user profile server (UP) for user preferences  
(cost, network type) and user location; 
• 
 query the NRM about network load, type, 
throughput and other useful information; 
 When all the information, which defines the user 
context, is present, the aggregate information is used to 
match policies stored in policy repository (PR). 
The process can be further optimized with a caching 
mechanism at CAHC level, which can be combined with 
registering mechanism or with query/response interrogation. 
Each context information will have associated a specific 
lifetime depending on category of information cached (e.g. 
topology vs. network load). 
E. Handover Decision 
In this phase, the aggregated information will match a 
policy from the PR list and based on the user context. The 
aim is to find an appropriate network. The reference network 
and other candidate access networks will be ranked 
according to certain policy. Finally, the one before the 
reference network is selected as the target network. 
Therefore, both user experiences and resource efficiency 
could be guaranteed in this mechanism. 
Then current network sends handover preparation request 
to target network, with the information of MN capability and 
context. The target network will reserve the resources for 
MN in order to reduce interruption time and to preserve 
service continuity.  
F. Handover Execution 
After link layer handover is finished, higher layer 
mobility protocol (MIP or SIP) signalling is exchanged over 
the radio network. When the handover execution is 
complete, the resources from previous network are released. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF POLICY HANDOVER STRATEGIES 
 Architecture validation is done implementing the 
complete framework of the ns-2 [19] simulation environment 
for both vertical handover (Wi-Fi to Wimax) and horizontal 
handover (Wimax to Wimax). The energy model is part of 
core functionalities of ns-2 and the 802.21 functionality is 
incorporated in ns-2 as add-on modules developed by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
based on 802.21 (draft 3)[23]. Starting from the basic 
handover types, we define a set of six primary scenarios used 
to handle mobility (MIP or MIP+MIH). Finally, the primary 
scenarios are validated for different simulation parameters 
(speed, signal strength, advertising interval). 
A. Scenarios 
In defining the scenarios we took into account the 
mobility type – horizontal (between different cells of the 
same technology - HHO) and vertical (between different 
types of technologies - VHO),  protocol(s) used for mobility 
management – MIP or MIP with MIH support and the usage 
of the multiple interfaces in case of vertical handover. 
We evaluate the scenarios using user velocity, RSS 
threshold and routing advertising interval: 
1) HHO-MIP 
In this scenario, the user is performing a horizontal 
handover and the decision is based on signal strength and 
mechanism offered by the MIP for move detection. 
2) HHO-MIP-MIH 
In this scenario, the user is performing a horizontal 
handover and the decision based on triggers offered by MIH 
(link down or link going down) and mechanism offered by 
the MIP for move detection. 
3) VHO-MIP-single interface 
In this scenario, the user is performing a vertical 
handover, the decision based on signal strength and 
mechanisms offered by the MIP for move detection and use 
one interface at a certain time. 
4)  VHO-MIP-multiple interfaces 
In this scenario, the user is performing a vertical 
handover, the decision is based on signal strength and 
mechanism offered by the MIP for move detection, but 
during handover preparation and execution uses both 
interfaces (e.g. Wi-Fi and Wimax). 
5) VHO-MIP-MIH-single interface 
In this scenario the user is performing an vertical 
handover and the decision is based on triggers offered by 
MIH (link down or link going down) and mechanism offered 
by the MIP for move detection and use one interface at a 
certain time (either Wi-Fi or Wimax). 
6) VHO-MIP-MIH-multiple interfeces 
In this scenario the user is performing an vertical 
handover and the decision is based on triggers offered by 
MIH (link down or link going down) and mechanism offered 
by the MIP for move detection, but during  handover 
preparation and execution use both interfaces (e.g. Wi-Fi and 
Wimax). 
B. Simulation results 
In this section, we present the results obtained by 
simulating the primary scenarios. For each scenario, we 
measure (i) system packet loss, (ii) handover time (latency), 
(iii) bandwidth efficiency and (iv) energy consumption. 
 
Figure 3.  Packet loss 
23
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

Fig. 3 shows the packet loss in the system. The packet 
loss in the system is the difference between the total number 
of packets sent by the CN and the number of the packets 
received by MN (including both Wimax and Wi-Fi 
interfaces). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Handover time (latency) 
Fig. 4 shows the evolution of HO time from old to new 
access network. The HO time is the amount of time that 
elapses between an interface is becoming DOWN, it is 
sending a MIPv6 Redirect Request to the CN and is 
receiving the correspondent Redirect Ack from the CN. 
 
Figure 5.  Bandwidth efficiency 
Fig. 5 presents the efficiency in utilizing the bandwidth 
available in the system. The bandwidth efficiency measure 
the ratio of bandwidth used for application traffic and total 
bandwidth (application and signalling). The application 
traffic represented by video stream of UDP packets sent at a 
constant bit rate (CBR) of 409.6 kbps. The data is used o 
exchange control information in between functional elements 
(MIH message and/or ND messages).  
 
Figure 6.  Energy consumption 
Fig. 6 shows the energy consumption variation. The 
energy consumption it is another way of expressing the 
battery lifetime of the mobile node and it measure the 
amount of energy consumed during simulation time. 
C. Policy enforcement 
In order, validate the architecture we define two simple 
policies. First policy (Policy 1) specifies that during the 
handover the number of packet loss is lower or equal to 20 
packets. Second policy (Policy 2) is defined based on energy 
consumption and it requires that energy consumed during 
100 sec (simulation time) to be lower or equal with 8 joules.  
 
Figure 7.  Policies enforcement for the same user context 
When we apply the two policies for the same user 
context (e.g. same user velocity), the solution space will be 
different in terms of possible handover types, mobility 
protocols, usage of multiple interfaces or signal strengths 
(see Fig. 7). 
24
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

 
Figure 8.  The same policy in two user’s contexts 
Similarly, if we apply the same policy in different user 
contexts (see Fig. 8) the solution space will depend on the 
same parameters, but with other results.  
Combining more than one metrics in one policy (e.g. 
Policy 3 = (Policy 1 && Policy 2)) will narrow the solution 
space for a specific user context.  
The use MAD strategies gives the best and accurate 
solution by regrouping all the decision factors (e.g. solution 
space), but they are weak in flexibility. Combining the 
decision factors with CA strategies will ensure a high 
flexibility and a high efficiency facing a heterogeneous 
environment. 
V. 
CONCLUSON AND FUTURED WORK 
In this paper, we provided an integrated architecture for 
handling the handover process in next generation of wireless 
networks using policy-based management and aggregated 
context information. 
Handover process complexity will require an augmented 
knowledge about context, as well as more flexibility in 
managing the resources. Previous 
objectives cannot 
addressed using the current static (hardcoded) mechanisms 
for handover initialization, decision and execution, therefore 
a policy-based architecture is proposed to assure the required 
level of adaptability and flexibility and to respond to user 
and network dynamics. 
Integrating the proposed architecture in a policy based 
management framework together with MIH services can 
further add flexibility to the network management and allow 
operators to make abstraction of the concrete wireless 
technology existent in the access network.  
The details of the protocol messages used convey policy 
information and its behaviour are under investigation. In 
addition, the design considerations related to coordinated 
decision on network and terminal side, caching mechanism 
and context information lifetime are open to further research, 
pending for a formal validation based on a prototypical 
implementation and performance evaluation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 3rd Generation Project Partnership, available at http://www.3gpp.org. 
[2] A. Calvagna and G. D. Modica, “A user-centric analysis of vertical 
handovers,” in WMASH ’04: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
international workshop on Wireless mobile applications and services 
on WLAN hotspots, (Philadelphia, PA, USA), pp. 137–146, October 
2004. 
[3] B. Moore, E. Ellesson, J. Strassner, and A.Westerinen. Policy Core 
Information Model. Internet RFC rfc3060.txt, Work in Progress, 
February 2001. 
[4] C. Perkins., “Mobility Support in IPv6”, IETF RFC 3220, Jan. 2002. 
[5] D. Johnson et al., Mobility Support in IPv4, IETF RFC 3775, 
Jun.2004 
[6] E. Stevens-Navarro and V. W. Wong, “Comparison between Vertical 
Handoff 
Decision 
Algorithms 
for 
Heterogeneous 
Wireless 
Networks,” in IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-
Spring), May 2006. 
[7] F. Zhu and J. McNair, “Optimizations for Vertical Handoff Decision 
Algorithms,” 
in 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Networking 
Conference (WCNC), pp. 867–872, March 2004. 
[8] H. J. Wang, R. H. Katz, and J. Giese, “Policy-Enabled Handoffs 
Across Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” in WMCSA, (New 
Orleans, LA, USA), February 1999. 
[9] H. Marques, J. Ribeiro, P. Marques, and J. Rodriguez, Simulation of 
802.21 Handovers Using ns-2, Journal of Computer Systems, 
Networks, and Communications, Volume 2010 (2010), Article ID 
794749, 11 pages 
[10] ICT ATOI proiect, available at http://www.ict-atoi.eu. 
[11] ICT HURRICANE project, available at http://www.ict-hurricane.eu. 
[12] ICT WINNER project, available at http://www.winner.org. 
[13] IEEE Std 802.21-2008, IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan 
area networks - Part 21: Media Independent Handover Services, 
January 2009.  
[14] J. Rosenberg et al., SIP: Session Initiation Protocol,IETF RFC 3261, 
June 2002. 
[15] M. Handley 
and 
V. Jacobson, 
SDP: 
Session 
Description 
Protocol,IETF RFC 4566, July 2006. 
[16] M. Kassar, B. Kervella, and G. Pujolle, “An overview of vertical 
handover decision strategies in heterogeneous wireless networks,” 
Comput. Commun., vol. 31, pp. 2607–2620, June 2008 
[17] M. Kassar, B. Kervella, and G. Pujolle, “Architecture of an Intelligent 
Inter-system HandoverManagement Scheme,” in Future generation 
communication and networking (fgcn 2007), (Jeju, Korea), pp. 332–
337, December 2007. 
[18] Mircea Axente-Stan, Eugen Borcoci, Integrating MPLS and Policy 
Based Management Technologies in Mobile Environment. EuroNGI 
Workshop 2004: 166-175. 
[19] ns-2, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns. 
[20] O. Ormond, J. Murphy, and G.-M. Muntean, “Utility-based 
Intelligent Network Selection in Beyond 3G Systems,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Communications, 2006. ICC ’06, 
(Istanbul, Turkey), pp. 1831–1836, June 2006. 
[21] Q. Guo, J. Zhu, and X. Xu, “An adaptive multi-crit eria vertical 
handoff decision algorithm for radio heterogeneous network,” in 
IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2005. ICC 2005, 
(Istanbul, Turkey), pp. 2769–2773, May 2005. 
[22] Q. Wei, K. Farkas, C. Prehofer, P. Mendes, and B. Plattner, “Context-
aware handover using active network technology,” Comput. Netw., 
vol. 50, no. 15, pp. 2855–2872, 2006. 
[23] NIST ns-2 add-on modules for 802.21 (draft 3) support, 
http://www.nist.gov/itl/antd/emntg/ssm_tools.cfm  
25
MESH 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-147-2

