Vertical Handover in Wireless Mesh Networks and its Impact on Routing 
Ferdawss Douma and Rafik Braham 
PRINCE RG, ISITCOM - University of Sousse, Tunisia 
E-mails :{ Ferdawss_douma@live.fr, rafik.braham@ensi.rnu.tn}
 
 
Abstract —This paper proposes a new idea to improve routing in 
wireless mesh networks using IEEE 802.21’s Media Independent 
Handover (MIH) functions. First, we evaluate the performance of 
a vertical handover using IEEE 802.21 protocol between WiFi 
and WiMax networks. Then, we present our proposal of using 
MIHF for optimizing the performance of IEEE 802.11s Wireless 
Mesh Networks (WMN) routing protocols, such as Hybrid 
Wireless Mesh Protocol (HWMP). 
Keywords-Wireless 
mesh 
networks; 
routing 
protocol; 
Handover; MIH; packets loss ratio; handover delay.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, wireless communication technologies have 
evolved thanks to their utility and flexibility. This has led to the 
emergence of new wireless network solutions. 
One such solution consists of Wireless Mesh Networks 
(WMN), which are gaining importance [1].  
IEEE 802.11s Group [2] was established in January 2004 to 
provide mesh functions to IEEE 802.11 architectures and 
protocols. 
Research in the field of WMNs [3] is broad and diverse. 
Indeed, substantial works are currently carried out by 
researchers on routing protocols and their performance 
indicators. In addition, many other works focus on higher-level 
protocols (Quality of Service (QoS), service discovery, etc.). 
Mobility is also a very active area of research.  
Handover process causes a number of problems in routing, 
which degrades the service continuity. We have noticed, 
however, that works that connect routing and handover or use 
the characteristics of one to enhance the other are extremely 
rare. Our idea then is to link these two operations.  
For this, we exploit the handover protocol described in 
IEEE’s Media Independent Handover (MIH) [4] in order to 
improve routing between different network components and 
maintain service continuity.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents an 
overview of WMNs and popular routing protocols. Section III 
presents the MIH standard and Section IV describes related 
works found in the literature. Then, Section V describes 
simulation experiments. Different applications are used for this 
topic such as Constant Bit Rate (CBR) video and voice traffic. 
 Our approach to improve routing in WMNs using MIH is 
presented in Section VI. In Section VII, we discuss simulation 
results and present the advantages and disadvantages of our 
proposed idea. Finally, Section VIII provides a summary of 
this paper and some perspectives. 
II. OVERVIEW OF IEEE 802.11S AND ROUTING 
PROTOCOLS 
WMN technology is widely used in the world and its 
standardization becomes very necessary for large-scale 
applications. Currently, WMN standards are: IEEE 802.15.5, 
IEEE 802.16 and IEEE 802.11s. 
IEEE 802.15.5 [5] is a standard which aims to introduce the 
MESH technology at the personal area networks level. This 
standard aims to identify and develop mechanisms that must be 
present at the physical and MAC layers in order to implement 
the MESH technology in WPANs. This standard provides 
personal area networks that offer higher rate and ensure 
transmissions over longer distances. 
IEEE 802.16 standard group [6] introduces the Mesh 
structure in the IEEE 802.16 d/e standard. In IEEE 802.16 
Mesh, any node in the network can form several links with its 
adjacent nodes and one of the links is selected to transmit the 
information from local node or other nodes.  
IEEE 802.11s is a flexible and extensible standard for 
WMNs based on IEEE 802.11 family. One of the important 
functionalities of IEEE 802.11s is the wireless multi-hop 
routing, which sets up paths for wireless forwarding.  
IEEE 802.11s mesh networks can be used in a wide range 
of application scenarios. These scenarios include residential for 
the digital home, companies and public places and temporary 
infrastructure in case of a disaster. Mesh networks are 
extensible to allow support for diverse applications and future 
innovation. 
Routing, also called path selection, consists of finding the 
optimal route from source to destination. IEEE 802.11s routing 
protocols are particularly based on the work of the IETF 
MANET [7], but operate at layer 2 unlike MANET protocols, 
which operate at layer 3. The 11s group has as target 
configuration a network which contains 32 entities that 
participate in routing. 
Two routing protocols are considered: Hybrid Wireless 
Mesh Protocol (HWMP) and Radio Aware Optimized Link 
State Routing Protocol (RA-OLSR) [8]. 
The HWMP is the default routing protocol for wireless 
mesh networks. It combines two approaches: reactive routing 
and proactive tree-based routing [9]. 
The main characteristic of reactive routing is that a path is 
computed only if one is needed for sending data between two 
mesh points.  
Proactive routing is based on three routing bases: 
 
A distance vector routing tree is built and maintained if 
a root portal is present. 
 
Tree-based routing is efficient for hierarchical 
networks. 
 
Tree-based routing avoids unnecessary discovery 
flooding during discovery and recovery. 
The RA-OLSR Protocol is an improvement of the 
Optimized Link State Routing Protocol OLSR [10]. The 
shortest path algorithm uses a radio-aware metric instead of the 
hop count metric. For that reason, a metric field is added to all 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

topology information messages. RA-OLSR uses MAC 
addresses rather than IP addresses. 
III. MEDIA INDEPENDENT HANDOVER (MIH) 
The scope of the IEEE 802.21 MIH standard is to develop a 
standard that would provide generic link layer intelligence and 
other network related information to upper layers to optimize 
handovers between different heterogeneous media such as the 
3rd Generation Partnership Project ( 3GPP), 3GPP2 and both 
wired and wireless media of the IEEE 802.21 family [11]. 
The main objective of MIH is to provide a framework that 
enables 
seamless 
handover 
between 
heterogeneous 
technologies. It uses a protocol stack implemented in all the 
devices involved in the handover which provides the necessary 
interactions among devices for optimizing handover decisions. 
The standard allows providing information which could 
help at the phase of selection of the network and the activation 
of the interface. The execution and the decision of handover is 
not part of the standard. 
In the mobility management protocol stack of both the MN 
and network element, the Media Independent Handover 
Function (MIHF) is logically defined as a sub-layer between 
L2 data link layer and L3 network layer. The upper layers are 
provided services by the MIH function through a unified 
interface. 
The services exposed by the unified interface are 
independent of access technologies. This unified interface is 
known as Media Independent Handover Service Access Point 
(MIH_SAP). The lower layer protocols communicate with the 
MIHF via media dependent SAPs [11]. 
 This standard defines services that comprise the MIHF 
services. These services which facilitate handovers between 
heterogeneous access links are: 
 
Media Independent Event Service (MIES) that 
provides event classification, event filtering and event 
reporting corresponding to dynamic changes in link 
characteristics, link status, and link quality. 
 
Media Independent Command Service (MICS) that 
enables MIH users to manage and control link behavior 
relevant to handovers and mobility, 
 
Media Independent Information Service (MIIS) that 
provides details on the characteristics and services 
provided by the serving and neighboring networks. The 
information enables effective system access and 
effective handover decisions. 
MIHF provides asynchronous and synchronous services 
through SAPs for link layers and MIH users. In the case of a 
system with multiple network interfaces of arbitrary type, MIH 
users employ event service, command service, and information 
service provided by MIHF to manage, determine, and control 
the state of underlying interfaces. 
These services provided by MIHF help the MIH users in 
maintaining service continuity, service adaptation to varying 
quality of service, battery life conservation, network discovery, 
and link selection.  
The handover is considered as “hard” or “soft,” depending 
on whether the handover procedure is “break-before-make” or 
“make-before-break”.  
 
IV. RELATED WORKS 
Many papers associated with MIH have focused on 
improving handoff performances.  
Several 
research 
studies 
have 
investigated 
the 
improvements that MIH could make to different mobility 
protocols at various levels.  
At the network layer, Mussabbir and Yao [12] proposed 
using MIH services in order to optimize the procedure of 
handover for Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers (FMIPv6). 
Magagula [13] shows that Proxy Mobile IPv6 is a protocol 
for mobility management. It is effective in improving the 
performance indicators of the operation such as handover 
latency and packet loss in particular when used with the IEEE 
802.21 protocol services MIH. 
At the transport layer, Chen [14] proposed an interaction 
between SCTP and 802.21. This optimizes the handover 
mechanisms in networks within the campus for VoIP 
applications. 
At the application layer, Choong [15] analyzes the 
improvements that can be gained by interaction between SIP 
and MIH. 
Lee et al. [16] proposed a framework for the integration of 
IEEE 802.21 MIHF with OLSR to improve the performances 
of this ad-hoc routing protocol using the Hello interval. 
Several research works evaluated routing protocols 
performances in mesh networks IEEE 802.11s. For example, 
N.R.Nomulwar et al. [17] presented performance analysis of 
routing protocol in Wireless Mesh Network such as HWMP, 
Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV), Dynamic 
Source Routing (DSR), and Destination-Sequenced Distance-
Vector (DSDV). 
Baumann [18] introduced a notification protocol driven by 
the access points and independent of used routing protocol. 
When access points detect the clients’ macro mobility by the 
change of addresses, the MAPs send to source node a 
notification message which contains the new configuration 
parameters. The notification message will be sent periodically 
for each client, which may cause a heavy additional signaling 
overhead in Wireless Mesh Network.  
A fast handoff management scheme in WMN have been 
developed by Kowalik et al. [19]. It is called MeshScan. It 
includes three main steps. First, a client device maintains a list 
of active Mesh Nodes (MNs) (SmartList). Then when it 
receives a disassociation message from the serving MN or 
when the measured signal strength from the serving MN 
exceeds the threshold, it performs the handoff. Finally, when 
handoff is required, a client transmits Authentication Request 
frames to all MNs on the list instead of broadcasting Probe 
Request frames as is usually the case in an active scan in order 
to discover available MNs.  
The goal of our proposal is to achieve improvements in 
network performances for wireless mesh network environments 
through the integration of MIH with mesh routing protocols 
like HWMP. 
V. SIMULATION MODEL BASED ON MIH PROTOCOL 
The simulation scenario consists of one WLAN cell and a 
WiMAX cell. It is assumed that one MN, equipped with 
multiple interfaces, is connected to WiFi before it goes through 
the WiMAX coverage area.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

The handover between the WLAN cell and WiMAX is 
performed when the MN leaves the coverage area of the 
WLAN AP. 
Figure 1 shows four main elements:  
 
The WLAN AP  
 
WiMAX BS 
 
The router connected to CN (Correspondent Node) 
 
The multi-interface MN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Simulation scenario 
A. Simulation  Parameters 
Table I summarizes parameter values used in the 
simulations which illustrates the generic network topology 
used. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Network Topology 
WiMAX cell coverage 
1000 m 
WLAN cell coverage 
20 m 
Router Configuration 
MAX_RA_DELAY (s) 
0.5 
Router lifetime (s)Wlan 
1800 
Router lifetime (s)WiMax 
20 
802.11 MAC Layer Configuration 
WLAN beacon interval (s) 
0.1 
Default scanning mode 
Passive 
MinChannelTime (s) 
0.02 
MaxChannelTime  
0.06 
802.16 Configuration 
Dcd_interval 
5 
Ucd_interval 
5 
Client_timeout_ 
50 
Default modulation (s) 
OFDM_16_QAM 
Application Traffic for Mobile Node 
Type 
Depends on application 
Packet size (bytes) 
Depends on application 
Packet inter-arrival time (s) 
Depends on application 
 
To evaluate handover performances, we have chosen to 
compare results between two applications. These are: 
 
CBR Video traffic (real-time data). 
 
CBR Voice traffic (real-time data). 
We used a real-time traffic to study the effect of the 
handover on this type of application that requires a good 
Quality of Service (QoS). 
The realization of our simulations is based on the NIST 
NS-2 implementation [20] of IEEE 802.21 for infrastructure-
based network environments. 
B. Performance criteria  
The performance criteria adopted in our simulations to 
evaluate the vertical handover between WLAN and Wimax are 
Delay and Packets Loss Ratio. These parameters are the main 
criteria of QoS in the networks. 
C. Simulation results:  
1) Packet Loss Ratio 
We calculate in this section the percentage of lost packets. 
Figure 2 demonstrates that the handover causes a jump in 
packet loss. Each curve contains a peak, which corresponds to 
the Packet Loss Ratio during roaming period. As expected, the 
handover process causes an increase in the number of dropped 
packets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Packets Loss Ratio during simulation: voice and video traffic 
For voice traffic, the packet size is 160 bytes, the CBR 
interval is 0.02 seconds and the mobile node velocity is 13 
m/s. Figure 2 shows that the packet loss ratio increases 
suddenly at the beginning of handover to a value of 1.95%. 
In the foreign network, the packet loss ratio for the mobile 
node degrades to achieve 0.06%. 
For video traffic, we use a packets size of 1240 bytes, a 
CBR interval of 0.1 seconds and a velocity of 13 m/s. 
We deduce that for low mobility handover performances 
are acceptable. Indeed, for a speed of 13 m/s the packet loss 
ratio is less than 3.2%. The higher value of loss appears during 
the execution of the handover (the peak of the curve), which 
reached 3.2% (see Figure 2). 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

When the mobile moves to the foreign network (WiMAX) 
the packet loss ratio decreases to a value below 0.5%. 
The packets loss ratio for voice traffic during handover 
was 1.95%. Compared to the packets loss ratio of video type 
traffic (3.2%), it is much smaller. The result was as expected 
since the packet size will necessarily affect the packets loss 
ratio.  
2) Delay 
The delay is a very important parameter to evaluate the 
QoS for real time traffic. This is the time needed for a packet 
to be transmitted across a network from source to destination 
(end-to-end). 
In this section, we discuss packet delays during the 
simulation time when applying the scenario of the handover 
from WLAN to WiMAX. 
We present voice traffic results first. We notice the 
existence of a peak at the moment of the handover execution 
because the transfer time becomes quite important (between 
0.76 and 1.18 s). 
After executing the handover, the delay of packet 
transmission falls, it becomes almost constant and less than 
0.2 seconds. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Delay during simulation :Video and voice traffic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Delay during simulation: voice and video traffic. 
For video traffic, we note that at the time of handover 
execution, the delay of packets transmission becomes 
important (between 0.8 and 1.43 s). The delay increases with 
the execution of the handover. This explains the occurrence of 
the peak at the starting moment of handover. 
After executing the handover, the delay falls and becomes 
almost constant and less than 0.2 seconds. 
VI. PROPOSED APPROACH TO IMPROVE ROUTING IN WMN 
WITH MIH 
A mobile node that implements MIH module includes two 
agents: MIH agent and routing agent. In wireless mesh 
networks, the routing agent used is HWMP or RA-OLSR. 
MIHF in the ad hoc node interacts with the MAC Layer and 
MIH users in higher layers. 
Triggers for handoffs may be initiated from MAC, 
PHYSICAL or upper levels through the MAC SAP either at 
the Mobile node or at the BS [11]. The cause for these triggers 
can be either within the local stack or from the distant stack. 
Layer 2 triggers are classified into two types, predictive and 
event triggers. Predictive triggers express a probability of a 
change in system properties in the future. Event triggers 
describe an exact event that has occurred. Link_Up is an 
example of an event trigger. Link-Going-Down is an example 
of a predictive trigger. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  MIHF interaction to uper and lower layers. 
The MAC layer receives measurement data of neighboring 
nodes and provides information to MIH. The MIH triggers the 
handover and HWMP/OLSR routing agent registers as a user 
and performs MIH stains triggered by the MIH agent. 
For this, we propose to exploit the messages exchanged 
during the procedure of handover by the routing agent to detect 
the mobility of nodes faster and consequently routing can take 
place quickly. 
We propose to use 2 messages to realize our approach:  
 
MIH_Link_Down.indication is sent to local MIHF 
users to notify them of a local event, or is the result of 
the receipt of a MIH_Link_Down indication message 
to indicate to the remote MIHF users who have 
subscribed to this remote event. Parameters used in 
this case are Type of link, MAC Address of mobile 
node, MAC Address of old Access Router and of 
course “Reason” for the link down. 
 
MIH_Link_Up.indication is sent to local MIHF users 
to notify them of a local event, or is the result of the 
receipt of a MIH_Link_Up indication message to 
notify remote MIHF users who have subscribed to this 
remote event. Parameters for this trigger are Type of 
link, MAC Address of mobile node, MAC Address of 
old Access Router, MAC Address of new Access 
Router, and Network Identifier for detecting possible 
change in subnet. 
Figure 5 below illustrates the communication between the 
MIH agent and HWMP protocol. 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Communication between HWMP and MIH agent. 
At the beginning, we must register the routing protocol 
HWMP as an MIH user to receive messages issued by the 
MIHF. This can be implemented by providing an interface 
between the MIHF and HWMP agents in NS2 simulator, as in 
[16].  
We will study two cases of mobility: 
 
A mobile node leaves a wireless mesh network to a 
foreign network. 
 
A new MN joins a wireless mesh network from 
another network. 
We start by explaining the first case. As we have already 
indicated, when the received signal quality drops, the link layer 
of the terminal can anticipate the handover and triggers the 
event service Link_Going_Down on both MIH entities: MIHs 
terminal of the local mobile network and the MESH. 
Then, the MIH agent informs the HWMP routing agent to 
update its routing table and remove the node corresponding to 
this link. A routing table’s update must be invoked at all nodes 
in the network. They must in turn remove the node associated 
with the message MIH_Link_Going_Down and do not wait for 
the periodic updating of routing tables. With this method, the 
node mobility is detected faster by all network users. 
In the case when a mobile node tries to join a wireless mesh 
network while executing a handover and once all steps of link 
attachment are completed and the link is ready to send packets, 
a trigger event link-up indication may be sent to the MIH 
function on the local and remote link. 
Once the MIH agent receives this message, it triggers the 
HWMP routing agent to update routes. The access point, then, 
triggers a links update throughout the network by broadcasting 
a PREQ message and putting the MN as destination. 
Thereafter, when an intermediary Mesh Point receives PREQ, 
it creates a path to the request source and forwards PREQ to 
the destination and so on until it reaches the mobile.  
When the mobile node receives PREQ, it sends in unicast a 
PREP message to the source. When the source node receives 
the PREP message, it creates a path to the mobile node. This 
update will accelerate the detection of a new node that joins the 
network, which will therefore accelerate the data routing to that 
node.  
VII. DISCUSSION  
Through the simulation of MIH protocol and according to 
our results, we note that the delay of a vertical handover can 
reach a maximum value of 1.43 s. To evaluate the performance 
of the this protocol, we can compare this value with that of a 
vertical handover without the MIH protocol like the case of 
[21], in which for streaming traffic between CDMA 2000 and 
IEEE 802.16e networks, handover delay can reach a value of 2 
seconds. Concerning the packet loss ratio, in our scenario we 
have a maximum value of 3.2%. This value is lower than that 
of [21], which can reach 5%. We can conclude that the MIH 
provides a transaction from one network to another with a low 
delay and an acceptable packet loss ratio.  
Our idea to accelerate routing data in WMN using 
messages exchanged during handover process may have 
positive and negative impacts. 
When node movement is detected faster than before even 
by few seconds, it will accelerate data routing to the mobile 
node since the corresponding nodes will be informed of its new 
location and route data based on this new information. 
Consequently, Packets Loss Ratio will be reduced. 
On another side, this route update needs a significant 
exchange of extra control messages, which can cause 
additional signaling overhead. It can also cause loss of energy 
of the mobile node. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we studied the mechanisms of vertical 
handover between WiMAX and WiFi networks by the 
implementation of protocols related to these mechanisms. 
We defined a simulation scenario to implement this 
principle. Then we gave an analysis of vertical handover 
between WiFi and WiMAX and performance figures with the 
use of NS-2 simulator.  
The objective of this work was to propose an approach that 
creates a link between the handover process and routing 
operation. Our main idea consists of using Media Independent 
Handover protocols in order to optimize routing in wireless 
mesh networks. 
As a future work, we propose to simulate other scenarios. 
Indeed, we can illustrate the effect of the number of mobile 
nodes on the performance of vertical handover between 
WiMAX and WiFi. Other types of applications can also be 
simulated, such as a non-real time applications like FTP and 
best effort services (TELNET). 
Another possible investigation may consist of evaluating 
the performance of MIH and other mobility protocols with 
other types of heterogeneous networks such as LTE, MPLS, 
etc. 
Finally, it would also be interesting to run further 
simulations with our approach in order to further study its 
impact on routing in other mesh network scenarios. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. R. Hiertz, S. Max, E. WeiB, L. Berlemann, D. Denteneer, and S. 
Mangold, "Mesh Technology enabling Ubiquitous Wireless Networks," 
in Proceedings of the 2nd Annual International Wireless Internet 
Conference (WICON), Boston, USA, Aug. 2006, pp. 11-23. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

[2] IEEE, “Draft amendment: ESS mesh networking”, IEEE P802.11s 
Draft1.00, November 2006. 
[3] I.F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey”, Computer Networks, vol. 47, no. 4, Mar. 2005, pp. 445-487. 
[4] IEEE 802.21, “IEEE 802.21 Media independent handover,” vol. 2006: 
IEEE 802.21 standards, http://ieee802.org/21/, 06.14.2013. 
[5] M. Lee, R.Zhang, Ch.Zhu , and T.Park “Meshing wireless personal area 
networks: Introducing IEEE 802.15.5”, Communications Magazine, 
IEEE (Volume: 48, Issue: 1 ), January 2010, pp. 54–61. 
[6] IEEE Std 802.16-2004, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless 
Access Systems, IEEE Revision of 802.16-2001”, Oct 2004. 
[7] “Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANET) Working Group,” Internet 
Engineering 
Task 
Force 
(IETF), 
http: 
//www.ietf.org/html.charters/manet-charter.html, 06.14.2013. 
[8] M. Bahr, “Proposed Routing for IEEE 802.11s WLAN Mesh Networks”, 
The 2nd Annual International Wireless Internet Conference, Boston, 
,2006, pp. 6-13. 
[9] A. Amir Pirzada, M. Portmann, and J. Indulska. “Hybrid Mesh Ad-hoc 
On-demand Distance Vector Routing Protocol”, Proceeding ACSC '07 
Proceedings of the thirtieth Australasian conference on Computer 
science-Volume 62, Australian Computer Society, Inc. Darlinghurst, 
Australia, 2007, pp. 49-58. 
[10] P. Jacquet, P.Mühlethaler, A. Qayyum, A. Laouiti, T. Clausen, and L. 
Viennot, “Optimized Link State Routing Protocol”, IEEE INMIC 
Pakistan, Dec 2001, pp.62–68. 
[11] Draft IEEE standards ,“IEEE802.21 Standard and Metropolitan Area 
Networks: 
Media 
Independent 
Handover 
Services”, 
Draft 
P802.21/D00.05, March 2006 
[12] Q.B. Mussabbir, and W. Yao, “Optimized FMIPv6 handover using 
IEEE802.21 MIH Services”, Proc. of MobiArch 2006, ACM Press, New 
York , 2006, pp. 43–48. 
[13] L Magagula, O.E. Falowo, and H.A. Cha. , “ PMIPv6 and MIH-
enhanced PMIPv6 for mobility management in heterogeneous wireless 
networks.” Proceedings of Africon,Kenya, September 2009, pp. 23-25. 
[14] Y.M. Chen, M.Y. Lai, S.C. Lin, S.C. Chang, and T.Y. Chung, “SCTP-
based handoff based on MIH triggers information in campus networks”, 
The 8th International Conference of Advanced Communication 
Technology (ICACT’06), February 2006, pp. 1301-1305. 
[15] K.N. Choong, V.S. Kesavan, S.L. Ng, F. de Carvalho, A.L.Y. Low and 
C. Maciocco, “SIP-based IEEE802.21 media independent handover - a 
BT Intel collaboration”, BT Technology Journal, vol. 25, no. 2, April 
2007, pp. 219–230. 
[16] J. Lee, A.McAuley and S.Das, “Framework for Integration of IEEE 
802.21 MIH Function with Ad Hoc Routing Protocol”, Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC Spring) IEEE 73rd, Budapest-Hungary, 
2011, pp. 1-6. 
[17] N.R.Nomulwar, J. N. VarshaPriya, B. B. Meshram, and S. T. Shinghade, 
“Comparision of performance of routing protocol in Wireless Mesh 
Network”, The International Journal of Computer Science & 
Applications (TIJCSA), vol. 1, no. 3, May 2012, pp. 61-65. 
[18] R. Baumann, O. Bondareva, S. Heimlicher, and M. May, “A Protocol for 
Macro Mobility and Multihoming Notification in Wireless Mesh 
Networks”, Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops (AINAW '07), 2007, pp. 34-37. 
[19] Chen, Y., K. Kowalik, and M. Davis, “MeshScan: Fast and Efficient 
Handoff in IEEE802.11 Mesh Networks”, The 7th ACM International 
Symposium on Mobility Management and Wireless Access (MobiWAC 
2009), Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, October 2009, pp. 105-108. 
[20] The Network Simulator NS-2 NIST add-on IEEE 802.21 model, NIST 
January 2007. 
[21] S. Park, S. Kim, J. Cho, I. Ryoo, D. Lee, J. Yu, J. Lim, and S. Oh, “A 
Performance Evaluation of Vertical Handoff Scheme between IEEE 
802.16e and cdma2000 Networks”, Communications in Computing, Las 
Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2006, pp. 104-109. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

