A Survey on QoS in Wireless Mesh Network 
 
Chems eddine Bemmoussat 
STIC Laboratory 
Abou Bekr Belkaid University 
Tlemcen, Algeria  
chems_telecom@yahoo.fr 
 
Fedoua Didi 
Dept of Computer engineering  
 Abou Bekr Belkaid University 
Tlemcen, Algeria  
f_didi@mail.univ-tlemcen.dz 
 
Mohamed Feham 
Dept of Telecommunications 
Abou Bekr Belkaid University 
Tlemcen, Algeria  
m_feham@mail.univ-tlemcen.dz 
Abstract— The wireless mesh network is a new emerging 
technology that will change the world of industrial 
networks connectivity to more efficient and profitable. 
Mesh networks consist of static wireless nodes and mobile 
customer; have emerged as a key technology for new 
generation networks. The QoS is designed to promote and 
support multimedia applications (audio and video), real 
time (ToIP, VoIP). However guarantee of QoS on wireless 
networks is a difficult problem by comparison at its 
deployment in a wired IP network. The reason is the 
random mobility of nodes, the nature of wireless channel 
(interference), the multi-hop communication and the lack 
of a central coordinating authority. Wireless Mesh 
Networks (WMNs) are commonly considered the most 
suitable architecture because of their versatility that 
allows flexible configurations. Different studies have 
proposed number of protocols in different layers of model 
TCP/IP to enhance transmission of data and its QoS. This 
paper mainly focuses on classification layer of the largest 
existing approaches dedicated to QoS. It is also discussing 
the most interesting works on QoS in WMNs networks. 
Keywords-WMN; QoS; TCP/IP; Routing protocols.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Internet in the near future will be everywhere 
and offer broadband today, that we have never 
experimented. Networks invade all sectors with 
individuals and organizations always interconnected 
private networks and connected to the internet. 
These networks aim to provide a wide range of 
beneficial 
social 
functions: 
individual 
medical 
monitoring in urban and rural make up and support 
business projects effectively. The WMN is a promising 
candidate for the implementation of such connectivity, 
also known for its ease of deployment.  
A group IEEE 802.11s was created in January 2004 
[1] to provide benefits and features of the mesh network 
architectures and IEEE 802.11 protocols. More 
specifically, to define the necessary amendments at the 
MAC and physical layers to create a wireless 
distribution system based on IEEE 802.11 technology. 
WMN self-organizing and self-configure increases 
the coverage of wireless LAN standard (802.11n) to the 
wireless mesh MAN (802.11s) without significant 
additional infrastructure deployment. It also offers a 
good platform for promoting social partnerships in 
urban and rural areas.  
In the non-meshed WLANs, stations must associate 
with an access point (AP) to access the network, and 
these stations depend on this access point with which 
they have come together to communicate. In a mesh 
APs can communicate with each other directly without 
going through an external network. [1] 
 
Figure 1. WMN architecture 
An example of mesh networks is illustrated in 
Figure 1. In fact, a mesh network is divided into three 
parts:  
- The first level is generally distinguished gateway 
nodes for wireless mesh nodes passed to external 
networks such as Internet, GSM, WiMax, etc 
- The 2nd level is the mesh nodes (wireless AP) 
that are usually fixed to create the skeleton of 802.11s 
wireless network and serve the 3rd level. 
- The 3rd level is composed of Mesh customers; 
these customers are often mobile and use services via 
the 802.11s.  
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. 
First, we discuss about WMN uses in different cases, 
second is an introduction to our analyzes and 
comparisons in Section 3. A network layer approaches 
is explained in Section 4. A link layer approaches is 
presented in Section 5. At last, a physical layer 
approach is elaborate in section 6, with a global 
concluding and remarks in Section 7. 
 
II.          THE IEEE 802.11S USES 
The wireless mesh network defines four possible 
deployments: residential deploying for the digital home, 
deployment for a company as WLAN, deployment in 
public places to allow access to the internet and finally 
as temporary wireless network infrastructure disaster. 
In the residential case, the mesh network, also 
called the digital home, will create low cost and ease of 
deployment with an excellent wireless coverage in all 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

floors of the house. The main motivation behind the 
introduction of mesh networks to provide connectivity 
in the company is to use a wireless technology 
performance, reliable, inexpensive and easy to deploy. 
This allows companies to control costs associated with 
network installation and reduce the time required for 
deployment 
but 
also 
guaranteeing 
mobility 
for 
employees. 
III. 
APPROACHES FOR QOS IN WIRELESS MESH 
NETWORK 
Different approaches have been proposed by the 
state of the art spread over the different layers of the 
TCP / IP, we will summarize the most interesting in the 
following section. 
IV. 
A NETWORK LAYER APPROACHES 
      As WMNs become an increasingly popular 
replacement technology for last-mile connectivity to the 
home networking, community and neighborhood 
networking, it is imperative to design an efficient 
resource management system for these networks. 
Routing is one of the most challenging issues in 
resource 
management 
for 
supporting 
real-time 
applications with stringent QoS requirements.  
In general, there are two main kind of routing 
protocols for multi-hop wireless networks: (i) topology-
based protocols which need topological information to 
set up a path between the nodes, (ii) position-based 
protocols which require some geographical information 
for the route discovery process. Among the topology-
based routing protocols considered here, two distinct 
categories can be defined: 
Proactive which maintain the information about the 
routes to every node all the time by sending periodic 
updates even if the nodes do not communicate with 
each other, including DSDV (Destination-Sequenced-
Distance 
Vector),OLSR 
(Optimized 
Link 
State 
Routing) and MPR (Mesh Networking Routing 
Protocol) 
 Reactive called also 'on-demand' for which the paths 
are computed and maintained only when needed, 
including 
AODV 
(Ad-hoc 
On-demand 
Distance 
Vector), and DSR (Dynamic Source Routing) [2]. 
DSDV ([3], [4], [5]). It is a modification of Bellman-
Ford 
algorithm 
implemented 
in 
RIP 
(Routing 
Information Protocol) adapted for self-configuring 
networks. Every node maintains its own routing table 
with the information about network topology and the 
cost of the links between the nodes.  
OLSR ([6], [4], [5]). It uses shortest-path algorithm 
having the access to the routing information whenever it 
is needed (storing and updating periodically). The 
optimization idea is based on specific neighborhood 
detection and Multipoint Relays (MPR-s) selection 
concept. 
MRP [9]. In this protocol each client is chosen a 
gateway to connect to the internet. If the gateway fails 
or the node moves, the node will choose a different 
gateway. All the traffic is assumed to flow through the 
gateway to the internet. This protocol is mainly 
available in three versions. One of the versions is MRP 
on-demand. 
AODV ([7], [4], [5]). It uses Route Request/ Route 
Reply (RREQ/RREP) mechanism for route discovery 
and destination sequence numbers for each route entry 
like DSDV. This helps detecting outdated routing. 
Moreover, it keeps track of the next hop instead of the 
entire route. 
DSR ([8], [4], [5]). Similarly to AODV, it is based on 
RREQ/RREP packets. However, RREQ gathers the 
addresses of the 'visited' nodes and maintains 
information about the whole path from the source to the 
destination node, not just the next hop. Moreover, the 
information is stored by every node in a route cache 
instead of the routing table.  
Several studies have compared the routing protocols 
used in most networks Mesh, to find, expand and 
improve those who gave the best results; the most 
recent are listed below. 
A. Analysis of Routing Protocol Performance in 
Wireless Mesh Networks 
This work [2] is divided into two parts: the first 
part, the compared protocols are: AODV, DSR, DSDV 
and OLSR, using a fixed topology and other mobile on 
wireless mesh network with NS -2. The results show 
that the protocol AODV is the best in terms of delay, 
throughput and that the DSR is the worst among the 
four protocols mentioned.  
Furthermore, the authors introduced TCP and UDP 
in the scenarios of the first part, to assess the degree of 
impact of the transport layer at the network layer. The 
results confirm that UDP is more interesting than TCP 
in terms of QoS management. 
There 
is 
no 
ideal 
and 
the 
best 
routing 
recommendation for WMN. From the protocols studied 
in this paper, OLSR and AODV should be considered 
as the ideas worth considering. However, scalability is 
one of the crucial problems also in this case. One of the 
solutions is to propose a new routing metric for the 
existing protocols, use hybrid routing techniques or/and 
multiple radios and interfaces in order to improve 
performance of the network and provide better capacity 
of the network 
B. R-AODV  Rate Aware Routing Protocol for WMN 
After our previous analysis and existing literature, 
the routing protocol AODV is most advantageous to 
ensure QoS, and naturally, lot of works was directed 
towards the extension of AODV, to improve its 
performances. It is the aim of the paper [10]. Rate 
aware routing protocol based on AODV (R-AODV) [9] 
uses minimum network layer transmission time as a 
performance metric. Nodes will select higher data rate 
link using R-AODV.  
The simulation result indicates that R-AODV can 
improve the network throughput and decrease network 
delay.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

C. Optimization of routing algorithm in WMN  
For specific application like, emergency or search 
and rescue operations in case of natural disaster, 
policing and fire fighting military applications such as 
on the battle field, meeting rooms, sports stadium etc, 
almost all routing protocols in one way or other, try to 
converge into shortest path routing. One of the 
advantages of using shortest path routing is that it is 
good for overall energy efficiency because energy 
needed to transmit a packet is directly proportional to 
path length or number of hops. But the shortest path 
routing is restricted to use the same set of hops to route 
the data packets, thus causing some of the heavily 
loaded nodes and thus causing some of the nodes to die 
earlier resulting into holes in the network or even worst 
into partitioning of the network. Thus the need for load 
balanced routing emerges.  
Authors in [11] formulate the problem of routing as 
a network optimization problem, and present a general 
LP (linear programming) formulation for modeling the 
problem. The authors propose the optimized algorithm 
for known traffic demand and then explain the 
performance ratio for this. The routing algorithms 
derived 
from 
these 
formulations 
usually 
claim 
analytical properties such as optimal resource utilization 
and throughput fairness. The simulation results 
demonstrate that their statistical problem formulation 
could effectively incorporate the traffic demand 
uncertainty in routing optimization, and its algorithm 
outperforms the algorithm which only considers the 
static traffic demand. To achieve this objective the 
problem for congestion has been designed.  
D. A Throughput Optimizing Routing Protocol for 
Wireless Mesh Networks 
The goal of the proposed routing protocol [12] is to 
establish a route from the source to the destination that 
allows traffic flow within a guaranteed end-to-end 
latency using the minimum control overhead. The 
protocol is based on a reliable estimation of wireless 
link quality and the available bandwidth on a routing 
path. It also minimizes control overhead by effectively 
controlling broadcast messages in the network. The 
QoS-awareness in the protocol is achieved by a robust 
estimation of the available bandwidth of the wireless 
channel and a proactive discovery of the routing path by 
an accurate estimation of the wireless link quality. In 
addition, the protocol uses the multi-point relay (MPR) 
nodes to minimize the overhead due to flooding. 
The key contributions of the paper are as follows: 
(i) it exploits the benefits of using MPRs and circular 
routing to increase the network throughput by reducing 
the control overhead. (ii) It computes a link quality 
estimator and utilizes it in route selection. (iii) It 
provides framework for reliable estimation of available 
bandwidth in a routing path so that flow admission with 
guaranteed QoS satisfaction can be made. It also 
ensures that the number of retransmission required is 
minimized. 
E. Routing Packets into Wireless Mesh Networks  
On the forward path, from mesh nodes to Internet 
nodes, for all mesh nodes only route information for 
one destination, the gateways, needs to be maintained. 
However, on the backward path from the Internet to 
mesh nodes, an individual route for every mesh node is 
required. 
         In [13], the authors investigate protocols for 
backward path routing in wireless mesh networks. 
Using simulation experiments with realistic mobility 
patterns of pedestrians and cars in cities, they compare 
three protocols, each of which represents a routing 
protocol family: (i) AODV with an extension for mesh 
networks, a reactive routing protocol, (ii) FBR, a 
proactive routing protocol, and (iii) GSR, a source 
routing protocol. Their results indicate that FBR has the 
highest packet delivery ratio but is not scalable to the 
network size. The extended AODV seems to be neither 
scalable nor does it achieve a high packet delivery ratio. 
A good compromise is provided by GSR, which is the 
most scalable. 
F. Backup Routing for Multimedia Transmissions over 
Mesh Networks 
Liu et al. [14] proposed an available bandwidth 
estimation algorithm plus a QoS backup route 
mechanism to accommodate multimedia traffic flows in 
mobile wireless mesh networks. Moreover, to validate 
the correctness of our proposed algorithm, the authors 
have implemented the algorithm on the campus wireless 
mesh network testbed. Their implementation and 
experiments show that their mechanisms can improve 
the network stability, throughput, and delivery ratio 
effectively, while decreasing the number of route 
failure. They implement their proposed algorithms on 
the testbed through an improved DSR protocol. Their 
implementation and experiments show that the 
mechanisms can effectively improve the network 
stability, throughput, delivery ratio, while decreasing 
the route invalidation ratio, and can guarantee the fluent 
transmission of multimedia streams. 
In order to support multimedia transmission with 
QoS requirements, they improve the wireless routing 
protocol on the testbed with a dynamic ACK 
mechanism, which is used to balance the throughput 
and the quality of transmission. Additionally, authors 
introduce a dynamic mechanism to change the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

multimedia coding rate dynamically at the source node 
according to the available bandwidth. Moreover, they 
also made improvement on the admission control 
protocol to facilitate an experiment. 
G. Efficient Routing Anomaly Detection in Wireless 
Mesh Networks 
The throughput of a WMN may be severely 
degraded due to presence of some selfish routers that 
avoid forwarding packets for other nodes even as they 
send their own traffic through the network. Jaydip Sen. 
[15] presents an algorithm for detection of selfish nodes 
in a WMN.  
It uses statistical theory of inference for reliable 
clustering of the nodes and is based on local 
observations by the nodes. Simulation results show that 
the algorithm has a high detection rate while having a 
low rate of false positive 
H. Algorithm for Congestion Control in Wireless Mesh 
Network 
Congestion control is an important research area in 
wireless mesh network (WMN). In order to solve 
congestion control in WMN, a random routing 
algorithm based on path weights (WA) is presented. 
The algorithm adopts multi-gateway wireless mesh 
network routing protocol to solve the congestion 
problem of single gateway.  
And any cast service was used to ensure the 
successful rate of service requests. Simulation results 
show that WA is the better algorithm as it has less 
average wait time and the successful rate of service 
requests. The algorithm can effectively solve congestion 
problem, and make the network stable and efficient.  
I. 
A new vision of routing protocol   
The mesh network, as is a special case of Ad-hoc 
networks and MANET networks. These include a new 
vision of routing protocols based clusters, whose 
principle is very simple: divide the whole network into 
several parts, each party will elect a central node, 
responsible for coordination of routing information 
between other adjacent nodes, that node is named CH 
(Cluster Head), other nodes called its members. 
       Communication in this type of network is simple, 
any member wishing to transmit, do it through its CH. 
The latter has a routing table, if the destination is 
internal (in the same group), then the delivery will be 
direct, if not the CH sends queries to neighbors to find 
the right path. 
Very recent works have focused on this type of 
MANET routing. Mukesh Kumar [16] compared a 
routing protocol named CBRP (Cluster Based Routing 
Protocol) which gave results much interest as the basic 
protocols in terms of QoS (delay, throughput) and a 
good transition to across the MANET. 
J. 
Conclusion 
The first assertion that we can do, is that, according to 
the comparative studies results, done to determine what 
is the best choice between the existing routing 
algorithms in the state of the art, AODV and OLSR are 
the best choice by report to others, in terms of QOS. 
The second assertion is that several trends have 
emerged, as follows: 
 
 
Extending the traditional routing algorithms 
such as AODV, DSR, OLSR, to improve their 
performances. 
 
Changing values of the metric, like hybrid or 
dynamic   metric, as bandwidth of links, or 
end-to-end latency instead of number of hops, 
for example. 
 
Propose protocols completely different from 
those present in the802.11s standard 
 
Use of the clustering approach 
V. 
A LINK LAYER APPROACHES 
MAC protocol design is important in meeting QoS 
requirements since much of the latency experienced in a 
wireless network occurs in accessing the shared 
medium. In addition, MAC protocols must be 
interoperable with existing wireless networks operating 
on the same RF spectrum and fair toward all users. 
A. A Distributed QoS MAC Protocol for Wireless 
Mesh 
Abundant hidden node collisions and correlated 
channel access due to multi-hop flows degrade QoS in 
wireless mesh networks. QoS in nearby WLANs 
operating on a single channel is also affected. Mathilde 
Benveniste [17] propose using wider contention 
windows for backoff to lower the risk of repeated 
hidden-node collisions, a spatial extension of the TXOP 
concept called 'express forwarding' is an enhancement 
of the CSMA/CA protocol designed to reduce the 
latency experienced end-to-end by a multi-hop wireless 
mesh to clear multi-hop flows sooner, and a new 
mechanism called 'express retransmission' to reduce 
collisions on retransmission. Simulation results show 
the potential benefit of the proposed enhancements and 
impact on fairness.  
B. A Novel Spatial TDMA Scheduler for Concurrent 
Transmit Receive WMN 
A key approach to increasing network capacity is to 
equip wireless routers with smart antennas. These 
routers, therefore, are capable of focusing their 
transmission on specific neighbors whilst causing little 
interference to other nodes. This, however, assumes 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

there is a link scheduling algorithm that activates links 
in a way that maximizes network capacity. To this end, 
Chin et al. [18] propose a novel link activation 
algorithm that maximally creates a bipartite graph, 
which is then used to derive the link activation schedule 
of each router.  
Authors verified the proposed algorithm on various 
topologies with increasing node degrees as well as node 
numbers. From extensive simulation studies, authors 
find 
that 
their 
algorithm 
outperforms 
existing 
algorithms in terms of the number of links activated per 
slot, super frame length, computation time, route length 
and end-to-end delay. 
C. A Real time Video Stream Aggregation in WMN 
Navda et al. [19] design and evaluate Ganges, a 
wireless mesh network architecture that can efficiently 
transport real time video streams from multiple sources 
to a central monitoring station. Video quality suffers 
from deterioration in the presence of bursty network 
losses and due to packets missing their playback 
/deadline. Ganges spatially separates the paths to reduce 
inter-flow contention. It finds out a fair rate allocation 
for the different video sources.  
The wireless routers in the mesh network 
implement several optimizations in order to reduce the 
end-to-end delay variation. Ganges improves the 
network capacity by a shortest path tree, and video 
picture quality by Central. 
D. On the Support of Multimedia Applications over 
802.11s 
The contribution of this work [20] is twofold. First 
Riggio et al. propose a methodology for evaluating 
multimedia applications over real world WMN 
deployments.  
Second, based on the defined methodology, they 
report the results of an extensive measurement 
campaign performed exploiting an IEEE 802.11-based 
WMN testbed deployed in a typical office environment. 
The focus of their research on three mainstream 
multimedia applications: VoIP, Video Conference, and 
Video Streaming. Two single-hop star-shaped network 
topologies (with symmetric and asymmetric links) and a 
multi-hop string topology have been exploited in order 
to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the testbed’s 
performances. 
E. Enhancing Video Streaming in 802.11 Wireless 
Mesh Networks using Two-Layer Mechanism 
Solution 
Moleme et al. [21] proposes a two-layer mechanism 
for the transportation of real-time video. In this 
mechanism, rate adaptation is implemented in the data 
link layer for channel error control, link stability and 
reliability. In addition, the network layer routing 
protocol is optimized for congestion control and optimal 
route selection by using congestion information from 
the data link layer and link quality metric from the 
network layer. 
The proposed scheme aims at ameliorating the 
performance of UDP in WMV video streaming 
applications by improving throughput, packet loss and 
latency, so the authors in this work try to improve a 
standard protocol (UDP) to improve the QoS, us you 
know as we know, affect the operation of a standard 
protocol is a risk, it may have secondary effects on the 
proposed solutions 
F. An 
STDMA-Based 
Framework 
for 
QoS 
Provisioning in Wireless Mesh Network 
The framework is based on STDMA scheduling at 
the MAC layer, which is periodically executed at the 
network manager to adapt to changes in traffic demand. 
While scheduling computation is centralized, admission 
control is performed locally at the wireless backbone 
nodes, thus reducing signaling.  
Leoncini et al. [22] propose two bandwidth 
distribution and related admission control policies, 
which 
are 
at 
opposite 
ends 
of 
the 
network 
utilization/spatial fairness tradeoff. 
G. Conclusion 
The link layer is very important to provide QoS for 
Wireless Mesh Networks. Researchers are focused on 
specific areas as we have seen. A set of researches focus 
on mechanisms of allocating resources such as 
CSMA/CA 
or 
TDMA. 
Other 
studied 
queue 
management, by doing a control admission, and another 
approach is to use correcting codes.  
VI. 
A PHYSICAL LAYER APPROACHES 
The problems of the propagation of radio waves in 
a cluttered environment with lot of obstacles, are 
numerous and known. Works on these problems were 
progressed, but new solutions are regularly found and 
proposed, as we shall see below. 
A. A Study of End to End Video Robust Transmission 
Via WMN 
The Video Transmission over the multi-path fading 
wireless channel has to overcome the inherent 
vulnerability of compressed video to the channel errors. 
To effectively prevent the corruption of video stream 
and error propagation in spatial and temporal domain, 
proactive error controls are widely been deployed. A 
novel video transmission architecture [23] via WMNs is 
proposed to meet the error robust requirement of 
wireless video Transmission. This architecture address a 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

strategy of jointing sources coding and channel coding 
based on H.264 video code standard [23]. By taking the 
time-varying wireless channel condition and video 
codec characteristics into account. 
B. Characterizing the End-to-End Throughput in 
WMN Using Multiple Directional Antennas  
In WMN backbone, the throughput is mainly 
limited by 2 factors: the ingress/egress congestion in 
gateway and link interference caused by simultaneous 
transmissions. Recent study found deploying multiple 
gateways in WMN is an efficient way to alleviate the 
ingress/egress bottleneck. Besides, utilizing multiple 
channels, multiple radio interfaces and directional 
antenna technology in WMN can greatly alleviate 
interference problem. In the paper, we propose a 
practical wireless mesh networks architecture using 
multi-channels, multi-radios and multiple directional 
antennas. The end-to-end throughput characters of the 
proposed WMN are studied based on a network model 
considering the directional antenna.  
A STDMA based centralized link scheduling 
algorithm is used to ensure proper operation of the 
backbone transmission. Zhao et al. [24] provide 
necessary conditions to verify the feasibility of rate 
vectors in the networks, and use them to derive upper 
bounds of achievable end-to-end throughput. The 
approaches are illustrated by simulation examples. The 
results show that their scheduling algorithm has a better 
throughput performance compared with scheduling 
algorithm using greedy method 
C. Distributed 
Gateway 
Placement 
for 
Cost 
Minimization in Wireless Mesh Network 
XiaoHua et al. [25] study the problem of gateway 
placement for cost minimization (GPCM) in two-
dimensional wireless mesh networks. They are given a 
set of mesh routers; assume they have identical 
transmission range r, represented by unit transmission 
disks around them.  
A router may be selected as a gateway at certain 
placing cost. A router is served by a gateway if and only 
if the gateway is within its transmission range. The goal 
of this work is to select a set of mesh routers as 
gateways to serve the rest routers with minimum overall 
cost. This problem is NP-hard. According to the 
authors, no distributed algorithm with a constant 
approximation ratio has been given before. Their 
algorithms greatly improve the best approximation 
ratios. 
 
 
 
D. Gateways and Performance of WMN  
Gateway has fixed bandwidth to be shared by all 
the clients for communication. It causes reduction in per 
client throughput as the number of clients is increasing 
and thus may lead to overall performance degradation. 
Associating clients to gateway is a crucial point in 
deciding performance as is gateway placement, routing 
and scheduling at the gateway. Associating nodes to a 
single nearest gateway causes reduction in capacity of 
WMN and unfairness amongst the nodes. Clients can be 
associated to multiple gateways. WMN are dynamically 
self-organizing and self-healing and this imposes even 
more responsibility on gateways. Having multiple 
gateways in clustered WMN can improve performance 
significantly. 
E. conclusion 
The solutions studied in the physical layer, 
generally focused on: 
 
The use of smart antennas, directed by our 
needs, to a particular neighboring node 
 
Reduction of rate of errors due to transmission 
 
Use of several gateways instead of one, to 
balance the load across the network 
 
The use of novel encoding methods, use of 
MIMO and use of different frequency of 
transmission at the same time, by the mobile 
stations, improve de rate of transmission 
VII. 
GLOBAL CONCLUSION 
This paper summarize the challenges in QoS 
provisioning for Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs). We 
reach at the obvious conclusion that if we want to 
optimize network resources WMN to ensure QOS, the 
most effective way is to combine the most effective 
solutions in the three layers together. 
In terms of routing, we think the approach of 
clustering is the most interesting and in another paper, 
we present our proposal of clustering routing algorithm, 
with a presentation and discussion of several 
simulations. 
Regarding the solutions of Link layer, changing the 
CSMA/CA 
protocol 
in 
IEEE 
802.11 
is 
not 
recommended. The link layer provides various solutions 
for improving the QoS as queue management, error 
control, etc so we recommend instead, the use of a 
control admission algorithm, in addition to existed 
mechanisms of QoS provided in the standard, thus we 
limit the non-interoperability with equipment already in 
use. 
The use of MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output) 
is already used by AP to increase the speed 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

significantly; also the use of smart antennas is a good 
option to limit interferences. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ian F. Akyildiz And XudongWang “Wireless Mesh Networks”,      
Edition : WILEY , 2009. 
[2] Anna Zakrzewska, Leszek Koszalka, Iwona Pozniak-Koszalka,           
Andrzej Kasprzak, “Analysis of Routing Protocol Performance 
in Wireless Mesh Networks”, International Conference of 
Computational Science and Its Applications, 2010. 
[3] C. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “ Highly Dynamic Destination-
Sequenced Distance-Vector Routing (DSDV) for Mobile 
Computers”, Proc. Of SIGCOMM’94, 1994 
[4] A. Kasprzak,, Topological Design of the Wide Area Networks, 
WUT Press, Wroclaw, 2001 
[5] M. Bahr, J. Wang, and X. Jia, “Routing in Wireless Mesh 
Networks”, in: Wireless Mesh Networking: Architectures, 
Protocols and Standards. (eds.) Zhang Y., Luo J., Hu H., 
Auerbach, 2006 
[6] T. H. Clausen and P. Jacquet, Optimized Link State Routing 
Protocol (OLSR), IETF Experimental. RFC 362, 2003 
[7] C. Perkins, “ Ad hoc on-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
Routing, RFC3561, 2003 
[8] D. Johnson, “The Dynamic Source Routing Protocol (DSR) for 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for IPv4, RFC4728, 2007P.Santi, 
“Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor”,  
Networks.Wiley : Chichester, 2005.   
[9] S. Siva Nageswara Rao, Y. K. Sundara Krishna, and 
K.Nageswara Rao “A Survey: Routing Protocols for Wireless 
Mesh Networks” International Journal of Research and Reviews 
in Wireless Sensor Networks.2011 
[10] Yong Zhang, Yifei Wei, Mei Song, Junde Song  “R-AODV  
Rate Aware Routing Protocol for Wifi Mesh Network” 
ICWMMN2006 Proceedings.2006 
[11] Bhupendra Kumar Gupta and B.M.Acharya Manoj Kumar 
Mishra  “Optimization of routing algorithm in Wireless Mesh 
Network” IEEE, 2009  
[12] Jaydip Sen “A Throughput Optimizing Routing Protocol for 
Wireless Mesh Networks”. 12th IEEE International Conference 
on High Performance Computing and Communications.2010.  
[13] Rainer Baumann, Simon Heimlicher, Vincent Lenders, Martin 
May “Routing Packets into Wireless Mesh Networks” Third 
IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile 
Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob 2007). 
[14] Chungui Liu, Yantai Shu and Lianfang Zhang, Maode Ma 
“Backup Routing for Multimedia Transmissions over Mesh 
Networks” 2007 IEEE 
[15] Jaydip Sen “Efficient Routing Anomaly Detection in Wireless 
Mesh Networks” First International Conference on Integrated 
Intelligent Computing.2010. 
[16] Mukesh Kumar “Comparative Analyses of CBRP, DSR, AODV 
routing protocol in MANET” International Journal on Computer 
Science and Engineering.2010 
[17] Mathilde Benveniste “A Distributed QoS MAC Protocol for 
Wireless Mesh” The Second International Conference on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, 2008. 
[18] Kwan-Wu Chin, Sieteng Soh, Chen Meng, “ A Novel Spatial 
TDMA Scheduler for Concurrent Transmit Receive WMN” 24th 
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications, 2010. 
[19] Vishnu Navda, Anand Kashyap, Samrat Ganguly and Rauf 
Izmailov “ Real time Video Stream Aggregation in Wireless 
Mesh Networks” IEEE 2010. 
[20] Roberto Riggio, Karina Gomez and Tinku Rasheed “On the 
Support of Multimedia Applications over Wireless Mesh 
Network” IEEE 2009. 
[21] N. H. Moleme, M.a. Odhiambo, A.M. Kurien, “Enhancing  
Video Streaming in 802.11 Wireless Mesh Networks using  
Two-Layer Mechanism Solution” IEEE 2009. 
[22] Mauro Leoncini, Paolo Santi, Paolo Valente,“An STDMA-
Based Framework for QoS Provisioning in Wireless Mesh 
Network”, IEEE 2008. 
[23] Tanghuai Fan, Lizhong Xu, Xuewu Zhang and Huibin Wang, 
“A Study of End to End Video Robust Transmission Via 
WMN”, IEEE 2009 
[24] Zhuyan Zhao, Jianhong Mu, Hao Guan, “Characterizing the 
End-to-End Throughput in WMN Using Multiple Directional 
Antennas” IEEE 2010. 
[25] XiaoHua, Xu ShaoJie, Tang Xufei, Mao Xiang-Yang Li, 
“Distributed Gateway Placement for Cost Minimization in 
Wireless 
Mesh 
Network” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Distributed Computing Systems.2010. 
[26] Geeta Tripathi, Prof. Dr. N. G. Bawane,” Gateways and 
Performance of WMN” 2nd International Conforence on 
Education Technology and Computer (ICETC).2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

