QoS-based Channel and Radio Assignment Algorithm for Mesh Cognitive Radio 
Networks intended for HealthCare  
Amjad Ali1, Muddesar Iqbal2, Saba Saifullah2and Ju Bin Song1 
1Department of Electronics and Radio Engineering, Kyung Hee University, South Korea 
2Department of Computer Sciences and Information Technology, University of Gujrat, Pakistan 
                                  amjad.khu@gmail.com, m.iqbal@uog.edu.pk, saba.csit@gmail.com, jsong@khu.ac.kr 
 
Abstract— Smart homes monitoring for patient healthcare is 
an emerging research area. Monitoring smart homes locally 
at large scale requires a lot of infrastructure deployment 
which is not a cost effective solution. Thus the recent 
advancement in the cloud computing and introduction of 
cognitive radio’s provides a new direction to the smart 
homes monitoring. Thus in future all the data monitoring 
and analysis at large scale will be on cloud using cognitive 
radios. 
Cognitive 
radios 
utilize 
radio 
spectrum 
opportunistically 
without 
purchasing 
their 
license. 
Therefore, efficient routing and quality of service based 
channel selection and radio assignment are most challenging 
issues in the deployment of this technology for remote smart 
homes monitoring. In this paper, we proposed a novel 
channel selection and radio assignment scheme for multi-
radio multi-channel multi-hop mesh cognitive networks with 
the objectives of minimizing overall network interference 
and minimum interference with the primary users. Channel 
and radio assignment in such networks is a NP-hard 
problem. Therefore, integer linear programming model is 
presented and heuristic solution for susceptibility and 
capacity aware channel selection and radio assignment is 
proposed. Furthermore, collaborative channel utilization 
and local healing Scheme is also presented. Our proposed 
algorithms maintain highly quality of service based stable 
routes with the overall reduction of network interference. 
Keywords- Multipath routing; Susceptibility and capacity 
aware channel assignment; Multi-hop mesh cognitive 
networks; local healing  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In medical applications collecting patient’s related 
information’s are crucial for taking timely treatments and 
providing other emergency services. In the last few years 
patient health care has been improved using Smart Homes 
Monitoring Systems (SHMS). In SHMS the patient 
related information’s are exchanged using modern 
telecommunication 
technologies 
which 
enable 
the 
medical and emergency teams to take timely decision to 
save the patient’s lives [1]. In the past few years, Wireless 
Mesh Networks (WMN’s) turn into a very prominent 
form of networking and being used for providing many 
interesting services such as multicast video delivery, 
content sharing and sensor network backhaul [2]. 
Moreover, many patients’ monitoring and healthcare 
applications are also relay on this form of networking due 
to amazing characteristics such as self organization, self 
haling and self management. WMN has a lot of 
advantages like large coverage area, low operation and 
deployment cost and improved reliability and robustness 
[3] this idea was first introduced by a Victor Pierobon in 
1995 [4]. Figure 1 shows SHM using multi-hop mesh 
cognitive networks.  
 
      Figure 1. Multi-hop Mesh Cognitive Networking of SM’s.    
Cognitive Radio (CR) introduced by Joseph Mitola III 
in 1999 to improve the utilization of radio spectrum is 
evolves as future networking technology [5]. Recent 
measurements show that around 70% to 80% of assigned 
spectrum is being wasted in U.S [6]. Mesh nodes 
equipped with multiple cognitive radios can be viewed as 
a novel approach for improving the bandwidth scarcity of 
mesh networks by efficiently utilizing the white spaces 
and performing concurrent transmission [7]. Currently, 
cognitive radios equipped mesh networking is being 
considered for critical and Quality of Service (QoS) 
demanding health care applications, where stability of 
communication paths and reliability of contents delivery 
are major concern as well these are most critical issues in 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Networks 
(CRN’s). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Use of Mesh Cognitive in HealthCare Applications. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Figure 2 shows another use of cognitive mesh networking 
for patient health care and medical applications. Figure 3 
show the importance of channel and radio assignment for 
healthcare and remote monitoring applications. All such 
applications required routing for exchange of information 
therefore, connected, stable and interference free routes 
are being demanded. All these can be achieved by 
efficient channel and radio assignment. 
 
             
 
Figure 3. Significance of Channel Assignment. 
To the best of our knowledge, available routing 
proposals for the Mesh Cognitive Radio Networks 
(MCRNs) 
select 
free 
available 
channels 
without 
considering their susceptibility as well as radios are being 
selected without proper analysis of their workload. 
Therefore, an efficient channel and radio assignment 
mechanism is still an open issue to increase the overall 
network performance. In this paper, we have presented a 
new metric that considered the best availability of channel 
before selection as well as we also considered the 
utilization of available radio’s before their assignment.  
The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows: 
In Section 2, we have presented the current state-of-the-
art and our motivation. In section 3, we have presented 
problem statement, assumptions and system model. In 
section 4, we have shown derivation and calculation of 
our selected parameters. In section 5, we presented the 
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) modeling of channel 
and radio assignment and our proposed algorithm is 
presented in section 6. Conclusion and future work are 
discussed in section 7. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Multi-radio MCRN’s are more powerful and flexible 
than Single-radio CRN. Therefore, algorithms designing 
for 
Multi-radio 
MCRN’s 
are 
substantially 
more 
challenging than that for ordinary Single-radio CRN.  
Ramachandran et al. [8] calculated interference 
estimation based on the packet capturing and based on 
that scheme they purposed channel assignment for mesh 
networks. Dai et al. [9] presented a channel assignment 
algorithm for CRN based on SINR. The channel is 
selected based on the SINR values and then assigned to 
the communicating nodes. Junior et al. in [10] presented a 
common control channel based distributed channel 
assignment algorithm for single radio cognitive networks.  
Kim et al. in [2] Proposed Urban-X a channel assignment 
for MCRN operating is ISM band.  They use primary 
node activities and workload as important parameters in 
their algorithm. Wang et al. in [11] proposed a new 
multipath 
routing 
and 
spectrum 
access 
(MRSA) 
framework for multi-radio mesh networks assuming 
cognitive radio (CR) environments. The proposed 
framework seeks to establish multiple paths that 
maximize “spectrum wise” disjointedness to minimize 
contention and interference among links.  
It is clear from the current state-of-the-art that the 
mostly algorithms are focusing on reducing the 
interferences with the primary user and other co-located 
users which is the primary objective of the CRN but none 
of them considering the reliability and stability of 
available channel set which is primary need of critical 
applications such as healthcare. Per packet channel 
switching degrades overall network performance as well 
as causes long delays in communication which is not 
affordable in 
such crucial and 
QoS demanding 
applications [12]. Our algorithm mainly focuses on 
reliability of available and capacity of available channels 
as well as we considered the workload of available radios. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
The channel assignment problem for Multi-hop Multi-
radio Mesh Cognitive Networks (M3CN’s) is described as 
follows: Given a M3CN with each mesh node equipped 
with multiple cognitive radios and each node has an 
option of selecting multiple licensed channels for its 
communication. The objective of our channel and radio 
assignment scheme is to select best channels and radios 
those meets the QoS demand of critical applications for 
each flow with minimum inter and intra flow interference 
as well as minimum interference with the primary users. 
To achieve this objective, we proposed susceptibility and 
capacity aware channel and radio assignment scheme.  
A. Assumptions 
Following are assumptions of our system: 
 Common Control Channel (CCC) is available for 
sharing network information’s. 
 Each cognitive node has the capability of sensing and 
determining the arrivals and utilization time of 
licensed channels. 
B. Network Model 
We are considering that our MCRN is operating under 
the heterogeneous licensed channels where each node is 
equipped with multiple cognitive radios. We modeled our 
network using undirected graph 
 is set of cognitive nodes and 
 is a set of 
global available channels and each node have a subset of 
this global set. 
 is a global set of 
primary nodes operating on licensed channels and any 
subset of this set is operating in any particular vicinity. 
Each mesh node is equipped with R radios 
 is set of available cognitive radios. 
Key Design 
Issues for 
CRA
Interference
Connectivity
Routing
Stability
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

IV. 
PARAMETERS DERIVATION AND 
CALCULATION  
Our channel and radio assignment algorithm is mainly 
based 
on 
two 
important 
parameters 
known 
as 
susceptibility and capacity. These two parameters show 
characteristics of communication channels in term of 
reliability of available channels and amount/speed of data 
delivery over the channels.  
A. Susceptibility 
Means that how much a channel changes due to the 
cause of some force or some parameter changing’s. In 
CRN primary user is one of the parameter that’s causes 
the change in licensed channel availability. As we are 
concentrating on rate of change of channel due to primary 
user arrivals therefore we will select a channel with less 
susceptibility value for successful transmission over a 
stable path to maximize the network performance. 
 
Figure 4. Primary user activity. 
 
In the above Fig 4 A1, A2, A3…. An are the arrivals of 
primary user on any licensed channel. We are considering 
a scenario in which no of primary user arrivals as well as 
utilization time during each arrival is random. First we 
calculate the total utilization of any licensed channel by 
its primary user. This calculation is based on following 
values: 
1- 
Total scanning time of a channel 
2- 
Total number of arrivals 
3- 
Total utilization time during each arrival. 
             (1) 
Where CU is average Channel Utilization. Above 
equation (1) gives us the total utilization of a channel, our 
objective is to find the susceptibility on the basics of 
channel utilization. Then we will tag each channel based 
on its susceptibility value and select a most reliable and 
durable channel from the poll of available channels.  
 
 
Channel Susceptibility 
 
Where TF is Total Free, TU is Total Usage and TNA is 
Total Number of Arrivals. 
B. Example Calculations 
 = 18.91             when 10 No. of arrivals, and 
free space 70% 
 = 6.25             when 15 No. of arrivals and 
free space 50% 
 = 50                  when 4 No. of arrivals and 
free space 80% 
So, each node maintains a pool of free available 
channels with susceptibility tag. Thus pool of free 
available channel looks like as follows: 
TABLE 1. SUSCEPTIBILITY POOL. 
Available Channels 
Susceptibility Value 
C1 
18.91 
C2 
6.25 
C3 
50 
C. Channel capacity  
Channel capacity is one of the primary criteria for 
QoS demanding applications where channel over the 
selected path ensures this demand [13]. CRN’s are 
heterogeneous in term of channels availability as well as 
in term of bandwidths. Therefore we are interested to 
select a channel which is better both in term of 
susceptibility as well as capacity to fulfill the requirement 
of applications. The effective capacity of any channel is 
calculated as follows: 
                 (3) 
is 
capacity 
of 
channel 
 
between 
two
, 
 
 
 and 
 
 
 Transmission 
Using 
equation (3) each node calculates the effective capacity on 
all available channels and further channels are tagged 
with their effective capacity values. Thus, after 
associating capacity value against each available channel, 
our table looks as follows: 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

TABLE 2. SUSCEPTIBILITY AND CAPACITY. 
Available Channels 
Susceptibility Value 
Capacity (Mbps) 
C1 
18.91 
2 
C2 
6.25 
11 
C3 
50 
5.5 
D. Radio Usage information 
We are considering Mesh Cognitive Nodes (MCN’s) 
equipped with multiple radios. As each node is working 
as router therefore, it’s being used for passing many other 
flows/traffic other than its own traffic. Selecting if radio 
on any MCN node count a lot as per packet switching of 
radio causes overall network performance degradation as 
well causes long delays. Thus for efficient radio 
utilization and to improve overall network performance 
each node must add its radio usage information’s with the 
susceptibility and capacity table  and use this information 
for assigning radio for any new flow. Furthermore, 
operating multiple radios over the same channel cause 
intra radios interference. Thus our table approach will 
help to avoid this intra radio interference. After adding 
radio usage information the table looks like as follows:  
TABLE 3. RADIO INFORMATION TABLE (RIT). 
Available 
Radios 
Status           
Tuned on 
Channel 
Used among 
No. of  Flows 
R1 
Idle  
 
0 
R2 
Busy 
C1 
2 
R3 
Idle 
 
0 
R4 
Busy 
C3 
3 
 
We merge all necessary information’s into a single 
table called Channel Susceptibility Capacity and Radio 
Information Table (CR2IT). We will use this CR2IT table 
in our SCACRA algorithm. Thus after adding inheriting 
some use full information from RIT table, CR2IT looks 
like as follows:  
TABLE 4. CHANNEL SUSCEPTIBILITY CAPACITY RADIO 
INFORMATION TABLE.  
Channel 
Susceptibility 
Capacity          
Radio 
Usage 
Used among 
No. of Flows 
C1 
18.91 
2 
R2 
2 
C2 
6.25 
11 
 
0 
C3 
50 
5.5 
R4 
3 
C4 
8.91 
20 
 
0 
C5 
40.12 
55 
 
0 
C6 
12.40 
11 
 
0 
V. 
ILP FORMULATION  
In this section, we formulate the Integer Linear 
Programming (ILP) modeling of radio and channel 
selection problem. Presented ILP model will help to 
obtain the optimal results of our said problem. Consider 
an undirected graph 
 where 
 
is set of cognitive radio node and 
 is set 
of vertices 
 is set of global licensed 
channels and each cognitive node have subset of this 
global channel set. 
 is capacity of each channel .
is 
flow demand passing on link 
 where 
is link between 
two cognitive nodes 
 operating on channel  .
 is set of interfering cognitive nodes on 
channel  each cognitive node is equipped with multiple 
radios 
 is set of available radios. 
 is set of primary nodes operating 
in the vicinity of CMN.  
A. Decision variables 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Objective  Function 
 
Subject to the following Constraints: 
C. Channel availibility Constraint 
 
Channel is free only when no primary node operating 
on it.     
D. Inter and Intra node Interference Constraint 
 
 
 
 
 
At most one mesh cognitive node can operate on free 
channel from all interfering nodes.  
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

E. Intra flow/radio Interference Constraint 
 
 
 
At any mesh cognitive node at most one radio can 
operate on any channel at a time. 
F. Radio Interfaces Constraint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any cognitive node cannot use more than the 
available interfaces. 
G. Channel Constraint 
 
 
 
 
 
Any mesh cognitive node cannot use more than the 
available channels or vice vera a channel cannot be 
assigned if it is not available.  
H. Channel Capacity Constraint  
 
 & 
 
Mesh cognitive node cannot transmit traffic/flow 
demand more than the available capacity of the channel.     
I. Flow preservation Constraint  
 
 
Each mesh cognitive node must pass the amount of 
traffic it receives. 
J. End to End Flow preservation Constraint 
 
 
& 
  
 
 
Amount of data at destination mesh node must be 
equal the amount of data send by source node.  
K. Non Negativity Constraint  
 
VI. 
 PROPOSED ALGORITHM  
In this section, we presented our proposed heuristic 
algorithm that select best options of channels and radios 
along a selected path. We are assuming best paths are 
selected based on any criteria like minimum hop count 
etc.
 is a set of selected intermediate 
mesh cognitive nodes. Before presenting radio and 
channel selection algorithm we first present collaborative 
channel utilization and Local healing algorithm for mesh 
cognitive nodes.  
A. Collaborative Channel Utilization and Local Healing 
Scheme (CCULHS) for Mesh Cognitive Nodes 
----------------------------------------------------------------- 
1. All nodes share their CR2IT information’s on 
Common Control Channel (CCC) with its 1-Hop 
neighbors periodically or triggered this event when 
there are some updates in its local CR2IT.    
2. Each node update its table after receiving CR2IT 
information’s from its 1-Hop neighbors and mark 
those channel unavailable which are already being 
used by its 1-Hop neighbor. 
3. Each node mark the channel unavailable as primary 
user is detected on the channel and unicast the new 
table information with its communicating nodes over 
CCC.  
4. Each effected node selects some other suitable 
channel locally based on CR2IT information. 
5. Transmeter node tune its Tx on newly selected 
channel and inform the receiving node about this 
newly selected channel on CCC. 
6. Receving node also tune its Rx and Tx radios 
accordingly and update its CR2IT.  
 
C is a set of common channels for path that are used 
by neither primary node nor any 1-hop MCN. But 
channels can be already tuned on some other radio on the 
same MCN. In the following algorithm, we discussed 
major cases of channel and radios selection and 
assignment and further sub cases will be considered in the 
detail while implementing the algorithm. If radio is not 
idle then tuning already our new channel cause more 
delay therefore we are giving priority to the channel 
which is already tuned and we are considering fair 
scheduling in our algorithm. 
B. Susceptibility and Capacity Aware Channel and Radio 
Assignment (SCACRA) Algorithm 
----------------------------------------------------------------- 
1. While (Path! =Null) { 
2.     For each (channel available on all nodes)  
3.         Compute C on path         
4.         While ([vi,vj] ϵ Path) { 
5.          Case 1: both radios and channels are idle { 
 
 
 
 
 
 & 
 
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

6.                    If (Rvi = idle && Rvj = idle) { 
7.             //Selecting best channel for pair of radios 
8.                        Compute free channel with less   
                           Susceptibility and high Bandwidth 
9.                     OR   
10. 
         Compute free channel with less 
                           Susceptibility and good Bandwidth 
11. 
     OR  
12. 
         Compute free channel with average  
                            Susceptibility and High Bandwidth 
13. 
    OR 
14. 
         Compute free channel with average  
                           Susceptibility and Average Bandwidth 
15. 
       } end if 
16. 
    } end Case1: 
17. 
Case 2: One radio and one channel is idle { 
18. 
          If ((Rvi = idle && Rvj ≠ idle) || (Rvi 
                                    ≠ idle   && Rvj =idle)) { 
19. 
               Repeat step 11 to 17  
20. 
     OR 
21. 
         Compute used channel with less usage 
                            Ratio, less Susceptibility and good  
                            Bandwidth and select that already 
                            Tuned radio as no idle radio 
22. 
      OR   
23. 
         Compute used channel with average  
 Usage ratio, average Susceptibility and 
average bandwidth and select that already 
tuned radio as non idle radio 
24. 
       } end if 
25. 
    } end Case2: 
26. 
Case 3: Both radio and channels are not idle{ 
27. 
   If (Rvi ≠ idle && Rvj ≠ idle) { 
28. 
         Repeat step 11 to 17 
29. 
         OR   
30. 
Compute used channels and radios with 
less usage ratio, less- Susceptibility and 
good bandwidth and select these 
channels and radios 
31. 
           OR 
32. 
Compute used channels and radios with 
average usage ratio, average 
Susceptibility average good bandwidth 
and select these channels and radios 
33. 
        } end if 
34. 
      } end Case2: 
35. 
    } End While 
36. 
  } End For 
37. 
} end while  
_____________________________________________ 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We proposed a novel susceptibility and capacity 
aware channel and radio assignment algorithms for 
MCRN’s indented for QoS based traffics like multimedia 
traffic for healthcare. Susceptibility plays a vital role in 
reliable channel assignment while capacity ensures the 
QoS need of, QoS demanding applications. In our future 
work, we will study the detail analysis of our proposed 
algorithm with optimal solution which can be obtained 
from our presented ILP and with some other available 
algorithms.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. S. H. Istepanian, E. Jovanov and Y. T. Zhang, “Guest 
editorial introduction to the special section on M-health: 
beyond seamless mobility and global wireless health-care 
connectivity”, IEEE Trans. on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, December 2004. 
 
[2] W. Kim, A. J. Kassler, M. Di Felice and M. Gerla“Urban- 
X: towards distributed channel assignment in cognitive 
multi-radio mesh networks,” In Proc. IEEE/IFIP Wireless 
Days, 2010. 
 
[3] XH. Wang, M. Iqbal and X. Zhou “Design and     
implementation of a dual-radio wireless mesh network        
testbed for healthcare” 5th International conference of        
Information 
Technology 
and 
Applications 
in         
Biomedicine(ITAB 2008), May 2008. 
 
[4] Victor Pierobon, “Massive Array Cellular System,         
Canada Patent,” Canadian Intellectual Property Office          
Patent 2132180, September 1994. 
 
[5]  J. Mitola et al., “Cognitive radio: Making software   radios 
more personal,” IEEE Pers. Commun, Aug, 1999. 
 
[6] Federal 
Communications 
Commission 
(FCC),   
http://www.fcc.gov. 
 
[7] W. Ren, Q. Zhao, R. Ramanathan, J. Gao, A. Swami,     A. 
Bar- Noy, M. Johnson and P. Basu “Broadcasting in  multi-
radio multi-channel wireless networks using simplicial      
complexes”, In Proc  IEEE 8th International Conference on 
Mobile Ad hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), 2011. 
 
[8] K. Ramachandran, E. Belding, K. Almeroth, and M.      
Buddhikot, “Interference-Aware Channel Assignment in 
Multi-Radio Wireless Mesh Networks,” In Proc. IEEE 
INFOCOM, 2006. 
 
[9] Y. Dai and J.Wu, “Efficient Channel Assignment Under 
Dynamic Source Routing in Cognitive Radio Networks,” In 
Proc. of the 8th IEEE International Conference on Mobile 
Ad-hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), October 2011. 
 
[10]  P. R. W. Junior, M. Fonseca, A. Munaretto, A. C.               
Viana and A. Ziviani, “Zap: A distributed channel                 
assignment algorithm for cognitive radio networks,” To 
appear in Eurasip Journal on Wireless Communications and 
Networking, 2011. 
 
[11]  Wang, X. Kwon, T.T. and Choi,” A multipath routing  and 
spectrum access (MRSA)framework for cognitive radio  
systems in multi-radio mesh networks” In Proc. Workshop 
on Cognitive radio networks, 2009. 
[12]  P. Kyasanur and N. Vaidya, “Routing and interface      
assignment 
in 
multichannel 
multi-interface 
wireless                  
networks,” In Proc. of IEEE WCNC, 2005. 
 
[13]  Qingwen Han, Mi Huang, Tao Wang, Shumin Shang and          
Lingqiu Zeng, “Qos Routing Algorithm for Cognitive               
Radio Based on Channel Capacity and Interference”,              
International Journal of Digital Content Technology                
and its Applications, 2011. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-210-3
MESH 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

