 
Blue Bridge and Linkage 
Connecting Africa through 802.11, Bluetooth and Raspberry Pis 
 
Curtis Sahd and Hannah Thinyane 
Department of Computer Science 
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
{curtissahd@gmail.com, h.thinyane@ru.ac.za}
 
 
 
Abstract—Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTNs) are 
predominantly comprised of proprietary protocols and are not 
well suited to integration with the ever expanding Voice over 
IP (VoIP) network. PSTNs have evolved from analogue circuit 
switched systems and purely fixed line services, to the digital 
and mobile realms, but still remain proprietary. With the 
advent of wireless technologies and the explosion in VoIP 
services, the combination of these two technologies results in a 
large number of integration possibilities and inter-connection 
of systems. In this paper, we show how existing technologies 
can be used in the creation of community telephone networks. 
Specifically, we provide an overview of our system (Blue 
Bridge), which performs the bridging of Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless. We also provide an overview of the associated 
lightweight hybrid protocol (Linkage), which delivers status 
updates and data transmissions. 
Keywords-Bluetooth 
bridging; 
Community 
telephone 
networks; Linkage; Raspberry Pi; Wireless mesh networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) and VoIP have 
become key players in IP-based telephony services and have 
revolutionized the industry in terms of cost, geographically 
constrained infrastructure and service, and interoperability 
between devices [6]. 
WMNs can be defined as dynamic self configuring 
networks in which all nodes have the ability to route traffic 
directly to the endpoint, or via a multi-hop path. The network 
is dynamic, which enables it to deal with nodes entering the 
network, as well as nodes leaving the network due to node 
failure or connectivity issues [8]. WMNs are comprised of 
two types of nodes: mesh routers and mesh clients [1]. Mesh 
routers provide similar functions to traditional wireless 
routers, except that they provide more routing functions 
which are suited to WMNs. Mesh routers achieve the same 
coverage as traditional routers, but with less transmission 
power, by means of multi-hop communications [1]. Mesh 
clients can also work as routers, but do not have gateway or 
bridge functionality as found with mesh routers. WMN 
architecture is an important consideration when determining 
how and where the WMN should be implemented. WMN 
architecture can be classified according to three primary 
implementations: infrastructure WMNs, client WMNs, and 
hybrid WMNs [2]. The backbone of an Infrastructure WMN 
is predominantly comprised of mesh routers with which 
mesh clients associate.  
Client 
WMNs 
provide 
peer-to-peer 
network 
functionality, and are mostly comprised of mesh clients 
which perform the routing of packets. 
Hybrid WMNs are a combination of Infrastructure and 
Client WMNs, with the infrastructure being comprised of 
both mesh routers and mesh clients [2].  
The concept of WMNs has been around for quite some 
time, and the development of protocols which enable the 
efficient functioning of these networks has been a core focus 
area. Since the inception of  VoIP, the way in which we 
communicate has drastically changed, enabling long distance 
phone calls at a fraction of the cost when compared to 
previous years. Although easily and universally accessible, 
VoIP communication has traditionally taken place with 
somewhat limited mobility, with instances such as calls 
being made from fixed landlines and scattered wireless 
hotspots. There still exists a heavy reliance on mobile 
networks utilizing proprietary protocols, and with the cost of 
data being close to that of calls, the reality of reliable VoIP 
communication over mobile networks is an optimistic idea. 
Over and above the cost of data communications on mobile 
networks, the filtering and throttling of VoIP protocols on 
these networks is not an uncommon practice [7] [12]. 
Extensive development of the IEEE 802.11 wireless protocol 
has taken place and drastically increased the ease with which 
we are able to communicate, as well as the general mobility 
of people and services. IEEE 802.11 wireless technology 
provides reliable mobile communication with equipment 
costs being a fraction of those encountered with traditional 
radio networks.  
A community, city, and even country wide WMN 
running open standards can prove to be a feasible solution in 
providing cost effective communication along with ease of 
integration and expandability.  
As such, we propose the implementation of a WMN-
based Community Telephone Network (CTN), which 
enables communication for Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

wireless clients by means of distributed bridging nodes (Blue 
Bridges) and a lightweight protocol enabling Push To Talk 
(PTT) communication and signaling (Linkage). Section II 
provides an overview of the Bluetooth protocol and the 
benefits it provides in the South African context, as well as 
the associated constraints. Section III introduces PTT 
systems and provides a brief overview of how they aid in 
minimizing scalability concerns and constraints inherent in 
the Bluetooth protocol. Section IV, then introduces CTNs 
and outlines the benefits of such networks as well as a brief 
literature review of the common issues encountered with 
these networks. Section V builds on the ideas introduced and 
discussed in the aforementioned sections and discusses the 
various components of our prototype system (Blue Bridge). 
Section VI provides an in depth discussion of the functioning 
of our hybrid notification and communication protocol 
(Linkage). Future work is discussed in Section VII and this 
paper is then concluded in Section VIII. 
II. 
BLUETOOTH OVERVIEW 
Bluetooth is a low powered, low cost, and short range 
wireless Radio Frequency (RF) technology, which operates 
in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz Industrial Scientific Medical 
(ISM) frequency range [9]. Bluetooth is comprised of three 
classes ranging from 1m to 100m. Bluetooth was originally 
developed to alleviate the problems caused by incompatible 
connectors, and also as a cable replacement technology [3]. 
Although, while very limited in terms of bandwidth and 
scalability, Bluetooth proves to be a widely adopted protocol 
in South Africa, with a large portion of the population not 
able to afford IEEE 802.11 wireless enabled mobile phones. 
Bluetooth communication is typically used in Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (WPANs), which are best suited to 
ad hoc communication between devices within close 
proximity of one another. Piconets are the most common 
type of Bluetooth WPAN, and enable communication 
between a maximum of 7 active slave nodes and 1 master 
node. Master nodes control the ability of slave nodes to 
transmit on the channel [4]. 
The obvious drawback of Piconets is the maximum 
number of nodes which are able to simultaneously 
communicate. The total available bandwidth for Class 2 
Bluetooth chips (commonly found in mobile devices) is 800 
kb/s, which severely limits Bluetooth in terms of scalability 
[4]. PTT-based communication requires minimal bandwidth 
and also places a low memory footprint on constrained 
devices such as those commonly used throughout 
impoverished communities in South Africa. The next section 
provides a brief overview of PTT systems. 
 
III. 
PUSH TO TALK COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
PTT communication is a well-known system used in two 
way radios, which eliminates the need for call signaling 
procedures encountered in traditional cellular calls. PTT calls 
can be established between two users, or alternatively, in 
group communication, between multiple users [2]. PTT-
based communication systems prove to be considerably more 
cost effective than cellular or landline-based services in that 
charges are only deducted for the time used while speaking, 
and not for the elapsed time of the call.  
Some of the benefits of IP-based PTT systems include: 
faster communication and less call setup overhead, group 
communication, integration with existing applications on 
LANs, unlimited range and improved costs [12]. PTT-based 
systems can be compared to instant messaging systems in 
that communication is instant and requires minimal call 
setup and signaling. Apart from faster communication than 
traditional 
systems, 
PTT 
systems 
provide 
group 
communication, which proves to be incredibly cost effective 
in organizations consisting of teams of employees. One of 
the major drawbacks of two way radio communication is the 
range at which communication can occur. LAN-based PTT 
systems overcome the range limitation of traditional radio 
network PTT systems and integrate with existing network 
infrastructure and software. 
LAN-based PTT systems prove to be a cost effective 
solution to communication in the African context, and as 
such we have chosen a PTT-based system for the 
implementation of our CTN.  
The next section introduces WMN-based CTNs and 
shows the relationship between the number of hops and 
supported calls on the network. 
 
IV. 
COMMUNITY TELEPHONE NETWORKS 
The idea of VoIP communications over IEEE 802.11 
wireless networks is by no means a novel one, and the 
benefits of such implementations are well researched with 
plenty of optimizations available [6]. For the purposes of this 
research, we will define CTNs as those which are run by the 
community, for the community, consisting of open protocols, 
and subscribed to with very little or no cost. We envision the 
architecture of CTNs, to be comprised of either fixed 
wireless access points spanning the area of the community 
concerned, or WMNs where clients participating in the CTN 
are an extension to the network and its functionality.  
In the case of WMN-based CTNs, it is important to 
understand the effect of multiple hops between clients on the 
efficient functioning of the network. Ganguly et al. [6]  
found that eight calls are supported when each call utilizes a 
single hop on a 2 Mb/s wireless link en route its destination. 
They observed that as the number of hops increased from 
one to four on the 2 Mb/s wireless link, the number of 
supported calls decreased from eight to one. They suggest, 
that reason for the drastic drop in the number of supported 
calls is in converse relation to the number of hops. This can 
be attributed to the following: 1) a decrease in the User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) throughput as a result of self 
interference; 2) large amount of packet loss due to the 
increased number of hops and the subsequent need for 
forwarding; 3) a high protocol overhead for the small VoIP 
packet sizes (20 bytes for IEEE 802.11 IP/UDP/RTP). They 
suggest two approaches which reduce the effects of multiple 
hops on the number of simultaneous calls supported: packet 
aggregation and packet header compression. They found a 
200% - 300% increase in the capacity by implementing these 
methods. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Due to the dynamic creation and association capabilities 
of WMNs, they are ideal for peer-to-peer-based systems and 
are thus very suitable as the underlying platform for CTNs. 
As seen in [1] and [6], the main constraint regarding WMNs 
is the number of hops and the throughput each hop is capable 
of carrying.  
Apart from being limited by the number of hops and 
available bandwidth, WMNs and Bluetooth often suffer from 
a large number of lost packets which are related to the 
interference caused by the plethora of devices operating in 
the 2.4 GHz frequency range. With an overview of PTT 
systems and CTNs, the next section introduces Blue Bridge, 
and demonstrates the important role it plays in the creation of 
cost effective CTNs in the South African context. 
 
V. 
BLUE BRIDGE 
Blue Bridge aims to combine the Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless protocols across a series of Raspberry Pi 
[11] computers, in an effort to create a CTN using existing 
technologies. Due to the transmission limitations of the 
Bluetooth protocol, we propose the implementation of Blue 
Bridge on multiple Raspberry Pi computers in order to create 
an array of Bluetooth hotspots. People within range of the 
Bluetooth hotspots will be able to connect to the CTN and in 
turn place calls to other parties connected via Bluetooth or 
IEEE 802.11 Wireless. 
In order to avoid a large amount of broadcast traffic in an 
already bandwidth constrained network, we found it 
necessary to centralize client specific information on the 
Centralized Authentication and Accounting Server (CAAS). 
Figure 1 shows architecture of our proposed CTN: 
 
 
Figure 1.  CTN Architecture 
From Figure 1, it can be seen that multiple Blue Bridges 
form the infrastructure of the WMN. Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless clients connect to the CTN through nearby 
Blue Bridges. The CAAS minimizes broadcast traffic by 
centralizing the status of each client, as well as which router 
each client is currently associated with. In the event of 
clients moving between hotspot locations, updates are sent to 
the CAAS with the newly associated access point address 
and the status of the client. Multiple IEEE 802.11 wireless 
clients are able to associate with each Blue Bridge, however, 
a total of 7 active Bluetooth clients are able to communicate 
with each Blue Bridge due to constraints inherent in the 
Bluetooth protocol. 
Connections can be made to and from Blue Bridges via 
the external Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 Wireless interfaces 
attached through the USB ports on the Raspberry Pi.  Figure 
2 provides an overview of the internal structure of each Blue 
Bridge and shows how connections on the same interface as 
well as varying interfaces are bridged: 
 
 
Figure 2.  Blue Bridge Architecture 
From Figure 2, it can be seen from step (ii) that incoming 
Bluetooth connections (via the Bluetooth Receiver) are sent 
to the Central Bridge Unit (CBU), which performs the 
necessary bridging and compression and forwards the data 
and control packets to the called party on the IEEE 802.11 
wireless interface (IEEE 802.11 Wireless Transmitter). Since 
the concerned Blue Bridge is connected to other Blue 
Bridges via the WMN, incoming Bluetooth connections can 
be connected to any other client on the network without 
encountering typical range limitations inherent in the 
Bluetooth protocol. Incoming connections via the IEEE 
802.11 wireless interface can similarly be bridged with 
clients on the attached Bluetooth interface. 
In the event where two clients connected to the same 
Blue Bridge 
via 
the Bluetooth 
interface 
want 
to 
communicate, a connection from the calling party is first 
made to the Blue Bridge which then forwards the connection 
to the called party. This process can be seen in Figure 2 (i). 
In terms of enabling communication between clients 
communicating with one another via Bluetooth, there is no 
need for the Blue Bridge to perform any bridging functions 
or be involved with the communication process at all. With 
that 
said, 
a 
number 
of 
advantages 
of 
routing 
calls/communication via the Blue Bridge exist: the ability to 
perform authentication and accounting functions, which 
provides useful statistics for network and call monitoring; the 
ability to create and participate in group calls where clients 
are distributed across the CTN. There are of course 
disadvantages of routing local connections via the Blue 
Bridge: since the Bluetooth Master (Bluetooth interface of 
each Blue Bridge) communicates with other locally 
connected Bluetooth clients, the bandwidth is divided among 
each connected client and thus reduces the quality of calls; 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

and increased processing requirements are placed on each 
Blue Bridge. 
An SDL diagram of the functioning of the Blue Bridge 
can be seen in Figure 5. The process can be outlined as 
follows: the Blue Bridge listens for and accepts new 
connections. Upon accepting a connection the Blue Bridge 
attempts to find the routing information and status of the 
called client locally (and if not found locally, the CAAS is 
queried, as seen in Figure 4). This process is illustrated by 
(a) in Figure 5. Upon finding the routing information for the 
destination device, the Blue Bridge determines the interface 
from which the data should be sent (as seen in b). If the 
destination device is connected via the IEEE 802.11 wireless 
interface, data is forwarded between the concerned devices 
(as seen in steps c and d). However, if the destination device 
is connected via the Bluetooth interface, the number of active 
connections needs to be determined (as seen in g). If the 
number of active Bluetooth connections is less than or equal 
to 7, then data is forwarded between the participating devices 
(as seen in h). In the event where the number of active 
connections is greater than 7, the Blue Bridge terminates the 
connection and sends the "calling" status to the CAAS as 
well as the client (not depicted in Figure 5). 
With an overview of Blue Bridge and how it performs the 
bridging of the Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 Wireless 
protocols, the next section introduces our signaling and voice 
payload protocol, Linkage. 
VI. 
LINKAGE 
Although each Blue Bridge performs the bridging 
between the IEEE 802.11 wireless and Bluetooth protocols, 
without the ability for Blue Bridges to communicate, the 
CTN would cease to exist. We therefore propose Linkage, 
which facilitates inter-communication between Blue Bridges 
and between each Blue Bridge and the CAAS. Linkage is a 
lightweight hybrid (UDP and TCP) protocol, which performs 
the following functions: determining status updates and 
which Blue Bridge each client is currently associated with; 
informing the CAAS of new clients connected at each Blue 
Bridge; informing the CAAS of existing clients associating 
with new Blue Bridges; status updates between clients, and 
between Blue Bridges and the CAAS; and the transportation 
of traffic between Blue Bridges  and clients. 
Traditional voice communication is generally session-
based, which means that communication between clients and 
servers 
is 
request-response-based. 
Since 
voice 
communication is essentially the transmission of voice data 
from one client to another and the subsequent playback of 
this voice data at the receiving end, we decided to abandon 
the traditional session-based model of voice communication. 
As such, packets are transmitted from one client to another 
(via Blue Bridges) in a best effort attempt without the need 
for exchange of information between clients.  
We envision a CTN, to be one in which all protocols are 
open and easily expandable. As such, we designed Linkage 
in such a way that it can be extended beyond its original 
function (transportation of voice data between Blue Bridges 
and clients) and transport various other types of traffic by 
means of custom field addition in the protocol structure. 
In order for communication between clients to take place, 
the following processes are followed: 
 
1. The calling client communicates with the 
CAAS to determine which Blue Bridge the 
destination client is currently associated with. 
2. Once the calling client has knowledge of the 
destination Blue Bridge, it then sends data 
(voice data in the case of our CTN) via Linkage 
to the destination Blue Bridge. 
3. Upon receipt of voice data the concerned Blue 
Bridge utilizes the information contained within 
Linkage to route the packet to the destination 
client. 
4. The destination client can then respond to the 
calling client by utilizing information contained 
within Linkage.  
 
In order to better understand how Linkage performs the 
necessary functions required for the implementation of a 
CTN we provide an overview of the protocol structure and 
the components used throughout the process above. 
 
Figure 3 shows the structure of Linkage packet: 
  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Linkage packet structure 
Due to the nature of our CTN and for the purposes of 
efficiency, we utilized the UDP protocol as the underlying 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

protocol for communication between the clients and Blue 
Bridges, and the TCP protocol for communication between 
Blue Bridges and the CAAS. UDP was chosen as the primary 
protocol between clients and Blue Bridges due to the fact that 
potential lost packets would only result in a decrease in audio 
quality and would not cause the CTN to cease functioning. 
TCP 
was 
chosen 
as 
the 
preferred 
protocol 
for 
communication between Blue Bridges and the CAAS to 
ensure reliable conveyance of client status information, new 
client registrations, and reporting of statistical data. 
For 
the 
purposes 
of 
client 
and 
Blue 
Bridge 
communication, we propose the addition of the following 
fields to the UDP protocol: Linkage specific fields, and the 
payload data field which carries the voice data. In cases 
where Linkage is used merely for informational transfer, the 
payload data field is left empty. 
From Figure 3, it can be seen that the Linkage fields are 
as follows: the packet ID field; client source information; 
and client destination information. 
The PacketID field uniquely identifies each packet for 
the purposes of accounting, and returned routable responses. 
The client source is comprised of the telephone number 
of the calling client; the IP address of the source Blue 
Bridge; the current state of the client; the total number of 
packets being transmitted during the voice communication 
session (if applicable); the current progress of the voice 
transmission (if applicable); and any additional number of 
custom fields. The current progress, and total number of 
packets for the voice communication session, play an 
important role in optimizing the CTN in that they allow the 
CAAS to change the status of communicating clients as soon 
as the voice transmission is complete. These fields also 
ensure that statuses are updated in the event of lost packets. 
The client destination is comprised of the telephone 
number of the called party, the IP address of the destination 
router with which the called party is associated; and then any 
additional custom fields. Due to changing IP addresses, the 
client telephone numbers serve as the main identifier for 
communication in the CTN.  
A. Statuses and Notifications 
In order for the CAAS to be notified of new clients 
joining the CTN, the above Linkage packet is ideal in that 
new clients can encapsulate their telephone number, and the 
Blue Bridge with which they are associated, as well as their 
current status. In order to minimize network congestion and 
unnecessary strain on clients, Blue Bridges are required to 
inform the CAAS of new client associations as well as 
changes in client statuses. A client can have the following 
statuses: available; calling; and offline. 
It is important to notify calling clients of the status of 
called clients, so as to avoid engaged calls being mistaken 
for non-existent clients. An example of this would be, where 
Client A attempts to call Client B and Client B is currently 
participating in another call. As such, we have implemented 
a status field so as to notify the CAAS of the statuses of 
communicating clients. This scenario can be seen in Figure 
4: 
 
 
Figure 4.  Typical communication session 
From Figure 4, Client B and Client C are in a 
communication session with one another. Client A attempts 
to call Client B by querying Client B's information from 
Blue Bridge A (shown as (i) above). Since Blue Bridge A 
does not have any information pertaining to Client B, it then 
queries the CAAS for this information (show as (ii) above). 
The CAAS retrieves Client B's status from the database, and 
determines that Client B's status is "calling". The CAAS then 
alters the status field of the Linkage packet to "calling" and 
notifies Blue Bridge A (shown as (iii) above). Blue Bridge A 
then notifies Client A that Client B is engaged and terminates 
the connection (shown as (iv) above). 
A typical communication session between Client B and 
Client C can be seen in Figure 4. The communication 
process begins with Client B querying Blue Bridge B for 
information pertaining to Client C. The Linkage packet sent 
to Blue Bridge B contains the first media packet to be 
transmitted to Client C.  Since Blue Bridge B does not 
contain any routing information pertaining to Client C, it 
strips and stores the voice data temporarily while it attains 
this routing information from the CAAS (steps 2 and 3). If 
the CAAS determines that the status of Client C is 
"available" it updates Client C's status to "calling", which 
will prevent unnecessary call setup when other clients try to 
call Client B or C while in the "calling" state. 
Throughout the attainment of Client C's routing 
information, Client B continues to transmit voice data to 
Blue Bridge B. Blue Bridge B records packet information in 
a local MYSQL database which references the stored 
Adaptive Multi-Rate (AMR) media files. Once Blue Bridge 
B has determined the necessary routing information of Client 
C, it processes the stored queue of media data and transmits 
the packets to Blue Bridge C (as seen in step 4). Since Blue 
Bridge C has a local record of Client C being associated with 
it, packets can be sent directly to Client C without the need 
to obtain routing information from the CAAS (as seen in step 
5). Blue Bridge C's local database is then also updated with 
the routing information of Client B. In order to eliminate the 
storage of non-current client routing information, the local 
database of Blue Bridges is purged every 10 minutes. Client 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

C is then able to respond to Client B by sending the voice 
data to Blue Bridge C (as seen in step 6) which forwards the 
packet to Blue Bridge B (step 7). Blue Bridge B in turn 
forwards the data to Client B (step 8). Since both Blue 
Bridge B and C contain the necessary routing information, 
communication between Clients B and C then takes place via 
Blue Bridges B and C (independent of CAAS queries and 
updates).  
When Client B is done communicating with Client C, a 
status packet (stripped of all voice data) is sent to Blue 
Bridge B (step 9), which then updates the local database of 
the status of Client B. Blue Bridge B then notifies the CAAS 
of the status update (the two way arrow in the diagram 
indicates a TCP connection, which ensures delivery of the 
packet - step 11). Similarly, Client C, Blue Bridge C, and the 
CAAS perform the necessary updates and termination of the 
communication session as seen in steps 10 and 12.    
B. Lost Packets 
Since Linkage is a best effort based protocol operating 
across interference prone wireless protocols, the likelihood 
of lost packets is quite high. In order to minimize the effect 
of lost packets on the functioning of the CTN we transmit the 
state the client is currently in; the total number of packets to 
be transmitted; and the current progress of the transmission 
from each client transmitting data to its associated Blue 
Bridge. The last packet transmitted from either client 
contains the "available" state, which notifies the concerned 
Blue Bridge that the client is not participating in a 
communication session.  
In the event where the last packet is lost, the associated 
Blue Bridge is able to determine when the communication 
session should have ended based on the total number of 
packets and the last noted progress. The concerned Blue 
Bridge then terminates the connection and changes the status 
of the client to "available  
 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
Although channeling all communication through Blue 
Bridges may result in increased delays throughout the CTN, 
this type of architecture allows for the system to be extended 
by providing group calling functionality. This is made 
possible by Blue Bridges forwarding voice packets to 
everyone in a particular group. By enabling group broadcasts 
on Blue Bridges, processing requirements of constrained 
client handsets is reduced. The ability to provide instant 
messaging functionality, and create community polling and 
support systems are other possible extensions. Community 
polling is particularly useful in areas where there is a 
shortage of staff. This allows the community to inform the 
municipality of areas which require attention. These polling 
systems could also provide benefits for the security and 
emergency industries, providing a means for people to alert 
authorities in the event of an emergency.  
Our CTN network implementation currently only 
provides node status updates from Blue Bridges to the CAAS 
when calls between clients are complete; when new clients 
join 
the 
CTN, 
or 
when 
Blue 
Bridges 
terminate 
communication sessions in the event of suspected packet 
loss. The disadvantage of status updates only in these 
instances is that client statuses on communicating Blue 
Bridges are updated, but the CAAS does not have the most 
recent client statuses (except where clients have not 
communicated since their last session). A possible extension 
could be to enable client status updates upon Blue Bridges 
querying routing information for destination clients from the 
CAAS. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper provided an overview of WMNs, CTNs and 
the Bluetooth protocol, as well as instances of how these 
technologies and systems are implemented in related work. 
This paper demonstrated a need for cost effective 
communication methods utilizing existing technologies and 
provided an architectural overview of our proposed CTN. 
This paper explained the benefits and potential constraints of 
the system, as well as possible solutions to these constraints. 
This paper identified the problems associated with voice 
communication in South Africa; provided an overview of 
existing systems and where they can be improved; and 
proposed a solution to these problems by means of bridging 
Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 wireless connections on a series 
of Raspberry Pi computers (Blue Bridge). This paper also 
demonstrated how a CTN can be created through the inter-
connection of these Blue Bridges by means of the proposed 
protocol - Linkage. Finally, this paper suggested possible 
extensions to the current infrastructure and how these 
extensions could be implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank our sponsors, the Telkom Centre 
of Excellence at Rhodes University, funded by Telkom SA, 
Business Connexion, Verso Technologies, THRIP, Stortech, 
Tellabs and the National Research Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Ian Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, "Wireless mesh 
networks: a survey," Computer Networks., 2005, vol. 47, no. 
4, pp. 445-487. 
[2] At&t., "Learn more about Push to Talk," 2012. Available at: 
http://www.wireless.att.com/learn/popups/push-talk-faq.jsp. 
[Accessed 04-10-2013]. 
[3] C. Bisdikian, "An overview of the Bluetooth wireless 
technology," Communications Magazine IEEE., 2001, vol. 
39, no. 12, pp. 86-94. 
[4] R. Bruno, M. Conti, and E. Gregori, "Bluetooth: Architecture, 
protocols and scheduling algorithms," Cluster Computing., 
2002, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 117-131. 
[5] M.C. Castro, P. Dely, J. Karlson, and A. Kassler, "Capacity 
Increase for Voice over IP Traffic through Packet 
Aggregation in Wireless Multihop Mesh Networks," IEE 
Journal., 2007, vol. 2, pp. 350-355. 
[6] S. Ganguly, V. Navda, K. Kim, A. Kashyap, D. Niculescu, R. 
Izmailov, S. Hong, and S.R. Das, "Performance Optimizations 
for delpoying VoIP Services in Mesh Networks," IEEE 
Journal, November 2006, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2147-2158. 
[7] R. Huang, "Heavy-handed network throttling 'bad for 
business'," 2012. Available at: http://www.zdnet.com/heavy-
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

handed-network-throttling-bad-for-business-7000001953/. 
[Accessed 03-21-2013]. 
[8] J. Ishmael, S. Bury, D. Pezaros, and N.J.P Race, "Deploying 
rural community wireless mesh networks," IEEE Journal, 
2008, vol. 12, no 4, pp. 22-29. 
[9] P. Johansson, R. Kapoor, A. Kazantzidis, and M. Gerla, 
"Rendezvous scheduling in Bluetooth scatternets," IEEE 
International Conference., 2002, vol. 1,  pp. 318-324. 
[10] Push to Talk LTD., "Benefits of PTT," 2011. Available at: 
http://www.pushtotalkuk.com/push_to_talk_benefits.aspx. 
[Accessed 04-09-2013]. 
[11] Raspberry Pi., "An ARM GNU/Linux box for $25," 2012. 
Available at: http://www.raspberrypi.org. [Accessed 04-08-
2013]. 
[12] B. Tubb, "Operators deny VOIP throttling," 2013. Available 
at: 
http://www.itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&vie
w=article&id=61979. 
[Accessed 
03-21-2013].
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Process diagram for proposed CTN 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

