A New Advertisement Method of Displaying a Crowd 
 
 
 
Taku Watanabe 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University, Japan 
e-mail: t.watanabe@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
 
 
Kenji Tsukamoto  
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Waseda University, Japan  
e-mail: tenbook223@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp   
 
 
 
Yuta Matsushima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Waseda University, Japan 
e-mail: y.matsushima@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
 
 
Kota Gushima  
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  
Waseda University, Japan  
e-mail: gushi@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp  
 
Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Scient and Engineering 
Waseda University, Japan 
e-mail: tatsuo@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, using a new advertising method within 
a virtual space, we examine a method that portrays a crowd by 
showing multiple people in front of institutions and stores. This 
method is intended to promote advertising by utilizing the 
behavioral psychology of users who want to agree with what 
many other people support. We examine how the attractiveness 
of the store changes due to the presence or absence of crowds in 
a shopping mall within a virtual space. Although there were 
some subjects whose store ratings were not increased due to the 
negative image of crowds and the unnaturalness of the crowds, 
the proposed method generally increased the appeal of the store 
and the subjects’ impression of the store. 
Keywords-Virtual Reality; Bandwagon Effect. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, with the development of virtual reality 
technologies, there have been many attempts to represent 
actual facilities, services, stores, etc. in virtual spaces [1]-[3]. 
Attempts have been made to develop a virtual space as a social 
infrastructure and expand it as a place for people's activities 
[4]-[6]. As a result of such research, if virtual reality as a social 
infrastructure expands in the future and becomes the basis of 
human activities, users will be able to perform more free-of-
charge activities in the virtual world than they can in the real 
world. Currently, while attempts are being made to 
communicate information to users via various forms of media 
[7], it is noteworthy that when advertising activities are 
conducted in a virtual society, this method of expression 
spreads information more than when using conventional 
methods. For example, while disseminating information 
throughout a shopping mall or department store is possible in 
a virtual world, methods of poster text, illustrations, and voice 
guidance must generally be used in the real world. On the 
other hand, objects existing in the virtual world can be 
converted and alternatively expressed by using information 
technologies, and a more flexible transmission method can be 
expected. In this paper, we propose a method of displaying 
crowds as a way to guide users. The purpose of the method is 
to portray a thriving situation by placing multiple virtual 
people in front of the store, event, or object that the system 
wants to advertise, as shown in Figure 1. It is hypothesized 
that this approach makes it possible to advertise in a way that 
is more suitable to the situation than is the traditional text-
based guidance. 
 
Figure 1.  Displaying a Crowd. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 
describes the background of this study. In Section 3, we 
explain the concepts of new advertisement method of 
displaying a crowd and an experiment to verify the effect of 
displaying crowd. The result of this experiments is presented 
in Section 4. In Section 5, we discuss the obtained results after 
the experiment. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section introduces the background that led to the 
proposal of our advertising method. 
A. Bandwagon Effect and Snob Effect 
The concept behind this advertising effect approach is the 
bandwagon effect that exists in human behavioral psychology 
[8]. The bandwagon effect is a psychological phenomenon in 
which people think that something that many other people 
support is valuable. This effect is used in economic marketing 
and can be incorporated into advertising effects that sell 
products to customers [9][10]. Political studies have 
suggested a relationship with the voter rate of elections [11]-
[14]. On the other hand, there is also a psychological 
phenomenon where people want to keep their perception of 
scarcity and do not want to own what many people support. 
This is called the snob effect or the underdog effect. These 
effects are not contradictory but rooted in human behavioral 
psychology [15][16]. 
B. Introducing the Bandwagon Effect based on IoT 
Technologies 
Research is being conducted to investigate the impact of 
introducing this bandwagon effect to IoT-based systems. In 
the study of [17], a recommended system incorporating the 
bandwagon effect is considered from the user's selection 
history. In recent years, a system that the user operates 
digitally and without thinking has become popular. This 
experiment is one example of the research that is related to 
persuasion without attracting the user's attention [18]. In 
addition, by adopting the method of giving only the necessary 
information to the user of a digital device, the user can select 
their level of necessary information according to the 
environment of their future society in which the amount of 
information increases enormously [19]. In the study of [20], 
the authors proposed solutions to public institution 
bottlenecks by providing information about the surrounding 
environment and presenting it to the user. As described above, 
such research has been conducted to enrich people's lives by 
providing information on the everyday world in which people 
live. 
III. 
A PROPOSED APPROACH AND ITS EXPERIMENT 
DESIGN 
As an approach to inducing people, it is effective to 
examine human psychology, and such methods are currently 
being studied [21]. In this paper, we propose an advertising 
method of portraying a shop as being one that many people 
support as a way to guide the target shops. Specifically, a 
crowd is displayed in front of a store as an expression that it 
is supported by many people in a virtual space, as shown in 
Figures 2-4. By using the projection method that places virtual 
people in stores within a virtual shopping mall, the natural 
guidance that makes users feel as comfortable as possible is 
realized. In this case, the method may be effective for users 
who are strongly oriented to joining bandwagons, as it 
emphasizes the support of the majority. In addition, it is 
necessary to consider how to respond when the same approach 
is attempted on user who is highly snob-effect oriented. 
In the remaining section, we show how the experiment 
investigating the effectiveness of our approach is designed. 
A. Preliminary Survey 
Before starting the experiments, we examine the 
psychological tendencies of subjects in their daily life. This is 
because the results will vary greatly depending on whether 
their human behavioral psychological intention to follow a 
large number of opinions (bandwagonism) or their desire to 
retain one's rarity (snobbish) is stronger. In the preliminary 
survey as shown in TABLE I, several questions regarding the 
subject's bandwagonism are prepared in the form of a 6-point 
Likert score. We classify people who responded positively to 
a large number of opinion-based answers with an average 
score of 3.5 or higher as a “Bandwagoner”, and those who 
scored less than that value are classified as a “Snob”. 
TABLE I.  
THE CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY SURVEYS 
No 
Question 
Q1 
Do you decide your actions by looking at the 
people around you? 
Q2 
Would you like to go to a store recommended on TV 
or the web? 
Q3 
Would you like to go to a shop that has gained a 
reputation from word of mouth? 
Q4 
What kind of shop do you care about when you find 
thriving shops on the street? 
Q5 
Are you interested in shops that are said to be in 
line with other people? 
 
B. Patrolling in the Virtual Mall 
After the preliminary survey is completed, the subject 
conducts a patrol through the virtual shopping mall with the 
headset attached as shown in Figure 5. Three clothing stores 
in the mall are set as destinations, the presence or absence of 
a crowd is compared among the stores, and how the attraction 
level of the store changes depending on the crowd is evaluated 
on a 6-point Likert scale. 
C. Post-Experimental Survey and Interview 
After the patrol of the mall, we ask the subjects about the 
crowd conditions. Specifically, we ask, "At what crowd level 
do you feel the charm of the store?" and "At what crowd level 
do you want to enter the store?" The responses to these 
questions can either be “Quiet”, “Congested”, or “Very 
Congested”. Furthermore, the model that expresses the crowd 
itself, the location where the crowd is generated, and whether 
the behavior of the model feels uncomfortable are all 
evaluated in 6 stages. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

 
Figure 2.  First Situation in a Virtual Mall. 
 
Figure 3.  Second Situation in a Virtual Mall. 
 
Figure 4.  Third Situation in a Virtual Mall. 
 
Figure 5.  A Scene of Patrolling in a Virtual Mall. 
TABLE II.  
DETAIL OF POST-EXPERIMENTAL INTERVIEWS 
No 
Question 
Q1 
Evaluation of Crowds as Advertisement 
Q2 
Discomfort with Human Models and Crowds 
Q3 
Facilities that May be Judged from Crowds 
After all the experiments were completed, the subjects are 
interviewed from three viewpoints, as shown in TABLE II, 
to obtain their impressions and opinions on the crowd-
controlled advertising. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

IV. 
RESULTS FROM THE EXPERIMENT 
The experiment described in Section 4 was conducted on 
8 men and 1 woman. Based on the preliminary survey, those 
are were classified as a bandwagoner are expressed as B1, B2, 
…, and those who were classified as a snob are expressed as 
S1, S2, …. 
A. Reactions from Patrolling the Virtual Mall 
From the mall patrol experiment, it can be seen that 
although there is a difference in degree, the main intention is 
whether the person enters the store or not. Figure 6 shows the 
difference of score of stores’ attractiveness by displaying 
crowd or not. Furthermore, the distributions of answers to the 
question related to displaying crowd are shown in Figure 7, 
8. 
 
Figure 6.  The Score of Store Impressions 
 
Figure 7.  The Distribution of Answers to the question of how crowded 
 
Figure 8.  The Score of Stores Impression 
B. Discomfort with Crowded Displays 
Evaluating discomfort with crowded display methods 
shows that most users say that they feel uncomfortable with 
the projection, as shown in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9.  The Score of Discomfort of Human Models 
 
Figure 10.  The Score of Store Impressions 
Furthermore, as a result of calculating the correlation 
between the evaluation of an uncomfortable feeling with 
respect to the crowd and the evaluation of the crowd display 
from the scatter diagram of Figure 10, the correlation 
coefficient was calculated to be approximately −0.57. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
S1
S2
S3
Discomfort
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

V. 
DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we examine whether our proposed method 
has the potential to be used as an advertising technique based 
on the results of the experiments. 
A. Feasibility of the Bandwagon Approach 
First, the experiments and surveys suggested that the 
presence of people in a store was a factor in the overall appeal 
of the store itself and that this tendency existed regardless of 
whether the shopper was a bandwagoner or a snob. It can be 
considered that a sense of security was obtained when people 
were shown that the store was supported by way of the 
presence of a crowd in the store. In addition, the subjects 
answered in the interview that “I want to go to this store when 
it is available (S2)” or “I want to check out this store when I 
return (B3)”. 
Even if there was no immediate effect of crowding as a 
form of advertisement, it can be considered that this approach 
does leave an impression on the user. In addition, there was 
an opinion that the approach of displaying crowds is reliable 
and interesting because it suggests a guarantee that the store 
is popular at that moment compared to Internet reviews and 
conventional advertisements (S2). On the other hand, there 
were both bandwagoner and snob subjects who replied that 
the appeal of the store decreased with respect to the crowd 
display (B2, B5, S1). It was noted that the evaluation values 
change depending on the negative impression of the crowd 
itself and the type of store that advertises using a crowd. 
Furthermore, the display of a crowd may interfere with the 
appearance of the store. In such cases, the store may not be 
able to showcase the information that it truly wants to show 
to customers, such as store design, recommended products, 
discount advertisements, etc. 
B. Current Problems of the Proposed Method 
A couple of subjects expressed the opinion that there were 
problems with the proposed method (B2, B4). In addition, it 
was mentioned that the model as adverse effects, such as 
imparting too much stress on the user and making it difficult 
to enter the store because too many people were standing in 
the entrance (B4, B6, S1). Therefore, it is thought that the size 
of the crowd must be adjusted within a range that does not 
disturb the scenery of the store. 
The most prevalent opinion expressed in this experiment 
was that the subject felt uncomfortable in the situation where 
people were crowded in front of the store (B1, B2, B4, B5, 
B6, S1, S3). In reality, the situation in which people are 
crowded in front of the store is unnatural; therefore, some 
subjects said they felt anxiety that an incident had occurred 
in the store (B6) or it was a problematic store (S1). 
Furthermore, the appropriateness of the store displaying a 
crowd is related to the uncomfortable feeling produced by 
such a crowd. In this situation, the subject was supposed to 
go to a clothing store, but at the clothing store, the subject 
said that congestion at the store was not preferable for reasons, 
such as wanting to talk to a store clerk or try on clothing (B2). 
Therefore, it is desirable that the facilities and stores that 
display crowds guarantee their value due to the presence of 
additional people, e.g., restaurants that require up-to-date 
evaluations (B6, S2), movie theaters in which the state of the 
facilities cannot be seen from outside (B4), live events that 
are increased by crowds (S1), and station congestion 
information disseminated through the display of crowds (S3). 
As shown in Figure 10, the uncomfortable feeling related to 
crowding has a negative correlation with the attractiveness of 
the store; therefore, reducing the uncomfortable feeling of 
crowding will be a future challenge. 
C. Concern About Using the System in the Real World 
In this paper, we proposed a method to display crowds as 
a form of advertisement. It is thought that the advertising 
effect of displaying crowds can be expected to some extent in 
the virtual world, but there are various concerns about using 
this method in the real world. 
The first concern is that it must be possible to distinguish 
the objects that are projected to the user while also 
harmonizing with the existing objects (B4). This is because if 
the user cannot actually distinguish between displayed and 
real objects when walking around the city or facilities, there 
will be problems, such as collision with surrounding people 
and forcing the user to perform useless actions, such as 
avoiding the projected objects. However, as described above, 
there is the problem of the advertising effect being slim 
unless the user can be guided without a sense of incongruity. 
To implement this advertising method in reality, it is 
necessary to consider a good projection method that resolves 
these conflicts. In interviews with the subjects, model 
methods were suggested that both avoid the user (B4) and 
that display the crowd only at a distance and disappear when 
the user moves close to the crowd (S2). It is necessary to 
further verify how the advertising effect will change by 
introducing these methods. 
The second concern is that the approach could be used for 
so-called stealth marketing, in which the store intentionally 
manipulates the crowd to enforce the store's advertisements 
without notice to the user, and thus the user cannot make the 
correct choice (B6). We must be careful of the social 
problems caused by malicious stealth marketing [22] 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The possibility of a new advertising method in the virtual 
world was considered through the current experiment. This 
method cannot be applied to every facility or store, but it can 
be used to relate the prosperity and reputation of a store at a 
glance and to attract people's attention. This approach can be 
used for a facility that is directly related to popularity, such 
as a restaurant, or an event that gathers people with the same 
purpose, such as a live performance. 
In the next step of our research, we will verify whether it 
is possible to reduce the user's uncomfortable feeling toward 
the crowd displayed in the shopping mall by changing the 
location, the viewing location, the number of people, and the 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

behavior of the crowd. We will also evaluate how the 
attractiveness of the store changes as the feeling of 
discomfort decreases. In addition, it is considered necessary 
to verify how the user’s impression of the store changes by 
changing the type of store that displays crowds in front of 
them. 
Furthermore, through interviews, we will evaluate 
whether the risk of actually using the system in reality can be 
reduced by introducing a method to lower the risk of using 
the technique. It is thought that it is necessary to verify and 
evaluate how discomfort with the crowd changes by 
introducing this method and whether the projection has an 
advertising effect. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Speicher, S. Cucerca, and A. Krüger, “VRShop: A Mobile 
Interactive Virtual Reality Shopping Environment Combining 
the Benefits of On- and Offline Shopping”, Proceedings of the 
ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous 
Technologies, Volume 1 Issue 3, September 2017, Article No. 
102, [online] Available from: https://doi.org/10.1145/3130967, 
accessed 2020/01/02 
[2] K. Oiwake, K. Komiya, H. Akasaki, and T. Nakajima, “VR 
Classroom: Enhancing Learning Experience with Virtual Class 
Rooms”, 2018, pp.1-6 
[3] H. Tsuboi, S. Toyama, and T. Nakajima, “Enhancing Bicycle 
Safety Through Immersive Experiences Using Virtual Reality 
Technologies”. International Conference on Augmented 
Cognition 2018, pp.444-456 
[4] D. P. Brutzman, M. R. Macedonia, and M. J. Zyda, 
“Internetwork 
Infrastructure 
Requirements 
for 
Virtual 
Environment”, The unpredictable Certainly: White Papers, 
pp.110-122, 2000,  
[5] T. L. Taylor, “Life in Virtual Worlds: Plural Existence, 
Multimodalities, and Other Online Research Challenges.”, 
American Behavioral Scientist 43, no.3, November 1999 
pp.436–449 
[6] M. N. Boulos, L. Hetherington and S. Wheeler, “Second Life: 
an overview of the potential of 3-D virtual worlds in medical 
and health education”, Health Information and Libraries 
Journal, Volume 24, Issue 4, December 2007, pp.233-308, 
[7] A. Shankar and B. Horton, “Ambient media: advertising's new 
media opportunity?”, International Journal of Advertising, The 
Review of Marketing Communications, March 02 2015, 
pp.305-321. 
[8] H. Leibenstein, "Bandwagon, Snob and Veblen Effects in the 
Theory of Consumers' Demand", The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, May 1950, pp.183-207 
[9] N. McBride, “Business use of the internet: Strategic decision 
or another bandwagon?”, European Management Journal, 
Volume 15, Issue 1, February 1997, pp.58-67 
[10] P. Nitin and S. Klein, “Bandwagon Pressures and Interfirm 
Alliances in the Global Pharmaceutical Industry.”Journal of 
International Marketing, vol. 6, No. 2, June 1998, pp.54–73 
[11] H. A. Simon, “Bandwagon and Underdog Effects and the 
Possibility of Election Predictions”, Public Opinion Quarterly, 
Volume 18, Issue 3, FALL 1954, pp.245–253 
[12] I. McAllister and D. T. Studlar, “Bandwagon, Underdog, or 
Projection? Opinion Polls and Electoral Choice in Britain, 
1979-1987”, The Journal of Politics 1991 53:3, pp.720-741 
[13] C. E. Zech, “Leibenstein’s bandwagon effect as applied to 
Voting", Public Choice, Volume 21, Issue 1, pp.117-122, 
March 1975 
[14] R. Schmitt-Beck, “Mass Media, the Electorate, and the 
Bandwagon. a Study of Communication Effects on Vote 
Choice in Germany”, International Journal of Public Opinion 
Research, Volume 8, Issue 3, FALL 1996, pp.266–291 
[15] Y. Aragaki et al., “Bandwagon effect and snob effect that occur 
within the same consumer.”,Chuo University Faculity of 
Commerse, 
2012, 
[online] 
Avaiable 
from: 
http://c-
faculty.chuo-
u.ac.jp/~shoyuki/2012%20bandwagon%20and%20snob.pdf, 
accessed 2019/10/05 
[16] Y. Kuwashima, “Structural Equivalence and Cohesion Can 
Explain Bandwagon and Snob Effect”, Annals of Business 
Administrative Science, 2016, Volume 15, Issue 1, pp.1-14 
[17] S. Choi, H. Lee, Y. Han, K. L. Man, and W. K. Chong, “A 
Recommendation Model Using the Bandwagon Effect for E-
Marketing Purposes in IoT.” International Journal of 
Distributed Sensor Networks, July 7, 2015, [online] Available 
from: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1155/2015/475163, 
accessed 2020/01/02 
[18] J. Ham, C. Midden, and F. Beute, “Can ambient persuasive 
technology persuade unconsciously?: using subliminal 
feedback to influence energy consumption ratings of household 
appliances”, Persuasive ’09, April 2009, Article No.29, pp.1-6 
[19] K. Gushima, H. Akasaki, and T. Nakajima, “Ambient bot: 
delivering daily casual information through eye contact with an 
intimate virtual creature”, AcademicMindtrek '17, September 
20-21, 2017, pp.231-234 
[20] G. Boehm, “Ambient Persuasive Guidance”, TEI ’11, January 
2011, pp.431-432 
[21] J. M. Weyant, “Applying Social Psychology to Induce 
Charitable Donations”, Journal of Applied Social Psychology 
banner, Volume14, Issue5, October 1984, pp.441-447 
[22] K. D. Martin and N. C. Smith, “Commercializing Social 
Interaction: The Ethics of Stealth Marketing”, INSEAD 
Business School Research Paper No.2008/19/ISIC, March 
2008, pp.1-36. 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

