Natural User Interaction Requires Good Affordance
When Using a Head-Mounted Display
Takayuki Miura, Shoma Urakawa, Mitsuharu Isojima, Jianing Yu, Akihito Yoshii, Tatsuo Nakajima
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Waseda University
Tokyo, Japan
emails: {t.miura, shoma_urakawa, mitsuharu_isojima, yu_jianing, a_yoshii, tatsuo}@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp
Abstract—Natural user interface (NUI) devices have become
commercially common in various types of Virtual reality
(VR)-based
services
such
as
video
games
and
public
attractions. Recently, a type of head-mounted display (HMD)
such as Oculus Rift also attracts the industry with the
possibility of developing new types of emerging VR-based
services. In this paper, we report that appropriate affordances
are necessary to use respective NUI devices, particularly when
a
user
wears
an
HMD,
which
implies
that
different
affordances are necessary for different NUI devices. We have
developed a preliminary case study to use different NUI
devices, where a user wears an HMD and navigates the
interaction with the case study service. We conducted an
experiment
to
investigate
the
relationship
between
the
affordances and the NUI devices to extract useful insights to
develop future VR-based services that use NUI devices and
HMDs. The results suggest that it is important to consider the
differences of NUI devices for the affordance design to
navigate VR-based services.
Keywords-NUI; HMD; VR; Affordance; Mental model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, virtual reality (VR) technologies have revived
because
inexpensive
and
practical
commercial
head-
mounted displays (HMD) such as Oculus Rift are used [12].
Thus, various types of VR-based services [13] are easily
developed and can be commercially used. For example, in
Japan, some VR-based attractions using an HMD have
attracted many people [14].
To offer desirable interactive users’ experiences, natural
user interaction (NUI) devices such as Microsoft Kinect [15]
or Leap Motion [16] are widely used. Many VR-based
games have been developed, and they assume to use these
NUI devices because these devices offer an immersive user
experience through the natural interaction, which we use in
our daily life, such as hand gesture and arm movement [2],
with the virtual world without prior knowledge. However, it
is assumed that using the current NUI devices causes a gap
between the ideal situation and reality. In particular, using
NUI devices with an HMD may cause a new problem. Yang
and Pan have reported that MS Kinect fails to track a user’s
body when the user does not have enough experience with
an HMD [11]. Additionally, Sabir, Stolte, Tabor, and
O’Donoghue show that poor performance when using NUI
devices has been found if the users have little practice with
the NUI devices [5].
As claimed in [9], considering the affordance is effective
for VR-based services when used with an HMD. Thus, we
believe that those types of problems occur because different
NUI devices require proper affordances to use them,
particularly an HMD. When using NUI devices, it is usually
assumed that a user can easily find where the devices are
and how to navigate them, but the devices cannot be seen
when the user wears an HMD. In computing environments,
various commodity NUI devices will be used to develop
new VR-based services; thus, the described issues will soon
become a more serious problem. We must also investigate
what types of affordance are appropriate. We discuss two
types of affordance: inherent and augmented affordances,
which we defined based on the inherent and augmented
feedforward, as proposed in [10]. Furthermore, we would
like to study whether different features of NUI devices affect
the appropriateness of the types of affordance. Our research
question is that a different NUI device requires a different
affordance. This research question is the foundation in the
research area of VR, HMD, and NUI devices, but only few
studies were mentioned because of the rapid development of
this research area.
In this paper, we have developed a simple VR-based
service to investigate the above issues as a case study and
demonstrate how we can design proper affordances for
respective NUI devices. The extracted insights from our
experiment are useful for designing future NUI devices and
VR-based services.
This paper consists of the following sections. Section II
shows the background of our study and the issues that we
must investigate in our study. In Section III, we explain
some issues of designing affordances and how we tackle
these issues. Section IV presents some related work of this
study. Section V illustrates a prototype service as a case
study that we developed to investigate our research question.
Section VI presents our conducted experimental design, and
Section VII shows the results and discussions of the
experiment. Section VIII presents the conclusion and future
direction of our study.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

II.
BACKGROUND
A well-designed service requires a good mental model
for navigation [3]. Traditional VR-based services typically
use special and dedicated NUI devices that are developed
only for the services [1]. Thus, the NUI devices usually fit
well for the mental models of the services. However, in
ubiquitous computing environments, we would like to adopt
cheap and available NUI devices, such as MS Kinect and
Leap Motion, to easily deploy the new VR-based services.
One of the potential pitfalls is that the NUI devices may
cause gaps between the mental model and the assumption of
the NUI devices, although it is desirable that these services
can be used with any NUI device to increase the portability.
For example, a user can navigate services with the
movement of his/her entire body using MS Kinect, whereas
he/she must assume to use only one hand to navigate the
services when using Leap Motion.
Figure 1. A Play Scene of Dance Evolution
Some concrete examples of using NUI devices are
“Dance Evolution” [17] and “Nike+ Kinect Training” [18],
where the video games are played on Xbox 360 using MS
Kinect. “Dance Evolution” is a dance game, as shown in
Figure 1, and “Nike+ Kinect Training” is an exercise game,
as shown in Figure 2. In both games, the movement of each
player’s body is tracked by MS Kinect, and some players
can compete for scores in the games. The players easily play
the games by following the visual instructions on the screen,
but when we assume that MS Kinect is replaced by Leap
Motion, no player may play the games well because the
presented visual instructions do not afford the operations of
the games with Leap Motion.
Figure 2. A Play Scene of Nike+ Kinect Training
This problem does not apply in these games because the
games were developed to be currently operated only with
MS
Kinect.
However,
for
general-purpose
VR-based
services that can be operated using several types of NUI
devices, to overcome the issues of using various types of
NUI devices for VR-based services, we require a new
solution to use a VR-based service.
III.
AFFORDANCES AND OUR RESEARCH GOAL
Our solution is to offer affordances to help construct the
mental model to navigate the VR-based services. In this
paper, we use the term “affordance” with the meaning of
“perceived affordance”. A typical affordance is the knob of a
door; we usually know how we can open the door without
any instruction when we look at the form of the doorknob.
In other words, affordances are the functions that provide
the critical clues required for their proper operation.
Additionally, affordances can be used to navigate human
behavior [6]. However, the following research questions
remain: whether respective affordances are necessary for
different NUI devices, and what types of affordances must
be offered.
In this study, based on [10], we define two types of
affordances: inherent affordance and augmented affordance.
The inherent affordance makes us understand how we use a
VR-based service based on the UI elements’ shapes,
positions, etc. The definition of the affordance is widely
used when designing daily objects [3]. The augmented
affordance uses images or words to make us understand how
we use a VR-based service. Investigating these two types of
affordances enables us to extract useful insights when
designing affordances for future VR-based services.
IV.
RELATED WORK
Terrenghi, Kirk, Sellen, and Izadi show that each
interface creates a different affordance in [8]. In this paper,
the authors asked the participants to perform a puzzle task
and a task to sort photos, where each task was performed
with the two following methods: using physical puzzle
pieces or photos and using their digital forms, which could
be operated through a touch panel, as shown in Figure 3 and
4. The result of their study is that even with identical tasks,
the
affordances
of
the
respective
interfaces
appear
differently.
In [7], Shin, Kim, and Chang studied the usability of
two devices in VR-based services with HMD. They asked
the participants to play a race game and an action game as
shown in Figure 5 and 6, respectively, with two different
types of controllers: Hydra, which must be grasped to play
the game, and MS Kinect. The results of the experiment
show that even in identical games, the difference in
controller devices affects the impression that the users feel.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Figure 3. Puzzle Task in Two Styles [8]
Figure 4. Sorting Photos in Two Styles [8]
Figure 5. Race Game [7]
Figure 6. Action Game [7]
Thus, it is desirable to offer different affordances for
each controller device to increase the usability of VR-based
services when an HMD is used.
V.
A CASE STUDY
We have developed a VR-based photo viewer service as
a case study, which is illustrated in Figure 7, to demonstrate
the proposed ideas.
Figure 7. Construction of the image viewer we developed
Figure 8. No Affordances for both MS Kinect and Leap Motion
Figures 8, 9 and 10 show the screen captures of the
services that are displayed in an HMD. The small white
sphere shown on the screen represents a cursor that a user
can navigate using his/her motion. Several photos rotate
around in user’s sight. At the bottom part of the screen, there
are two arrow objects, which indicate “Speed up” and
“Speed Down”. A user adjusts the photo’s moving speed by
putting the moving cursor on these objects. By putting the
cursor on a photo for a time period, the size of the photo is
enlarged.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Figure 9. Inherent and Augmented Affordances for MS Kinect
Figure 10. Inherent and Augmented Affordances for Leap Motion
The current case study assumes to use either MS Kinect
or Leap Motion as NUI devices. We designed the inherent
and augmented affordances for the respective NUI devices.
The
service
can
be
used
without
presenting
these
affordances.
MS Kinect tracks the positions of a user’s body. In this
case study, the position of a user’s right hand is captured to
move the cursor. Conversely, Leap Motion tracks the
positions of the joints of a user’s hand. In this case study, the
position of the back of a user’ hand is detected to move the
cursor. Figure 8 is a screenshot when no affordance is shown.
Figure 9 shows the screens that represent the inherent and
augmented affordances for MS Kinect, and Figure 10
presents those for Leap Motion.
In the experiment of this case study, we conducted user
studies for the following five combinations.
(1) No affordance + MS Kinect or Leap Motion: the
“Speed Up” and “Speed Down” objects are shown at the
bottom of the screen.
(2) Leap Motion + Inherent affordance: The “Speed Up”
and “Speed Down” objects are represented with smaller
sizes than those in the service with no affordance, and the
region that a user can move his/her hand is visualized.
(3) Leap Motion + Augmented affordance: A picture of a
hand and the sentence “Right Hand here” are displayed at
the bottom of the screen.
(4) MS Kinect + Inherent affordance: The positions of
“Speed Up” and “Speed Down” objects are shown on the
top and bottom right side of the screen.
(5) MS Kinect + Augmented affordance: A picture of a
hand and the sentence “Use Right Arm Widely” are
displayed at the bottom of the screen.
VI.
EXPERIMENT DESIGN
In this study, we performed an experiment to investigate
the above combinations. A participant selects two photos in
each combination. The word “select” indicates enlarging the
photos by putting the cursor on the photos for a period of
time. In this experiment, we investigated the differences
when there is an affordance or not and when two types of
affordances
are
presented.
We
also
investigated
the
situations when the participant knows what NUI device
he/she uses and when he/she does not know which NUI
device is used.
In this experiment, twelve participants with ages of 21-
54 participated. Figure 11 shows one actual scene during the
experiment.
Figure 11. A Scene in Our Experiment
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

The experiment for one person took approximately 20-
40 minutes. We conducted the semi-structured interview for
them after the experiment.
VII.
DESIGN IMPLICATION
In the experiment, most participants basically showed
positive attitudes for our proposed approach, and said, “The
presentation of the affordance helps me to navigate the
service.” In the section, we presented some more detailed
answers in the interview conducted after the experiment
described in the previous section.
We asked the participants “Why did you consider that the
affordance helps you?” Some of them answered “How,
what, and where to move my hand or arm could be
understood easily by the affordance” Also, when asking a
question “Why did you prefer the inherent affordance of MS
Kinect?”
Some
participants
who
prefer
the
inherent
affordance
for
MS
Kinect
answered
“The
inherent
affordance for MS Kinect is effective because the position of
the arrow objects indicates the necessary action for my right
arm”
One opinion for the merit of the inherent affordance for
Leap Motion is that the operative range of the device is easy
to understand. However, some participants said, “The
inherent affordance is not good for me”, and they presented
its reason as follows; “I cannot understand the meaning of
the affordance, and it confused me.” When comparing the
inherent affordance for MS Kinect and Leap Motion, most
participants said the affordance for Leap Motion is better. In
terms of the augmented affordance, when asking the
participants “Comparing MS Kinect with Leap Motion, do
you
think
which
augmented
affordance
was
easy
to
understand?”, Most participants answered “The difference
between the affordances for MS Kinect and Leap Motion is
small because the augmented affordances for both devices
are similar”
In the opinion about the inherent and augmented
affordance, many participants said the augmented affordance
is better than inherent one, because words and images are
understandable in an easier way. Additionally, the inherent
affordance offers the better effect when the participants
know which NUI device is currently used, whereas the
augmented affordance has a better effect when they do not
know which NUI device is used.
Ideally, a VR-based service should offer a proper mental
model regardless of the NUI devices, but in reality, it is
difficult to navigate the service without knowing which NUI
device is used. Some participants said that the inherent
affordance was good, but the others said that it was not
good. We think that the variations are caused by whether
they consider that they can intuitively understand the offered
affordances. We hypothesize that the inherent affordance for
Leap Motion was preferred to the affordance for MS Kinect
because the participants easily understood the visualization
of the affordance, whereas the movable region of their hands
was limited in Leap Motion case. This result may indicate
that some features of NUI devices affect the difficulty of
understanding particular types of affordances. Additionally,
most participants feel that the differences between the
augmented affordances for MS Kinect and Leap Motion are
small because the images and sentences in the augmented
affordance are easily understood for most participants. Thus,
the variations among individuals are small.
When comparing the inherent affordance with the
augmented one, many participants claimed the augmented
affordance is better. We analyzed the reason of it is that the
question in the interview asked only whether the affordance
was easy to understand or not. The inherent affordance uses
only objects’ shapes or positions, so in terms of human
abilities for understanding the world, words and images have
significant advantages because these are useful tools that can
be used for explaining the world. We consider that asking
“Did
you
think
this
affordance
is
suitable
for
the
guidance?”, does not mean not only the difficulty of
understanding but also the accident in understanding, and
the results may differ.
Finally, the participants that knew which NUI device
was used during the experiment preferred the inherent
affordances because they could construct proper mental
models before they found the affordances. Thus, they
preferred the inherent affordance that required a lower
recognition load. Additionally, the participants that did not
know which NUI device was used preferred the augmented
affordance because the affordance that helped them to easily
construct the mental model is desirable for them.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION
Recently, HMD and VR have become attractive options
to
develop
emerging
new entertainment
services
and
attractions. In particular, video games will use them to offer
more immersive game experiences. NUI devices allow the
games to be naturally interacted. However, there is no
sufficient discussion on how to offer affordances for
different NUI devices. This paper shows that each NUI
device requires a different affordance when the VR-based
services are used with HMDs.
In the next step, we will investigate a more systematic
design guideline for affordances based on the insights of the
current experiment. For example, as shown in [4], using
multiple types of affordances together may offer a better
result because of different effects. We will also attempt to
discuss how to use other NUI devices to expand our current
insights. In addition, we should consider other VR-based
services to deepen our study.
In the future, many types of NUI devices will be
available to develop advanced VR-based services. However,
if the developers must consider different affordances for
respective NUI devices, it may become troublesome.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Mazuryk and M. Gervautz, “Virtual Reality History,
Applications, Technology and Future”, TR-186-2-96-06,
Institute of Computer Graphics and Algorithms, Vienna,
University of Technology, 1996.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

[2]
A. Macaranas, A. Antle, and E. B. Riecke, “Three Strategies
for
Designing
Intuitive
Natural
User
Interfaces”,
In
Proceedings
of
Extended
Abstracts
of
the
Designing
Interactive Systems (ACM DIS) Conference, 2012.
[3]
D. Norman, “The Design of Everyday Things”, The MIT
Press; revised and expanded, 2014.
[4]
D.
Norman,
“Affordance
and
Design”,
http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/affordances_and.html,
accessed
09/29/2015.
[5]
K. Sabir, C. Stolte, B. Tabor, and S. I. O’Donoghue, “The
Molecular
Control
Toolkit:
Controlling
3D
Molecular
Graphics via Gesture and Voice”, In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Biological Data Visualization,
2013, pp. 49-56.
[6]
M. Sakamoto and T. Nakajima, “In Search of the Right
Abstraction for Designing Persuasive Affordance towards a
Flourished Society”, In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference
on
Design
and
Semantics
of
Form
and
Movement, 2015., pp. 251-260.
[7]
S. Shin, S. Kim, and J. Chang, “An Implementation of the
HMD-Enabled Interface and System Usability Test”, ISSSG
2014, 2014, pp. 183-193.
[8]
L. Terrenghi, D. Kirk, A. Sellen, and S. Izadi, “Affordances
for Manipulation
of Physical versus Digital Media on
Interactive
Surface”,
HCI
2007
Proceedings,
Novel
Navigation, 2007, pp. 1157-1166.
[9]
T. R. Corte, M. Marchal, G. Cirio, and A. Lecuyer
“Perceiving affordances in virtual reality: influence of person
and environmental properties in perception of standing on
virtual grounds”, Virtual Reality vol.17, no.1, Springer-
Verlag London, 2013, pp. 17-28.
[10] S. A. G. Wesveen, J. P. Djajadiningrat, and C. J. Overbeeke,
“Interaction Frogger: A Design Framework to Couple Action
and
Function
through
Feedback and
Feedforward”,
In
Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive
systems, 2004, pp. 177-184.
[11] X. Yang and L. Pan, “Navigating the Virtual Environment
Using Microsoft Kinect”, accessed 12/08/2015.
[12] http://www.oculus.com/, accessed 12/07/2015.
[13] http://share.oculus.com/, accessed 12/07/2015.
[14] http://weekly.ascii.jp/elem/000/000/278/278687,
accessed
12/07/2015.
[15] http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/Kinectforwindows/,
accessed 12/07/2015.
[16] https://www.leapmotion.com/, accessed 12/07/2015.
[17] http://www.xbox.com/ja-
JP/Marketplace/SplashPages/danceevolution,
accessed
12/07/2015.
[18] http://www.xbox.com/ja-JP/Marketplace/SplashPages/nike-
kinect-training, accessed 12/12/2015.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

