AiArt: Towards Artificial Intelligence Art 
 
Weiwen Chen 
           Mohammad Shidujaman 
                 Xuelin Tang 
 
Academy of Arts and Design                       Academy of Arts and Design                            Academy of Arts and Design 
Tsinghua University                                       Tsinghua University 
                      Tsinghua University 
Beijing, China                                                Beijing, China                                                  Beijing, China 
  Email: cww-lisa@outlook.com              Email: shangt15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn            Email: m18273126206@163.com 
 
Abstract— With the advance of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
applied profoundly into different areas of industries, a growing 
number of artists have shown great interest in exploring and 
discovering the potential possibilities of AI in art through 
embracing the latest techniques, such as neural networks and 
deep learning. As a result, a new kind of art named artificial 
intelligence art (AiArt) has emerged, which is a creative activity 
that combines artists with technical experts, intelligent robots, 
and audience by using AI as the core medium to create, express 
thoughts and emotions. The purpose of this article is to define 
the AiArt as an approach to distinguish it from other art forms 
and provide new inspiration and direction for art practitioners, 
theoreticians and scientists, which is related to one of the topics 
of the conference like “artificial intelligence injected artistic 
creation”. This paper first briefly reviews the recent 
development of AiArt and then attempts a discussion about the 
essence and characteristics of this new form of art through 
analyzing the disciplines behind the AI artworks. Finally, this 
paper draws the conclusion that the diversification of subjects, 
the intelligence of the media, and the modernization of 
expression are the nature of AiArt, which are the fundamental 
signs that distinguish AiArt from traditional arts, such as 
painting, sculpture, and digital art. In addition to the creative, 
historical, and aesthetic characteristics of general art, we 
suppose there are more four new features in AiArt: synesthesia 
experience, flowability and changeability, interaction and 
communication, and penetration and integration. 
Keywords-artificial intelligence (AI); art; artificial intelligence art 
(AiArt); AiArt essence; AiArt characteristics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
It is a truth universally acknowledged that art always has 
a 
long-standing, 
complex 
and 
continually 
evolving 
relationship with science and technology. As with advanced 
technologies, some artists will gradually abandon the previous 
tools they used to create artworks and attempt to utilize the 
newest inventions as an alternative medium, which has huge 
impacts on art that is produced, and the way art is perceived 
and apprehended by viewers [1]. Like the invention of 
pigments, the printing press, photography and computers, it is 
believed that AI is a new revolution of technology that will 
radically alter the way people make artworks and extend our 
creative potential and imagination [2]. 
AI is a domain of computer science whose purpose is to 
explore the limits and the methods of using digital computers 
to simulate [3][4], extend and expand functions carried out by 
the human brains, such as obtaining and dealing information 
through the senses, understanding natural languages and 
solving a complex problem [5]. Over the past 20 years, with 
the support of big data and cloud computing, AI has made 
breakthroughs in key technologies, such as machine learning, 
natural language processing, speech recognition and computer 
vision. In this context, more and more artists have keenly 
captured the applicational prospects of AI technology in the 
art field [6], and been eager to use AI media to carry out 
artistic creation without hesitation. Hence, the combination of 
AI and art has given birth to a new form of art called AiArt, 
which has its own unique artistic standards and features that 
need us to research and redefine. 
At the same time, theoretical researches on AiArt are far 
left behind its practices. It is rare that there are few types of 
research focusing on the ideological and theoretical level of 
AiArt, but most of the papers are written from the perspective 
of technique and application. In 1983, a digital artist named 
Stephen Wilson [7] put forward an anticipation of the future 
trend for computer art that developments in AI might make 
artworks created by artists learn from experience and interact 
with audiences in intelligent ways with human-like 
sensibilities, and stressed the importance of AI to visual artists 
who are encouraged to participate in this inevitable trend. 
Kaifu Li, an AI expert, published a monograph called 
Artificial Intelligence in 2017, which has discussed the 
relationship between AI and artistic creation [8]. He believed 
the artistic process based on AI algorithms is only the simple 
imitation of a particular creative style of artworks created by 
artists through learning a lot of human works as a database. 
Thus, there is no possibility that computers are able to 
approach or surpass human artists in the next few years. 
Liqing Tan, a famous artist, has given a bold interpretation and 
prediction for the development of AiArt in the future and put 
forward the concept of singularity art [9]. He has discussed the 
challenges that artists will face when it comes to strong AI and 
analyzed the nature and characteristics of singularity art and 
the new type of relationship between artists and the audience. 
He supposed that singularity art is a high combination of 
human intelligence and AI when science and technology reach 
the singularity. Singularity artists are no longer just creators 
and 
messengers, 
but 
participants 
and 
coordinators; 
experiencers are no longer just external watchers, but also 
participants and creators. There is no clear distinction between 
viewers and creators. Some scholars thought that AiArt is 
more intelligent and autonomous which make them separate 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

from traditional computer art and it can help to improve the 
imagination, creativity, perception that computer did not have 
before [10]. In short, theoretical researches on AiArt which is 
neither comprehensively nor deeply, has just begun, and 
requires vigorous improvement and development. 
It is generally thought that the practice of AI, which artists 
use as core medium to create a growing number of intelligent 
artworks has flourished, and the birth of enthralling artistic 
robots has shown the fabulous and outstanding ability of 
imitation [11]. However, what exactly is the AiArt? What is 
the nature and characteristics of AiArt? What are the 
principles and prospects of AiArt? Those are the questions 
that need to be answered urgently from the theoretical aspect 
with the gradual exploration into AiArt, otherwise, the AiArt 
practice will develop blindly. Therefore, this article aims to 
answer the question of what AiArt is theoretically, that is, to 
find out the essence of AiArt as new features that make it 
different from other forms of art. 
 In Section 2, we review briefly AI artworks with the 
development of science and technology. In Section 3, we 
discuss the essence of AiArt. In Section 4, we conclude the 
characteristics of AiArt. It would be a better understanding of 
this new type of art, the importance of combining computers 
and humans, and the new relationship between AI, artists, art 
robots, and audiences. 
II. 
A BRIEF REVIEW ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF AIART 
The AiArt has an ongoing and long-standing relationship 
with the advance of AI technology. The development of AiArt, 
therefore, has gone through three stages: germination stage, 
rising stage and popularization stage. Figure 1 explains the 
three stages of the development of AiArt.  
 
Figure 1.  Three stages of the development of AiArt 
A. The first stage 
From the 1960s to the end of the 20th century is the 
embryonic stage of AiArt, that is, the stage of computer art. 
AI is a domain of computer science, thus computer art is the 
forerunner and foundation of AiArt. At this stage, some 
foreign artists and art writers have begun to generate artworks 
enthusiastically with the aid of digital computer programs. 
They need to conceive the visual art patterns they want in their 
minds from the start, and then write the corresponding 
program code to achieve the desired renderings and drawings 
of mathematical features. At the beginning of 1960, Desmond 
Hen, a lecturer at the University of Manchester, used the bomb 
simulation computer program used in World War II to 
continuously manufacture the world's earliest automatic 
drawing machines named the Henry drawing machine [12]. In 
1963, the American computer magazine "Computer and 
Automation" organized the first computer image competition, 
which ignited the craze for computer image creation. Harold 
Cohen, an art professor at the University of California, San 
Diego, is one of the earliest explorers of computer art. He 
wrote the AARON computer program to create a series of 
regular images [13]. Figure 2 shows the process of creating 
artwork by AARON.  
 
Figure 2.  The process of creating artwork by AARON 
In 1965, the inventor Ray Kurzweil first composed a piano 
piece created by a computer that was able to recognize 
patterns of various musical compositions and use these 
patterns to create new melodies [14]. 
B. The second stage 
 From the end of the 20th century to the beginning of the 
21st century is the rising stage of AiArt, that is, the stage of 
interactive art. The landmark event of this stage was that, in 
1997, the "dark blue" robot developed by IBM defeated the 
world chess champion Kasparov in a competition. Since the 
1990s, with the invention of human-computer interaction 
technologies [15][16], AiArt has gradually separated from 
previous computer art. The AI system in this period can use 
sensors and other devices to obtain visual, auditory, and tactile 
sensations. It can achieve human-computer communication 
and interaction through receiving information from the 
surrounding environment (including people), and then use text, 
voice, motion and other information media and sensor systems 
to output feedback to users [17]. Artist Char Daives constantly 
explores the combination and interaction of art and computer 
graphics. In 1990, he created the first "Interior Body Series" 
art project based on 3D images. In 1993, he created Osmose 
(infiltration), which allows visitors to explore the mysteries of 
the world through operations such as breathing and balance in 
VR [18]. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

C. The third stage  
From the beginning of the 21st century to now is the stage 
of popularization of AiArt, that is, the stage of cognitive 
intelligence art. The landmark event of this stage is that 
Google-developed robot AlphaGo defeated the world Go 
champion ninth player Shishi Li by 4: 1 in 2016. Compared 
with traditional computer programs and systems, AI also has 
learning and analysis capabilities in addition to perception 
capabilities, which can adaptively adjust parameters and 
iteratively optimize models with changes in the environment, 
tasks, and input data [19]. This means that different inputs 
result in different effects. Over the past few years, approaches 
to so-called “Deep Learning”, one of the most popular 
algorithms in AI, have started to produce impressive results 
by simulating the neurons’ construction [20]. 
In 2015, Some researchers from the University of 
Tübingen combined realistic pictures with artist styles through 
using neutrally inspired algorithms [21]. In 2016, Deep Dream, 
a neural network program first developed by Google, was 
trained by inputting thousands of pictures for image 
classification and generating artistic images. The Generative 
Adversarial Networks (GAN) program was designed to make 
computers learn and imitate classic artworks in history. In 
2017, scientists created a kind of independently creative 
program Creative Adversarial Networks (CAN) program 
based on the original GAN, which makes the computer no 
longer simply emulate the activities of human beings, but 
create artworks by itself [22]. 
Artists also use cognitive intelligence to "learn" specific 
aesthetic rules by analyzing thousands of images, and then try 
to "create" new images that fit their aesthetic characteristics. 
Artist Harshit Agrawal of Bangalore based in India, input 
60,000 human anatomy pictures into the algorithm, created a 
series of abstract paintings like crimson blizzards, and finally 
produced works of art with unique aesthetics of AI. Figure 3 
shows “The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Algorithm” of Harshit 
Agrawal.  
 
Figure 3.  “The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Algorithm” of Harshit Agrawal
（resource：http://harshitagrawal.com/） 
This is also how the Portrait of Edmond Belamy, which 
was sold at a high price in 2018, was created. Three artists 
from France "feed" thousands of portrait paintings from 500 
years ago to the algorithm program, allowing it to 
"understand" the characteristics of past portrait paintings, so 
this seemingly weird artwork was created [23].   
III. 
THE ESSENCE OF AIART 
The so-called essence is the inherent and intrinsic nature 
of things. It is the built-in prescriptiveness of a thing that 
distinguishes it from each other, which makes the world 
diversified and sophisticated. AiArt is an artistic activity 
where artists, scientists, engineers, art robots and audiences 
use AI as the core medium to create, express thoughts and 
emotions, spreading truth, kindness and beauty. The 
diversification of subjects, the intelligence of the media, and 
the modernization of expression are the essence of AiArt, 
which are the fundamental signs that distinguish AiArt from 
traditional arts such as painting art, sculpture art, and new 
media art. Figure 4 explains the block diagram of the essence 
of AiArt.  
 
Figure 4.  Bolck diagram of the essence of the AiArt  
A. The Diversity of Creative Subjects 
In the traditional art creation process, the artist who holds 
the sole right to speak is the only creative subject. With the 
development of science and technology, the creative power 
held by the artist is gradually given to the audience and team 
members [24]. In the creation of AiArt, artists will be limited 
by the lack of knowledge of AI expertise and technology, 
which means that not only artists are able to actively cooperate 
with scientists who grasp the modern scientific knowledge, 
but that they should form alliances with AI experts to 
transform algorithms into artistic information. At the same 
time, with the advance of AI technology, artistic robots have 
emerged one after another such as painting robots, writing 
robots, music robots, dance robots, etc. [25]. They can learn, 
perceive the world like humans, and carry out artistic creation 
independently which makes them become one of the creative 
subjects [26]. In AiArt, the audience can also participate in the 
process of artistic creation and become one of the creators, as 
the British artist Roy Ascot has profoundly pointed out that art 
observers who are audiences are no longer just watch the 
artworks on the sidelines, or from the outside, but can also 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

participate in it and become the central figure in the creative 
process [27]. AiArt not only opens a window for the audience 
to understand the world, but also builds a door for the audience, 
and invites them to enter this interaction and transformation 
of the digital world. Therefore, the role of the audience in 
AiArt has undergone a fundamental change that they are no 
longer spectators in the original sense, but participants and 
creators. In short, in addition to artists, the creative subjects of 
AiArt also include scientists, AI experts who work with them 
and the audience. 
B. The Intelligence of the Creative Medium 
The form of artistic expression is determined by the feature 
of the media. As McLuhan said that the difference between 
old and new art is the difference in the use of media [28]. If 
the same content is expressed in different media, the effects 
will be extremely divergent. The media not only determines 
the way and form of artistic expression but also has a huge 
impact on the nature and aesthetics of artistic works, which 
indirectly leads to the changes in artistic thinking and 
concepts. Compared with traditional media, AI media has 
unparalleled superiority that it can break away from the 
constraints of time and space, communicate and interact with 
the audience in a humane and intelligent way, and integrate 
the virtual world and reality [29]. In addition to those 
advantages mentioned above, the intelligent media whose 
image is intuitive can not only convey a large amount of 
information faster than before but also have a wider range of 
transmission, which is easier to be accepted by the audience. 
At present, AI is widely used in artistic creation, whose core 
position is becoming increasingly apparent. Although digital 
AI media is invisible and intangible, it plays a core role in 
artistic creation that controls the overall context of artworks, 
reveals the ideological content of the work and replaces part 
of the artist’s labor. This is the value of AI as the core medium. 
C. Modernization of Meaning Expression 
In the past, traditional artworks are usually stored indoors, 
and the artist's thoughts and emotions are always hidden in the 
works, which make the meaning expression passive and 
indirect. In addition to this, the audience must always keep a 
certain distance to watch and experience. The meaning 
expression of AiArt, nevertheless, has special advantages. Not 
only can the creators' thoughts and emotions be directly 
expressed through computer vision, speech recognition and 
sensing technologies, but also break through the constraints of 
time and space to communicate with the audience through 
network and remote communication technologies; It also has 
aesthetic and practical value which could meet people's 
aesthetic and real needs, and integrates the concept of beauty 
and artistic style into products. Therefore, AiArt which has 
various functions like seeking truth, enlightening thinking, 
and recognizing objective laws can not only entertain people, 
cultivate sentiment, regulate emotions, but also treat mental 
illness in the future. 
IV. 
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF AIART  
AiArt is a form of art, therefore it has the general 
characteristics of traditional art, such as creativity, historicity, 
and aesthetics. However, interaction as a product of the 
combination of high technology and artistic creation in artistic 
development will be a new direction for AiArt. It has new 
features that are different from previous art forms. The new 
characteristics of AiArt are mainly four aspects: synesthesia 
experience, flowability and changeability, communication 
and interaction, and penetration and integration. Figure 5 
shows the block diagram of the characteristics of the AiArt. 
 
Figure 5.  Block diagram of the characteristics of the AiArt  
A.  Synesthesia Experience 
Traditional art is also experiential, but this experience is 
often single, either a perceptual experience, a visual 
experience, or an auditory experience that is low-level, 
superficial, incomplete, and passive. In this experience, the 
audience's thoughts and emotions about the artworks are 
incomprehensive, incomplete and superficial. However, the 
experience of AiArt is full-sense, comprehensive, and 
omnidirectional. It not only has the perceptual experience, 
visual experience, and auditory experience but also has a 
higher level of psychological experience and thinking 
experience of which the directivity and strong contagiousness 
can clearly, vividly and comprehensively express the creator's 
thoughts, emotions and will. 
B.  Flowability and Changeability 
Traditional arts, such as painting, sculpture, and 
photography are static. They only pay attention to the form 
and surface but ignore the inner and process of things. 
However, AiArt that has flowability and changeability is 
totally different. It reflects the changing process and 
movement of things. As the British artist, Roy Ascot said that 
the focus of art has moved from appearance to immanence, 
which is a dynamic process that moves from the externally 
visible form to the internal form [27]. AiArt is a kind of 
infinitely changing art, a flowing art. 
C. Interaction and Communication 
Interaction and communication are the main features that 
distinguish AiArt from other art forms. In the future of AiArt, 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

audience can not only interact verbally and physically with 
artworks, but also communicate spiritually with art creators 
and participate in the reconstruction of their artworks. This 
interaction can be audible or silent; it can be direct or indirect; 
it can be close or long distance. Artists and participants 
communicate with each other through the AI medium which 
transforms the audience from the past "viewers" into 
"participants". This not only means that the creators are able 
to get rid of the shackles of the spirit, but also makes viewers 
have a more open, inclusive, and more diverse interpretation 
of interactive art creation. The AiArt has broken the 
boundaries between art and life, the subject of creation and the 
subject of viewing, making Boyce's "social sculpture" ideal of 
"everyone can be an artist, and everyone is an artist" a reality. 
Interaction and communication are the new breakthroughs in 
artistic expression and the new realm of human aesthetic 
needs, which make AiArt have more prominent advantages 
and more vitality than traditional art forms.  
D. Penetration and Integration  
AiArt will be a highly comprehensive cross-media art that 
not only integrates various elements such as sound, light, 
video, image and text but also integrates images with 
exhibition space, virtual space and real space together. What's 
more important is that it bridges the gap between technology 
and art, breaks the boundaries between science and art, and 
opens up a new way for artists to express their thoughts and 
emotions. With the development of technology, the connected 
and non-linear integration of AiArt is becoming stronger and 
stronger, which may become an imperative methodology that 
could reconcile different or opposite beliefs, and bring 
different physical and non-physical entity together with 
philosophy, religion, and cultural customs. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
After the AI was mentioned at the Dartmouth conference 
in 1956, its technology and content have been changed 
continually with the progress of the times. Nowadays, it has 
been given a whole new meaning by big data and deep 
learning. Therefore, the potential of AI is once again be 
inspired. And art has been in the process of continuous 
integration with technology. The combination of AI and art 
has gone through several stages of development. Only in 
recent years has it slowly entered the audience's field of vision, 
and AiArt starts to show an explosive growth trend with 
various related art exhibitions and competitions followed. 
However, the theory of AiArt lags behind the practice of 
creation, and there is a lack of theoretical journals and 
discussions on the art of AI. This is still a relatively young 
research area. Based on this, we have identified the need for 
deeper understanding of how AI and art interact and how they 
affect and help each other by analyzing and sorting out the 
context of the development of AiArt.  
Here, we have presented the preliminary results of the 
literature review, showing in which directions research is 
being done. We have discussed the nature and characteristics 
of AiArt, which are the most basic and most important thing. 
It can define AiArt and distinguish it from other art forms 
through giving this brand-new art genre a label. We believed 
that the nature of AiArt is determined by three aspects, that is, 
a diverse creative subject, an intelligent creative medium, and 
a modern expression of meaning; on the other hand, we also 
summarized the basic characteristics of AiArt from now to the 
future: synesthesia experience, flowability and changeability, 
interaction and communication, penetration and integration. 
In the future, we hope we will make a progress by trial and 
error on theories, models, and tools to explore the potential 
creativity and innovation in AiArt development. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Torre, “Expectations versus Reality of Artificial 
Intelligence Using Art to Examine Ontological Issues,” 
Leonardo, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 31-35, 2017. 
[2] B. A. Y. Arcas. “Art in the Age of Machine Intelligence+,” Arts, 
vol.6, pp. 34-43, Sep. 2017, doi:10.3390/arts6040018. 
[3] A. Trifonova,  S. U. Ahmed, and L. Jaccheri, “SArt: Towards 
Innovation at the intersection of Software engineering and art,” 
In Information systems development, pp. 809-827, Boston, 
MA, 2009. 
[4] S. U. Ahmed, C. Camerano, L. Fortuna, M. Frasca, and L. 
Jaccheri, “Information technology and art: Concepts and state 
of the practice,”  In Handbook of Multimedia for Digital 
Entertainment and Arts, pp. 567-592, Boston, MA, 2009. 
[5] P. Kugel, “Artificial Intelligence and Visual Art,” Leonardo, 
vol. 14, pp. 137-139, 1981, doi:10.2307/1574409. 
[6] J. Meyer, L. Staples, S. Minneman, M. Naimark, and A. 
Glassner, “Artists and technologists working together (panel),” 
In Proceedings of the 11th annual ACM symposium on User 
interface software and technology, pp. 67-69, Nov. 1998. 
[7] S.  Wilson, “Computer Art: Artificial Intelligence and the Arts,” 
Leonardo, vol. 16, pp. 15-20, 1983, doi:10.2307/1575036. 
[8] K. F. Li and Y. G. Wang, Artificial Intelligence, Beijing: 
Culture Development Press, pp. 160-217, 2017. 
[9] L. Q. Tan, Singularity Art: How Technology Singularity Will 
Impact Art, Beijing: China Machine Press, pp. 35-72, 2018. 
[10] F. Tao, X. H. Zou, and D. Ren, “The Art of Human Intelligence 
and the Technology of Artificial Intelligence: Artificial 
Intelligence Visual Art Research,” International Conference on 
Intelligence Science (ICIS 2018), Springer, Cham, Oct. 2018, 
pp. 146–155, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01313-4_15. 
[11] P. Machado, J. Romero, A. Santos, A. Cardoso, and A. Pazos, 
“On the development of evolutionary artificial artists,” 
Computers & Graphics, Vol. 31, pp. 818-826, 2007. 
[12] Y. Li, “20 Years of Digital Art,” IT Manager World, vol. 495, 
pp. 68-71, Nov. 2018. 
[13] P. Cohen, “Harold Cohen and AARON,”  Ai Magazine, vol. 
37, pp. 63-66, Dec. 2016, doi:10.1609/aimag.v37i4.2695. 
[14] H. Barovic, “An Inventive Author,” Time International (South 
Pacific Edition), vol. 156, p. 116, Dec. 2000. 
[15] U. S. Ahmed, “Interaction and Interactivity: In the Context of 
Digital 
Interactive 
Art 
Installation,” 
In 
International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 241-257, 
July 2018. 
[16] U. S. Ahmed, “Developing software-dependent artwork: Artist 
and software developers' collaboration,” Leonardo, Vol.45, pp. 
92-93, 2012. 
[17] O. H. Cho and W. H. Lee, “Application of Reinforcement 
Learning System to Interactive Digital Art,” Journal of Internet 
Technology, 
Vol. 
14, 
pp. 
99-106, 
2013, 
doi: 
10.6138/JIT.2013.14.1.10. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

[18] C. Davies, “OSMOSE: Notes on being in Immersive virtual 
space,” Digital Creativity, vol. 9, pp. 65-74, 1998, doi: 
10.1080/14626269808567111. 
[19] M. Mateas, “Expressive AI: A Hybrid Art and Science 
Practice,” Leonardo, vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 147–153, 2001, doi: 
10.1162/002409401750184717. 
[20] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning, 
Boston: MIT Press, pp.24-108, 2016.  
[21] L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, and M. Bethge, “A Neural Algorithm 
of Artistic Style,” Journal of Vision, vol. 16, pp. 326, Sep. 2016, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1167/16.12.326 
[22] A. Elgammal, B. Liu, M. Elhoseiny, and M. Mazzone. “CAN: 
Creative Adversarial Networks Generating ‘Art’ by Learning 
About Styles and Deviating from Style Norms,” the Eighth 
International Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC), 
pp.1-22, 2017. 
[23] S. M. Du, “Can AI ever be truly creative?” New Scientist, vol. 
242, 
pp.38-41, 
Nov. 
2019, 
doi:10.1016/S0262-
4079(19)30840-1. 
[24] D. F. Albertini, “From artefactual to artificial intelligence—
meeting the needs of ART patients and practitioners,” Journal 
of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics, vol. 35, pp. 1543–1544, 
2018. 
[25] G. W. Smith and F. F. Leymarie, “The Machine as Artist: An 
Introduction,” 
Arts, 
vol.6, 
pp.28-35, 
April 
2017, 
doi:10.3390/arts6020005. 
[26] M. Shidujaman and H. Mi, “Which Country Are You from? A 
Cross-Cultural Study on Greeting Interaction Design for Social 
Robots, ” In International Conference on Cross-Cultural 
Design, pp. 362-374, Springer, Cham, July. 2018. 
[27] R. Ascott, The Future is Now: Art, Technology and 
Consciousness, Beijing: Jincheng Press, pp. 1–278, 2012. 
[28] H. M. Mcluhan, Understanding the Media: An Extension of the 
Man, Beijing: Commercial Press, pp. 46–326, 2000. 
[29] A. Lomas, “On Hybrid Creativity,” Arts, vol.7,pp.38-48, 2018, 
doi:10.3390/arts7030025.
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

