Using Grammar Induction to Discover the Structure
of Recurrent TV Programs
Bingqing Qu
University of Rennes 1
French National Audiovisual Institute
bqu@ina.fr
F´elicien Vallet, Jean Carrive
French National Audiovisual Institute
fvallet@ina.fr, jcarrive@ina.fr
Guillaume Gravier
CNRS
IRISA & INRIA Rennes
guillaume.gravier@irisa.fr
Abstract—Video structuring, in particular applied to TV
programs which have strong editing structures, mostly relies on
supervised approaches either to retrieve a known structure for
which a model has been obtained or to detect key elements from
which a known structure is inferred. In this paper, we propose
an unsupervised approach to recurrent TV program structuring,
exploiting the repetitiveness of key structural elements across
episodes of the same show. We cast the problem of structure
discovery as a grammatical inference problem and show that
a suited symbolic representation can be obtained by ﬁltering
generic events based on their reoccurring property. The method
follows three steps: i) generic event detection, ii) selection of events
relevant to the structure and iii) grammatical inference from a
symbolic representation. Experimental evaluation is performed
on three types of shows, viz., game shows, news and magazines,
demonstrating that grammatical inference can be used to discover
the structure of recurrent programs with very limited supervision.
Keywords—TV program structuring; symbolic representation;
structural grammar induction; unsupervised approach.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Large scale audiovisual archives offer an extremely abun-
dant digital TV program library for users and content
providers. For instance, the French National Audiovisual Insti-
tute [1], a repository of French radio and television audiovisual
archives, has more than ﬁve million hours of radio and
television programs stored. However, in order to be useful for
later usage such as Internet diffusion, browsing and sharing,
such large-scale archives need to be appropriately indexed. In
particular, structuring programs, i.e., obtaining a temporal seg-
mentation of programs into their basic constituents, is a crucial
step for high-quality indexing, enabling better description as
well as direct access to meaningful excerpts.
TV program structuring consists in automatically recov-
ering the structure of a program from the video material,
where structure refers to the way in which a program is
organized by editors. In the video, the underlying program
structure is often reﬂected in editing rules. Also, the structure
of a program is consistent across the different episodes. For
example, as described in [2], TV news programs usually
start with a brief outline of the reports announced by the
anchorperson. Headlines are followed by an alternation of
anchorperson’s announcement of the upcoming topic and news
reports. Most news programs end with interview segments,
weather forecasts or program trailers. Program structuring aims
at detecting the existence and the temporal boundaries, i.e., the
start and end frames, of such constituting elements designated
as the structural elements, or events, of the program. In the
framework of recurrent programs, i.e., of programs for which
several episodes are available, a structural element refers to a
video segment with a particular syntactic meaning and which
can be regularly found in different episodes.
In this paper, we report ongoing work investigating gram-
matical inference to discover the basic structural elements as
well as their temporal ordering, i.e., the temporal structure,
by analyzing a collection of episodes from the program with
minimal prior knowledge about the program genre and about
the type of structural elements which might be present. In
particular, we make very limited assumptions on what struc-
tural elements should be, as opposed to supervised approaches
which seek to retrieve structural elements previously deemed
as relevant for a type of program. To skirt the issue of not
knowing which structural elements to look for, we exploit the
repetitive nature of recurrent TV programs. A recurrent TV
program [3] is a program with multiple episodes which are
periodically broadcasted, e.g., daily, weekly. News, entertain-
ments, games and magazines are typical recurrent programs.
Most episodes, if not all, follow the same editorial structure:
structural elements appear in almost the same order with very
similar durations, separated by sequences which repeat across
episodes at more or less the same time instants. This last
property is successfully used in [3] to detect separators. We
adopt a similar idea, further exploiting separators to yield a
symbolic representation of episodes suited for grammatical
inference. By searching for recurrent elements throughout the
episodes and selecting the ones which are relevant to the
structure, one can infer the grammar of the show, i.e., the
time ordered sequence of structural elements that each episode
follows. Assuming such a grammar can be found, a model of
the structure of the show can then be established to process
additional episodes.
As a proof of concept, we focus here on grammar inference,
implementing a three steps approach based on the sole visual
modality. Firstly, a batch of broad scope event detection tools
are used to ﬁnd various types of events in all episodes.
Secondly, events detected are analyzed across episodes to
select the ones relevant to the structure of the program. Finally,
a symbolic representation is derived from the segmentation
given by structural element s and grammatical inference is
applied to yield a grammar of the program by analyzing the
symbolic time-ordered representation of each episode.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

reviews the existing techniques for TV program structuring.
Section III explains the overall method and details each step to-
wards grammar induction for unsupervised TV program struc-
turing. Experimental evaluations are reported in Section IV,
followed by conclusions and perspectives in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
TV program structuring has been extensively studied, al-
most exclusively relying on supervised approaches, which
can be classiﬁed in two categories, depending on whether a
particular program is targeted or not.
Previous work on TV program structuring mainly focused
on the case where information on the structure is available as
prior knowledge, thus enabling the use of supervised classi-
ﬁcation techniques. This is typically the case when targeting
news or sports, two domains which have received tremendous
attention (see, e.g., [2], [4], [5], [6]). Assuming the entire
structure of the program is relevant, models of the structure
can be learned from annotated data. Hidden Markov models,
in multiple variants, have been widely used to this end [7],
[8]. Event detection has also been used as an alternative to
structure modeling. In this case, models are designed for the
events of interest, e.g., goal or penalty in soccer, violent scenes
in movies, and parameters are estimated on annotated training
data.
Resorting to prior knowledge on the structure offers rela-
tively accurate structuring algorithms but is limited by nature
to speciﬁc types of programs, requiring training data for each
new type. As an alternative, research has targeted the detection
of typical structural elements, i.e., of events related to the
structure independently of the different program types. Such el-
ements are very diverse, such as anchorperson [9], [10], typical
scenes or separators [3], [11] as deﬁned by their repetitiveness.
Separators, which are short sequences separating the different
parts of a program, are of particular interest to unsupervised
structuring. However, program-independent structural elements
are insufﬁcient to yield a complete program structure.
Work reported in this paper attempts to make the best of
both worlds, i.e., being independent of the program type and
obtaining a complete model of the structure.
III.
STRUCTURE DISCOVERY WITH GRAMMATICAL
INFERENCE
The global objective we are targeting consists in inducing a
structural grammar for a recurrent TV program, taking advan-
tage of the existence of a collection of episodes of the same
program. To avoid any confusion, the term program refers to
the name of the show, thus being disconnected from video
material, while episode refers to an exemplar of the program.
A structural grammar is comprised of the set of structural
elements, representing the different elements which compose
each episode, and their temporal order. For example, report
and anchorperson’s announcement are structural elements for
a news program, on top of which a temporal model with
occurrence probabilities can be built to form a structural
grammar.
A natural idea to discover the temporal model is to use
grammatical inference on a symbolic representation of the
video material representing each episode. The main difﬁculty
Fig. 1: General architecture of the three steps approach for
the grammatical inference of a program structure.
therefore lies in obtaining a symbolic representation of the
episodes in the absence of prior knowledge on what structural
elements are to be considered. To solve this problem, we
take advantage of the redundancy of information across all
episodes to obtain symbols in an almost unsupervised manner.
Redundancy appears in the structural elements, as well as
in the so-called separators which recurrently occur between
structural elements. The key idea of our method is therefore to
analyze recurrent separators to in turn ﬁnd recurrent elements
which are deemed structural elements and which can be used
for grammatical inference.
Targeting this general idea, we propose a three steps
approach as illustrated in Figure 1. In the ﬁrst step, a set of
broad scope event detectors are used to ﬁnd events within each
episode, which might be of interest as a potential structural
element or as a potential separator. In the second step, we
assess the set of events detected along two lines. Density
estimation is used to assess repeatability, i.e., to ﬁnd events
which recurrently occur at about the same instant in each
episode. Role recognition is further used to assign properties
to structural elements so as to help in deriving a symbolic
representation. Finally, we induce the structural grammar of
the program by leveraging multiple sequence alignment tech-
niques.
One of the beneﬁts of this approach is the very limited
supervision that is required, thus making it possible to virtually
apply the method on any collection quite straightforwardly. In
particular, no data annotation is required at any step of the
process. Apart from the selection of episodes, minimal prior
knowledge on the program genre is required to select relevant
event detectors in the ﬁrst step and, in the second step, to
deduct a meaningful symbolic representation from the set of
structural elements found.
We detail in turn each of the three steps.
A. Detection of broad scope events
Ideally, a large number of event detectors should be used,
which are generic enough to apply to a large number of shows.
This is however not very practical because of implementation
and run time issues. A number of key event detectors must
therefore be selected based on a trade-off between the type
of programs to process, the complexity at run time and, to a
lesser extent, the implementation complexity. In this work, ﬁve
event detectors were used as described below. Note that only
minimal knowledge on the type of programs to process was
considered, resulting in general purpose detectors, which were
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Fig. 2: Flowchart for person clustering
applied to all types of programs in evaluation.
Shot detector. Shots are basic units for program structure
which are required for structuring purposes. Shot boundaries
were detected using the implementation of J. Mathe et al. [12]
which seeks for hard cuts.
Dissolve detector. Gradual transitions are also common in TV
programs, which usually signal the start and end of a scene.
We focused on dissolve transitions, the most common gradual
transition. Dissolve were detected using an extension of [13]
in which the dissolve feature description was improved using
double chromatic difference.
Monochrome image detector. Monochrome images—mostly
white or black—are usually added to the TV streams at
edition time to separate the different parts of a program.
Detecting monochrome images is therefore an obvious choice
for structure discovery in TV programs, in particular due to
the simplicity of implementation. In this work, monochrome
images are detected by simply verifying the histogram variance
of the images.
Person clustering. Persons are essential features for almost
any type of TV program. Especially, in many programs, a
few number of key persons appear and are strong structure
cues, such as the anchorperson in news shows or the host
in game shows. TV show conductors usually appear as the
most dominant face in a program, i.e., the one which appears
most. Dominant person is usually implemented using person
clustering based on faces and clothing. Taking news as an ex-
ample, the anchorpersons clothes are usually carefully chosen
so as to be easily distinguishable from guests (and one from
another in case of multiple anchors) and obviously do not
change within an episode. Person clustering was implemented
using Viola and Jones face detection [14] and dress bounding
box determination [15]. A key frame of each shot with a face
is ﬁrstly otained. For each key frame, face features [16] and
clothing histograms are then used in a two-step clustering algo-
rithm, shown in Figure 2, based on K-means and hierarchical
clustering to obtain person clusters.
Shot reverse shot detector. Shot reverse shot is a classical
video technique depicting shots alternating between two char-
acters facing one another, usually engaged in some face to
face interaction. In the case of TV programs, we assume that
a segment of shot reverse shot represents a dialog and that
such interaction between two characters are relevant to the
structure. Based on the results of person clustering, we detect
shot reverse shot segments by a straightforward analysis of the
cluster interlacing.
B. Determination of structural elements
Events detected in the ﬁrst step are obviously not all
relevant to the structure of a program and cannot be used
as is to obtain a symbolic representation of episodes. For
instance, monochrome images appear between two parts of
a game show as a separator, i.e., a structural element, but
can also be found at other places such as in a night scene.
The second step therefore consists in selecting valid structural
elements from which the symbolic representation is obtained.
Selection of structural events implements two complementary
strategies. On the one hand, role recognition is used to further
characterize the outcome of person clustering and identify
important persons. On the other hand, the temporal distribution
of the events across episodes is analyzed to ﬁnd elements
which repeat with relative temporal stability.
Role recognition. Role recognition enables determining the
role of each person cluster resulting from face and clothing
clustering. We mostly focus here on the conductor, or anchor,
role which is clearly a strong cue with respect to structure.
The ﬁrst characteristic of the anchor is that he/she appears
frequently, at more or less regular intervals and at key places,
e.g., start and end of the each episode.
We used similar features as those deﬁned in [17] to
characterize a cluster, viz.: total duration of appearance (TFL);
total number of distinct appearances, i.e., number of non
consecutive clusters (TFT); duration of the longest segment
in which the person appears (LFL); time range between the
ﬁrst and last occurrence (FR); duration in which the speaker
is engaged in a dialog (DPT). Given such features, a dominant
person is assumed to ideally have the following properties:
he/she is the one that appears most (highest TFL); he/she is
ﬁlmed the most frequently (highest TFT); he/she participates
the most frequently in dialogs (highest DPT); his/her range
of appearance (FR) and longest time of appearance (LFL)
should not be the lowest. To account for varying episodes and
programs lengths, all ﬁve features are scaled in [0, 1]. Decision
on the dominant person is taken based on the sum of the ﬁve
normalized features, the cluster for which the sum is maximal
being identiﬁed as the dominant person.
Density ﬁltering. In addition to role recognition, we exploit
the property of repeatability across episodes to ﬁlter out events
which occasionally appear in some episodes and which are
therefore not relevant for the global structure of the program.
Since different episodes of a recurrent program share a com-
mon temporal structure and have almost identical structural
elements, the latter should appear in the vast majority of
episodes and at about the same time.
Identifying elements which appear frequently at roughly
the same time in all episodes is performed using temporal
density analysis with a kernel function. For each type of event,
we project onto the temporal axis the occurrences across all
episodes of the event considered, counting the number of
occurrences. To smooth out limited time variations, a kernel
density estimation is used based on the following function
f(x; h) =
1
nhd
n
X
i=1
K(x − xi
h
) ,
(1)
where f(x; h) is the estimated density function, h the band-
width and K() is the kernel. A Gaussian kernel was used with
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Fig. 3: Example of temporal density ﬁltering to select
structural events corresponding to separators (from [3])
optimal bandwidth automatically chosen [18]. Peaks in the
density estimation identify segments with high structural power
due to their repetitiveness across episodes. Structural elements
are selected based on thresholding of the density function to
retain only relevant separators. This process is illustrated in
Figure 3, where events in black are removed while the ones in
gray are retained because of their high temporal concentration
C. Structural Grammar Induction
As a result of structural element determination, each
episode can be represented as a time-ordered sequence of
symbols with one symbol per structural element. Selecting and
identifying valid structural elements for a program requires
semantic interpretation of the structural elements detected via
role recognition and temporal density ﬁltering. This identiﬁ-
cation in turn requires minimal prior knowledge. For instance,
a structural element corresponding to a sequence of white
frames is a separator, while a long duration shot containing
the dominant person at the beginning of the program is the
conductor’s opening.
Based on simple rules to identify valid structural ele-
ments, each episode is represented as a symbolic sequence
depicting the succession of valid structural elements. The
symbolic sequences corresponding to the different episodes of
a program are usually similar due to the temporal stability of
recurrent TV program structure. However, slight differences
still exist between different episodes. Inferring a grammar
from such sequences can be done by discovering the com-
mon patterns across symbolic sequences, a problem which is
straightforwardly handled via grammatical inference. We adopt
multiple sequence alignment techniques which can align the
symbolic sequences in the way that alphabet symbols, i.e.,
valid structural elements, in a given position are homologous,
superposable or play a common functional role. Many multiple
sequence alignment tools have been developed, e.g., T-Coffee,
MAFFT and ClustalW. We adopt in this work the ClustalW
algorithm [19], which is one of the most widely used sequential
tools for multiple sequence alignment due to its high accuracy,
effectiveness and free availability [20]. While more complex
grammatical inference techniques exist, based on regular ex-
pressions or context free grammars [21], we limited ourselves
to multiple sequence alignment to study the meaningfulness of
symbolic representations derived in an unsupervised manner.
The process of grammar induction from a symbolic rep-
resentation is illustrated in Figure 4 with three episodes.
Symbols, i.e., SGCDYE, represent the valid structural elements
Fig. 4: Illustration of structural grammar induction from
three episodes with symbols SGCDYE.
TABLE I: Description of the data used for evaluation
Dataset
Date
Episodes
Type
Average duration
GAME
Sep. - Dec. 1991
12
Game
37.4 m
NEWS
Jan. - Dec. 2007
12
TV news
36.9 m
MAG
Jan. - Jul. 1997
12
Magazine
56.2 m
that were identiﬁed. A graphical representation of the resulting
grammar was obtained using WebLogo [22]. A stack of
symbols is used to illustrate each position in the grammar:
The height of objects within the stack indicates the relative
frequency of each symbol while the stack width is proportional
to the fraction of valid symbols in that position.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Experiments are conducted on three recurrent programs
from different types, viz., game, news and magazine. Eval-
uation considers in turn the three steps of our method for
structural grammar inference. We ﬁrst measure performance of
the event detectors considered. Second, we evaluate structural
element determination. Finally, we discuss the grammar in-
ferred for each of the three programs to assess their relevance.
A. Data set description
Three different programs, with 12 episodes each, are
used for inference and evaluation, as given in Table I. Two
programs, Que le meilleur gagne (GAME) and 20h News
(NEWS), were taken with episodes selected over a large
time period spanning 1991 to 2007. Que le meilleur gagne
is a game show with four parts divided by separators. The
program, leaded by a conductor, mainly contains interview
scenes and questions/answers scenes with full text segments.
The daily news show follows a standard pattern for such shows.
The third program Thalassa (MAG) is a magazine about sea
stories, where episodes were taken over a single year (1997).
A conductor leads the show which is composed of reports
and discussions. While the same conductor appears in all the
episodes of GAME, two distinct conductors can be found both
for NEWS and MAG.
B. Performance of broad scope detectors
Initial general purpose detectors are a key to subsequent
steps and must therefore exhibit an acceptable level of accu-
racy. We report here evaluation of dissolve transition detection
and person clustering. Shot detection and monochrome image
detection are based on standard techniques which yield very
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE II: Performance of dissolve transition and person
clustering
Dataset
Dissolve
Person
Prec.
Rec.
F
Purity
GAME
0.62
0.79
0.70
72.7%
NEWS
0.64
0.81
0.71
49.5%
MAGS
0.52
0.95
0.67
69.6%
high accuracy. Performance for shot reverse shot detection is
directly linked to performance of person clustering.
Results are presented in Table II. Dissolve detection is
evaluated in terms of recall and precision. Detectors perform
similarly for the three programs with correct recall and preci-
sion rates. Person clustering is evaluated by means of cluster
purity. While correct purity values are obtained for GAME
and MAGS, purity is rather low on NEWS. This is likely
due to the fact that a fairly large number of persons appear
in news programs and that scenes of reports in news are
very variable with non discriminative clothing. Nevertheless,
clustering results were found reliable enough for structure
inference.
C. Structural elements detection
Selection of structural elements from the output of event
detectors is evaluated both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Regarding temporal density ﬁltering to select recurrent
events, we observed for GAME that peaks in the density
coincide for monochrome frames and for dissolve transitions,
with a relatively consistent number of such regions, i.e., 3 or
4 per episode. For NEWS, monochrome images were found
to be often around the same temporal positions. Additionally,
two short sequences of monochrome images are found in
each episode, resp. at the beginning and end of the episode.
Positions of events and separators are illustrated in Figure 5.
Based on their characteristics, such elements are considered
as separators on both programs. For evaluation purposes, a
separator is considered as correctly detected when overlapping
with a reference separator as annotated in the data. Precision
and recall in GAME are resp. 94 % and 67 %. In NEWS, where
we have a stronger structure, a recall of 96 % is achieved with
similar precision as in GAME.
Dominant person detection succeeded in 83 % of the
episodes for GAME, 92 % for NEWS and 75 % for MAG.
NEWS are obviously easier with clear features identifying
the anchorperson as the dominant speaker: fewer gestures,
large area showing clothing, neutral and still facial expression,
etc. In spite of relatively low cluster purity, dominant person
detection is accurate. At the other end of the spectrum, MAG
is a difﬁcult content with long interviews for which occurrence
time of the interviewee is almost as long as that of the anchor.
Results in grammatical inference below indicate that limited
accuracy in MAG did not hurt structure inference, even in spite
of the limited number of episodes considered.
Moreover, identifying monologues of the dominant person
turned out to be fairly easy based on the duration of the shots
containing the dominant person. Dialog segments were also
accurately determined combining person clustering and shot
reverse shot detection, with performance directly proportional
to the purity of the person clusters.
(a) GAME
(b) NEWS
Fig. 5: Examples of separators for ﬁve different episodes of
GAME and NEWS, where “+” in green (resp. blue)
represents monochrome images (resp. dissolve) and “o”
represents separators
D. Structural grammar inference
Results for grammar induction are illustrated in Figure 6
for the three programs. For NEWS, separators, denoted as
S, are ﬁrst determined. The segment between two separators,
accounting for most time of the program, is considered as news
content, denoted as N. The grammar of NEWS is therefore
that of an introduction, followed by news reports, followed
by a conclusion, a grammar shared by all shows. For MAG,
selected symbols are based on dominant person’s monologue
and dialogs segments, yielding a simple deterministic gram-
mar. A continuous segment with long duration, denoted N, is
considered as a report while A and D represent anchorperson’s
monologue and dialogs respectively. For GAME, separators,
dominant person (i.e., monologues of the conductor) and
dialogs are the valid structural elements, resp. denoted S, D
and A. The grammar inferred is more complex than for NEWS
and MAG, reﬂecting the greater variability across shows. The
main syntax is as follows: The game starts with an introduction
(separator) followed by a dialog (between the anchor and the
participants). We then have an alternating pattern of anchor
(dominant person) and game phases (appearing as separator).
With very limited supervision, i.e., basic prior knowledge
about TV program structure, possible structure is yielded for
each program. All the identiﬁed structural elements in this on-
going work are the most common ones, so little bias caused
by prior knowledge inﬂuences the ﬁnal structural grammars.
Obviously, all three grammars are concise because of the
simple symbolic representation that was adopted. Yet, each
one represents the structure of the corresponding program, thus
demonstrating that grammar inference can efﬁciently handle
structure inference in videos.Results on the game program
interestingly prove that non deterministic video structures can
be discovered. This last result opens the door to inferring
structures at a ﬁner grain. Considering symbolic description
at a ﬁner granularity will increase grammar diversity and
complexity, which we believe can be handled via probabilistic
grammar inference. Taking NEWS as an example, the news
content, coarsely denoted N, can be divided into a repeating
alternating an anchor’s introduction and a report. This can be
reﬂected in a grammar, either using multiple sequence align-
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

(a) Grammar of NEWS
(b) Grammar of MAG
(c) Grammar of GAME
Fig. 6: Grammars induced for resp. NEWS, MAG and GAME. See text for details.
ment as considered here (assuming the number of reports is
comparable across news episodes) or relying on more complex
grammatical inference techniques with better factoring and
generalization capabilities.
V.
CONCLUSION
Preliminary work described in this paper shows how a
symbolic representation suited for grammatical inference can
be obtained from a collection of episodes of the same pro-
gram, with almost no supervision and no speciﬁc training
data. Starting from a set of general purpose event detectors,
structural elements are derived with minimal prior knowledge
by exploiting role recognition and recurrence across episodes.
Grammatical inference ﬁnally brings a ﬁnal layer of abstraction
by evidentiating the overall structure of the program from the
joint analysis of multiple episodes. Experimental evaluation
on three types of programs shows that coarse yet relevant
structures can be discovered from examples, even for non
deterministic programs structures.
Results reported here mostly hint that unsupervised video
structuring in recurrent collections using grammatical infer-
ence is viable and deserves further attention. The framework
proposed in this paper as a proof of concept remains general
and can be extended in a number of directions. Obviously,
obtaining a symbolic description at a ﬁner grain with limited
supervision has yet to be achieved. Increasing the number of
general purpose detectors and targeting multiple modalities
seems like the most natural path to follow. But adding detectors
will challenge the determination of structural elements and the
grammar induction step, requiring more elaborate grammars to
be considered.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge the help of Franc¸ois
Coste and Vincent Claveau, IRISA, for their advise. They in
particular have been very useful in guiding the choices made
regarding grammar induction.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.institut-national-audiovisuel.fr/en/home.
[2]
H. Zhang, Y. Gong, S. W. Smoliar, and S. Y. Tan, “Automatic parsing of
news video,” in Multimedia Computing and Systems, 1994., Proceedings
of the International Conference on.
IEEE, 1994.
[3]
A. E. Abduraman, S.-A. Berrani, and B. Merialdo, “An unsupervised
approach for recurrent tv program structuring,” in of the European
Interactive TV Conference, 2011.
[4]
M. Bertini, A. Del Bimbo, and P. Pala, “Content-based indexing and
retrieval of tv news,” Pattern Recognition Letters, 2001.
[5]
H. Li, J. Tang, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, and S. Lin, “Automatic detection and
analysis of player action in moving background sports video sequences,”
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on, 2010.
[6]
L.-Y. Duan, M. Xu, Q. Tian, C.-S. Xu, and J. S. Jin, “A uniﬁed
framework for semantic shot classiﬁcation in sports video,” Multimedia,
IEEE Transactions on, 2005.
[7]
L. Xie, P. Xu, S.-F. Chang, A. Divakaran, and H. Sun, “Structure
analysis of soccer video with domain knowledge and hidden markov
models,” Pattern Recognition Letters, 2004.
[8]
E. Kijak, G. Gravier, L. Oisel, and P. Gros, “Audiovisual integration for
tennis broadcast structuring,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, 2006.
[9]
A. Hanjalic, R. Lagensijk, and J. Biemond, “Template-based detection
of anchorperson shots in news programs,” in Image Processing, 1998.
ICIP 98. Proceedings. 1998 International Conference on. IEEE, 1998.
[10]
X. Gao and X. Tang, “Unsupervised video-shot segmentation and
model-free anchorperson detection for news video story parsing,” Cir-
cuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on, 2002.
[11]
A. E. Abduraman, S.-A. Berrani, and B. Merialdo, “Audio/visual
recurrences and decision trees for unsupervised tv program structuring,”
in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computer Vision
Theory and Applications (VISAPP), 2013.
[12]
http://johmathe.name/shotdetect.html.
[13]
A. Mittal, L.-F. Cheong, and L. T. Sing, “Robust identiﬁcation of
gradual shot-transition types,” in Image Processing. 2002. Proceedings.
2002 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2002.
[14]
P. Viola and M. Jones, “Robust real-time object detection,” International
Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 4, 2001.
[15]
G. Jaffr´e, P. Joly et al., “Costume: A new feature for automatic video
content indexing,” in Proceedings of RIAO.
Citeseer, 2004.
[16]
J. Sivic, M. Everingham, and A. Zisserman, “who are you?-learning
person speciﬁc classiﬁers from video,” in Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2009.
[17]
D. B. Jayagopi, S. Ba, J.-M. Odobez, and D. Gatica-Perez, “Predicting
two facets of social verticality in meetings from ﬁve-minute time slices
and nonverbal cues,” in Proceedings of the 10th international conference
on Multimodal interfaces.
ACM, 2008.
[18]
Z. Botev, J. Grotowski, and D. Kroese, “Kernel density estimation via
diffusion,” The Annals of Statistics, 2010.
[19]
J. D. Thompson, D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson, “Clustal w: improving
the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-speciﬁc gap penalties and weight matrix
choice,” Nucleic acids research, 1994.
[20]
M. Larkin, G. Blackshields, N. Brown, R. Chenna, P. A. McGettigan,
H. McWilliam, F. Valentin, I. M. Wallace, A. Wilm, R. Lopez et al.,
“Clustal w and clustal x version 2.0,” Bioinformatics, 2007.
[21]
Y. Sakakibara, “Efﬁcient learning of context-free grammars from posi-
tive structural examples,” Information and Computation, 1992.
[22]
G. E. Crooks, G. Hon, J.-M. Chandonia, and S. E. Brenner, “Weblogo:
a sequence logo generator,” Genome research, 2004.
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

