Video Watermarking Based on Interactive Detection of Feature Regions 
 
Asma Kerbiche, Saoussen Ben Jabra, Ezzeddine Zagrouba 
Lab. RIADI - Team of Research SIIVA 
Higher Institute of Computer Science  
University Tunis El Manar 
Ariana, Tunisia 
asma.kerbiche@gmail.com  saoussen.bj@laposte.net  
ezzeddine.zagrouba@fsm.rnu.tn  
Vincent Charvillat  
Lab. IRIT - Team of Research VORTEX  
ENSEEIHT - INP TOULOUSE  
University of Toulouse 
Toulouse, France 
vincent.charvillat@enseeiht.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Video watermarking is very important in many 
areas of activity and especially in multimedia applications. 
Therefore, security of video stream has recently become a 
major concern and has attracted more and more attention in 
both the research and industrial domains. In this perspective, 
several video watermarking approaches are proposed but, 
based on our knowledge, there is no method which verified the 
compromise between invisibility and robustness against all 
usual attacks. In our previous work, we proposed a new video 
watermarking approach based on feature region generated 
from mosaic frame and multi-frequential embedding. This 
approach allowed obtaining a good invisibility and robustness 
against the maximum of usual attacks. In our future work, we 
propose to optimize the choice of the region of interest by using 
crowdsourcing technique. This last one is an emerging field of 
knowledge management that involves analyzing the behavior 
of users when they view a video to automatically deduct the 
regions of interest. 
Keywords-watermarking; 
crowdsourcing; 
robustness; 
invisibility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The fast development of the Internet in recent years has 
eased the process of coping, transmitting, and distributing 
digital data such as image, 3D meshes and video. In fact, the 
recent decade has seen the emergence of video-based 
application technologies, such as wireless video, video 
conferencing, and videophones. As with other types of 
multimedia data, it was necessary to find new techniques for 
visualization, compression, indexing, and also the security of 
this type of media to enable the protection of rights, 
authentication and data integrity during transfer on a given 
communication channel. Therefore, the need for protection 
from piracy and illegal use rises more and more. The best 
technique to protect digital video from this manipulation is 
watermarking. It consists of embedding a signature into data 
and to try to detect it after any manipulation done on marked 
data. Usually, signature must be imperceptible and should 
resist to malicious attacks which try to destroy or to remove 
it. Several studies have been made to develop robust and 
invisible video watermarking methods [18]. These methods 
differ mainly in the insertion area [27] (spatial or frequency) 
and the type of the treated stream [26] (compressed or 
uncompressed). To improve the invisibility and the 
robustness of the watermark, some methods are based on the 
choice of region of interest where the embedding will be 
done. This choice can be based on many tests applied on 
different feature regions [17] or using a specific technique 
[13]. In our work, we propose to use crowdsourcing 
technique that involves analyzing the behavior of users when 
they view a video to automatically deduct the regions of 
interest. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
in Section 2, video watermarking and crowdsourcing 
technique are presented while Section 3 describes the 
proposed watermarking method based on interactive 
detection of regions of interest using crowdsourcing 
technique. Finally, conclusion is drawn in Section 4. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Watermarking 
Several techniques of watermarking video have been 
proposed in the literature. We chose to classify them 
according to two criteria. The first one is the original video 
format which can be compressed or uncompressed.  In fact, 
watermarking can be applied to compressed stream where 
the insertion is done during the compression process or after 
compression [1],[2],[3]. For the uncompressed video, four 
classes of embedding methods can be applied (some of them 
can also be used on compressed video). The first class is 
derived from frame by frame watermarking that consider 
video as a succession of images and consists of applying still 
images watermarking algorithms [4],[5]. The second one is 
the spatio-temporal schemes where video is defined as a 3D 
signal considering the temporal dimension in video 
sequences. These schemes decompose the video by 
performing spatial 2D transform on individual frames 
followed by 1D transform in the temporal domain [6],[7],[8]. 
The third class is the temporal schemes that insert the 
signature in the temporal domain by modifying only the low 
spatial frequencies [9],[10],[11]. Finally, the last class is 
based on mosaic frame generated from the original video 
[12],[13]. This last one selects an interesting area where the 
mark should be embedded. In fact, mosaïcing allows the 
insertion of the same mark into the same pixels which 
represent the same physical point.  
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE I.  
ADVANTAGES AND INCONVENIENCES OF EACH CLASS 
ACCORDING TO VIDEO FORMAT 
Methods 
Advantages 
Inconveniences 
Invisibility 
Frame by 
frame 
watermarking 
Minimum 
insertion 
time 
and 
Avoids 
compression 
and 
decompression 
steps which can 
degrade 
the 
images of the 
sequence. 
May 
be 
ineffective 
against 
a 
MPEG-4 
compression 
that will destroy 
the 
inserted 
signature. 
Possibility 
of 
artifacts 
+ 
Spatio-
temporal 
schemes 
Robustness 
against 
temporal 
changes 
Unblinded 
detection 
and 
low 
insertion 
capacity 
++ 
Temporal 
Schemes 
The mark value 
is constant for a 
given 
image, 
but vary from 
one image to 
another. 
Fragile 
watermark 
against 
temporal 
changes. 
+ 
Compressed 
Video 
If the encoding 
is 
complex 
detection is not. 
Fragile 
watermark 
against motion 
estimation and 
may 
disappear 
at re-coding. 
++ 
Mosaic 
Schemes 
Robust against 
MPEG-4 
compression, 
collusion 
attacks 
and 
deleting images 
Not 
robust 
against MPEG-
2 compression. 
++ 
 
The second criterion is embedding domain where 
signature can be inserted directly on video by modifying its 
pixels [14] or by modifying some video transformations like 
DCT 
(Discrete 
Cosine 
Transform), 
DWT 
(Discrete Wavelet Transform) and SVD transform (Singular 
Value Decomposition) [15],[16]. The scheme disperses the 
watermark in the spatial domain of the video frame, hence 
making it very difficult to remove the embedded watermark. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF EMBEDDING DOMAIN CLASSES 
 
Methods 
Advantages 
Invisibility 
Frequency 
Domain 
DCT 
The most robust 
against 
compression 
++ 
DWT 
The most robust 
against 
compression 
++ 
SVD 
Robust against 
compression, 
rotation, 
noise 
and 
deleting 
frames 
++ 
Spatial 
Domain 
 
LSB 
 
Not 
robuste 
against 
collusion, 
compression, 
noise... 
+ 
Correlation-
Based 
techniques 
 
In our previous work, after a comparative study of these 
classes [17], we proposed a new watermarking schema based 
on mosaic and multi-frequentiel embedding algorithm using 
wavelet, DCT and SVD transforms. In fact, it consists to 
generate mosaic from original video. Then, the region where 
the objects move is selected to be marked. Finally, signature 
is inserted using wavelet, DCT and SVD transforms. This 
choice allows obtaining robustness against various types of 
attacks, such as geometric transformations (rotation, 
zooming), cropping vertices, MPEG4 part X (h.264 
Advanced Video Coding (AVC)) compression, noise, frame 
suppression and collusion.  
B. Crowdsourcing 
With the sweeping progress of Web 2.0 technologies and 
capabilities, many socio-technical systems have attracted 
attention 
from 
both 
practitioners 
and 
scholars. 
Crowdsourcing is a new emerging Web 2.0 based 
phenomenon and becomes a recognized sourcing mechanism 
for problem solving in organizations and societies by 
outsourcing problems to an undefined entity or the „crowd‟. 
For that, crowdsourcing research has become a dynamic and 
vibrant research area, and has been steadily growing over the 
years. 
The term crowdsourcing was first coined by Howe, in a 
Wired Magazine article in June 2006 [19]: “Simply defined, 
crowdsourcing represents the act of a company or institution 
taking a function once performed by employees and 
outsourcing it to an undefined (and generally large) network 
of people in the form of an open call. This can take the form 
of 
peer-production 
(when 
the 
job 
is 
performed 
collaboratively), but is also often undertaken by sole 
individuals. The crucial prerequisite is the use of the open 
call format and the large network of potential laborers”. 
In essence, crowdsourcing is based on a simple, but 
powerful, concept: virtually everyone has a potential to plug 
in valuable information [20]. It seeks to mobilize 
competence and expertise, which are distributed among the 
crowd and has different forms [21]. 
Crowdsourcing is not exclusive for business purposes. In 
fact, many non-profit organizations have adopted it as an 
effective model for problem-solving [22],[23]. In addition to 
having gained great attention and interest from the industry, 
crowdsourcing has also gained attention from the academic 
community. 
Indeed, 
several 
recent 
studies 
are 
based 
on 
crowdsourcing technique. Xie et al. [24] propose new 
method to detect user interest maps and extract user attention 
objects from the image browsing log using crowdsourcing 
where ten subjects were selected to take part in this study, 
and the criterion for their selection was that they should be 
very familiar with the use of computers and cell phones 
before the study. A smart image viewer was then developed 
based on user interest analysis and a second experiment was 
carried out to study how users behave with such a viewer. 
This approach is more efficient than image-analysis based 
methods and can better represent users‟ actual interest. Based 
on the fact that the viewing experience on the mobile devices 
can be improved by determining important and interesting 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

regions within the video (regions of interest, or ROIs) and 
displaying only the ROIs to the viewer, Carlier et al [25] 
propose an alternative paradigm to infer ROIs from a video 
by crowdsourcing from a large number of users through their 
implicit viewing behavior using a zoom and pan interface, 
and infer the ROIs from their collective wisdom. A 
retargeted video, consisting of relevant shots determined 
from historical users‟ behavior, can be automatically 
generated and replayed to subsequent users who would 
prefer a less interactive viewing experience. A user study 
with 48 participants shows that this automatically retargeted 
video is of comparable quality to one handcrafted by an 
expert user. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
The study of watermarking and crowdsourcing recent 
works shows that these two areas can be combined to 
propose a new watermarking approach which presents a high 
level of robustness against the most important attacks. In 
fact, our work aims to develop new robust approaches to 
introduce signatures in videos. Our idea consists in a first 
step to understand the visual content of the original video 
and then to select feature regions to embed signature. To 
achieve our goal, crowdsourcing technique will be used. 
Although, the concept of crowdsourcing is based on sharing 
media to the public, this can cause confidentiality problems 
and can damage watermarking process. To avoid this 
problem, we thought to generate a video summary and to 
share it to a fixed number of selected users. 
The proposed approach is decomposed to three main 
stages: video summarization, interactive detection of feature 
regions using crowdsourcing technique and signature 
insertion. General architecture of the proposed approach is 
presented by Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1.  General architecture our proposed method. 
A. 1st Step: Video Summarization 
To avoid confidentiality problems that can be caused by 
sharing the original video, its summary will be generated 
using the approach proposed in [29]. This last one is an 
object-based technique which allows extracting a relatively 
small number of still key-frames in order to summarize the 
salient visual content of a video. This method is based on 
spatial segmentation of each frame in order to detect the 
important events. Indeed, the extraction of key-frames will 
be facing a much more semantic criterion so that each 
extracted key-frame present an important event such as the 
appearance and/or the disappearance of significant objects. 
B. 2nd Step: Feature Regions Detection 
After video summarization, feature regions must be 
selected to embed signature. To detect these regions, 
crowdsourcing technique is chosen. In fact, this technique is 
an emerging field of knowledge management which allows 
analyzing the behavior of users when they watch a video to 
automatically deduct the regions of interest. Indeed, the 
combination of the analysis of visual content and interactive 
use of the identified data can improve the detection of 
interest visual objects in a video. The method proposed in 
[26] and explained in the previous section, has been used for 
this step. To ensure the confidentiality of our video and to 
avoid video hacking, we choose to interact with an X number 
of selected users in our laboratory. 
C. 3rd Step: Watermarking 
After extracting user attention objects, the signature will 
be inserted in the N feature regions selected from second 
step. 
To 
embed 
signature, 
our 
multi-frequential 
watermarking scheme [17] based on DWT, DCT and SVD 
transforms will be used. In fact, the regions selected by users 
are the most important regions in the video and their 
destruction will cause the destruction of the whole video. 
Thereby, the insertion in these selected regions will ensure a 
greatest robustness of our watermark. General architecture of 
the embedding step is presented by Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  General architecture of the embedding step. 
D. Test 
The reliability of the developed method will be tested by 
evaluating the two main criterions: robustness and 
invisibility. In fact, for the robustness we will test the 
resistance of the watermark against compression phases, 
collusion, Cropping and several main types of video attacks 
that could destroy the watermark. For invisibility criterion 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

and in order to enhance our tests, crowdsourcing process will 
be used. A user study will be carried. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUR WORK 
Crowdsourcing has become a dynamic and vibrant 
research area, and has been steadily growing over the years. 
In fact, it can be applied to a wide variety of problems and 
ever more classes of applications. For this reason, we 
proposed in this paper a new video watermarking based on 
crowdsourcing technique to select the most interesting 
feature regions. These last ones will be used to insert 
signature. In fact, interactive detection of feature regions 
using Crowdsourcing technique will guaranty a high level of 
robustness and invisibility of marked video. The robustness 
of the proposed method will be verified after application of 
various types of attacks such as geometric transformations 
(rotation, zooming), cropping vertices, MPEG4 compression, 
noise, frame suppression and collusion. For invisibility, we 
will use three metrics (peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR), 
Haussdorff distances and correlation) and a user study will 
be done to measure marked video quality. 
This method can be extended to 3D video and can be 
used by all watermarking applications such as video 
indexing. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Mohaghegh and O. Fatemi, “H.264 copyright protection with 
motion vector watermarking,” in Proc. Int‟l Conf. on Audio, 
Language and Image Processing, July 2008, pp. 1384-1389. 
[2] P. Bas, J. M. Chassery, and B. Macq, “Image watermarking; An 
evolution to content based approaches,” Pattern Recognition, Special 
Issue on Image/Video Communication, vol 35, march 2002, pp 545-
561. 
[3] H. Joumaa and F. Davoine, “Performance of an application video 
watermarking scheme using informed techniques,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Image Processing, vol 1, Sept. 2005, pp. 
261-365. 
[4] J. J. Chae and B. S. Manjunath, “Data hiding in video,” in 6th IEEE 
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP‟99), Kobe, 
Japan, vol 1, Oct. 1999, pp. 311-315. 
[5] S. N. Merchant, A. Harchandani, S. Dua, H. Donde, and I. Sunesara, 
“Watermarking of video data using integer-to-integer discrete wavelet 
transform,” in Proc. IEEE TENCON Conference on Convergent 
Technologies for the Asia-Pacific Region,  vol 3, Oct 2003, pp. 939-
943. 
[6] F. Deguillaume, G. Csurka, J. J. O‟Ruanaidh, and T. Pun, “Robust 3D 
DFT video watermarking,” in Proc. Security and Watermarking of 
Multimedia Contents, SPIE, vol. 3657,  no. 1,  1999, pp. 113-124.  
[7] J. H. Lim, D. J. Kim, H. T. Kim, and C. S. Won, “Digital video 
watermarking using 3D-DCT and intracubic correlation,” in Proc. 
SPIE Security and Water- marking of Multimedia Contents III, vol. 
4314, no. 1, 2001, pp. 64-72.  
[8] S. J. Kim et al., “A new digital video watermarking using the dual 
watermark images and 3D DWT,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 
TENCON, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 291-294. 
[9] P. Vinod and P. K. Bora, “Motion-compensated inter-frame collusion 
attack on video watermarking and a countermeasure,” in IEEE 
Proceedings on Information Security, vol. 153, no. 2, June 2006, pp. 
61-73. 
[10] P. Vinod, G. Doerr, and P. K. Bora, “Assessing motion-coherency in 
video watermarking,” in Proc. ACM Multimedia and Security, 2006, 
pp. 114-119. 
[11] K. Su, D. Kundur, and D. Hatzinakos, “Statistical invisibility for 
collusion resistant digital video watermarking,” in IEEE Trans. 
Multimedia, vol. 7, no. 1, Feb 2005, pp. 43-51. 
[12] G. Doerr and J. Dugelay, “Secure background watermarking based on 
video mosaicing,” in Proc. SPIE 5306 Electronic Imaging, 2004, pp. 
304-314. 
[13] M. Koubaa, M. Elarbi, C. Ben Amar, and H. Nicolas, “Collusion, 
MPEG4 
compression 
and 
frame 
dropping 
resistant 
video 
watermarking,” in International Journal of multimedia tools and 
applications MTAF, Springer Netherlands, Vol. 56, 2012, pp. 281-
301. 
[14] H. Seddik, M. Sayadi, F. Fnaiech, and M. cheriet, “A New Spatial 
Watermarking Method, based on a Logarithmic transformation of An 
Encrypted embedded Mark”, in 17th IMACS World Congress on 
Scientific Computation, Applied Mathematics and Simulation, Paris, 
France, July 2005.  
[15] L. S. Liu,   R. H. Li,  and Q. Gao, “A robust video watermarking 
scheme based on DCT,” in Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 
Proceedings of 2005 International Conference, Vol. 8, Aug. 2005, pp. 
5176-5180. 
[16] P. P. W. Chan, and M. R. Lyu. “A DWT-based Digital Video 
Watermarking Scheme with Error Correcting Code,” in ICICS, Vol. 
2836 Springer, 2003, pp. 202-213. 
[17] A. Kerbiche, S. B. Jabra, and E. Zagrouba, “A robust video 
watermarking based on image mosacing and multi-frequential 
embedding,” in IEEE International Conference on Intelligent 
Computer Communication and Processing ICCP, Aug. 2012, pp 159-
166. 
[18] R. T. Paul, “Review of Robust Video Watermarking Techniques,” in 
IJCA Special Issue on Computational Science New Dimensions and 
Perspectives, Vol. 3, 2011, pp. 90-95. 
[19] J. Howe,  “The rise of crowdsourcing,” in Wired Magazine 14(6), 
June 2006, pp. 1-4. 
[20] S. Greengard, “Following the Crowd,” in Communications of the 
ACM 54(2), Feb. 2011, pp 20–22. 
[21] Y. Zhao and Q. Zhu, “Evaluation on crowdsourcing research: Current 
status and future direction.” in Information Systems Frontiers, 2012, 
pp 1-18. 
[22] D. C. Brabham, “Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving: an 
introduction and cases,” in The International Journal of Research into 
New Media Technologies 14(1), 2008, pp 75-90. 
[23] D. C. Brabham, “Moving the crowd at threadless: motivations for 
participation in a crowdsourcing application,” in Information, 
Communication and Society 13(8), 2010, pp 1122–1145. 
[24] X. Xie , H. Liu , S. Goumaz , and W. Y. Ma, “Learning User Interest 
for Image Browsing on Small-formfactor Devices” in SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2005, pp. 671-
680. 
[25] A. Carlier, V. Charvillat, W. T. Ooi, R. Grigoras, and G. Morin, 
“Crowd-sourced Automatic Zoom and Scroll for Video Retargeting,” 
in ACM Multimedia, 2010, pp. 201-210. 
[26] P. Campisi and A. Neri, “Video watermarking in the 3D-DWT 
domain using perceptual masking,” in Proc. IEEE ICIP, vol. 1, 2005, 
pp. 997-1000. 
[27] L. Rajab, T. Al-Khatib, and A. Al-Haj, “Video Watermarking 
Algorithms Using the SVD Transform,” in European Journal of 
Scientific Research, 2009, pp. 389-401. 
[28] N. Mlik, W. Barhoumi, and E. Zagrouba, “Object-based event 
detection for the extraction of video key-frames,” in International 
Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems, Tangier, 
Morocco, May 2012. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

