Cyber Physical Multimedia Systems: A Pervasive Virtual Audio Community
Markus Duchon, Corina Schindhelm, Christoph Niedermeier
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology CT T DE IT 1, Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 80200 Munich
{markus.duchon.ext, corina.schindhelm, christoph.niedermeier}@siemens.com
Abstract—In recent years, pervasive systems have gained
importance in the context of home automation. Social online
communities are becoming more and more popular, and indoor
positioning techniques have made considerable progress. Thus,
creation of virtual environments integrated with the physical
world that enhance the user’s perception and cognition, be-
comes feasible. In this paper, we propose a system combin-
ing these concepts into something we call a cyber physical
multimedia system. This technology leverages pervasive audio
communities that facilitate social activities for people with
limited mobility, such as the elderly or handicapped.
Keywords-Social Networks, Multimedia, Pervasive Comput-
ing, Indoor Positioning, Cyber Physical Systems;
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays being virtually connected with friends, busi-
ness partners, or items of interests has already become an
inherent part of our lives. Via Twitter, Facebook, Ebay and
Amazon, we follow news feeds of our favorite musicians
or political happenings, we keep in contact and chat with
friends and we go shopping while sitting on the couch,
respectively. The web has opened a new world of intercon-
nection and communication; however, only the young and
computer savvy generation is able to grasp its beneﬁts. Peo-
ple with limited mobility, such as the elderly or handicapped,
would beneﬁt greatly from social communities due to their
naturally tends to suffer from isolation, yet they have only
few possibilities because of their lack of computer knowl-
edge and/or lack of special in-/output assistance for those
features. For Germany, the demographic forecast shows that
by the year 2035 more than two-thirds will be over 60 years
old. Many projects (e.g. Smart Senior) are based on this fact
and its resultant problems, such as rising health care costs.
The main goal is to create comprehensive cyber physical
systems that allow elderly people to stay in their home
environment as long as possible, for example, by enabling
remote healthcare or community platforms for friends and
family to prevent isolation. Cyber physical systems (CPS)
[1] are physical and engineered systems whose operations
are monitored, coordinated, controlled and integrated by a
computing and communication core. We will extend this
by the term multimedia reinforcing the utilization of audio
communication to a Cyber Physical Multimedia System
(CPMS).
In this paper, we will focus on the design of a CPMS,
which enables handicapped and elderly people to communi-
cate in an easy way. The remainder is organized as follows.
In Section II, we will introduce a scenario and detail basic
requirements we consider indispensable for a suitable CPMS
enabling a pervasive virtual audio community. Our system
architecture is presented in Section III. Section IV discusses
related work before Section V concludes the paper.
II. REQUIREMENTS
Before discussing requirements of a CPMS, we will
outline an application scenario. Imagine three different apart-
ments like illustrated in Figure 1 of Peter, Mary and Paul.
They agreed on a coffee party within their own kitchens.
Peter and Mary are already in their kitchens and have a
Figure 1.
Three different apartments forming a virtual audio community
conversation about the latest news, whereas Paul resides in
another room at that time (A). As soon as he enters his own
kitchen, it is recognized by the system and an audio channel
is opened to a virtual kitchen where he participates in the
conversation of Peter and Mary (B). Seeking for a CPMS
to enable a distributed, virtual audio community, we must
consider some basic requirements a proper solution has to
fulﬁll.
A. System Conﬁguration
The system should provide different levels of conﬁgura-
tion mechanisms. This is necessary because such a complex
system as the proposed virtual audio community, in some
cases, requires ﬁne-tuning involving a considerable amount
of user interaction whereas during normal operation it should
be possible to conﬁgure basic behavior in a simple and intu-
itive way. The system must provide a detailed conﬁguration
87
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

interface that could be accessed via a Web browser. This
kind of interface may be used for ﬁne-tuning, in particular
during initial conﬁguration of the system for a user that
has just joined the community or wants to perform major
changes in his conﬁguration. For instance, the web-based
conﬁguration interface may be used for speciﬁcation of
a mapping function for a physical actor to be integrated
into the virtual environment. The system must provide a
basic conﬁguration interface that can be controlled via voice
commands. This kind of interface may be used to change
settings during normal operation of the system. For instance,
a user could temporarily map a corner of his living room to
the virtual kitchen by issuing a respective voice command.
B. Physical Actors
The system may integrate with the physical environment
of the real rooms which are mapped to virtual rooms of the
pervasive audio community wherefore some requirements
are essential. Integration of physical actors into the virtual
environment must be restricted to certain contexts. The vir-
tual actor should only have an effect on real actors belonging
to a community user if the respective user has authorized
and activated a corresponding context. For instance, lighting
control should only occur in a particular room if the user has
actually entered the corresponding virtual room. Integration
of physical actors requires a mapping between states of the
physical actors and the virtual actor associated with them.
For a simple actor that just has an ON and an OFF state,
this is trivial. But, if a whole spectrum of states (e.g. light
intensity or volume of background music) is to be addressed,
a mapping function is required. When a user leaves a virtual
room, the actors in the real room must be restored to their
original states (i.e. the states that they had before the user
entered the virtual room) unless the user explicitly decides
otherwise.
C. Audio System
Since we want to convey the impression that physically
separated people are together in an audio community the
audio system should support surround sound capabilities for
each room. Since the system should not be restricted to a
single room but rather provide coverage for several rooms or
even a complete apartment, several input and output devices
are necessary. These resources need to be connected and
individually responsive to an audio management component.
A dynamic change of audio components in terms of volume
adjustment and device handover is required to provide an ac-
curate impression when moving around. Also, the exchange
of audio communication data among remote participants has
to be achieved especially for conference-like community
communication.
D. Maps and Indoor Positioning
The system must be able to map physical rooms onto
virtual rooms and also be able to ﬁnd the current position
of the user. Therefore, two aspects have to be considered:
Maps of the home environment must be available in digital
form and context must be added to these maps. The
maps serve as a basis for the positioning system, and the
additional context is necessary to identify a room e.g.,
as living room etc. making a mapping to virtual rooms
possible.
A positioning system must be installed. The higher the
precision of this system, the better the features developed
for it will be. Room level accuracy is the minimum accuracy
the system requires. WLAN positioning systems offer a
precision around 1-2 meters, which would be sufﬁcient
to determine with high probability in which room the
user resides. If high precision positioning is available, for
example with ultra-wideband (UWB), special effects are
possible. As an example, we would like to describe sound
fading. Imagine a user group in the virtual room ”kitchen”
standing around the stove. One user physically moves away
from this stove but doesnt leave the room. The voices of the
remaining users would become softer out of the speakers,
which creates a more realistic experience.
III. ARCHITECTURE
Driven by today’s ambient assisted living approaches
our system utilizes several mature technologies and com-
bines them to a CPMS enabling a Pervasive Virtual
Audio Community for elderly, handicapped or disabled
people to enhance their participation in social life including a
realistic experience. An overview of our system architecture
Figure 2.
System architecture for a pervasive virtual audio community
is illustrated in Figure 2. Because our goal is to facilitate
a community among physically separated users, a platform
represented by a Community Server (CS) that provides
virtual rooms and offers community capabilities is used.
Connected through broadband internet, the platform can be
accessed by several Home Gateway Servers (HGS),
which represent the basis on the user side and are able
to control and sense activities within ﬂats. To ensure the
user’s privacy the proposed system has to be activated and
deactivated explicitly by the user. Several physical actors are
connected to the gateway and can be controlled regarding
the community context - imagine light, window shutters
or coffee makers. The required hardware, speakers and
88
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

microphones, for audio system is deployed and also linked
to the control entity. Since the system heavily depends on the
current location of the users moving around in their homes,
a ﬁne-grained indoor positioning system is utilized.
A. Community Server
The CS provides virtual rooms where participants can
exchange audio signals in the ﬁrst step. The main idea is
sketched in Figure 3, whereby the kitchens of three different
ﬂats are uniﬁed in a virtual kitchen. These virtual rooms
Figure 3.
The CS provides a virtual room (kitchen) to which the real
kitchens in several ﬂats are interconnected through their HGSs.
represent certain areas of a habitation where multiple users
can participate similar to a telephone conference. Thereby
the CS needs to provide certain group functionalities in order
to provide multiple virtual kitchens for several independent
circles of friends as well as user registration capabilities.
B. Home Gateway Server
Within our system the HGS has to fulﬁll several tasks,
which will be explained in turn.
Interaction and Communication:
Considering our tar-
get group the handling during operation should be kept
as simple as possible wherefore our system utilizes voice
commands. These commands can be easily deﬁned and ex-
tended following a simple syntax: System: <command>.
For example, the user can use the command System:
start/stop to start or stop the community system. This
command structure can also be used for simple system
conﬁguration tasks. For example, the command System:
map to living room can be used to set the current
room the user is in, to the living room. After the recognition
of a command the gateway maps the corresponding orders
into machine readable commands by applying a ruled based
approach. Audio communication within the community is
crucial, since we want to achieve interaction with other
users. We decided to utilize audio communication in the
ﬁrst step wherefore a VoIP system is sufﬁcient for the
desired functionality. The user’s command System: call
kitchen initiates a connection to the CS to join the virtual
kitchen of that group the user is associated with. Once the
registration process at the CS is completed an audio channel
is set up to the speciﬁed virtual room. In addition to the
transmission of audio signals, notiﬁcation messages among
remote participants need to be exchanged which include
information that will be utilized by the connected HGS to
adapt the local environment. For these messages we utilize
the SUBSCRIBE request dialog [2], [3], which can be used
for status notiﬁcations to remote users and therefore can be
interpreted by the remote HGSs.
Physical Actors, Audio- and Positioning System: The
HGS is also responsible for managing the user’s environment
by the interpretation of notiﬁcation messages. According
to the content of these messages a command is generated
and passed to the corresponding home appliance. These
messages are created according to the status of the real home
appliances which are connected to their virtual counterpart.
This will enhance the user’s perception and cognition when
participating in a pervasive virtual audio community. For
instance, community users have attached their room lighting
to a virtual lighting control system which than can be used
to dim the lighting in the virtual room. As a consequence,
the lighting of the real rooms mapped to the virtual room
is dimmed accordingly. Another example is a coffee party
that has agreed to meet in a virtual kitchen at a certain time.
A community user starts all coffee machines mapped to a
virtual coffee machine by starting his own machine so that
coffee is ready when the other users show up in the virtual
kitchen. Besides the adaptation of the physical environment
we want our users to be informed about the communication
status. Therefore, controllable status lights (i.e. small LEDs)
are deployed in appropriate rooms. These lights indicate the
remote activity in a speciﬁc virtual room by changing color
and intensity.
The audio system mainly consists of several microphones
and speakers deployed in the household, which represent
different sources and sinks in terms of acoustic signals and
can be accessed and controlled individually by the HGS.
It should be emphasized that an actual voice transmission
only takes place when the user is nearby. A user who leaves
the kitchen physically, also leaves the virtual kitchen and
therefore does not participate in a conversation anymore
which takes place there. However, when a user enters the
(virtual) living room, where another group resides, the HGS
needs to switch to the corresponding room at the CS as well
as change the microphone source and the speaker sinks to the
user’s new location. Furthermore, by using a more precise
positioning system it is possible to adjust the surround
volume at the remote sides considering the user’s position in
the real room in terms of a cardinal direction. As highlighted,
the audio system needs to be highly coupled to a positioning
system. Whenever the user changes his location, the HGS
takes action: a) to inform remote gateways about the activity
change (status lights, position update) and b) switching
the communication in-/output in accordance with the user’s
physical location. The coupling is performed by the HGS,
which holds and manages an indoor map, an overlay map of
the deﬁned virtual rooms, and an overlay map for the audio
components and their corresponding volumes. The better the
precision of the positioning system, the more ﬁne-grained
89
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

the audio control performance is, the more realistic a virtual
conversation will be.
IV. RELATED WORK
In the following, we will outline the state of the art
of technologies and subcomponents that are part of virtual
audio communities.
A. Physical interaction
Regarding physical control, so called home automation
servers are used for processes like adjusting the heating
according to the current temperature or adjusting the lighting
system as well as the background music either by voice
commands or proactively by context recognition. Lots of
attention has been put on voice controlled systems [4]–[6] to
facilitate their utilization. Also several communication stan-
dards and network protocols are widely used. An overview
of relevant standards is given in [7].
B. Audio Communities
Prominent representatives like Skype or, GoogleTalk are
also capable of conference calls, but are inconvenient to op-
erate, require direct computer interaction and lack of spatial
perception of human interaction. Healy et al. [8] present
a prototype of audio spatial augmentation headphones in
order to take advantage of the innate psycho acoustical
perception of sound source locations. Hyder et al. [9] outline
the difﬁculties to identify the speaker of a teleconference
and present a solution which adds a virtual acoustic room
simulation. Kim et a. [10] propose a 3-dimensional VoIP
system for two user groups, whereby the participants can
hear the voice of remote users as if each remote user speaks
at his or her corresponding position.
C. Positioning Systems
One key information is the position of the user within his
home environment. When there is only one person living in
a household, the identiﬁcation of the person is not actually
necessary, and as a result, positioning could be accomplished
via smart home equipment, such as motion sensors in each
room or contact sensors on doors. However, when more than
one person lives within a household, the identiﬁcation of
the person using the system is essential. A vast number of
positioning technologies and systems exist which support
different levels of accuracy. An overview is provided in [11].
If radio-based technologies are used, the user needs to wear
or carry a tag. For room level accuracy, WLAN positioning
is sufﬁcient and can be enhanced by adding motion sensors.
If a higher level of accuracy is needed, UWB systems enable
positioning in the range of centimeters.
V. CONCLUSION
As for now, most of the systems dealing with pervasive
computing and home automation put the focus on an easy
interaction with the user, by utilizing gesture control, voice
control, or on fully automated approaches which analyze the
user’s context in order to support him in his daily life. As
a result, only one facility is addressed which is inhabited
by one or more users. Our approach enhances pervasive
systems by adding the community aspect. This is achieved
by adopting a mixed-reality approach that associates several
real and a single virtual environment. At the current stage
of implementation we identiﬁed future research directions
and possible enhancements. The system could be extended
by integrating augmented reality aspects both acoustically
and optically. This could further enhance the user experience
and intensify the illusion of actually spending time together
rather than communicating via the internet. This could mean
a signiﬁcant improvement to the lives of people not able to
leave their homes and thus being subject to social isolation.
REFERENCES
[1] E. A. Lee, “Cyber Physical Systems: Design Challenges,” in
ISORC, 2008.
[2] G. Camarillo, A. Roach, and O. Levin, “Subscriptions to
Request-Contained Resource Lists in the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP),” RFC 5367 (Proposed Standard), IETF, Octo-
ber 2008.
[3] A. B. Roach, “Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Speciﬁc Event
Notiﬁcation,” RFC 3265, IETF, June 2002.
[4] I. Mporas, T. Ganchev, T. Kostoulas, K. Kermanidis, and
N. Fakotakis, “Automatic Speech Recognition System for
Home Appliances Control,” in PCI, 2009, pp. 114–117.
[5] J. Zhu, X. Gao, Y. Yang, H. Li, Z. Ai, and X. Cui, “Develop-
ing a voice control system for ZigBee-based home automation
networks,” in IC-NIDC, 2010, pp. 737–741.
[6] A. G´arate, N. Herrasti, and A. L´opez, “GENIO: an ambient
intelligence application in home automation and entertain-
ment environment,” ser. EUSAI, 2005, pp. 241–245.
[7] W. Kastner, G. Neugschwandtner, S. Soucek, and H. M.
Newmann, “Communication systems for building automation
and control,” vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 1178–1203, 2005.
[8] G. Healy and A. F. Smeaton, “Spatially augmented audio
delivery: Applications of spatial sound awareness in sensor-
equipped indoor environments,” in MDM, 2009, pp. 704–708.
[9] M. Hyder, M. Haun, and C. Hoene, “Placing the participants
of a spatial audio conference call,” in CCNC, 2010, pp. 1–7.
[10] C. Kim, S. C. Ahn, I.-J. Kim, and H.-G. Kim, “3d voice
communication system for two user groups,” in ICACT, 2005,
pp. 100–105.
[11] Y. Gu, A. Lo, and I. Niemegeers, “A survey of indoor
positioning systems for wireless personal networks,” Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, pp. 13–32, 2009.
90
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

