 
 
An Interaction Model Based on Narrative Programs to Improve Understanding and 
Contribution to Non-Linear Narratives. 
Joaquim Colás, Alan Tapscott, Ayman Moghnieh, and Josep Blat 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
Email:{Joaquim.colas, alan.tapscott, ayman.moghnie, josep.blat} @upf.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Collaborative 
creation 
of 
stories 
poses 
new 
challenges to the authoring task. Being able to comprehend a 
large non-linear information space and to take into account 
inputs from other creators are important to contribute 
meaningfully and consistently. This work presents a model 
based on the classic semiotics concept of “narrative programs” 
to structure and present the information with the purpose of 
making non-linearity more accessible, facilitating contribution, 
and inspiring creative opportunities. We introduce a prototype 
that implements this model, and use it in an experiment to 
explore how users read a non-linear story, understand it, and 
contribute to it. Results show how users identified the main 
characters and related them to their narrative programs 
achieving 
high 
levels 
of 
comprehension, 
which 
the 
correspondence between comprehension and contribution 
consistency was, and that the users expanded the narrative 
from multiple points of view.  
Keywords-storytelling; comprehension; interaction models; 
authoring; collaborative creation. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The traditional mono-directionality of storytelling is 
challenged by media concepts such as Transmedia (to 
combine different channels to create different narrative 
experiences in the same narrative universe, understood as the 
self-consistent fictional setting where the stories take place 
[1]), or by narrative “prosumers” (proactive consumers) who 
demand to actively participate in the development of those 
narrative universes (for instance in fan-fiction websites [2], 
where followers of a movie, TV series, novel series or other 
fiction franchises share their own stories taking place in their 
original universes). Nevertheless, the new types of narratives 
can grow into larger and more complex structures and pose 
new challenges to the creative authors, whose different 
contributions must deal with the specific requirements of the 
narrative genre, such as thematic and logic coherence and 
cause-to-effect connectivity [3]. 
Using a Research Through Design [4] approach, in 
previous works [5, 6] we identified that tools to support 
collaborative authoring require 1) providing the interaction 
mechanisms that allow the user to expand a story at any 
point of space and time, and 2) to empower the user to have a 
comprehensive view of all the large narrative space.  
 Comprehension (being able to understand the narrative 
content and to establish logical relations) can be a key factor 
for the creator to contribute meaningfully and consistently, 
as its lack when multiple users collaborate in the same space 
and not take into account the other contributions leads to 
narrative inconsistencies [6] (i.e., parts of the story contradict 
other parts), while psychological studies have highlighted 
comprehension as a factor for good authoring performance in 
terms of structure and consistency [7]. 
On the other hand, authoring in digital storytelling has 
been approached from diverse angles: some works close to 
automatic generation, as the ones by Pizzi and Cavazza [8] 
or Swatjes and Theune [9] propose authoring as a co-creation 
between generative Artificial Intelligences (AIs), which will 
grant the correctness of the information, and humans. Some 
researchers have worked with children and tangible 
interfaces for the creation of emergent fairytales [10, 11], 
where the systems try to respond consistently to the 
improvised actions of the kids. Most of the state of the art of 
interactive storytelling presents authoring tools that use 
graphs for organizing the non-linear narrative structures [12, 
13, 14]. The collaborative online experiment by Likarish [15] 
pointed out the need of tools that provide the authors with 
the necessary information when contributing to multi-
authored spaces. 
In this paper, we propose an interaction model to 
facilitate the navigation of non-linear narrative spaces and to 
increase the contributors’ awareness of the other authors 
input. Our model uses the “narrative programs” concept [16, 
17] from narrative semiotics (which studies the creation of 
meaning in narratives) to structure the narration in character 
storylines and to present a way to connect them 
meaningfully. We turned this model into a prototype, 
Proppulsion, which is used in an experiment to test the 
readers’ comprehension of the story, and to analyze the 
contributions of those who expand it.  
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
review the related work on information models for 
storytelling systems. Section III introduces our model based 
on Narrative Programs for presenting and exploring narrative 
spaces from the perspective of the character roles and their 
relations towards other characters. In Section IV, we 
introduce Proppulsion and explain the setting and 
development of the experiment, followed by the presentation 
of the results in Section V. In Section VI, we discuss our 
findings: we point at how users identified the main 
characters relating them to their narrative programs and used 
their storylines as a backbone for exploring the whole 
narrative; how users who achieved greater comprehension 
also seemed to achieve greater consistency in their 
contributions; and how the system encouraged them to 
expand the story from multiple points of view. Finally, 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
Section VII briefly summarizes our main conclusions and 
indicates some future work. 
II. 
INFORMATION MODELS FOR STORYTELLING 
The study of narrative information models has been 
usually approached with the goal of building intelligent 
generative systems that automatically produce narratives. 
Computational models to be processed through AI are far 
from our goal of interaction models aimed at being 
understood by authors, but it is convenient to indicate some 
of their aspects that are relevant for our approach.  
Bailey [18] divides automatic story generation models 
into author models (imitating the human processes of 
authoring), story models (following a structural grammar) 
and world models (populating a setting with agents whose 
interactions result in a story) and proposes a model based on 
the reader’s perspective. For Riedl and Young [19], 
generative systems can be categorized within a framework 
that balances plot coherence (author-centric systems) with 
character believability (character-centric systems). Mateas 
and Sengers [20] define story-understanding systems as 
those which “seek to model the processes by which a human 
understands a story”.  
From our perspective of narrative information models 
intended to support the interaction of human authors, we 
distinguish two types of models, depending on whether the 
story content is produced automatically or by an author.  
Among the models for automatic generative systems, 
some are plot-based, when the system follows a set of rules 
to generate the story that has a certain semiotic structure; 
others are character-based, when the model is used to 
generate the actions of a set of characters and the narrative 
emerges from those actions, as in Cavazza’s work [21]. This 
vision of the narrative, as the result of multiple characters 
each following his/her own narrative programs, helps to form 
our vision of a multi-linear story. Gervás [22] uses an 
implementation of the formal model of Propp’s morphology 
of folk-tales, from which we draw some basic concepts in the 
next section. Some systems using generative models can be 
interactive as well, as Mateas and Stern Façade [23], where a 
user takes part in the story as a character and the system has 
to generate storyworld events and respond to his/her actions. 
Other models support authoring systems, where one or 
more users perform the role of author. A lot of examples 
come from the field of authoring systems for interactive 
narratives, as Storytec [12], Scenejo [13] or Narrative 
Threads [14]. Those systems present the users tools to 
produce narratives and, as in classical hypertext narratives, 
they have to deal with non-linearity, since the author needs 
to build a changing structure that varies depending on the 
choices of the player. Quite a few of them (including [12, 13, 
and 14]) use graphs to represent those configurations. 
Hartman et al. [24] use Propp’s structures to build those 
graphs.  
How readers understand a narrative is useful not only for 
AI systems, as Matheas et al suggest for “story-
understanding systems”, but for the design of authoring 
systems as well. Also, classic semiotic models reflect how 
stories are understood from a human perspective, and this 
has been used for generative systems to build stories, but not 
so frequently for helping humans to deal with them. In this 
paper we adopt some of their notions.  
In the context of collaborative non-linear storytelling, the 
distinction between author and consumer profiles is less 
clear. Authors do not prepare non-linear structures that will 
be experienced linearly by a reader, but read and then 
contribute to a global, multi-storyline structure that can be 
explored in many ways. We discuss next how we apply ideas 
from classic semiotics models, which help to understand and 
conform linear narrative structures, to this non-linear 
potentially ever-growing information space, in order to 
facilitate the authors to comprehend it and fit in it their 
contributions. 
III. 
AN INTERACTION MODEL BASED ON “CHARACTER 
NARRATIVE PROGRAMS” 
In Propp’s morphology of folk-tales [16], the story is 
driven by a concatenation of actions (called functions) of the 
main protagonist to reach his/her goal. The other characters 
perform simple functions within this chain depending on 
their roles in the story (rewarding the protagonist for 
accomplishing his/her goal, helping the protagonist in his/ 
her quest, being an antagonist trying to defeat the protagonist 
plans, etc.). Greimas revised these concepts in his semiotics 
theory, where he defined Narrative Programs as the 
selection of events linked together revealing a direction or an 
intentionality to form a coherent narrative, thereby providing 
the narrative with meaning [17]. 
This resounds with findings of our previous work [5], 
where users of the CrossTale interface found useful 
exploring and creating collaborative stories through linear 
paths, which we call storylines. We saw that users mainly 
perceive storylines as character-driven, and that plots that 
follow the development of a character were preferred. 
In this paper, we reinforce our approach by adapting the 
Narrative Program concept. Each character has his/her own 
narrative program, i.e., his/her own goal and associated 
storyline. When a character has a role in another character’s 
storyline, the two storylines cross. For instance, in a classical 
tale, from the protagonist perspective (the prince), a wizard 
can be a “helper character” in his mission to save the 
princess, but in a multi-storyline narrative, the wizard is also 
the protagonist of his own storyline, and he helps the prince 
as part of his own narrative program. 
Readers/authors can re-arrange the narrative space 
around a selected character storyline to explore and 
understand how the existent narrative programs connect, 
getting a consistent “bigger picture”. On the other hand, this 
multiple-points-of-view approach to the narrative space 
could encourage creators to develop different character 
storylines, generating opportunities for rich contributions.  
Next, we define each classical semiotics concept we use 
in our approach, explain how it relates to previous 
computational and interaction models for narratives and how 
we apply it in our proposed model. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
A. Main and Secondary Characters 
In Propp’s approach, the main character’s narrative 
program is the leitmotif of the story, while multiple 
secondary characters appear within this storyline. Plot-based 
systems built on classic semiotic models follow this. 
Character-based systems can have multiple protagonists 
depending on the complexity of the agents’ (characters’) 
actions. Authoring focused on reader’s interaction tends to 
put the reader/player in the place of the main character, while 
multi-author systems let authors control one or more 
characters [11], without distinguishing between main and 
secondary ones. Our approach presents the user (both reader 
and author) an explicit multiple-points-of-view exploration 
through the use of character-driven storylines. Each character 
performs as the main protagonist of his/her storyline, while 
the others are presented as secondary and defined by their 
relation with the protagonist’s narrative program, described 
by the secondary character’s role on it. 
B. Narrative Programs 
The main character undertakes multiple sub-tasks to 
accomplish his/her goal, creating a chain of events. 
Secondary characters’ narrative programs usually refer only 
to their roles in the main story. Some plot-based systems also 
use the protagonist’s narrative program as the story central 
structure. Character-based generative systems use narrative 
programs as agents’ goals, and their planning steps become 
action sequences. In authoring systems the narrative program 
tends to be implicit, as it is developed by the authors’ 
decisions. In our interaction model based on narrative 
programs, when focusing on a single character, his/her 
actions in the overall narrative space are presented in a linear 
and coherent sequence as the main plot of that sub-story. 
C. Character Roles 
Each character has a role or a small set of roles. 
Traditionally, they are always defined in relation with the 
protagonist (helper, antagonist, quest-giver, etc.), so that one 
could talk about “absolute” roles. In authoring systems, the 
roles of the characters are implicit in the story description. In 
character-based generative systems, roles are implicit in the 
character’s goals through their relation with those of the 
other agents; thus roles are “relative” to those of other 
characters, as each character is the protagonist in his/her 
storyline and plays different roles in the others’ storylines. 
Our approach makes explicit this notion of relative role.  
D. Time and Space 
In classical tales morphology, time is relative to the 
development of the main character story, while space is 
lightly considered. Some systems use a discretization of time 
(e.g., character-based systems using planning perform cycles 
of actions) or discretize space in finite “places” (e.g., [11]). 
Previously [5], we used a loose discretization of time in 
frames, while places were a list of settings. Users understood 
time in a vague way, contextualizing each scene depending 
on the semantic relation with the nearby ones, while place 
was just considered as an ambient accessory. In this paper, 
each scene has a global reading order, so that there is an 
implicit global sequence of scenes when a sub-set is chosen 
to read. Time is, and implicitly put, in relation between 
storylines when they cross. Space is not considered as a 
specific object but implicit in each scene description.  
To sum it up, our model draws from the classic semiotic 
elements of character narrative programs and roles but puts 
them in a multi-linear context, where each character can 
work as the protagonist of his/her own tale. It uses this 
structure to present the non-linear information to the reader 
so that s/he can explore and understand it in terms of the 
relations between the multiple stories. We aim at helping the 
readers achieve a better comprehension and suggest them 
new ways of contribution as authors.  
In the next section, we present a small first experiment 
with this model to observe the kind of exploration 
encouraged by its use, to determine if readers can get a good 
comprehension of a non-linear story that has to be read in a 
fragmented manner, to test how comprehension helps them 
to achieve more consistent contributions, and to observe the 
kind of contributions elicited. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETTING 
The interaction model we propose was implemented into a 
basic prototype we named “Proppulsion” (Figure 1). It reads 
a JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) file containing the 
story (a set of ordered unitary scenes, characters, and the 
definition of relations between them in each scene) and 
presents it through an interactive interface. There is a row of 
characters’ icons at the top of the interface (in randomized 
order so that a hierarchy among them cannot be presumed). 
By clicking on one of them, the character’s storyline (i.e., 
narrative program) is shown, as the series of scenes where 
s/he has a role presented in temporal order. The user can read 
it sequentially by using the “previous” and “next” buttons or 
in a desired order by selecting the titles of the scenes. In each 
scene, the interface shows a list of the secondary characters 
and their role with respect to the narrative program of the 
current protagonist’s (i.e., the character chosen) in that scene, 
defined by a colour code as “helper”, “opponent” or “other”. 
At any moment, the user can switch to another character. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Proppulsion interface. 
The experiment with Proppulsion was double blind: an 
external author created the story, a fairy-tale with 10 typical 
characters, each having different objectives, and 13 scenes. 
The story was written from a third person, omniscient point 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
of view, and revolved around the kidnap of a Princess by an 
evil Wizard who wanted to seduce her. The Wizard’s wife, a 
Witch, wanted to recover her husband with a love potion, but 
her plan backfires. The King offered a reward to recover the 
princess, and a Knight and his Squire volunteered. An Elf 
maiden also wanted to find the Princess to kill her, tricked by 
the Witch, and she needed a dagger from the Troll. The 
Squire, the Knight and the Elf, who were in most of the 
scenes, met halfway the adventure and helped each other, but 
the conflict arose when the Elf threatened to kill the Princess. 
The Troll, the King, a group of Elves, and a group of Goblins 
appeared only briefly. In the end, each character had his/her 
goal, and each character sub-story crossed at some point of 
his/her line with some of the other ones. 17 subjects of 
diverse ages and backgrounds took part in the experiment. 
They did not know precisely its goal. It was conducted 
individually in two phases. 
The first phase focused on reading / understanding. After 
signing a consent form, the subject received a brief 
introduction to Proppulsion interface and content. Then, s/he 
was asked to take as much time as s/he wanted to read, in 
any desired order. During this phase, we measured the 
reading time, kept a log of the characters and scenes selected, 
and mouse-tracked subjects’ navigation. At the end of this 
phase we asked a series of questions discussed later.  
The focus of the second phase was authoring / 
contributing. Subjects were offered to freely write more 
scenes for the story, indicating at which point of the narrative 
the scene was placed. The time taken for contributing was 
measured and a shorter questionnaire was asked at the end. 
In the first phase, we asked subjects about “perceived 
easiness of reading”, “perceived comprehension” and 
“perceived 
enjoyment” 
through 
some 
Likert 
scaled 
questions. We also asked the reader some questions to test 
his/her understanding of the story (such as who was the 
protagonist/s? or the main plot/s), and his/her method for 
reading (How did you choose what to read?). 
We measured the reader’s comprehension quantitatively, 
borrowing Tanenbaum’s strategy [25], where it was tested 
through a questionnaire after users had read a non-linear 
story in a partial, non-chronological way. The external author 
prepared a set of questions on her story asking the subject to 
relate different events. A panel of judges who had read the 
story selected a test from them. When answering the test, 
subjects were allowed to return to read the story. The same 
panel of judges scored the answers, and we tested the 
agreement of the judges on the resulting scores by measuring 
the Cohen-Kappa coefficient of inter-rater reliability [26]. 
We also measured the time taken to answer those questions, 
and the time employed to read when answering. 
In the second phase, the judges rated the contributions in 
terms of consistency (if the events fitted with the rest of the 
story), and the agreement of the judges was also tested. The 
perceived ease of contribution was measured with a 
questionnaire using Likert scales too. 
V. 
RESULTS 
Two subjects of the 17 took too long to complete the 
experiment (+ two times the standard deviation) and their 
results were excluded from further analysis. The time results 
were normally distributed with a confidence level of 84%. 
Table I summarizes the quantitative results of both phases. 
TABLE I.  
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 
 
Exp. total 
time (sec.) 
Initial 
reading time 
(sec.) 
Compr. test 
time (sec.) 
Reading time 
during compr. 
test (sec.) 
Mean 
/sd 
1373.60 / 
341.06 
457.20 / 
102.34 
253.67 / 97.75 
66.13 sec / 
71.38 
 
Total time 
contrib. (sec.) 
Time writing 
(sec.) 
Time reading 
when contrib. 
(sec.) 
Total reading 
time (sec.) 
Mean 
/sd 
257.00 / 
141.81 
328.67 / 
242.49 
72.33 / 57.43 
552.27 / 90.69 
 Perc. ease of 
reading (/4) 
Perceived 
compr. (/4) Enjoyment (/4) 
Compr. test 
result (/4) 
Mean 
/sd 
3.11 / 0.53 
3.07 / 0.36 
3.49 / 0.49 
3.32 /0.39 
 
Consist. of contrib. (/4) 
Perc. ease of contrib. (/4) 
Mean 
/sd 
3.67 / 0.30 
2.83 / 0.43 
 
For the two items rated by the panel of judges 
(comprehension and consistency of contribution), we 
excluded the judge with the lowest item-total correlation and 
achieved a moderate agreement in the scores (For the compr. 
test, percentage of overall agreement Po: 0.583332, free-
marginal kappa: 0.444443; for the consist. evaluation Po: 
0.619047, Free-marginal kappa: 0.492063). 
A. Navigation and story/character perception 
People understood the story from a character-centric 
point of view, and viewed it as a multi-character tale. When 
asked about the plot, all subjects referred to specific 
characters and their goals, and 14 out of 15 pointed out that 
there were multiple stories in one. Plots are regarded as 
implicit in the character storylines. 
When asked about who was/were the main character/s, 
people chose those characters with long and defined 
narrative programs. Table II shows that the characters 
appearing in more scenes are those more often chosen as 
protagonists by the readers. Characters who do not appear on 
the table were not mentioned by any subject and appear only 
in one or two scenes. The number of scenes is not the only 
factor for relevance. While the Knight and the Squire appear 
in the same number of scenes, subjects mentioned the Knight 
twice than the Squire. This could be due to the Knight 
having a mission, as defined in Proppean terms (a quest 
giver, the King, gives him a quest, to rescue the Princess, in 
order to obtain a reward), while the Squire acts as his helper.  
TABLE II.  
CHARACTERS BY MENTIONS , SCENES AND USES 
Character 
Mentions as 
Protagonist 
Scenes in 
the Story 
Times used in 
Contributions 
Elf maiden 
12 
7 
5 
Knight 
10 
6 
3 
Squire 
5 
6 
0 
Princess 
3 
4 
5 
Wizard 
2 
2 
2 
Witch 
1 
3 
4 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
B. Reading  patterns and story comprehension 
The analysis of the logs shows that subjects quickly 
identified the main (longer, protagonist-based) storylines, 
focused on reading them linearly, and then backtracked to 
read the secondary character’s stories non-linearly, despite 
the random order of the icons. In the questionnaires, subjects 
explained that they liked to read this way: first understand a 
single story and then read the related characters stories to 
understand their relationships with the main plot(s). 
40% of the subjects selected all the characters, and read 
all the scenes of the storyline of each character: in the end 
they read the whole story. The other 60% only chose part of 
characters; 75% of them read all the scenes of the characters 
they selected, while the remainder 25% only read some 
scenes of each character they had selected. 
Subjects achieved a high degree of comprehension (3.32 
points out of 4). The comprehension of those who read it 
entirely was slightly better (avg. 3.533, sd. 0.1902) than 
those who did not (avg. 3.1844, sd. 0.4275) but this 
difference was not significant (T-Test t(13)=1.8614, 
p=0.0854). The direct observations seem to indicate that 
reading one storyline gives enough information about the 
related storylines to be able to understand them without 
exhaustive reading. 
People taking longer to read at the beginning of the 
experiment seemed to need less time reading when 
answering the comprehension tests (Pearson’s correl. coef.: 
0.4544), while the reading time did not seem related to the 
comprehension achieved (correl. 0.1311). 
C. Reading impact on contribution 
Half of the subjects contributed to the story. People with 
better comprehension did not perceive the contribution task 
as easier, quite the opposite (Correl. -0.5633 between 
comprehension and perceived ease of contribution); neither 
did they contribute more quickly than others (the correlation 
between comprehension and contribution time is a weak 
0.2495). It seems that people with higher comprehension are 
more concerned about the complexity of the story they have 
to contribute to. On the other hand, those with better 
comprehension needed to read a lot less when contributing 
(correl. -0.9094 between comprehension and reading time 
during contribution).  
The judge-rated consistency of contributions was high 
(3.67 points out of 4). It is quite remarkable that there is a 
strong correlation (0.8120) between comprehension and 
consistency of contribution, which seems to indicate that 
people with better understanding of the story create scenes 
that fit better with the existing events. 
D. Interest of the contributors 
An analysis of the contributions indicates that there is an 
interest in expanding the stories of the characters considered 
“main characters”, but the authors also expand the stories of 
the characters regarded as “secondary” (see Table II).  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
In some way, our proposal relates to the traditional 
hypertext storytelling, as it challenges the reader to navigate 
a non-linear story and the author to build its structure. 
Proppulsion 
readers 
interact 
with 
the 
narrative 
on 
interpretative (understanding the story) and functional 
(manipulating the interface) levels, but not on an explicit one 
as hypertext readers do when their elections alter the story 
(using the interactivity levels of Salen and Zimmerman [27]). 
Pope [28] discusses how hypertext fiction, although still 
commercially produced (e.g., Storyspace [29]), does not 
appeal to a wider audience, pointing as problems 
unsatisfying hyper-linking, random plot structures, and lack 
of closure, while Berstein [30] described similar problems as 
lack of coherence, causality, and closure. Pope highlights the 
interface as an influential factor in reading enjoyment, and 
fulfilling the reader’s expectations to add purposefully to 
what has already been read. 
Unlike this perception of hypertext fiction reading as 
hard, our experiment revealed that the subjects perceived the 
non-liner story as easy to read and understand. In consonance 
with our previous CrossTale experiments [5, 6], following 
storylines proves useful for reading the nonlinear narrative 
space. Associating storylines with the character narrative 
programs resulted in a quite natural way to comprehend the 
story, with readers characterizing them as having one 
protagonist accomplishing one goal. The temporal, thematic, 
and cause-to-effect qualities the Narrative Program seem to 
be a useful tool to achieve this “meaningfulness” that Pope 
and others demand for hypertext narrative links. 
The reader-perceived “main characters” of the story are 
those with longer and more defined narrative programs in 
terms of classic semiotics: characters that receive a mission 
and follow a series of events to accomplish their goals, 
finding helpers and opponents on their path. The classical 
narrative roles still apply to the protagonist perception, but 
the “multiple-points-of-view” perception prevails: in our 
story, the elf is an anti-hero character that acts as an 
antagonist of the knight, since their missions are opposed and 
she becomes a traitor, but she is regarded as the main 
protagonist along the knight since she has also a defined goal 
and takes lots of steps towards its accomplishment. It would 
be interesting to experiment with different stories combining 
different characters and roles in unexpected ways, to deepen 
on this understanding of how readers recognize main 
characters. People identify those characters quickly, and they 
use those main storylines as the backbone of their navigation. 
Reading all the scenes of all characters, or spending more 
time reading, were not decisive factors to raise the 
comprehension level. Comprehension seems to be achieved 
through the ability to identify key characters and scenes and 
to understand their relations with other storylines, rather than 
through an exhaustive processing of all the information in 
the narrative space. With those key events the reader’s mind 
can establish connections and fill the gaps in the story, as in 
Tanenmbaum’s experiment involving non-linear stories [25]. 
Then, making explicit the relations between characters in 
each part of the story (i.e., their roles in the main character 
narrative program) empowers the subjects understanding. 
Subjects with higher levels of comprehension needed less 
time for contributing and achieved higher levels of 
consistency with the previous story, which is consistent with 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
psychological studies on the effect of comprehension in 
authoring tasks [7] and reinforces our hypothesis that, in a 
collaborative context, enhancing the comprehension of the 
readers will enhance their ability to contribute. 
Non-linearity seems to encourage expanding the story 
from different character’s points-of-view. Although the 
“main characters” are used regularly, people also expand the 
stories of characters regarded as “secondary”. We 
hypothesize that those “secondary” characters can become 
“main characters” for the future readers, encouraging 
participation. Berstein’s Thespis [30] proposed a theatre-
inspired system in which each author acts as an autonomous 
character. Some multi-user tangible interfaces [11] also take 
this approximation, each author developing one character in 
the story. Our proposal differs in that any number of writers 
can develop any number of characters, but in this 
experiment, as in previous ones [5], it seems that it is usual 
to concentrate on one storyline at a time. 
Finally, compared with Crosstale [5, 6], the proportion of 
subjects who became contributors after reading was smaller. 
The experiment demanded subjects to complete a long series 
of tests after reading and this might have disrupted a possible 
creative task. Also, Crosstale presented a visual scene editor 
that might have made the contribution task more appealing. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This model to represent and interact with non-linear 
stories based on the classic semiotics concept of Narrative 
Programs, focused on human authoring, represents a quite 
different approach from most current models based on 
semiotics, which are oriented towards automatic generation, 
although it shares some aspects of those which pay attention 
to readership. 
 The resulting exploration and development of multiple 
point-of-view storylines within a larger narrative space 
resounds with traditional hypertext fiction, plagued with 
reading issues. The experiment with our small prototype 
shows that we seem to have avoided the issues, with 
pleasurable reading and proficient comprehension, based on 
reading through connected storylines. This understanding led 
to contributions with a good level of consistency, featuring 
largely, but not exclusively, the main characters.  
We intend to use larger narrative spaces to determine 
how comprehension (and engagement) scales as a massively-
authored narrative grows, and whether contributions preserve 
consistency and the overall meaning. We also intend to see 
which non-obtrusive support can be automatically provided 
to authors, in addition to more visual means of contributing.  
REFERENCES 
[1] CA. Scolari, “Transmedia storytelling: Implicit consumers, 
narrative worlds, and branding in contemporary media 
production”,  International Journal of Communication, vol. 3, 
2009, pp. 586-606. 
[2] “FanFiction”, http://fanfiction.net,  Web, retrieved: 9 Feb. 
2015. 
[3] S. Chatman, “Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in 
Fiction and Film”, Cornwell University Press, 1990. 
[4] J. Zimmerman, J. Forlizzi, S. Evenson, “Research through 
design as a method for interaction design research in HCI”, 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, 2007, pp. 493-502. 
[5] J. Colàs, A. Tapscott, A. Moghnieh, J. Blat, “Shared 
Narratives as a New Interactive Medium: CrossTale as a 
prototype for Collaborative Storytelling”, International 
Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol. 6, no 1 and 
2, 2013, pp. 12-23. 
[6] A. Tapscott, J. Colàs, A. Moghnieh, J. Blat, “Writing 
Consistent Stories based on Structured Multi-Authored 
Narrative 
Spaces”, 
OASIcs-OpenAccess 
Series 
in 
Informatics, vol. 32, Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer 
Informatik, 2013, pp. 277-292. 
[7] K. Cain, “Text comprehension and its relation to coherence 
and cohesion in children’s fictional narratives”, British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, vol. 21, no 3, 2003, 
pp. 335-351. 
[8] P. David, and M. Cavazza, "From debugging to authoring: 
Adapting productivity tools to narrative content description", 
Interactive Storytelling,  Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, 
pp. 285-296. 
[9] S. Ivo, and M. Theune, "Iterative authoring using story 
generation feedback: debugging or co-creation?", Interactive 
Storytelling, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2009, pp. 62-73. 
[10] K. Ryokai, and J. Cassell, “StoryMat: a play space with 
narrative memories”, Proceedings of the 4th international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, ACM, 1998, p. 201. 
[11] M. Theune, T. Alofs, J. Linssen, I. Swartjes, “Having one's 
cake and eating it too: coherence of children's emergent 
narratives”, OASIcs-OpenAccess Series in Informatics, vol. 
32, Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2013, 
pp. 293-309. 
[12] S. Gobel, L. Salvatore, and R. Konrad, "StoryTec: A digital 
storytelling platform for the authoring and experiencing of 
interactive and non-linear stories", Automated solutions for 
Cross Media Content and Multi-channel Distribution, 
AXMEDIS'08 , IEEE, 2008, pp. 103-110. 
[13] U. Spierling, S. A. Weiß, W. Müller, “Towards accessible 
authoring tools for interactive storytelling”, Technologies for 
Interactive Digital Storytelling and Entertainment, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 169-180. 
[14] K. Howland, J. Good, B. du Boulay, “Narrative threads: A 
tool to support young people in creating their own narrative-
based computer games”, Transactions on Edutainment X, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 122-145. 
[15] P. Likarish, and J. Winet, “Exquisite Corpse 2.0: qualitative 
analysis of a community-based fiction project”, Proceedings 
of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference, ACM, 
2012, pp. 564-567. 
[16] V. Propp, “Morphology of the Folktale”, University of Texas 
Press, 1968. 
[17] A. J. Greimas, “Structural semantics: An attempt at a 
method”, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1983. 
[18] P. Bailey, “Searching for storiness: Story-generation from a 
reader’s perspective”, Working notes of the Narrative 
Intelligence Symposium, 1999, pp. 157-164. 
[19] M. O. Riedl, and R. M. Young, “Character-focused narrative 
generation for execution in virtual worlds”, Virtual 
Storytelling. 
Using 
Virtual 
Reality 
Technologies 
for 
Storytelling , Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 47-56. 
[20] M. Mateas, and P. Sengers, “Narrative intelligence”,  
Proceedings AAAI Fall Symposium on Narrative Intelligence, 
1999 , pp. 1-10. 
[21] M. O. Cavazza, F. Charles, S. J. Mead, “ Character-based 
interactive storytelling”, IEEE Intelligent systems, 2002. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
[22] P. Gervás, “Propp's Morphology of the Folk Tale as a 
Grammar for Generation”, OASIcs-OpenAccess Series in 
Informatics, vol. 32, Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer 
Informatik, 2013, pp. 106-122. 
[23] M. Mateas, and A. Stern, “Façade: An experiment in building 
a fully-realized interactive drama”, Game Developers 
Conference, 2003, pp. 4-8. 
[24] K. Hartmann, S. Hartmann, M. Feustel, “Motif definition and 
classification to structure non-linear plots and to control the 
narrative flow in interactive dramas”, Virtual Storytelling. 
Using Virtual Reality Technologies for Storytelling, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 158-167. 
[25] J. Tanenbaum, K. Tanenbaum, M. S. El-Nasr, M. Hatala, 
“Authoring tangible interactive narratives using cognitive 
hyperlinks”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Intelligent 
Narrative 
Technologies III Workshop, ACM, 2010, p. 6. 
[26] J. Cohen, “Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement 
provision 
for 
scaled 
disagreement 
or 
partial 
credit”, Psychological bulletin, vol. 70, no 4, 1968, p. 213. 
[27] K. Salen, and E. Zimmerman, “Rules of play: Game design 
fundamentals”, MIT press, 2004. 
[28] J. Pope,  "A Future for Hypertext Fiction", Convergence: The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Research 
into 
New 
Media 
Technologies , vol. 12, no 4, 2006, pp. 447-465. 
[29] “Eastgate Storyspace”, http://www.eastgate.com/storyspace, 
Eastgate Systems Inc., Web, retrieved: 9 Feb. 2015. 
[30] M. Bernstein, “Card shark and thespis: exotic tools for 
hypertext narrative”, Proceedings of the 12th ACM 
conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 2001, pp. 41-50. 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

