Structuring Video Database using a Formal Methods Approach  
 
Noraida Haji Ali, Fadilah Harun 
School of Informatics and Applied Mathematics,  
Universiti Malaysia Terengganu, Terengganu, Malaysia  
e-mail: aida@umt.edu.my, elaharun@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract— Formal methods provide a foundation for many of 
the techniques that have changed the face of software 
development over the last two decades. Structuralizing video 
streams plays an important role in the processing of video. The 
basic structure for video is a hierarchical structure which 
consists of four kinds of components, namely frame, shot, 
scene, and video program. Formalizing supports the reliability 
and accuracy of the modeling language. Various researches 
have 
been 
done 
related 
to 
formal 
methods, 
video  
structure, and formalizing. This paper discusses the analysis of 
formal methods, applications, and structuring formal methods 
in video structure. The output from this study is, can 
determine the relation in video structure using the algebraic 
relation. 
Keywords-formal 
methods; 
video; 
video 
structure; 
formalization and formal specification. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A multimedia database is a structure and organizes 
multimedia information for content retrieval [1]. It supports 
the various multimedia data types like texts, images, audio 
and video [2]. Among all these media types, video is the 
most challenging one [3]. This is because video combines 
all other media types’ information into a single data stream. 
This is also because the challenges faced by researchers 
when implementing video increase even further when one 
moves from images to image sequences, or video clips. 
Also, every single video programs have their own rules and 
format. 
Structuring the design is important in the development 
phase of the system. Our research is focused on structuring 
video using formal speficications. Video structure used 
segmentation-based techniques because individual shots or 
scenes logically meaningful units [4]. In addition, each shot 
or scene consisting of a sequence of frames and each frame 
can be considered as the image, allowing the use of the 
techniques available that have been developed to model and 
query image data. The increase in processing power and 
storage capabilities of modern computers has led to the 
development of new multimedia applications. The structures 
of a videos that are commercially available are not mutually 
compatible and interoperable. Furthermore, there are no 
database support video and view schema objects. These 
problems led to an effort to determine the specifications of a 
new structure for video federation. Previous researchers 
have outlined the issues related to video systems and 
discussed the technical challenges involved in developing a 
general-purpose video system. There are important issues in 
multimedia 
database 
management, 
including 
the 
development of formal modeling techniques for multimedia 
information, especially for video and image data. This 
structure should be rich with the ability to capture 
abstractions and semantics of multimedia information. By 
using formal methods, we hope to improve the structure of a 
video and can be more efficient for their content retrieval. 
Some benefits expected from this study is the 
improvement of the quality of the video structure. The main 
objective of a formal specification notation is to assist the 
descriptions of video in order to make sure the structures are 
complete, consistent and unambiguous. Therefore, we 
propose an algebraic relation to design the relation in video 
structure. 
This paper is organized as follows: The following 
section discusses research background on previous research 
and problem statement. In Section III, the video structure is 
explained. The formalizing of video structure and video 
algebra relation also discussed with the given example. In 
Section IV, elaborate on future works in this research. 
Finally, our conclusions are stated in Section V. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
This study presents a formal methods as a proposed 
method to apply in the design and structuring video system. 
This method requires to forces an analysis of the system 
requirements at an early stage. 
A. Previous Research 
Structuring a video  used several techniques, such as 
temporal and spatial [5] relations  to design the database. 
However, structuring a video has a limitation, example in 
size and modeling the complex object in a wide range of 
types for indexing, searching and organization methods [6]. 
Therefore, the previous research tried to solve relation issues 
in multimedia database using the temporal specification. The 
temporal relations are to determine duration relations 
between multimedia objects. Djeraba and Briand [7] used the 
power of temporal Petri net to model the temporal and 
interactive relations. Another research into the structured 
temporal composition of multimedia is based on binary 
operators that represent some of the previously described 
relations between intervals of unknown duration has been 
done [5]. Other research uses a novel indexing technique 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Video
 
SC
SH
KF
based-on, efficient compression of the feature space for 
approximate similarity searching in large multimedia 
databases [8]. 
B. Problem Statement 
A major problem encountered in the current database 
system is the lack of a natural way to define complex 
queries. This caused by the gap between the way users think 
and query language used in most systems. Multimedia data 
manipulation is not as easy as in a conventional database. 
The database structure can be represented with a clear video 
and can also be specified in requests for their content, but the 
main problem is to get the content of the video database. The 
difficulty arises because we must match the contents of the 
media data in the database with the content specified in the 
query. Each  answer queries posted on media data, it must 
have an advanced technique in analyzing the contents of the 
data to get the different semantics associated with the media 
data [9]. The development of the new multimedia 
applications have been realized based on the improvements 
in processing and storage capabilities of latest computers 
[10]. Sometimes,  available video structures are mutually 
incompatible and interoperability between them cannot be 
easily achieved. Furthermore, none of the approaches 
supports video and object view schemas. The issues on 
pertaining to video and discuss technical challenges involved 
in developing a general-purpose video system are 
specification requirements and the reference architecture. 
The salient issues in video system include development of 
formal modeling techniques for video information. These 
models should be high in capabilities for abstracting 
multimedia information and capturing semantics [6]. An 
important feature in accessing to databases of unknown 
structure is the presence of a schema repository where the 
database structure is explained, and a meta-model which 
provides a set of legal relationships and actions for entities in 
the database [10]. By using formal methods, we intend to 
improve the structure of video and it can be more efficient to 
retrieve their content. 
III. 
VIDEO STRUCTURE 
Video is the technology of capturing, recording, 
processing, storing, transmitting, and reconstructing a 
sequence of still images and representing scenes in motion. 
It helps to present the real world events to users.  Video 
database provides random access to sequential video data. A 
basic video structure design it using segmentation-based 
techniques because individual shots or scenes logically 
meaningful units. 
In order to help the users to retrieve relevant video 
materials, effectively at various semantic levels, a method 
defines a hierarchical structure of video material based on 
hierarchical data model. The structured proposes three steps 
of informal specification, as shown in Figure 1: 
 
Firstly, video is segmented into shots by shot 
boundary detection techniques [3]. 
 
Secondly, key frames are selected to represent the 
shots. 
 
Finally, shots are clustered to scenes, based on the 
extracted shot features. 
 
Figure 1. Video Structuring Process 
A. Formalizing of Video Structure 
Even though the others video do not have any specific  
content structure, as a scenes and  videos, many videos have 
a  fraction sequence of frames that is recorded from a single 
camera motion (shot) that can also express the content 
structure of the video [11]. A basic video structure contains 
scene, shot and key frame [12]. In Figure 2, a set of video 
structure is shown. The algebraic relationship model is 
illustrated through the statement mathematics [13]. A tuple 
is a set of relations and it structured in an easy form and this 
is called the schema relationships. However, this study is 
still in early stage. Before, we look further on video 
database system; we start on video basic structure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Set of Video Structure 
 
A structure representation in Figure 2 can be described 
in the following algebraic relations. 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 1: 
 Shot boundary detection  
 
Step 3: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shot Clustering 
 
 
Step 2:  
 
 
Shot feature extraction  
 
Video Stream 
Scene 
Shot 
Frame 
Scene 
 
Shot 
 
Shot 
 
Frame 
 
Frame 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

V (SC, SH, KF) 
SHSC 
KF  SH 
 
where: 
V: video 
SC: sequence of shots. 
SH: unbroken sequence of frames, and 
KF: selected from a shot to represent the contents of the 
shot. 
B. Video Algebra Relation 
The basic structure of the video is a hierarchical 
structure. It is produced by the video program, scene, shot 
and key frame. A video program usually consists of a few 
scenes, and each scene includes one or more shots [11]. A 
key frame is a static image and minimum logic unit of 
video. A shot is an uninterrupted segment of video frame 
sequence with static or continuous camera motion. A scene 
is a series of shots that are sticked together from the 
narrative point of view. The definition below is to explain 
the structure of the video. 
 
𝑀𝑀
      (V, SC, SH, KF) 
 
MM : Multimedia Database 
 
Every Xi in existence contains four data, such as represented 
below: 
 
𝑀𝑀
      (Vi, SCij, SHjk, KFkm) : i, j,k,m is an integer number. 
 
Assume Xi is a video structure of i that exist in multimedia 
database (MM). Which consists of: 
 
V : {<v,i>} | i vi MM} 
Vi : is a video for video of the i 
There exists a video(Vi) , in the video structure (Xi). 
 
SC : {<<sc,i> v,j>} | i <sc, v> SCij} 
SCij  : jth  Scene for the ith  Video (Vi) 
 
SH : {<<sh,j> sh,k>} | j <sh, j> SHjk} 
SHjk : kth  Shot for the jth Scene (SCj) 
 
KF :{<<kf,k> sh,m>} | k <kf, k> KFkm} 
KFkm  : mth  Key Frame for the kth Shot (SHk) 
 
There exists Scene (SCj), Shot (SCk) and Key Frame 
(KFm) in the video (Vi). 
 
C. Example 
In this section, we are given an example of notation 
representation based on the hierarchical structure of the 
video. In Figure 1, we showed that in Video (V1) there are 
two scenes, two shots and two key frames, and the algebra 
relation are: 
V1 SC1j={1,1..2} SHjk={1..2,1..2} 
KFkm= {1..2,1..2}  
 
If  i=1, j=2, k=2 and m=2, so:  
 
V1 = {SC1,F, SH1,1, KF1,1} 
     = {SC1,2, SH2,1, KF2,1} 

Xi MM ={V1, SC1,1..2, SH1..2,1..2, KF1..2,1..2} | Xi MM 
 
This shows that, in Video (V1), there are two scenes that 
were identified by integer value j, Scene (SC1..2,1..2). There 
also had two shots that were identified by an integer value k, 
Shot (SH1..2,1..2). Lastly, key frame identified by integer m, 
(KF 1..2,1..2). 
 
In general: 
X : { Xi | i  I   Xi  MM } 
 
where: 
X : exists in multimedia database (MM) 
I : integer number (1≤ I ≥ n) 
 
SXi represents the total of video in multimedia database 
and it may increase depending on the circumstances and 
situation of an existing system. Therefore: 
 
 
SXi =  
𝑋
𝑛
𝑖=1
i 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Structuring video is an important step in video data 
management. The basic video structure is used hierarchical 
structure. The structured modeling approach has evolved 
into segmentation-based approach. In this paper a 
mathematical notation used to describe the structure of the 
database video more clearly. It can explain the relation 
between the scene, shot and key frame. Mathematical 
notation is a combination of delegated some elements in the 
structure. From the representation algebraic relations, the 
structure of video extracted can be developed further. The 
video relation algebra generated will help in the process to 
design new structures of video database using formal 
methods. By using formal methods, hope can improve the 
structure of video and can be more efficient to retrieve their 
content. 
Based on Figure 3 below, this paper focused on early 
stage in formal specification methods. We started with 
algebraic relation to identify the relation of set in video 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

structure. An algebraic relation is an algebraic structure 
equipped with the Boolean operations [13]. Formal 
specifications have two types are property-oriented and 
model oriented [14]. Algebraic relation is part of property 
oriented. Property oriented is state desired properties in a 
purely declarative way. Relation algebraic will be written in 
the form of a schematic for proving and verifying. A schema 
is essentially the formal specification analogous to 
programming language subroutines that are used to structure 
a system, where the schemas are used to structure a formal 
specification. Z [15] is physically powerful on sets and 
functions. Formal proving is a complete argument of 
mathematical representation and it is used to validate 
statement about system description. Formal proving can be 
done using theorem proving tools, i.e., Z/Eves [15]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Formal Specification Methods [16]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are grateful to Universiti Malaysia Terengganu for 
financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.K. Jalal, "Multimedia Database: Content and Structure", Workshop 
on Multimedia and Internet Technologies, 2001. 
[2] F. Mohamed, M.N.A. Rahman, and M.L. Abdullah, "The 
development of temporal-based multimedia data management 
application using web services", in Intelligent Systems Design and 
Applications (ISDA), 2011 11th International Conference on. 2011. 
[3] L.S. Affendey, A. Mamat, H. Ibrahim, and F. Ahmad, "Video Data 
Modelling To Support Hybrid Query", IJCSNS, 2007. 7(9): pp. 53. 
[4] B. Günsel and A.M. Tekapl, "Content-based video abstraction", In 
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, 
1998: pp. 128-131. 
[5] A. Duda and C. Keramane, "Structured temporal Composition of 
Multimedia Data", in iw-mmdbms. 1995. 
[6] A. Ghafoor, "Multimedia Support Infrastructure (MSI)", National 
Science Foundation  2006  [cited 2013 20 November]; Available 
from: http://www.cs.purdue.edu/. 
[7] C. Djeraba and H. Briand, "Temporal and interactive relations in a 
multimedia database system", in Multimedia Applications, Services 
and Techniques—ECMAST'97. 1997, Springer. pp. 457-473. 
[8] E. Tuncel, H. Ferhatosmanoglu, and K. Rose, "VQ-index: An index 
structure for similarity searching in multimedia databases", in 
Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on 
Multimedia. 2002: ACM. 
[9] D.A. Keim and V. Lum, "Visual query specification in a multimedia 
database system", in Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on 
Visualization'92. 1992: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
[10] D. Bećarević  and M. Roantree, "A metadata approach to multimedia 
database federations", Information and Software Technology, 2004. 
46(3): pp. 195-207. 
[11] C.-j. Fu, G.-h. Li, and K.-x. Dai, "A framework for video structure 
mining", in Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 2005. Proceedings of 
2005 International Conference on. 2005: IEEE. 
[12] T. Catarci, M.E. Donderler, E. Saykol, O. Ulusoy, and U. Gudukbay, 
"BilVideo: a video database management system", MultiMedia, 
IEEE, 2003. 10(1): pp. 66-70. 
[13] N.L. Sarda, "Algebra and query language for a historical data model", 
The Computer Journal, 1990. 33(1): pp. 11-18. 
[14] E.M. Clarke and J.M. Wing, "Formal methods: State of the art and 
future directions", ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 1996. 28(4): 
pp. 626-643. 
[15] J.A. Jusoh, M.Y.M. Saman, and M. Man, "Formal Validation of DNA 
Database Using Theorem Proving". 
[16] J. M. Wing, "A Specifier's introduction To Formal Method", Defense 
Advanced Research Project Agency (DOD), 1990. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal 
Specifications 
Methods
Formal 
Specification
Formal Proof
Model 
Checking
Program 
Verification
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

