TV6: A Revisit to System Design, User Socialization and Content Recommendation
in Social TV
Chong Yuan, Zhi Wang and Lifeng Sun
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
{yuanc10, wangzhi04}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, sunlf@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—The move to social TV has challenged the tradi-
tional TV experience by allowing users to interact with their
friends and receive social multimedia contents when they are
watching videos. Social TV has made the social experience
equally important to users as the video contents. The rapid
emergence of online social network service and video sharing
service in today’s Internet, as well as the open interfaces (e.g.,
Open API) make it possible for a third party to build a social
TV system, based on existing social network and online video
service infrastructures. In this paper, we share our experience
of designing, developing, deploying and operating TV6—a
social TV system that embeds multiple online social network
systems and online video sharing systems. Through detailed
analysis of TV6, we present our observations and insights on
provisioning superb social TV experience to users, including
social content provision and traditional video content provision.
Keywords-social TV; video sharing; recommendation algo-
rithm;
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed a rapid convergence of
online social network service and online video service. Due
to this convergence, Social TV, a new TV service, has
emerged as important video experience in recent years (e.g.,
CollaboraTV [1] and Social TV from Motorola [2]). In
Social TV service, users receive not only the traditional
video contents from the video systems, but also the social
multimedia contents from the social networks. Social TV
allows users to interact and share their feelings with their
friends while watching videos.
Numbers of works have been devoted to the system
implementation of Social TV. Coppens et al. have designed
AmigoTV, which allows users to communicate with each
other using voice, text and animated emoticons. Which
communication form is the best one has been ﬁercely
debated (e.g., [3]). Boertjes et al. [4] have designed AOLTV,
a Set-Top Box (STB) which offers users the ability to
send and receive instant messages and emails on their TV.
The commercial social Web TV Joost [5], enables users to
do text chatting while watching online videos. Traditional
user-generated content (UGC) providers like YouTube are
also trying to allow users to communicate with each other
through video conference while watching the same video.
D. Shamma et al. [6] have studied the integration of Twitter
updates during live video streaming.
Previous works are mainly focused on designing a new
Social TV system which includes building a new social net-
work system. This can be too expensive to realize especially
when there are dominant online social network systems such
as Facebook and Twitter. To overcome this problem and
build a cheap Social TV system, we propose to implement
TV6—a social TV system based on the existing online
social networks and online video sharing systems. We only
control the logical information ﬂow about how videos and
social contents reach different users. The name “TV6” stands
for the “Six-degree of separation”, which means users are
closely connected in the system with diverse video and social
sources. As TV6 embeds multiple online social network
systems, we can use their social data, such as social graph
and users’ proﬁles, to provide superb social experience to
users. Our goal is to create a socially watching environment.
In this paper, we share our experience of designing, de-
veloping, deploying and operating TV6. A recommendation
system is implemented in TV6 to recommend videos for
both group and individuals. Our contributions can be sum-
marized as follows: (1) System design and analysis of TV6,
without owning any video service system and social network
system, are presented in detail; (2) A variety of social
experiences are provided to users by using the valuable
social relationship and context from the social networks; (3)
We present how we recommend videos to users when they
are consuming the videos in the social network, e.g., they
join social groups to watch a video.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review
the related works in Section II. Our system design is shown
in Section III. Then social experiences provision and video
contents provision are explained in Section IV and Section
V respectively. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
People may feel closer to their friends when they are
synchronously watching TV with them [7]. Traditional web
video does not support synchronous viewing. In order to
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

address these explicit challenges, researchers have developed
different solutions. Recently, D. Shamma et al. [7] propose
three practical prototypes—“Messenger Zync”, “Web Zync”
and “Invisible Zync”, which enable people to watch web
video in synchronization. But these solutions have some
limitations. The “Messenger Zync” is required to use Ya-
hoo! Messenger for Windows where group conversations
are not possible. Though the “Web Zync” and “Invisible
Zync” provide group conversation, they do not embed social
relationship in the system. It is not convenient for users to
start a watching activity through the two prototypes. For
example, user has to copy and paste the URL of video to
every friend who he/she decides to invite.
Watching TV program with friends or families is consid-
ered to be a preferred social viewing experience. People like
to share videos with friends and suggest interesting videos to
others. The traditional TV or video service does not support
video suggestion. When users want to recommend a funny
clip to others, they have to send the video’s address through
SMS or Instant Messaging(IM). Ambient TV [8] enables
users to send video suggestion to others through the TV
directly. G. Harboe et al. [8] also show that video suggestion
can prompt communication between users and some people
even use suggestion as a conversation starter. Explicit sug-
gestions are playing important roles in social inﬂuence and
pulling participants into a shared TV experience.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we present how we build TV6 as a third-
party application, based on three large online social network
systems and several large online video sharing systems,
without real control of these systems.
A. System Architecture and Data Flow
Social network sites, such as Facebook [9] and Twitter
[10] have begun to offer APIs to developers to access users’
proﬁle data and social graph in order to create their own
applications. Leveraging the APIs, we can quickly construct
a social TV application.
TV6 is based on the design philosophy to incorporate
social relations and user proﬁles from social network sites
(SNS), and videos (only the title, URL and tag information)
from video sharing systems. In particular, the social network
sites used in TV6 are illustrated as below:
• Weibo [11]: A twitter-like service of Tencent company
(Tencent is one of China’s largest Internet service
portal)
• QQ [12]: An instant messaging service of Tencent
company
• QZone [13]: A friend social network of Tencent com-
pany
TV6 server can retrieve the social graph and user proﬁle
from these three SNS after obtaining users’ authorization.
Figure 1.
Overview of system architecture
The video sharing systems used in TV6 contain dominant
video sharing sites in China, such as Youku [14] and Tencent
video [15].
Fig. 1 provides an overview of the system architecture
which is basically consisted of three parts. The actual TV6
application is set up on our own server which occupies the
central position in the architecture. The application collects
user meta data from the server of social network system and
video meta data from the server of video sharing system
periodically. These meta data are stored in the database of
TV6 application. When a user performs an action, such as
sharing a video or posting a comment, the TV6 server han-
dles the request. Then the application generates appropriate
answers which are JSON or XML responses and pushes
these to the SNS server. The chat message are actually sent
through the SNS server or application server. But it seems
users can communicate with each other directly (described
in Section IV-A). Both the TV6 server and the SNS server
do not handle the requests of video steaming. Once a user
begins to watch a video, the video data is loaded from the
server of video sharing system. The system’s architecture is
divided into three parts. The TV6 server plays a central role
in the system and controls the logical data ﬂow in the system.
The SNS stores the user meta data and handles request from
TV6 server. The video sharing system stores the video data
and directly provides the video streaming for the user.
B. Social Information Collection
Our system is designed to make use of user proﬁles hosted
by the existing online social networks. The open protocol
OAuth is used in TV6 to access users’ proﬁles. When a user
uses TV6 for the ﬁrst time, he/she is asked to authorize our
system to use his/her social proﬁle via Open APIs provided
by these online social networks. After the authorization,
TV6 is able to access these information: (1) user’s social
connections, including which users they are following and
which users are following them; (2) users’ posted microblogs
, including the ones with video links; (3) the number of
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

shares of a particular video link, which can later be used for
video content provision.
C. Video Information Collection
As video links imported from different video sharing
sites are collected in the microblogs from users’ proﬁles,
we are able to retrieve the video information from these
video sharing sites. TV6 only collects the meta data, i.e.
titles, URLs and tags of the videos, to reduce bandwidth
and save storage. When users play videos in TV6, they will
receive streaming data from the original video servers of the
video sharing sites. After obtaining video titles and tags, we
will use the word segmentation method to ﬁnd patterns of
words in them. These patterns of words can be clustered into
several topics which can be used to describe the content of
the videos. This is very important for the recommendation
system, which will be described in Section V.
D. Content Presentation
After collection of social proﬁles and video meta data,
the contents are presented back to users by TV6 as below.
(1) Video sharing list: This page contains videos that users’
friends have shared. Because users are probably interested
in the content generated by their friends [16], they may want
to watch the videos in the video sharing list. (2) Watching
list: Users can see what their friends are watching now
and viewing histories of their friends. (3) Personal page: It
contains user’s personal information such as his/her proﬁle
photo, viewing history and sharing history. (4) Player page:
User can watch TV programs or videos on this page and
chat with friends through text or voice at the same time.
IV. SOCIAL EXPERIENCE PROVISION
In this section, we will present how social information
and interactions are provided to users.
A. Talking to Friends
Social communication is the basic feature in TV6. Rich
communication tools with different purposes are provided in
TV6.
Figure 2.
An example of public chat room in TV6.
1) IM-like Communication: The most important facility
of the Internet-based Social TV is that it connects friends
located distantly, allowing them to watch videos simultane-
ously, as if they were sitting on the same couch [17], [18].
TV6 offers various ways of communication to supply the
distant communication among different users. (1) Single chat
via voice and/or text is offered between users in pairs. (2)
Group voice chat is also offered in this system. Participants
can speak simultaneously just like they were talking face to
face. (3) Users in (1) and (2) are both chatting in privacy.
TV6 also provides public chat rooms for users watching the
same video to discuss and comment on it. Each video has
its own chat room which is seperate from other’s. The new
comments will be pushed to all users who are watching the
same video by using the AJAX technology, as illustrated in
Fig. 2.
2) Email-like Communication: The IM-like communi-
cation requires users to be online to join the discussions
timely. We also provide the Email-like communications to
sustain longer period responding. In particularly, we use the
Tencent Weibo and Tencent QQ to achieve the email-like
communication. A TV6 user can leave comments to his
friends by posting a message. The message will be sent to
Weibo and QQ by the TV6 server. With the “@” function,
the designated friend will notify the comments immediately
when he/she login Weibo or QQ.
B. Knowing about Friends
In a Social TV system, it is important for users to be
aware of their friends. In TV6, a user knows not only about
what videos his friends have watched and are watching, but
also about the exact playback position that his friends are
currently at.
1) Knowing Videos Watched by Friends: When a user
watch a video, TV6 stores the video record into the user’s
viewing history list. He/She can add his/her favourite videos
to favorites list. The user’s viewing history and favorites
list are public to his/her friends. Users can ﬁgure out what
their friends have watched in the past and what they like.
This facility allows users to learn more about others’ video
viewing habits and preferences, and fosters a sense of
connectedness.
Figure 3.
Knowing videos being watched by friends.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

2) Knowing Videos Being Watched by Friends: In TV6,
we also extended user’s awareness to what videos are being
watched now by his/her friends. TV6 provides a “video
watching list”, which contains the videos that the user’s
friends are watching, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Moving the
mouse pointer upon the title of video in the watching list, we
can see proﬁle photos and names of users who are watching
this video.
3) Knowing the Exact Playback Position of Friends:
In TV6, user knows the exact playback position of his/her
friends. There is a module embedded in our video player that
can display the playback position of user’s friends. When
user moves mouse pointer upon the seek bar of the player,
he/she can see photos of his/her friends who are watching the
same video currently upon the seek bar, as illustrated in Fig.
4. The position of a friend’s proﬁle photo indicates his/her
playback position. User’s playback position is available to
his/her friends by default and user can hide his/her playback
position by change personal setting.
4) Privacy Protection in TV6: The privacy issues arise
when users know everything about their friends’ viewing
status [19]. In TV6, we allow users to choose if their status
is available to their friends. Every user has two states: on-
line and away. The away state indicates that this user is not
watching TV now. When he logs out, his state will be set to
be away automatically. User’s state is public to his friends
by default. If user wants to watch video in privacy, he can
set himself to be invisible and his friends won’t know his
status.
C. Watching with Friends
1) Following A Friend’s Playback Progress: In Social
TV, users are interested in sharing the same playback
progress with their friends. The most popular Internet ap-
plication, web video, does not support synchronous social
conversation. People have to watch videos alone and the
most common interaction in video sharing websites conﬁnes
to asynchronous comment. But many people want to watch
some TV programs or videos, such as football games, with
their friends synchronously. Their demand may be difﬁcult
to be satisﬁed. When a user’s friend provides a feedback or
a commentary on the video’s interesting moment, it is hard
for the user to ﬁgure out which part of the video attract
his friends. From our survey, in order to achieve the goal
of synchronous watching, people may send the URL of a
video to their friends and appoint a time when they start to
watch it. Apparently, this is inconvenient.
In TV6, users can “follow” the playback progress of their
friends by just clicking on friend’s name or proﬁle photo.
Then the user will have a synchronized viewing experience
with friends. The user can interrupt the synchronization at
any time.
2) Making Any Video Live in A Social Group: Further-
more, our system also provides a functionality that users
 
Figure 4.
Friend’s proﬁle photo indicates playback position.
can create activities to invite their friends to watch videos
synchronously. Assuming that there is an important match
tomorrow and you want to watch it with your close friends,
you can create a private activity to invite your friends.
After the activity is created, all the invited participants will
get notiﬁcations about the activity. There is a conceptual
“room” for every activity and the creator of the activity is
the room’s “master”. The playback progress of participants
in one activity are the same and synchronous experiences
are shared. Since the number of participants may be very
large, nobody except the “master” is authorized to control
the playback progress, i.e., to pause, rewind or load a new
video (change channel). At the same time, participants can
communicate with each other through text and voice. Owing
to this technique, remotely located friends and families can
share watching experience together.
In order to guarantee the synchronization, a server was
used to control the playback progress of participants. If
the “master” changes playback status (pause, rewind or
change channel), the server will inform other participants
and change their status synchronously. All the other par-
ticipants’ progress synchronizes with the master’s progress.
The server checks every participant’s progress regularly to
guarantee the synchronization.
The synchronization module supplies a virtual co-present
“watch together” and “on-the-couch” viewing experience.
This feature offers social experience combining online video
and traditional TV program which might become a very
important characteristic of future social TV.
V. VIDEO CONTENT PROVISION
A. Group Recommendation
As described in Section IV-C2, users may form social
group to enjoy co-present viewing experience. As a result,
the concept of group interactions in such systems has been
boosted. Such group viewing provides great potential for
users to ﬁnd videos that interest members in the group,
namely, group recommendation [20].
In TV6, group characteristics are affected not only by
inside group members, but also outsiders (e.g., followings).
Furthermore, in our system, the relation within group is
sparse. The information that we can use is not enough.
So the recommendation that is only based on information
within group is not accurate. According to [20], using infor-
mation from external experts (”External Experts” indicate
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

the people who are friends of the group members but do
not belong to the group), can help us make more accurate
recommendation. Our system adopts this method which has
proved its availability.
The database stores information of more than 30,000
videos which contains URLs, titles and tags. We use Topic
Model clustering algorithm [21] to ﬁnd out videos’ eigenvec-
tors by using their titles and tags. After words segmentation
by LDA and data training, we obtain 10 topics by Topic
Model clustering algorithm which have probability statistical
signiﬁcance and each video has a 10-dimension vector on
them.
We calculate the characteristics of external experts by
making use of their history behavior. If the video viewing
history of an external expert contains N videos denoted as
vi(i = 1, 2...N) and we use Vi to represent the eigenvector
of vi. Then the preference of the external expert, denoted as
P, can be calculated by
P =
∑N
i=1 Vi
N
(1)
Users of online social networks are often very interested in
the content generated by their friends and there is strong
relation between friends’ preference and user’s interests. So
the group members’ interests can be represented by their
external experts’ preference. As different external expert
has different level of impact on group members, we need
a weight to describe their different contribution to group
members’ interests. Here we set two kinds of weights. One
is Weight of Friends Number since we know that friendship
relation can get people with similar interest together. The
other is Weight of Common Behavior as we have measured
that common behavior is an important indicator of similar
interest. So we count total two kinds of weights between
an external expert and inner group members. Then summate
them to be Weight of External Expert, denoted as w, to
describe the contribution of the external expert to group
members’ interests.
Now we can calculate proﬁle to group G from the
preference of group members’ external experts. We assume
group G has M external experts. The preference of the
external expert j is denoted as Pj and the weight j is denoted
as wj. We carry out the proﬁle of group G, represented by
FG, as below:
FG =
∑M
j=1 Pj × wj
∑M
j=1 wj
(2)
We get a “virtual external expert” proﬁle for each group
with Group Preference Model. We can use Topic Model to
ﬁnd out the eigenvector of each video in candidate list. Then
we calculate the similarity, denoted as sim(G, i), between
each group proﬁle and each video in the candidate list. We
carry out the similarity computing formulation as below:
sim(G, i) =
Vi · FG
∥Vi∥ × ∥FG∥
(3)
We can sort the videos in the candidate list by sim(G, i)
and the sorted video list is the ﬁnal group recommendation
results.
With the above steps, we can get a comprehensive group
recommend proposal which can fully meet needs of a more
open social network with features of great dynamic and
sparse tightness.
The algorithm of individual recommendation is almost the
same as group recommendation.
B. Recommendation Experiments
We conduct experiments based on real-world group to
evaluate the performance of our recommendation algorithm.
We compare our algorithm with three other algorithms—
Average satisfaction, Least Misery and Most Pleasure [22].
We invited 18 groups to form various scale of groups
including 8 groups of 3 people, 6 groups of 5 and 4 groups
of 8. These participants are college students and graduates
with various profession backgrounds. People in one group
enter into TV6 to watch videos together and our server
automatically collect their meta data from SNS. When video
play ends, TV6 recommends videos for them using the
four recommendation algorithms. The group members mark
scores ranging from 1 to 5 for the results. Then we calculate
the average scores for each algorithm. The higher scores
indicate better performance. As we have three group size:3,
5, 8, we compare the four algorithms under different group
size. Fig. 5 illustrates the results. Apparently, our algorithm
performs better than other algorithms.
In face of sparse relation among group members, tradi-
tional algorithms have a poor performance. In contrast, our
algorithm concerning the inﬂuence of external experts is
more effective. Because group members are very interested
in content generated by their friends, using external experts’
history behavior can well reﬂect group members’ interests.
Our algorithm can also be used in other situation, such as e-
commerce if we use tweets with e-commerce content instead
of video content.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We discuss how to design and deploy TV6, a novel
social TV system, embeds multiple social network systems
and online video sharing systems in this paper. The TV6
application is publicly available now and more than ﬁve
thousand people have installed it. A number of users give
us their experience and some valuable advice. Based on the
users’ feedback, we learn about how users use the social
TV system. TV6 is also currently used as an experiment
platform in a course of Tsinghua University and students
are conducting experiments on it.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Figure 5.
Performance under different group size.
We found that the awareness of friends in TV6 can make
users more engaged into the social television experience and
foster a sense of connectedness through television. Some
users say that they like to watch videos in their friends’
viewing history and favorites. After they login TV6, they
may go directly to the video watching list to view videos
that their friends are watching currently. Users are often
interested in the content generated or shared by their friends.
Some users even use their friends’ viewing history and
favorites as schedules of program that they plan to watch.
Provided viewing history and favorites of users’ friends can
help users to learn about their friends’ interests. Given the
access to know what others are watching and their playback
progress, users ﬁnd social TV viewing an opportunity to
communicate with each other. Users may feel closer to
others while interact with their friends and the sociability
among users is also enhanced.
For future work, we will combine the internal and exter-
nal factors to see whether the comprehensive method can
enhance the group recommendation. We will also do some
experiments on larger groups as the group size are relatively
small now.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Nathan, C. Harrison, S. Yarosh, L. Terveen, L. Stead, and
B. Amento, “Collaboratv: making television viewing social
again,” in Proceedings of the 1st international conference on
Designing interactive user experiences for TV and video, ser.
UXTV ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 85–94.
[2] C. Metcalf, G. Harboe, J. Tullio, N. Massey, G. Romano,
E. M. Huang, and F. Bentley, “Examining presence and
lightweight messaging in a social television experience,” ACM
Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl., vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
27:1–27:16, Nov. 2008.
[3] J. Tullio, G. Harboe, and N. Massey, “Investigating the use of
voice and text chat in a social television system,” Changing
Television Environments, pp. 163–167, 2008.
[4] E. Boertjes, J. Klok, O. Niamut, and M. Staal, “Connecttv:
Share the experience,” in Adjunct Proceedings of EuroITV,
2007, pp. 139–140.
[5] http://www.joost.com. October 2012.
[6] D. Shamma, L. Kennedy, and E. Churchill, “Tweet the
debates: understanding community annotation of uncollected
sources,” in Proceedings of the ﬁrst SIGMM workshop on
Social media.
ACM, 2009, pp. 3–10.
[7] D. A. Shamma, M. Bastea-Forte, N. Joubert, and Y. Liu,
“Enhancing online personal connections through the synchro-
nized sharing of online video,” in CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI EA ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 2931–2936.
[8] G. Harboe, C. J. Metcalf, F. Bentley, J. Tullio, N. Massey,
and G. Romano, “Ambient social tv: drawing people into a
shared experience,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’08. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 1–10.
[9] http://developers.facebook.com. February 2013.
[10] https://dev.twitter.com. February 2013.
[11] http://t.qq.com. February 2013.
[12] http://im.qq.com. February 2013.
[13] http://qzone.qq.com. February 2013.
[14] http://www.youku.com. February 2013.
[15] http://v.qq.com. February 2013.
[16] P. Cesar and D. Geerts, “Past, present, and future of social
tv: A categorization,” in Consumer Communications and
Networking Conference (CCNC).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 347–351.
[17] D. Geerts and D. De Grooff, “Supporting the social uses of
television: sociability heuristics for social tv,” in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ser. CHI ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009,
pp. 595–604.
[18] P. Cesar and D. Geerts, “Understanding social tv: a survey,” in
Proceedings of the Networked and Electronic Media Summit
(NEM Summit 2011), Torino, Italy, September 2011, pp. 94–
99.
[19] G. Harboe, N. Massey, C. Metcalf, D. Wheatley, and G. Ro-
mano, “The uses of social television,” Comput. Entertain.,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 8:1–8:15, May 2008.
[20] X. Wang, L. Sun, Z. Wang, and D. Meng, “Group recommen-
dation using external followee for social tv,” in Multimedia
and Expo (ICME), 2012 IEEE International Conference on,
july 2012, pp. 37–42.
[21] D. M. Blei and J. D. Lafferty, “Dynamic topic models,” in
Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
learning, ser. ICML ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006,
pp. 113–120.
[22] M. Gartrell, X. Xing, Q. Lv, A. Beach, R. Han, S. Mishra,
and K. Seada, “Enhancing group recommendation by incor-
porating social relationship interactions,” in Proceedings of
the 16th ACM international conference on Supporting group
work.
ACM, 2010, pp. 97–106.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

