Classification of Human Skin Color                                                          
and its Application to Face Recognition 
 
Marwa Jmal, Wided Souidene Mseddi, Rabah Attia 
Electronic Systems and Communication Network Dept,  
TUNISIA Polytechnic School 
marwa.jmal@telnet-consulting.com, 
wided.souidene@ept.rnu.tn, rabah.attia@enit.rnu.tn 
 
Anis Youssef 
Head of Innovation Activities  
TELNET Group, Tunisia 
Technological Park El Ghazala,Tunisia 
anis.youssef@groupe-telnet.net 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel human skin color 
classification into skin color tones: White and Black. This is 
performed by developing a skin color classifier based on pixel-
based classification using RGB model. Our proposed method is 
classified under the category of an explicitly defined skin 
region model. The skin classifier divides our database formed 
by some images from the FERET set of faces into two sub-
databases according to the skin color. The skin color 
classification method is then applied on a face recognition 
technique by reducing the number of trained images in the 
matching process. The performance of the proposed human 
skin color classifier is evaluated perceptually. Experimental 
results showed that our proposed skin color classifier is able to 
classify a face into its possible skin color tone and reaches 87% 
as hit rate.  
 Keywords-Skin color classification; Face recognition; Pixel-
based classification; RGB model.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Face recognition is a biometric technique, which aims to 
identify a person from a digital image by comparing its 
extracted facial features with the ones of images in database. 
This field has presented for the past decades, the center of 
extensive research and it was mainly used for security and 
access control. However, human face image is vulnerable to 
a lot of variations caused by aging, illumination changes, 
facial expressions and low resolution, which make it harder 
for face recognition techniques to acquire interesting 
discrimination results. 
Several approaches of face recognition were developed 
as a solution to this problem. In this paper, we employ 
Lowe’s 
Scale 
Invariant 
Feature 
Transform 
(SIFT) 
descriptors [6] [13] to detect facial features. 
SIFT descriptors are known as the most local invariant 
feature descriptors. First, they were developed for object 
recognition systems and have become, recently, the core of 
many algorithms in computer vision applications. This 
method transforms an image into local feature vectors, which 
are invariant to image translation, scaling and rotation, and 
partially invariant to illumination changes and 3D projective 
transform. However, SIFT descriptors were designed only 
for gray images [9]. Thus, the color component in an image 
grants weighty information for object classification (animals, 
flowers, faces, etc.). For some sort of applications, such as 
face recognition, color may be an important distinction tool 
for discrimination and it has been proven that it is very 
salutary and robust for applications applied on faces 
(detection, tracking and recognition). 
Human skin color classification finds out to which color 
tone the skin belongs. The simplest and most employed 
technique for skin modeling is to explicitly define skin 
region [12]. The advantage of this method is the simplicity of 
detection rules which leads to building a very fast classifier. 
Other skin modeling techniques employing statistical based 
approaches are involved such as neural networks [7], k-
means clustering [3] and Bayesian networks [8]. 
Unlike it seems to be, skin modeling is complex and 
quite challenging. In fact, skin color in an image depends 
mostly on illumination conditions which affect the 
distribution model of the skin color. Other problems facing 
skin color classification are shade and shadow occlusions, 
resolution as well as skin tone variation between races.  
The purpose of this study is to develop a skin color 
classifier into skin color tones in order to improve the face 
recognition results based on SIFT descriptors.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is 
dedicated to the human skin color classification in which our 
proposed method is detailed. The application of our classifier 
to face recognition using SIFT descriptors is presented in 
Section 3. Experimental results are covered in Section 4. In 
Section 5, the conclusion is drawn. 
II. 
HUMAN SKIN COLOR CLASSIFICATION  
In general, the purpose of this study is to enhance a 
human skin classifier that is able to effectively classify skin 
color tones. To reach this objective, this section will present 
the pursued methodology which is divided into two steps: 
skin segmentation and skin color modeling.  
A. Skin segmentation 
Precise skin segmentation aims to remove all "non-skin" 
pixels in order to acquire good results in skin classification. 
Each image in the database was segmented according to the 
method proposed in [1]. In this article, a skin segmentation 
scheme based on RGB (Red, Green, Blue) pixels' color is 
developed. The model presented in [1] is divided into two 
rules. A pixel is considered as skin if: 
 
 
       
         
(1) 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

and 
 
 
 
         
(2) 
 
The RGB values of skin pixels were preserved as they 
are, while the RGB values of non-skin pixels were mapped 
to [0 0 0]. Fig. 1 exemplifies the skin segmentation process 
to preserve only skin pixels. 
        
 
 
        
 
   (a)  
                       (b) 
Figure 1. Example of skin segmentation: (a) Original image, (b) Mask 
image. 
This process excludes different parts like eyes, hair and 
accessories. Thus, it is not totally effective since it confuses, 
for example, skin with bright hair such as in Fig. 1 where 
some parts of the hair were not removed. 
This method outputted a mask image (Fig. 1 (b)) and 
stored it for further applications. 
B. Skin color modeling 
The fundamental goal of skin color modeling is to create 
a decision rule that will distinguish between skin color 
tones. To achieve this objective, this section will describe 
the methodology which is divided into three main steps as 
follows: 
 
Selection of the color space, 
 
Choice of skin color tones, 
 
Creation of the decision rule. 
 
1) Selection of the color space: The most important step 
is to select the color space in order to acquire more accurate 
classification results. Many color spaces have been involved 
in the problem of skin color representation and recognition 
such as RGB, YCrCb (Luminance, Chroma: Red, Chroma: 
Blue) and HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value). Shin et al. [4] 
suggest a comparison of the performance of eight color 
spaces for skin detection. As a conclusion, RGB and YCrCb 
were the best classified color spaces when dealing with 
separability. Based on this result, the RGB color space will 
be used for skin color mapping. 
2) Choice of skin color tones: In general, skin color 
tones are white, yellow, brown and black. In [10], the skin 
tone set was classified as white, brown and black since the 
yellow had its tone too close to the white one. However, 
experiment results had shown that the highest incidence of 
error was found in the brown skin color set: almost half of 
brown colored skin was misclassified. From this result, in 
the current paper, we present a new method for skin color 
classification into white and black tones based on the RGB 
model. Brown tone is classified under the black set. 
3) Creation of the decision rule: The human skin color 
classification technique is derived from histograms. In fact, 
histogram-based segmentation approach is an efficient 
method for image segmentation given its rapidity in 
training. Moreover, Vezhnevets, Sazona and Andreeva [2] 
revealed that this approach is independent from the shape of 
skin distribution. A new developed RGB ratio histogram 
was plotted to elicit new threshold for skin color tones. This 
ratio was formed by mixing RGB values in order to define 
new colors. It is defined as follows: 
 
Ratio: 
   
        
(3) 
 
The skin tone classification will be based on computing 
the distance between two histograms, histogram of a 
reference skin tone and histogram of a query skin tone, and 
comparing it to some thresholds. 
In literature, two methodologies exist in histogram 
distance measure: probalistic and vector. Probalistic based 
approach measures the distance between probability density 
functions. Examples of distances used in this approach are 
the Bhattacharyya distance or B-distance [14]. However, 
vector based measures between fixed histograms are more 
used in image indexing and retrieval [15] [11] such as city 
block, euclidean, correlation or intersection. In this paper, 
correlation has been used as a distance measure between 
two histograms h1 and h2. The range of values of this 
measure is always included between 0 and 1. The closer the 
distance to 1, more similarity is detected. This measure is 
given by: 
 
 (     )   
∑
    
̅̅̅( )  
̅̅̅( )
 
   
√∑
  
̅̅̅ ( )
 
   
 ∑
  
̅̅̅ ( )
 
   
 
(4) 
Where 
 ̅( )    ( )    
  ∑  ( )
 
   
 
(5) 
 
In order to improve the classiﬁcation results, we have 
added a second rule, which is based on the interpretation of 
the color distribution of an image as a probability 
distribution. In fact, the color distribution can be 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

characterized by three moments on each channel: mean, 
variance and skewness. Skewness measures the asymmetry 
of the probability distribution. If the value of the c color 
channel at the (x, y) image pixel is   (   ) and the number 
of pixels in the image is M × N, then skewness is given by: 
(        )  ( 
 
     ∑ ∑(  (   )
 
   
 
   
    ) )
 
  
(6) 
Where 
 
    
 
     ∑ ∑   (   )
 
   
 
   
 
(7) 
 
We computed the mean and skewness of red component 
values from the RGB color space of each image and compare 
them to some boundary. This choice was based on the fact 
that a majority of skin colors cluster in red channel. 
C. Human skin color classiﬁcation process 
Skin color classiﬁcation is composed from a pre-
processing step and classiﬁcation step. The entire process is 
introduced in Fig. 2. 
The pre-processing consists first in computing ratio 
given in equation (3) of the reference image, which 
represents black or white skin color tone and it is segmented 
so that the only parts left are skin regions. Then, histogram 
        is plotted. 
The classiﬁcation phase starts by first processing the 
query image: face detection, using the Viola-Jones face 
detector [17], and segmentation using the method described 
in paragraph II.A. After that, ratio (3), mean and skewness 
of red component values are computed.  
Then, histogram           is plotted and distance 
between histogram of query image and the one of reference 
image is computed. Let       the distance between          
of reference image and            of query image. 
Finally, obtained values are compared to some deﬁned 
thresholds in order to classify the skin color into its 
corresponding tone where at least two rules should be 
satisﬁed. 
Experiments of this proposed method have led to a new 
rule. Skin color tone is classiﬁed as black if at least two out 
of the following three conditions are satisﬁed: 
 
         
(8) 
        
(9) 
           
(10) 
 
Where T1 and T2 are thresholds experimentally 
determined. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Human skin color classification process 
 
III. 
APPLICATION OF THE HUMAN SKIN CLASSIFIER TO 
FACE RECOGNITION 
Human skin color classification may be considered as a 
preprocessing operation to many applications. In our proper 
application, we applied it on face recognition using SIFT 
descriptors. 
A. SIFT descriptors deﬁnition 
SIFT is an algorithm developed by David Lowe [6]. It 
aims to detect and identify similarities between extracted 
features of different digital images. SIFT features extraction 
consists mainly in four steps: 
 First step is to detect points of interest which 
correspond to the extreme points in an image. Those 
points are calculated from plane subsets of Difference 
of Gaussian (DoG) ﬁlters applied to the image at 
different scales. 
 Then, points of interest with low extreme of DoG are 
discarded. 
 After that, one or many orientations are given to the 
relevant points of interest. 
  Finally, digital descriptors derived from these 
orientations are modeled with a set of 128-length 
feature vectors. 
SIFT descriptor outputs large number of features with 
different scales and locations that cover the whole image. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Once extracted, feature vectors of an image may be 
compared to the query ones to ﬁnd the most relevant. This is 
called matching process. 
B. Matching features 
Feature matching has presented a major concern in 
computer vision and pattern recognition for several decades. 
For image matching and recognition, extracted features 
from the input image are compared with ones extracted from 
training images in database in order to identify the most 
similar image to the input one. This process is based on an 
image similarity measure between two images. Many 
factors can affect the performance of the matching such as 
the matching measure criterion and the type of used 
features. In this paper, we employ the fast approximate near 
neighbors measure [5]. 
In [5], Muja and Lowe compare many algorithms for 
Fast Approximate Nearest Neighbor (FANN) search. As a 
result, two algorithms showed the best performance. This 
algorithm used either the hierarchical k-means tree or 
multiple randomized kd-trees. 
C. Face recognition 
The human skin color classification process is ﬁrst 
applied on our database in order to divide it into two sub-
databases and to compute and save SIFT descriptors for 
each image. In the recognition phase, the skin color tone of 
the query image is determined, SIFT descriptor is computed 
and finally, the feature matching distance between SIFT 
descriptor of query image and ones of each of trained 
images in the appropriate database is evaluated. The 
resulting distance matches the query image to the nearest 
ones in database. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Our experiments were carried out with a set of FERET 
images [16]. This database contains 1564 sets of images for 
a total of 14,126 images that includes 1199 individuals and 
365 duplicate sets of images. 
In this paper, we selected a set of 200 (near) frontal FERET 
faces with different skin color tones: 100 samples of faces 
classiﬁed as black and 100 samples of faces classiﬁed as 
white. We ﬁrst present the evaluation results of our skin 
color classiﬁer followed by the face recognition results 
before and after classiﬁcation. 
1) 
Human skin color classiﬁer: The obtained results of 
our classiﬁer applied on each skin tone are shown in table I.  
TABLE I.  
HIT AND ERROR RATES 
Skin color 
white 
black 
Total 
Hit percentage (%) 
90  
84 
87 
Error percentage (%) 
10 
16 
13 
 
For the 100 white tone sample images, 10 were classiﬁed 
incorrectly, while for the 100 black tone sample images, 16 
were classiﬁed incorrectly. In fact, misclassiﬁcation is 
caused mainly by bad illumination conditions. Fig. 3 shows 
some of misclassiﬁed skin color tones. The two faces belong 
to white tone but due to dark illumination they were 
classiﬁed as black tone. 
Moreover, when considering the miscalssified black skin 
tones, we note that most of them belong to brown skin 
tones. 
   
  
  
  
 
 
Figure 3. Examples of incorrectly classiﬁed black skin color tone 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Examples of incorrectly classiﬁed skin color tones 
Our developed classiﬁer is able to classify 83% of faces 
successfully. This result is higher than the hit rate reached in 
[10] where only 70% of skin color tones were well 
classiﬁed. In that study, faces were classiﬁed into black, 
brown and white skin tones using also a pixel-based 
classiﬁcation based on the RGB model.  
The time elapsed for the classiﬁcation of our database is 
around 100sec (0.5sec for each image). This elapsed time 
includes: reading image from database, face detection, face 
segmentation, average of red component computing, 
histograms computing and comparison to thresholds. 
2) Face recognition using SIFT descriptors: An 
example of the performance of the employed face 
recognition technique before and after skin classification is 
presented. Fig. 5 presents the query image. In our database, 
ﬁve images belong to this person. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Query image 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
The face recognition results before and after classiﬁcation 
are illustrated in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 where the ﬁrst most 
similar images to the query one are displayed.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. The first similar images to the query before skin classification 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The first similar images to the query after skin classification 
According to the qualitative evaluation of the retrieved 
images, retrieval results are ameliorated and become more 
accurate. In fact, in the presented example, 90% of faces 
belonging to the same person appeared in the first ten 
retrieved images. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Human skin color classiﬁcation into skin tones is a hard 
operation since skin color may be easily affected by 
environmental effects especially illumination (light, shade, 
etc.). Moreover, it is considered as a delicate operation since 
it is employed as a preprocessing step in many systems such 
as face recognition. As a consequence, those systems’ 
performance is highly related to the results obtained in the 
classiﬁcation step. In spite of those facts, our proposed 
human skin color classiﬁer based on RGB model succeeded 
to reach a hit rate of 87%. Also, its high speed and accuracy 
makes it appropriate for real time applications. Hence, 
classiﬁcation reduces the processing time, but can degrade 
the recognition performance.  
In the future, this work should focus on overcoming the 
effect of illumination in skin color classiﬁcation. In fact the 
luminance histogram skewness is correlated with surface 
brightness. When the image of a surface has positively 
skewed statistics, it tends to appear darker than a similar 
surface with lower skewness. Thereby, image illumination 
can be enhanced basing on the skewness value. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research and innovation work is carried out within a 
MOBIDOC thesis funded by the EU under the PASRI 
project. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  G. Osman, M. S. Hitam and M. N. Ismail, "Enhanced skin 
colour classifier using RGB Ratio model," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1212.2692, 2012. 
[2]  V. Vezhnevets, V. Sazonov and A. Andreeva, "A survey on 
pixel-based skin color detection techniques," Proc. Graphicon, 
2003, pp. 85-92. 
[3]  K. Ravichandran and B. Ananthi, "Color skin segmentation 
using 
k-means 
cluster," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computational and Applied Mathematics, vol. 4, no. 2, 2009, 
pp. 153-157. 
[4]  M. C. Shin, K. I. Chang and L. V. Tsap, "Does colorspace 
transformation make any difference on skin detection?," in 
Applications of Computer Vision, 2002. (WACV 2002). 
Proceedings. Sixth IEEE Workshop on, IEEE, 2002, pp. 275-
279. 
[5]  M. Muja and D. G. Lowe, "Fast approximate nearest  
neighbors with automatic algorithm configuration," In 
VISAPP(1), 2009, pp. 331-340. 
[6]  D. G. Lowe, "Distinctive image features from scale-invariant 
keypoints," International journal of computer vision, vol. 60, 
no. 2, 2004, pp. 91-110. 
[7]  N. Bourbakis, P. Kakumanu, S. Makrogiannis, R. Bryll and S. 
Panchanathan, "Neural network approach for image chromatic 
adaptation for skin color detection," International journal of 
neural systems, vol. 17, no. 01, 2007, pp. 1-12. 
[8]  D. Chai, S. L. Phung and A. Bouzerdoum, "A Bayesian 
skin/non-skin color classifier using non-parametric density 
estimation," in Circuits and Systems, 2003. ISCAS'03. 
Proceedings of the 2003 International Symposium on, pp. II- 
464, 2003. 
[9]  A. E. Abdel-Hakim and A. A. Farag, "Csift: A sift descriptor 
with color invariant characteristics.," In Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition,2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference 
on, vol. 2, 2006, pp. 1978-1983. 
[10]  I. Boaventura, V. Volpe, I. da Silva and . A. Gonzaga, "Fuzzy 
Classification of Human Skin Color in Color Images," IEEE 
Int. Conf. on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 6, 2007, pp. 
5071-5075. 
[11]  M. J. Swain and D. H. Ballard, "Color indexing," International 
journal of computer vision, vol. 7, no. 1, 1991,  pp. 11-32. 
[12]  J. Kovac, P. Peer and F. Solina, "Human skin color clustering 
for face detection," vol. 2, 2003. 
[13]  D. G. Lowe, "Object recognition from local scale-invariant 
features," Computer vision, 1999. The proceedings of the 
seventh IEEE international conference on, vol. 2, 1999, pp. 
1150-1157. 
[14]  T. Kailath, "The divergence and Bhattacharyya distance 
measures in signal selection," Communication Technology, 
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 15, no. 1, 1967, pp. 52-60. 
[15]  M. Flickner, H. Sawhney, W. Niblack, J. Ashley, Q. Huang, 
B. Dom, M. Gorkani, J. Hafner, D. Lee, D. Petkovic and 
others, "Query by image and video content: The QBIC 
system," Computer, vol. 28, no. 9, 1995, pp. 23-32. 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

[16]  P. J. Phillips, H. Wechsler, J. Huang and P. J. Rauss, "The 
FERET database and evaluation procedure for face-
recognition algorithms," Image and vision computing, vol. 16, 
no. 5, 1998, pp. 295-306. 
[17]  P. Viola et M. Jones , "Rapid object detection using a boosted 
cascade of simple features," In Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 2001. CVPR 2001. Proceedings of the 2001 
IEEE Computer Society Conference on, IEEE, 2001, pp. I-
511. 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

