Development of Context-Aware Real-Sense Services 
for Multi-Media and Multi-Device Environment 
 
Hyunjeong Lee, Jaedoo Huh, Il-Woo Lee, 
Energy IT Technology Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, South Korea 
{hjlee294, jdhuh, ilwoo}@etri.re.kr 
Sang Ho Lee 
Dept. of Software Engineering 
Chungbuk National University 
Cheongju, Chungbuk, South Korea 
shlee@cbnu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract- In this paper, we propose based real sense media 
services based on context-aware. Some real sense technologies 
provide the same services without considering the users’ 
preferences and context. So, some users don’t want the 
unilaterally and passively real sense services. For solving these 
problems, we consider the users’ context, such as gender, age, 
preferences and provide the adequate real sense services for 
each user. First, we collect the context of users, environment 
and devices; then, we process and select the proper services 
considering the situation. Using this method, we can provide 
context-aware based real sense services for users more 
appropriately. 
Keywords-real sense; context-aware; preference; ubiquitous. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As many 3D contents and services are widely used, real-
sense technologies are studied and developed to provide 
more realistic feeling for users. They focus on the real-sense 
media playback, multiple audio/video synchronization, 
sensory effects, and so on [1]. Most of real-sense services 
provide unilateral and passive effects. But, all users do not 
like the same real-sense effects, and some services are not 
adequate for some situations. For example, someone likes 
water spray effects, but the other does not. Therefore, if we 
consider context-awareness in real-sense service, then we 
can provide real-sense effects with considering users’ 
preferences and context. Context-aware computing is the 
ability of a user’s applications to discover and react to 
changes in the context in which they are situated [2][3]. If we 
think over these technologies for real-sense services, then 
users will feel more sympathy by considering contexts, such 
as users’ age, gender, tastes, environmental situation, and so 
on [4]. So, we propose real-sense media services based on 
context-awareness 
for 
multi-media 
and 
multi-device 
environment. Multi-media means the contents are created 
and encoded using various media, such as several cameras, 
real-sense devices, in order to real-sense services for users. 
The contents are decoded as the original, and processed 
according to users’ context. First, we collect the context of 
users, environment and devices from sensors and profiles. 
Additionally, we consider the environment and devices for 
users; then, we process and provide the proper services for 
users considering their situation. Using this method, we can 
provide context-aware based real sense services more 
appropriately and effectively. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
explain the related works of context-awareness and real-
sense media services. We describe the context-aware based 
real-sense media services in Section 3, and present our 
conclusions in Section 4.  
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As Mark Weiser introduced ubiquitous computing and its 
vision of people and environments augmented with 
computational resources, many works for context-aware 
computing have been studied to provide information and 
services wherever and whenever users desired [5]. But, it is 
not easy to recognize contexts about environment and 
people, and to provide automatic services according to the 
context without human repulsion [6]. To aware the situation 
of users and their environment, many technologies are 
required to collect data, such as sensors, identifiers, 
predefined context, and so on. These days, there are many 
researches of context-awareness and applications using it. 
The EasyLiving project of Microsoft Research is to 
develop 
architecture 
and 
technologies 
for 
building 
intelligent environments that contains innumerable devices 
to provide intelligent environments [7]. Components in the 
environments include middleware, world modeling, and 
service description to provide users access to information 
and services. Also, the devices and systems in the 
environments have to understand the physical space in order 
to support richer interactions with users. 
The context-aware middleware for ubiquitous robotic 
companion systems (CAMUS) is a middleware for context-
aware applications with a development and execution 
methodology [8]. The CAMUS provides a context-aware 
framework for a ubiquitous robotic companion (URC), such 
as network-based hardware robots or software robots. To do 
this, CAMUS collects contextual information from various 
kinds of sensors and transfers the appropriate contextual 
information to variety of applications. Also, CAMUS 
provides autonomous service agents to recognize the context 
and to adapt themselves to different situations. In [9], 
content recommendation service agent (SA) and context-
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

aware task were developed based on the service framework 
and task development methodology of CAMUS.  
Internet technologies are also considering context-
awareness. As more and more users and services appear and 
utilize the Internet, it has some technological and 
operational limits imposed by its architecture in its attempt 
to give full support to the new requirements introduced by 
increasing services, applications, and content [10]. Also, 
users expect higher levels of performance, security, and 
reliability. Therefore context-aware service discovery is 
considered 
in 
future 
internet 
to 
provide 
adapted 
communications for new services, applications and content. 
This approach is expected to improve the satisfaction of 
users’ 
expectations 
by 
matching 
offered 
service 
characteristics with requirements and preferences previously 
determined by them. 
   As we described above, context-aware computing aims for 
maximizing user’s convenience and the utilization of 
environmental resource. This paper discusses technical 
issues regarding context-awareness for real-sense media 
service to consider the users’ preference and context 
information.  
 
III. 
CONTEXT-AWARE BASED REAL-SENSE SERVICES 
A. Conceptual model for the Context-aware based real-
sense services 
In this paper, we describe a scenario for real-sense 
services based on context-awareness for the purpose of 
maximizing the users’ comfort and convenience.  
 
Real-Sense Media Devices
Context-Awareness
Real-Sense
Services
 
Figure 1.  A Conceptual Model for Context-aware based real-sense 
services 
 
The conceptual model for the Context-aware based real-
sense services mentioned above is illustrated in Figure 1. 
There are many devices for real-sense effect in the home, 
hospital, education center, and so on. We recognize real-
senses in the content, and determine which devices to apply 
for the service. In this stage, we have some issues on which 
devices are available and who is the user for the service. To 
solve the issue, we use some kinds of technologies to 
recognize the user and devices in the space.  
In this paper, we use camera, infrared and 3D depth 
sensors in the device to detect users and users’ motion. For 
real-sense rehabilitation service, we define some item to 
describe the users’ context and preferences. Using the Real-
sense service based on context-awareness, users feel more 
comfortable and convenient in the future medical devices. 
B. Technical Issues 
There are some issues to discuss. Figure 2 shows technical 
issues for real-sense service based on context-awareness. 
First, sensor platform detects devices in the space or defines 
configuration information before hand. And we recognize 
users and environmental information. Temperature, humidity, 
weather is the environmental information, which is optional 
and is for further services. In our laboratory, we use devices 
with various sensors. They can detect the users’ physical 
condition and motion. Secondly, a context-aware framework 
in a service server recognizes the situation that who is the 
user, what the service is needed, where the location the 
service is provided, and which adequate devices the real-
sense service play. Then, the context-aware framework 
notifies this information to the service agent to provide the 
adequate real-sense service for the user. 
 
Sensor 
Platform
Context-aware 
Framework
Service
Agent
Device Detection 
User Detection 
Location context
User Preference
Adequate Devices
Rehabilitation
Service
Therapy
Service
Broadcasting
Service
Environment 
Detection 
 
Figure 2.  Technical issues for Context-Aware based Real-Sense Media 
Services 
C. System Architecture 
A context-aware framework interfaces with a Sensor 
platform and an service agent, and arbitrates between them 
for feeling the physical effects according to the contexts. A 
sensor platform has sensor nodes, such as camera sensors, 
infrared sensors, 3D depth sensors, and so on, collect data of  
the device, environment, and users’ situations, and send them 
to sensor coordinators, which manage several kinds of 
sensors and interfaces with a context-aware framework. A 
sensor networking sub-block adds, deletes and updates the 
information of sensor nodes and sensor coordinators. A 
sensor interface agent sends and receives messages to and 
from a context-aware framework in a service server. A 
context-aware framework consists of a semantic analyzer, a 
context ensembler, context manager and a context-aware 
interface agent. After a context-aware interface agent 
receives sensing data from a sensor platform agent, a 
semantic analyzer performs analysis of the received data’s 
meaning. Then context ensembler configure and register the 
context information messages and send them to an service 
agent. In case of a locational context, a context-aware 
framework receives raw data related to location from a 
sensor platform, analyzes its meaning, forms context 
information message, saves them to a context repository as 
context schema, and sends them to an service agent. In an 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

service agent, real-sense services are modeled for users, and 
customized services are formed as the users’ preferences. 
Then, a service interaction sub-block mediates the operation 
of real-sense services as the predefined priority rule, where 
the rule is provided by users according to the  their 
preference. 
 
Context
DB
Context-aware 
Framework
Context-
Aware
Interface
Agent
Sensor Platform
Sensor
Interface
Agent
Service Agent
Real-Sense
Interface
Agent
Sensor
Node
Context 
Ensembler
Context
Manager
Context
Repository
Context
Schema
Sensor
Coordinator
Sensor
Networking
Real-Sense
Service
Modeling
Customized
Service
Service 
Interaction
Semantic
Analyzer
Real-Sense
Media Server
 
Figure 3.  System Architecture for Context-Aware based Real-Sense Media Services
D. Service Flow 
The proposed system consists of a sensor platform, a 
context-aware framework and an service agent, where a 
context-aware framework and an service agent is in a service 
server. The sequence flow for real-sense service based on 
context-awareness is shown in Figure 4. In the service 
scenario, the user, Harry, wants to play real-sense game. 
First, context-aware framework recognizes the user and his 
location uing various sensors, such as camera, infrared and 
3D depth sensors. Then, the context-aware framework 
analyzes and recognizes his context and select the adequate 
real-sense service using his cotext and profile with 
preferences. He likes the wind and moving chair effects, and 
does not want water spray effects in the predefined his 
preference. Also, his preference can be changed using his 
actions in the effects. The service agent receives the context 
from the context-aware framework, and designs real-sense 
effects for Harry’s game service. Finally, the service agent 
selects and triggers the devices according to the context 
received from context-aware framework.  
 
Sensor Platform
Service Agent
Real-Sense Device
Context-aware 
Framework
Report Device/Environment 
Context
Users Detected 
or Not
Detect Users Context 
(ID & location)
Request Users Context
Report Users Context (ID & 
Location)
Request Available Device
Report Device Status 
(Device ID)
Request Session  
Activation (Device ID)
Activate Session 
(Operate Device)
Find the Device
 
Figure 4.  . A Sequence Flow of Context-Aware based Real-Sense Media Services
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed real-sense media services 
based on context-awareness. First, we collected the context 
of users, environment and devices from sensors and profiles. 
Then, we considered the environment and devices for the 
services and users. We processed context information to 
provide adequate services for users considering their 
situation. Using this method, we could provide context-
aware based real sense services more appropriately and 
effectively. 
In future work, the authors will focus on the interaction 
issues among several users in the same space. We will 
consider various scenarios to present service policy and 
interaction mechanism for solving the issues.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the MKE (Ministry of 
Knowledge Economy) [A004700008], Development of 
realistic sense transmission system with media gateway 
supporting multi-media and multi-device. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J.K. Yun, J.H. Jang, K.R. Park, and D.W. Han, “Real-Sense 
Media Representation Technology Using Multiple Devices 
Synchronization,” Software Technologies for Embedded and 
Ubiquitous Systems, LNCS 2009, vol. 5860/2009, 2009, pp. 
343-353. 
[2] William Noah Schilit, “A System Architecture for Context-
Aware Mobile Computing,” PhD dissertation, Columbia 
University, New York, 1995. 
[3] S. A. N. Shafer, B. Brumitt, and J. Cadiz, “Interaction Issues 
in Context-Aware Intelligent Environment, ” Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol.16, no. 2, 2001, pp.363-378. 
[4] H. Lee, S. Lim, and J. Huh, “Design and Implementation of 
Intelligent Home Care System based on Context-awareness,” 
2004 international conference on computers, communications 
and systems, vol. 1, Daegu University, South Korea, 2004, pp. 
169-173. 
[5] M. Weiser, “Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous 
Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 36, no. 7, July 1993, pp. 
75–84.  
[6] W. N. Schilit, “A System Architecture for Context-Aware 
Mobile Computing,” PhD dissertation, Columbia University, 
New York, 1995. 
[7] B. Brumitt, B. Meyers, J. Krumm, A. Kern, and S. Shafer, 
“EasyLiving: Technologies for Intelligent Environments,” 
LNCS 1927, Springer-Verlag, September 2000, pp 12-29. 
[8] Y. Ha, J. Sohn, Y. Cho, and H. Yoon, "Towards Ubiquitous 
Robotic 
Companion: 
Design 
and 
Implementation 
of 
Ubiquitous Robotic Service Framework," ETRI Journal, vol. 
27, no. 6, 2005, pp. 666-676.. 
[9] A. Moon, H. Kim, H. Kim, and S. Lee, “Context-Aware 
Active Services in Ubiquitous Computing Environments,” 
ETRI Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, April. 2007, pp. 169-178. 
[10] A. J. Gonzalez, R. M. de Pozuelo, M. German, J. Alcober, 
and F. Pinyol, “New Framework and Mechanisms of Context-
Aware Service Composition in the Future Internet,” ETRI 
Journal, vol. 35, no. 1, Feb. 2013, pp. 7-17. 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

