Regional Analysis Based on Location Information and Time Series Change Using 
Geotagged Tweets 
 
Masaki Endo, Shigeyoshi Ohno 
Division of Core Manufacturing 
Polytechnic University 
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: endou@uitec.ac.jp, ohno@uitec.ac.jp 
Masaharu Hirota 
Faculty of Informatics 
Okayama University of Science 
Okayama-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: hirota@mis.ous.ac.jp 
Tetsuya Araki, Hiroshi Ishikawa 
Graduate School of Systems Design 
Tokyo Metropolitan University 
Hino-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: araki@tmu.ac.jp, ishikawa-hiroshi@tmu.ac.jp
 
Abstract—Because of the popularization of Social Networking 
Services (SNSs), it is possible to acquire large amounts of data 
in real time. For this reason, various studies are being 
conducted to analyze social media data and to extract real-
world events. Among them, a salient advantage of analysis 
using positional information is that one can accurately extract 
events from target areas of interest. However, data having 
position information in social media data remain few: the data 
amount might be insufficient for analysis. Therefore, we are 
assessing a method for real-time analysis using data with 
location information that has been accumulated over a certain 
period of time. In this research, we are studying a method of 
regional analysis by position information and time series 
change using tweets with Twitter position information. Herein, 
we explain the results obtained from area analysis using the 
proposed method. 
Keywords-location information; time series; Twitter. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In our everyday life, because of the wide dissemination 
and rapid performance improvement of various devices such 
as smartphones and tablets, diverse and vast data are 
generated on the web. SNSs have become especially popular 
because users can post data and various messages easily. 
Twitter [1], an SNS that provides a micro-blogging service, 
is used as a real-time communication tool. Numerous tweets 
have been posted daily by vast numbers of users. Twitter is 
therefore a useful medium to obtain, from a large amount of 
information posted by many users, real-time information 
corresponding to the real world. 
By analyzing the information sent by these SNSs, the 
possibility exists of obtaining useful information in real time. 
We are conducting research related to providing tourist 
information to travelers. Therefore, this study specifically 
examines the provision of real-time sightseeing information. 
Herein, we describe the provision of information to 
tourists using web contents. Such information is useful for 
tourists, but providing timely and topical travel information 
entails high costs for information providers because they 
must update the information continually. Today, providing 
reliable information related to local travel is not only 
strongly demanded by tourists, but also by local governments, 
tourism organizations, and travel companies, which bear 
high costs of providing such information. 
For that reason, providing current, useful, real-world 
information for travelers by ascertaining changes of 
information according to seasons and time zones of the 
tourism region is important for the travel industry. It is 
possible to disseminate information using the popular SNS, 
but organizations that can actually do the work are limited by 
human resources and cost. Therefore, analysis using an SNS 
that can provide useful data leading to real-time information 
provision is one means of overcoming this difficulty. 
To solve this problem, much research to analyze SNS 
data is currently being conducted. Research using Twitter is 
one branch of investigation. Because tweets comprise short 
sentences, a location can be estimated if a tweet includes the 
place name and the facility name, but if such information is 
not included, identifying the location from a tweet might be 
difficult. For this reason, research using tweets with location 
information or tweets which give location information in the 
tweet itself is being conducted. Because geotagged tweets 
can identify places, they are effective for analysis. 
Nevertheless, few geo-tagged tweets exist among the total 
information content of tweets. It is therefore not possible to 
analyze all regions. For that reason, we also use geotagged 
tweets to conduct research using information interpolation to 
estimate the position around the area that is not specified by 
the position information [2]. 
Currently, we are considering a method for real-time 
analysis by collecting temporal and spatial information for a 
certain period of time using only geotagged tweets, which 
are said to have a small amount of information. This report 
presents an experimental approach. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents earlier research related to this topic. In 
Section III, we propose a method for real-time analysis using 
data collected for a certain period. Section IV describes 
experimentally obtained results for our proposed method and 
a discussion of the results. Section V presents a summary of 
the contributions and expectations for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Various studies are being conducted using SNS position 
information. Omori et al. [3] proposed a method to extract 
geographical features such as coastlines using tags of photo 
sharing sites with geotags. Sakaki et al. [4] proposed a 
method to detect events, such as earthquakes and typhoons 
based on a study estimating real-time events from Twitter. 
By analyzing the Twitter text stream, Pratap et al. [5] 
proposed a solution to optimize traffic control by considering 
previous traffic analysis methodology and social data in real 
time. Various analytical methods have been proposed for 
analyzing SNS using position information and time series 
information. However, analysis of data in which large 
amounts of position information and time series information 
exist is mainly addressed. Few research efforts examine 
information using only a few data. 
Some research has examined visualization. Nakaji et al. 
[6] proposed using a geotagged and visual feature of a 
photograph and suggested a way to select photographs 
related to a given real event from geotagged tweets. They 
developed a system that can visualize real-world events on 
online maps. In the GeoNLP Project [7], we are developing a 
geotagging system that extracts location descriptions such as 
place names and addresses contained in natural language 
sentences. The system provides metadata about where the 
sentences are descriptions. It is also offered as open source 
software. These studies are very useful for extraction of 
specific designated events and for analysis of preregistered 
places. However, another discussion must be held about 
automatically extracting events and identifying new places. 
As described above, conducting research using geotagged 
tweets for places with small information amounts and new 
events and places represents a new approach. Therefore, this 
research was conducted to identify events and places in real 
time using accumulation of information and differences in 
space-time space. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSED METHOD 
This section presents a description of a method for target 
data collection using our method of real-time analysis with 
position information and time series information. 
A. Data collection 
Here, we explain the data collection target for this 
research. Geotagged tweets sent from Twitter are the 
collection target. The range of geotagged tweets includes the 
Japanese archipelago (120.0°E ≤ longitude ≤ 154.0°E and 
20.0°N ≤ latitude ≤ 47.0°N) as the collection target. 
Collection of these data was done using a streaming 
Application Programming Interface (API) [8] provided by 
Twitter Inc. 
Next, we describe the number of collected data. 
According to a report by Hashimoto et al. [9], among all 
tweets originating in Japan, only about 0.18% are geotagged 
tweets: they are rare among all data. However, the collected 
geotagged tweets number about 70,000, even on weekdays. 
On some weekend days, more than 100,000 such messages 
are posted. We use about 423 million geotagged tweets from 
2015/2/17 through 2018/12/26. Therefore, we examined 19 
million geotagged tweets in Tokyo for these analyses.  
B. Preprocessing 
This section presents preprocessing after data collection. 
Preprocessing includes reverse geocoding and morphological 
analysis, with database storage for data collected using the 
process. 
Reverse 
geocoding 
identified 
prefectures 
and 
municipalities by town name using latitude and longitude 
information from the individually collected tweets. We use a 
simple reverse geocoding service [10] available from the 
National Agriculture and Food Research Organization in this 
process: 
e.g., 
(latitude, longitude) = (35.7384446N, 
139.460910W) by reverse geocoding becomes (Tokyo, 
Kodaira-Shi, Ogawanishi-machi 2-chome). In addition, 
based on latitude and longitude information of the collected 
tweets, data are accumulated by the same place. As data 
accumulate, the data are saved in mesh form as time elapses. 
Morphological analysis divides the collected geo-tagged 
tweet morphemes. We use the “Mecab” morphological 
analyzer [11]. As an example, “ 桜 は 美 し い で す ” 
(“Cherry blossoms are beautiful.” in English) is divisible 
into "(桜 / noun), (は / particle), (美しい / adjective), (です / 
auxiliary verb), (。 / symbol)". 
Preprocessing performs the necessary data storage from 
the result of data collection, reverse geocoding, and 
morphological analysis processing. Data used for this study 
are the tweet ID, tweet posting time, tweet text, morpheme 
analysis result, latitude, and longitude.  
C. Analysis method 
This section presents a description of the method of real-
time analysis using position information and time series 
information. 
The analytical method we proposed has the following 
three stages. 
1. Extraction of places by fixed point observation 
2. Analysis considering the time series based on 1 
3. Analysis using co-occurring words of 2 
Therein, 1 is an estimate of the location derived from 
stationary observation. At such spots, even in places with 
few tweets, one can discover the location through long-term 
observation. This method does spot extraction by adding 
geotagged tweets including specific keywords for long 
periods at every latitude and longitude. 
As presented above, 2 is a method of extracting new 
spots using spot information accumulated over a long period 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

as a baseline, by consideration of the time series and finding 
differences. 
As shown above, 3, time series analysis including co-
occurrence words in 2 and for keywords used in 1 is 
performed using the results of morphological analysis of 
tweets. It is a method used because differences in latitude, 
longitude, and time series alone might be insufficient to 
extract differences in data. 
Through analyses using these proposed methods, we aim 
to capture real-time changes in specific areas. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS 
This section presents a description of a real-time analysis 
experiment using the method proposed in Section III. 
A. Dataset 
Datasets used for this experiment were collected using 
streaming API, as described for data collection in Section III-
A. Data are geo-tagged tweets from Tokyo during 2015/2/17 
– 2018/12/26. The data include about 19 million items. We 
use these datasets for experiments to conduct the three 
methods proposed in Section III. 
B. Experimental method 
In this section, experiments using the proposed method 
shown in Section III are described in 1 to 3. 
1. 
Extraction of places by fixed point observation 
This experiment was conducted for Takao-
machi, Hachioji, Tokyo: an area of about 4 km 
east–west and about 2.5 km north–south, as shown 
in Figure 1. Experimentally obtained results 
described later are included within the thick frame 
depicted in Figure 1. For this area, we conducted an 
extraction experiment with the target word as 
"cherry blossom" in Japanese as "桜", "さくら", or 
"サクラ". In all, 65 tweets were found to include a 
target word. 
2. 
Analysis in considering of time series based on 1 
This experiment was conducted for 4-chome, 
Myojin-cho, Hachioji city, Tokyo: an area of about 
700 m east–west, and about 600 m north–south, as 
shown in Figure 2. Experimentally obtained results 
described later are included within the thick frame 
in Figure 2. For this area, we conduct an extraction 
experiment with the target word as "ramen" in 
Japanese as "ラーメン", "らーめん", or "拉麵". In 
all, 301 tweets were found to include a target word. 
3. 
Analysis using co-occurring words of 2 
This experiment was conducted for Marunouchi 
1-chome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo: an area of about 1 
km east–west and about 1 km north–south, as 
shown in Figure 3. Experimentally obtained results 
described later are included within the thick frame 
in Figure 3. For this area, we set the target word as 
"ramen", as in the second experiment, in Japanese 
as "ラーメン", "らーめん", or "拉麵". In all, 
6,979 tweets included a target word. As words co- 
 
 
Figure 1.  Target of Takao-machi, Hachioji City. 
 
Figure 2.  Target of Myojin-cho 4-chome, Hachioji City. 
 
Figure 3.  Target area of Marunouchi 1-chome, Chiyoda-ku. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

occurring after the object, we target tweets 
including "㐂蔵" and "玉", which represents the 
ramen shop name; the respective numbers of tweets 
were 273 and 31. 
C. Experimental result 
In this section, the results of 1–3 experiments explained 
in the previous section are presented. 
1. Extraction of places by fixed point observation 
The distributions of geotagged tweets in Takao-
machi, Hachioji City including cherry blossoms 
obtained in the experiment are shown in Figure 4 in 
2017 and in Figure 5 in 2018. The interior are of the 
bold frame in Figure 1 is shown in the table. It is 
about 265 m measured east–west and about 85 m 
measured north–south. The closer the color of the 
cell is to black, the more data are shown. 
Data extracted for this experiment were very 
few: 65 for the entire collection period. However, in 
2017 and 2018, we confirmed tweets to JR Takao 
Station, Takao Yamaguchi Station, Takao Station of 
Ropeway, and Takao Mountain. The correlation 
 
 
Figure 4.  Number of Tweets including Target Words in Takao-machi in 
2017. 
 
Figure 5.  Number of Tweets including Target Words in Takao-machi in 
2018. 
coefficient between the extracted spots in 2017 and 
2018 was 0.769: high positive correlation was found. 
Extraction of spots is possible even with few data. 
Moreover, various spots can be extracted when using 
longer periods. Therefore, fixed point extraction of 
sightseeing spots is regarded as possible through 
continuing observation of geotagged tweets. 
2. Analysis in considering of time series based on 1 
The results for distribution of the geotagged 
tweets of Myojin-cho 4-chome, Hachioji City 
including the ramen obtained in the experiment are 
shown in Figure 6 in 2016, Figure 7 in 2017, and 
Figure 8 in 2018. The area inside of the bold frame 
in Figure 2 is shown in the table. It is about 102 m 
measured east–west and about 39 m north–south. 
The closer the color of the cell is to black, the more 
data are shown. 
In this experiment, 301 data were extracted in 
all collection periods. The target area has three 
ramen shops, which can be extracted from the table 
of each year. Furthermore, in 2018, a new ramen 
shop opened at one point; in 2018 we extracted a 
new spot (latitude, longitude) = (35.69540009399, 
139.345001221). For this reason, the correlation 
coefficient between data of 2016 and 2017 was 
0.991, a high positive correlation was obtained. 
Nevertheless, the correlation coefficient between 
2017 and 2018 was only a weak positive correlation 
of 0.161. These results demonstrated the possibility 
of extracting new spots by fixed point observation. 
3. Analysis using co-occurring words of 2 
Distributions of geotagged tweets of Chiyoda-
ku including Ramen obtained in the experiment are 
shown in Figure 9 for 2017 and Figure 10 for 2018. 
The interior area of the bold frame in Figure 3 is 
shown in the table. It is about 80 m measured east–
west and about 25 m north–south. The closer the 
color of the cell is to black, the more data are shown. 
The data extracted in this experiment were 
6,979 in all collection periods. The area of about 540 
m east–west and about 540 m north–south in the 
frame of the heavy line in Figure 3 is a spot called 
Tokyo Ramen Street, with eight ramen shops. 
Therefore, as an analytical example using words co-
occurring in the target word, Figure 9 and Figure 10 
are experimentally obtained results including A="㐂
蔵" co-occurring in the target word and B = "玉". 
The ramen shop including A opened in 
September 2013 and closed in September 2018. The 
ramen shop including B opened on October 30, 2018. 
Therefore, although a difference exists in the 
number of data, it can be extracted as a spot. 
However, the closed A information is unsuitable for 
use as real-time information. The results of analysis 
considering the time series information are shown in 
Figure 11. From these results, tweets containing A 
are not extracted after 2018/9. However, tweets 
containing B have been extracted since 2018/10. 
Therefore, by considering the time series in addition 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

to latitude and longitude information, one can omit 
the old information in addition to extracting new 
 
 
Figure 6.  Number of Tweets including Target Words in Myojin-cho in 
2016. 
 
Figure 7.  Number of Tweets including Target Words in Myojin-cho in 
2017. 
 
Figure 8.  Number of Tweets including Target Words in Myojin-cho in 
2018. 
 spots. This result confirmed the possibility of 
realizing real-time information extraction. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Number of Tweets including “A” Co-occurring in Target Words 
in Marunouchi 1-chome. 
 
Figure 10.  Number of Tweets including “B” Co-occurring in Target Words 
in Marunouchi 1-chome. 
 
Figure 11.  Trends in number of tweets including target words. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

V. 
CONCLUSION 
As described in this paper, we evaluated a regional 
analysis method based on positional information and time 
series change using tweets with Twitter location information 
to provide real-time information. 
To conduct real-time regional analysis, after proposing a 
method using geotagged tweets' position information and 
time series information, we showed experimentally obtained 
results obtained using that method. Experiment results 
demonstrated that, even when geotagged tweets were few, 
spots could be extracted using position information with 
long-term accumulation. We also confirmed that new spots 
can be extracted by conducting time series analysis of spot 
information of position information. Furthermore, using 
morphological analysis results of tweets, we demonstrated 
the possibility of analyzing spots, even in densely populated 
areas with a large amount of information. 
Results show that we demonstrated the usefulness of 
SNS for providing real-time information. Future studies will 
examine other methods using machine learning to establish 
even more effective methods. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants No. 
18K13254, 16K00157, and 16K16158, and a Tokyo 
Metropolitan University Grant-in-Aid for Research on 
Priority Areas “Research on social big data.” 
REFERENCES 
[1] Twitter. It's what's happening. [Online]. Available from: 
https://Twitter.com/ 2015.02.15 
[2] M. Endo, S. Ohno, M. Hirota, D. Kato, and H. Ishikawa, 
“Examination of Best-time Estimation for Each Tourist Spots 
by Interlinking using Geotagged Tweets,” International 
Journal on Advanced in Systems and Measurements (IARIA), 
vol. 10, No 3&4, pp. 163-173, 2018. 
[3] M. Omori, M. Hirota, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “Can 
geo-tags on flickr draw coastlines?,” In Proceedings of the 
22nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on 
Advances in Geographic Information Systems (SIGSPATIAL 
'14). ACM, pp. 425-428, 2014. 
[4] T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo, “Earthquake shakes 
Twitter users: real-time event detection by social sensors,” 
WW W 2010, pp. 851–860, 2010. 
[5] A. R. Pratap, J. V. D. Prasad, K. P. Kumar, and S. Babu, "An 
investigation on optimizing traffic flow based on Twitter Data 
Analysis," 2018 Second International Conference on 
Inventive Communication and Computational Technologies 
(ICICCT), pp. 320-325, 2018. 
[6] Y. Nakaji and K. Yanai, “Visualization of Real-World Events 
with Geotagged Tweet Photos,” 2012 IEEE International 
Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops, pp. 272-277, 
2012. 
[7] GeoNLP Project. A place name information processing 
system which maps sentences automatically. [Online] 
Available from: https://geonlp.ex.nii.ac.jp/ 2019.02.14 
[8] Twitter Developers. Twitter Developer official site. [Online] 
Available from: https://dev.twitter.com/ 2015.02.15 
[9] Y. Hashimoto and M. Oka, “Statistics of Geo-Tagged Tweets 
in Urban Areas (<Special Issue>Synthesis and Analysis of 
Massive Data Flow),” JSAI, vol. 27, No. 4, pp. 424–431, 
2012 (in Japanese). 
[10] National Agriculture and Food Research Organization. Simple 
reverse geocoding service. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.finds.jp/wsdocs/rgeocode/index.html.ja 
2015.04.10 
[11] MeCab. Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological 
Analyzer. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://mecab.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mecab/doc/index.htm
l 2015.04.15 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

