A Proposal of Activation Mechanism for User Communication
based on User Behavior Analysis on Wedding Community Sites
Toshinori Hayashi∗, Yuanyuan Wang†, Yukiko Kawai‡, and Kazutoshi Sumiya∗
∗Kwansei Gakuin University,
2–1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669–1337, Japan
Email: den82687@kwansei.ac.jp, sumiya@kwansei.ac.jp
†Yamaguchi University,
2–16–1 Tokiwadai, Ube, Yamaguchi 755–8611, Japan
Email: y.wang@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp
‡Kyoto Sangyo University,
Kamigamo Motoyama, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603–8555, Japan
Email: kawai@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we present an active communication
mechanism based on a user behavior analysis on wedding
community sites. To this end, we propose a novel mechanism for
activation of user communication that provides related comments
and users by detecting knowledge and interests from archived
comments; this information from a wedding community website
evokes conversations among users. The proposed mechanism has
three components: 1) proﬁling static user information such as
users’ age and location and active user information like her
dynamic interest and intention to communicate, 2) detecting and
recommending users who are likely to communicate with each
other, and 3) recommending comments that may be of interest
to a user. Through the proposed activation mechanism, users
on a wedding community site can communicate with each other
easily and efﬁciently. We discuss our proposed user characteristic
extraction and user recommendation methods using actual user
posts from a wedding community website.
Keywords–user behavior analysis; wedding community site;
communication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, research has been conducted using data
from Social Networking Services (SNSs) [1][2]. It is important
to collect as much data as possible from SNS community sites,
such as Facebook, LINE, and other Q&A sites. However, such
services that focus on data collection cannot promote user
communication on community websites because of differences
in values. In this paper, we focus on a wedding community site,
and we aim to promote user communication by recommending
appropriate users and comments.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel active communication
mechanism that shares comments of users by considering
their knowledge and interests by analyzing their behavior on
community websites. To this end, we ﬁrst extract all posts
of each user and extract their feature words using the term
frequency–inverse document frequency (tf-idf) method. Next,
we calculate the similarities among users to detect appropriate
users. Finally, we recommend their comments by generating
links to them in posts (Fig. 1). To use this mechanism, users
can communicate with other users that are recommended
to them about wedding planning; furthermore, it promotes
communication among users on a wedding community site.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides an overview of our system and reviews related
work. Section III explains how to recommend users and their
Figure 1. User and comment recommendations for activation of user
communication based on a user behavior analysis.
comments on a wedding community site. Section IV illustrates
the experimental results obtained using a real dataset from
a wedding community site. Finally, Section V concludes the
paper and outlines our future work.
II.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW AND RELATED WORK
A. Active Communication Mechanism
We present an active communication mechanism based on
a user behavior analysis on wedding community sites. This
mechanism has three steps: 1) user login information and user
characteristic extraction, 2) user detection and recommenda-
tions, and 3) comment recommendations (Fig. 1).
To use this mechanism, users are required to install a
toolbar (a browser plug-in) on an existing wedding community
site in Japan. Wedding community sites are generally utilized
by couples that plan to hold a wedding and are intended to
assess a couples’ needs regarding marriage. On this website,
there are threads for wedding planning in different marriage
statuses, and users can freely post their comments to each
thread. The only way to communicate with other users is by
replying to other users’ comments on a thread. To improve
replies, we propose a method that recommends both users and
their comments by analyzing user behavior and their proﬁle
information on a wedding community site. Our goal is for our
active communication mechanism to determine which users
may want to communicate with other users.
A wedding community site is not a “Question & Answer
site”; rather, it is a website where users can share their posi-
tive opinions and experiences about weddings. The proposed
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

system will recommend other users who have had similar
situations or values of marriage to evoke communication be-
tween users. This system can also be used on other community
websites; however, since the proposed system is considered on
a wedding community site, it uses static information entered
by a user during their initial user registration regarding their
ideal wedding ceremony.
Fig. 1 shows the overview of our proposed mechanism.
After a user posts, the mechanism analyzes the user behavior
and recommends other users by calculating the similarities
between them.
B. Related Work
Issac et al. [3] noted that communication is important to
discuss different topics and work with others as a group. They
mentioned that communication makes people more willing to
contribute to society. Moreover, it is also effective for com-
munication on websites, not only face-to-face communication.
Ellison et al. [4] focused on SNS communities. According to
these studies, communicating with others on SNSs makes more
people feel happy.
In our previous work [5], users communicated with each
other when they searched for web pages. In this work, we
extend our previous work to recommend users and comments
based on the link generation for a wedding community site.
Although several automatic link generation methods for web-
sites have been studied [6][7], they have primarily focused on
web pages for knowledge support only; they did not consider
communication among users. To address this deﬁciency, our
proposed method recommends users to evoke communication.
Other studies that have recommended analyzing user behavior
on news sites [8] did not consider the relationships between
users. In this paper, we ﬁrst extract user posts to analyze
user behavior and detect users to recommend by extracting
the relationships between users.
Akihiro et al. [9] conducted an experiment for active com-
munication in e-lectures through a chat system. However, it
did not work very well because it was a burden for students to
chat with others during the lectures. In this paper, we propose
a new active communication mechanism by recommending
appropriate users for different marriage statuses of users.
III.
ACTIVE COMMUNICATION MECHANISM FOR
WEDDING SITES
A. User Behavior Analysis on a Wedding Community Site
To evoke communication among users, our active commu-
nication mechanism recommends users and their comments
by analyzing user behavior on a wedding community site.
According to our previous work [5], users can help other
users when they search for the same web pages. Furthermore,
in general, users communicate with each other easily when
they are in similar statuses or situations. Therefore, in order
to recommend users, we analyze to make 3 proﬁles based on
aspects of wedding community site (see Fig. 2); in particular,
we consider the axes of “Static Proﬁle Information”, “Marriage
Status”, and “Active Proﬁle Information”.
1) User Login Information Extraction: We extract user
login information by acquiring user registration information
on a wedding community site that users input upon site
registration. Users input information such as their ages, places
Figure 2. Proﬁling based on user’s aspects.
where they live, and marriage status. We divide the user login
information as user static proﬁle information and marriage
status.
2) User Characteristic Extraction: We extract user charac-
teristics by extracting all posts of each user. Next, we calculate
the term frequency and document frequency based on the tf-idf
method; speciﬁcally, we use the following formulas:
tfi,j
=
ni,j
∑
k nk,j
,
(1)
idfi
=
log |D|
dfi
,
(2)
where ni,j denotes the term frequency of the word ti in
document dj. In this work, dj denotes the document that is
integrated by all posts of one user. Therefore, the number of
documents is equal to the number of users on the wedding
community site. Furthermore, ∑
k nk,j denotes the sum of
the term frequencies of all words in document dj, and |D|
denotes the total number of documents, which is also equal to
the number of users. Finally, dfi denotes the number of the
documents that include the word ti.
Based on the above, we use the obtained tf-idf values and
feature words of each user to determine a users’ active proﬁle
information.
B. User Detection and Recommendation
1) User Detection: We detect users based on the similar-
ities of “Active Proﬁle Information” between users by using
the cosine similarity as follows:
Sim(−→x , −→y ) =
∑|V |
i=1 xi · yi
√∑|V |
i=1(xi)2 ·
√∑|V |
i=1(yi)2
,
(3)
where −→x denotes the feature vector of user x, and −→y denotes
the feature vector of user y; |V | is the number of dimensions
of the feature vector.
“Marriage Status” is an absolute value, such as “before
marriage” or “after marriage”; therefore, it will not change
based on other users. However, “Static Proﬁle Information”
and “Active Proﬁle Information” are relative values; they will
change depending on each user.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE I. FIVE USER PATTERNS FOR RECOMMENDATION.
Pattern
User (Who)
Marriage
Status
(to
who)
Static Proﬁle In-
formation
Active
Proﬁle
Information
Purpose
1
After marriage
Before
Neutral
Similar
Give advice
2
After marriage
After
Neutral
Similar
Share
3
Before marriage
Before
Similar
Different
Reference
4
Before marriage
Before
Neutral
Similar
Share
5
Before marriage
After
Neutral
Similar
Get advice
TABLE II. RECOMMENDATION SITUATION FOR EACH USER PATTERN.
Pattern
Purpose
When
How
1
Give advice
Links are generated in the comments
○○ needs some advice from you
2
Share
After Login
○○ is on the same status as you
3
Reference
Links are generated in the comments
You can refer to ○○
4
Share
After Login
○○ is on the same status as you
5
Get advice
Links are generated in the comments
○○ can be a good adviser for you
2) User Recommendation: We recommend users to com-
municate with others by considering users who have similar
situations; such users may easily relate and share their expe-
riences or advice. Based on the three axes described in the
previous subsection, we classify ﬁve useful patterns of users
on a wedding community site (see Table I).
We detect the user that is most similar to each user for
Patterns 1, 2, 4, and 5; moreover, we detect the user that is
most different from each user for Pattern 3. Based on the above
procedure, we propose recommendations to users.
C. Comment Recommendation
1) Comment Extraction: In the previous subsection, we
explained how to detect users and make recommendations
to stimulate communication on a wedding community site.
To recommend user comments, we calculate the most related
comments from the recommended users that are derived using
Eq. (3).
2) Recommendation Interface: Our active communication
mechanism recommends users or user comments in different
scenarios; we refer to each user pattern in Table II.
This mechanism has two methods of recommending users.
The ﬁrst method recommends users in the comments by
generating links to them. The second method recommends
users on the top page after login.
For the ﬁrst method, the interface of recommendation for
Patterns 1, 3, and 5, the mechanism generates links in the
comments. To generate links in the comments after users
have posted, we attach the links of user information or their
comments to related words by extracting user characteristics
(feature words).
In the second method, the interface of recommendation
for Patterns 2 and 4, the mechanism presents users on the
top page of the website after login. This mechanism also
recommends users on the top page that are likely to share
similar experiences. We assume that users prefer to see more
users on the top page than in the links generated in the
comments.
IV.
EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst extract the actual data from a
wedding community site to verify the user characteristic ex-
traction method by extracting feature words of all posts for
each user. Second, we detect similar users by comparing the
cosine similarity with collaborative ﬁltering.
A. Experiment 1: Veriﬁcation of User Characteristic Extrac-
tion
To evaluate our user characteristic extraction, we extracted
feature words of all posts for each user. We compared three
methods as follows:
1)
tf
2)
tf-idf (df = all of users)
3)
tf-idf (df = the users before or after marriage)
We extracted 7,728 terms from 588 user posts.
Table III shows the top-15 feature words for users A, B, C,
and D for each method. Bold words denote that feature words
are related to these users. We found that many feature words
are proper nouns for Methods 2) and 3) such as “Fish paste”
and “Limousine”. However, for Method 1), we found common
words that all users often use, i.e., there are no effective words
that can be considered feature words. We determined that
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE III. TOP-15 FEATURE WORDS OF USERS A, B, C, AND D.
XXXXXXX
User
Method
1)
2)
3)
A
of, a, ceremony, wedding ceremony, to, sister,
I will, heart, family, after, because, to, did, et
al., that
sister, wedding ceremony, earthquake disas-
ter, Fukushima, bata, ﬁreplace, chaya, sis-
ter, attendance, column, heart, family, safety,
stop, name
wedding ceremony, sister, Earthquake dis-
aster, bata, attendance, heart, Fukushima,
chaya, ﬁreplace, family, sister, column, 11,
safety, inﬂuence
B
of, did, better, object, pull, a marriage, I
will, he, now, a student, generation, learning,
Toyama, now, chestnut
ﬁsh paste, Toyama, red snapper, gift, girl-
friend, object, luck, a student, surprised, age,
pull, mountain, form, chestnut, happiness
Toyama, red snapper, ﬁsh paste, object, gift,
girlfriend, luck, a student, surprised, age,
mountain, form, happiness, chestnut, woman
C
did, of, better, reach, day, that, friend, friends,
ceremony, wedding ceremony, while, a, be-
fore, ﬁrst, good
it seems intriguing, eve, limousine, the eve,
ﬁrst meeting, face to face, a van, friend, the
other day, reach, move, the previous day,
festival, the best
eve, it seems intriguing, limousine, ﬁrst
meeting, friend, face to face, the best, a van,
move, the previous day, festival, the other
day, Hawaii, fellow, reach
D
a, of, did, one, this, now, better, “”, to, about,
place, et al., yo, ﬁltration, meeting
reserved, snow board, lending, no, alter-
nating current, table, hair style, comment,
ﬁring, male, rooftop, development, release,
frank
reserved, snow board, alternating current,
male, hair style, table, board, BGM, rooftop,
ﬁring, girlfriend, in Tokyo, development,
comment
calculating with idf is a more effective way to extract feature
words; however, there are no differences between Methods 2)
and 3). The idf values imply how the words are generally
used by many users; if the idf value is high, the word is
rarely used among users, and similarly, if it is low, the word
is common among users. Therefore, there are no differences
between the posts of users before marriage and the posts of
users after marriage. Thus, we considered different deﬁnitions
of document groups, which are not limited to marriage status.
Our results suggest that in the future, we need to remove
common words since some generally used words were identi-
ﬁed using Methods 2) and 3).
The above discussion conﬁrms that many feature words of
users are effectively extracted using tf-idf methods, namely,
Methods 2) and 3). To detect user characteristics with feature
words, more advanced methods are required.
B. Experiment 2: Veriﬁcation of User Detection
In our active communication mechanism, the similarities
between users are the key point for recommending users. In the
previous section, we described our classiﬁcation scheme that
classiﬁes users based on similarities of three axes. In this way,
we choose the most suitable users to promote communication.
To evaluate the similarities between users, we com-
pared two calculation methods; the ﬁrst method is the pro-
posed method, speciﬁcally, the content-based recommendation
method using the cosine similarity with active proﬁle informa-
tion, and the second method is the item-based recommendation
method that uses collaborative ﬁltering with static proﬁle
information and marriage status. As mentioned before, we
calculated the cosine similarity based on user characteristics,
which consist of feature words of each user. Therefore, each
user has feature vectors of tf-idf values. In Experiment 1,
Method 2) is the most useful method for extracting feature
words. We also calculated the cosine similarity based on the
feature words produced by Method 2). Collaborative ﬁltering is
also a method used to calculate similarities between users. This
method calculates similarities using user login information as
items of each user. It is mainly used to recommend other items
to users according to the following formula:
Sim(X, Y ) =
∑(x − ¯x)(y − ¯y)
√∑(x − ¯x)2 ∑(y − ¯y)2 .
(4)
TABLE IV. COSINE SIMILARITY AMONG 588 USERS.
value
#user combinations
0 - 0.1
154,132
0.1- 0.2
16,158
0.2 - 0.3
2,022
0.3 - 0.4
209
0.4 - 0.5
46
0.5 - 0.6
7
0.6 - 0.7
4
0.7 - 1.0
0
This equation calculates the similarity between users X
and Y . On a wedding community site, users create individual
accounts by answering questions about their wedding planning.
For example, “Do you agree with a simple style marriage?” For
each question, a user may choose from one of the following
responses: ”Strongly disagree,” ”Disagree,” ”Neither disagree
nor agree,” ”Agree,” or ”Strongly agree.” Each of these re-
sponses was assigned a numerical value ranging from 1 to 5,
respectively, for calculation purposes. We then calculated the
similarities using these numbers. Note that ¯x and ¯y denote the
averages of the chosen answers, for example, if a user chose
answers 1 to 5, the average value would be 3.
The users evaluated for our proposed user characteristic
extraction are shown in Table III. For this evaluation, we
calculated 172,578 combinations from 588 users; the value of
the cosine similarity ranges between 0 and 1.
Table IV shows the distribution of results of the cosine
similarity. The average value of all combinations is 0.045. We
found that many results of user combinations are below 0.1.
This can be attributed to the fact that most users talk about
different topics related to their wedding planning. However,
some user combinations induce a high cosine similarity.
Table V shows the distribution of results of collaborative
ﬁltering. The value of collaborative ﬁltering should be between
-1 and 1. For this method, the values are calculated based on
the answers from the questions regarding wedding planning
when users create accounts on the wedding community site.
A high value implies the users have similar wedding planning
ideas. For this evaluation, we calculated 435 combinations of
30 users. The average value of all combinations was 0.304,
which conﬁrms that many users have similar wedding planning
tastes.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE V. COLLABORATIVE FILTERING AMONG 30 USERS.
value
#user combinations
-1.0 - -0.9
0
-0.9 - -0.8
0
-0.8 - -0.7
2
-0.7 - -0.6
4
-0.6 - -0.5
5
-0.5 - -0.4
8
-0.4 - -0.3
8
-0.3 - -0.2
15
-0.2 - -0.1
23
-0.1 - 0
26
0 - 0.1
35
0.1- 0.2
39
0.2 - 0.3
40
0.3 - 0.4
38
0.4 - 0.5
41
0.5 - 0.6
41
0.3 - 0.7
44
0.7 - 0.8
31
0.8 - 0.9
26
0.9 - 1.0
9
Based on these results, we compared two similarity calcu-
lation methods. Here, we focused on user E, who has a high
cosine similarity with other users and often posts on a wedding
community site as a main user. We calculated all combinations
with user E; therefore, there were a total of 588 values of the
cosine similarity and 588 values of collaborative ﬁltering.
Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the cosine similarity and
collaborative ﬁltering for 10 users, speciﬁcally, users E, H,
I, J, K, L, M, N, O, and P. Each dot corresponds to one
user and has two values: the cosine similarity with each user,
and the collaborative ﬁltering with each user. The vertical
axis corresponds to the values of the cosine similarity, and
the horizontal axis corresponds to the values of collaborative
ﬁltering. We focused on two users, speciﬁcally, F and G for
user E. Both of these users have high cosine similarity values
above 0.6, but their values of collaborative ﬁltering are 0 and
0.54, respectively.
First, we compared the posts of users E and F. A post
by user E describes their cousins’ impressive wedding with
the grooms’ tears. On the other hand, a post of user F
describes how their cousins’ wedding was organized. Even
though common words were used in their posts, the meanings
of these sentences and their topics are different.
Second, we compared the posts of users E and G. The post
from user E is the same post mentioned above. A post from
user G describes their cousins’ wedding with tears because of
a letter about a grandmother who was gone. These posts both
mention the same type of wedding and their cousins’ weddings
with tears, even though the content of these posts is slightly
different.
As a result, we found that only calculating the cosine
similarity is not effective to detect similar comments. However,
we found that calculating both the cosine similarity and col-
laborative ﬁltering are effective. Therefore, these two methods
can help detect similar user comments to evoke communication
among users. However, we still must evaluate other situations
of users with other users’ axes and marriage statuses.
Figure 3. Distribution of the cosine similarity and collaborative ﬁltering 1.
Figure 4. Distribution of the cosine similarity and collaborative ﬁltering 2.
Fig. 4 brieﬂy shows the distribution of the cosine similarity
and collaborative ﬁltering for users E, K, M, N, and O. We
found several users that are especially similar to these users
such as users Q and R. In future, we plan to propose methods
for clustering with the cosine similarity and collaborative
ﬁltering.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an active communication mech-
anism for a wedding community site. This mechanism recom-
mended 1) users who may potentially evoke communication
and 2) their comments. To detect users, this mechanism
classiﬁed all users into three axes, speciﬁcally, ”Static Proﬁle
Information,” ”Marriage Status,” and ”Active Proﬁle Infor-
mation.” We then calculated the similarities between users
using the cosine similarity. To extract comments that were
posted on a wedding community site by recommended users,
our mechanism detected the most related comments. Finally,
we evaluated the user characteristic extraction from posts by
comparing tf-idf methods and evaluated similarity calculation
methods with the cosine similarity and collaborative ﬁltering.
In the future, we plan to enhance the proposed method
based on our experimental results and evaluate the effects of
user recommendations. Furthermore, we plan to extract the
relationships between users by constructing a matrix based on
user behavior, as in our previous work [10].
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Numbers 15K00162 and 16H01722.
REFERENCES
[1]
U. Pfeil, R. Arjan, and P. Zaphiris, “Age differences in online social
networking–a study of user proﬁles and the social capital divide among
teenagers and older users in myspace,” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 25, no. 3, 2009, pp. 643–654.
[2]
M. D. Roblyer, M. McDaniel, M. Webb, J. Herman, and J. V. Witty,
“Findings on facebook in higher education: A comparison of college
faculty and student uses and perceptions of social networking sites,”
The Internet and higher education, vol. 13, no. 3, 2010, pp. 134–140.
[3]
R. Isaac and J. Walker, “Communication and free-riding behavior: The
voluntary contribution mechanism,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 26, no. 4,
1988, pp. 585–608.
[4]
N. B. Ellison, C. Steinﬁeld, and C. Lampe, “The beneﬁts of facebook
“friends:” social capital and college students’ use of online social
network sites,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 12,
no. 4, 2007, pp. 1143–1168.
[5]
Y. Mastsui and Y. Kawai, “Social search system for retrieval and
communication based on networks of pages and users,” Computer
Software, vol. 28, no. 4, 2011, pp. 196–205.
[6]
D. Zhou, M. Truran, T. Brailsford, H. Ashman, and A. Pourabdollah,
“Llama-b: Automatic hyperlink authoring in the blogosphere,” in
Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Conference on Hypertext and
Hypermedia, ser. HT ’08. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 133–
138. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1379092.1379119
[7]
R. D. souza, A. Kulkarni, and I. A. Mirza, “Automatic link generation
for search engine optimization,” International Journal of Information
and Education Technology, vol. 2, no. 4, 2012, pp. 401–403, ISSN:
2010-3689.
[8]
J. Liu, E. Pedersen, and P. Dolan, “Personalized news recommendation
based on click behavior,” Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2010, pp. 31–40.
[9]
H. Akihiro, Y. Madoka, T. Hiroyuki, and K. Yahiko, “Experimental
chat sessions to encourage active communication in lectures,” IPSJ SIG
Notes, vol. 2000, no. 45, 2000, pp. 61–66.
[10]
Y. Wang, Y. Kawai, S. Miyamoto, and K. Sumiya, “An automatic
scoring system for e-reports based on student peer evaluation using
groupware,” DBSJ Journal, vol. 13, no. 1, 2015, pp. 71–76.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

