Information Hiding in Real Object Images Captured with Video Camera Using 
Brightness-Modulated Light 
Kohei Ohshita, Hiroshi Unno, and Kazutake Uehira 
Department of Information Network and Communication 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
e-mail: hssangaku@yahoo.co.jp, unno@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp, uehira@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— We propose a technology that can invisibly embed 
information into the image of a real object captured with a 
video camera. It uses illumination light that illuminates the 
real 
object. 
The 
illumination 
light 
invisibly 
contains 
information. As the illumination contains information, the 
image of the object illuminated by such light also contains 
information. Information in the light is produced by 
modulating luminance according to the embedded pattern at 
half-frame frequency. Frame images over a certain period are 
added up after the sign of the even- or odd-numbered frames is 
changed. Changes in brightness by modulation in each frame 
are accumulated over the frames while the object image is 
removed because the even and odd frames are opposite in sign. 
This makes it possible to read out the embedded patterns. This 
paper demonstrates the feasibility of information hiding from 
our experimental results. 
Keywords-information 
hiding; 
digital 
watermarking; 
brightness-modulated light. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Information hiding or data embedding technologies 
have recently been studied and used in various 
applications. Although conventional information hiding 
technologies hide information into digital data, we have 
studied a technique that does not hide information in 
digital data but conceals it on the surface of a real object 
[1]–[3].  The main purpose of this technique is to protect the 
portrait rights of real objects that are highly valued as 
portraits such as those in celebrated paintings in museums. 
The technique we propose uses illumination light for the 
real objects. This light invisibly contains certain 
information. Since the illumination contains information, 
the captured images of real objects illuminated by such 
light also contain information as watermarks. Although 
we studied this technique for still images, the need for 
these kinds of techniques for moving images has recently 
been increasing because taking moving images at any 
time and from anywhere has recently become easier for 
everyone than ever before because of the widespread use 
of smart phones that have video cameras built into them. 
The main purpose of our study was to develop the 
same technique for moving pictures captured with video 
cameras as that for still images. We propose a technique 
using temporally and spatially illumination-modulated 
light for moving images. We demonstrated the feasibility 
of this technique experimentally in this study by using 
actual moving images captured with a video camera that 
solved problems that arise in practical use, such as 
asynchronicity between video cameras and projectors. 
II. 
HIDING AND READING OUT INFORMATION 
Figure 1 illustrates the basic configuration for the 
technique we present in this paper. It uses a kind of 
projector as a light source to illuminate the real object by 
projecting light whose luminance is temporally and spatially 
modulated. The embedded pattern is binary image and it is 
embedded in the projected light by increasing (decreasing) 
luminance in the patterned area by slight degree dB from the 
averaged value for odd- (even-) numbered frames. The 
amplitude of modulation, dB, is too small for human vision 
to perceive. Since the luminance of the light projected onto 
the object is modulated, the brightness of the captured 
image of the object is also modulated, although it is 
invisible. Because dB is so small, it is difficult to read out 
the embedded pattern from a single frame image. Therefore, 
frame images over certain periods are added up after the 
sign of the brightness in even- or odd-numbered frames is 
changed. Because the sign of every other frame is changed, 
the changes in brightness by modulation in each frame are 
accumulated over the frames. However, the background 
image is removed because the brightness of even and odd 
ID: 2016.2 
ID: 2016.2 
Information to be embedded  
Encoding into 
invisible pattern  
Read out from 
image  
Real object 
Light source 
Light 
Figure 1. Basic configuration of technology. 
Captured image  
Camera 
(Smartphone) 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

frames cancels one another out. As a result, the embedded 
patterns become visible and it is then possible to read them 
out. 
This technique presupposes that the captured image and 
projected image are synchronized. However, they are not 
actually synchronized, especially in phase. If the phase is 
shifted near 90 degrees in the worst case, the brightness of 
the modulated pattern is cancelled and cannot be added up 
since a frame of the image is captured across two frames of 
the projected moving image. To solve this problem, we 
propose a method where luminance is modulated at half 
frequency of the frame frequency of the projector that 
produces two groups of added up images; the first is 
produced by only adding up odd-numbered frames and the 
second is produced by only adding up even-numbered 
frames. The frames of captured image do not go across the 
two frames of projected images whose signs of dB are 
opposite by doing this, at least for one of these two frames. 
Therefore, it becomes possible to read out the embedded 
pattern by choosing the one with the largest contrast. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
We 
conducted 
experiment 
to 
demonstrate 
the 
effectiveness of the proposed technique. We only embedded 
information in blue component images to enhance 
invisibility. We embedded simple pattern, characters, and 
quick response (QR) code. We used A1 size printed color 
images as real objects. We used a projector that had 1280 x 
1024 pixels to project light that contained the invisible 
pattern. The brightness of the light was 200 except for the 
pattern embedded region where brightness was modulated 
with amplitude of dB, which was changed up to 20 as an 
experimental parameter. These figures indicate the gray scale 
value of which maximum is 255. The image of the object 
projected the light modulated with invisible pattern was 
captured with video camera that had 1280 x 720 pixel as a 
color video image. 
 We also evaluated the invisibility of the embedded 
information through subjective tests when it was in the light 
and captured images.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results from the experiments revealed that invisible 
patterns could be read out for dB of over four and when the 
number of frames (NF) added up to over 20. Figure 2(a) 
shows an example of the pattern to be hidden, Figure 2(b) 
has the brightness distribution of the projected light 
modulated by the pattern, Figure 2(c) has the image of the 
real object projected by the modulated light, and Figure 2(d) 
has the read out pattern. The conditions in this example were 
that dB was 20, NF was 30, and the size of the embedded 
characters in the original image was 20 pt. It can be seen in 
Figure 2 that the hidden pattern of the characters cannot be 
seen on the real object; however, it can be seen by summing 
up the frame images, although noise is seen in the 
background. 
We found with regard to invisibility that for dB of under 
10, the embedded pattern could not be seen either in the light 
or captured images and for dB of 20, we saw the flicker in 
the embedded pattern area although pattern could not be seen. 
These results indicated that there were conditions where both 
the invisibility and readability of the patterns were 
simultaneously satisfied although we have to remove the 
flicker in future. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
We proposed a new technique for information hiding in 
real object images captured with a video camera using 
brightness-modulated light as illumination for the real object. 
Although the changes in brightness with this technique by 
modulation in each frame are too small to be visible, they 
become visible when they are   accumulated over the frames. 
We conducted experiments and the results from these 
revealed that invisible hidden patterns could be read out, as 
we had expected. We intend to remove the noise in 
background and flicker in the embedded pattern region in 
future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Uehira and M. Suzuki, "Digital Watermarking Technique 
Using Brightness-Modulated Light," Proc. of IEEE 2008 
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, Jun. 2008, 
pp. 257–260. 
[2] Y. Ishikawa, K. Uehira, and K. Yanaka, "Practical evaluation 
of illumination watermarking technique using orthogonal 
transforms," IEEE/OSA J. Display Technology, vol. 6, No. 9, 
pp. 351–358,  2010. 
[3] M. Komori and K. Uehira, "Optical watermarking technology 
for protecting portrait rights of three-dimensional shaped real 
objects using one-dimensional high-frequency patterns," 
Journal of Electric Imaging, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 033004-1–
033004-7, 2013. 
 
Figure 2. Example of hidden pattern and read out pattern. 
(a) 
Hidden pattern 
(b) 
Projected light 
(c) 
Image of real object 
projected by modulated light  
(d) 
Read out pattern 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

