A Statistical Approach for the Automatic
Recognition of Trafﬁc Sign Deterioration
Walter Allasia, Francesco Gallo
Research Department
EURIX
Torino, Italy
e-mail: allasia@eurix.it, gallo@eurix.it
Mario Ferraro
Dipartimento di Fisica
Universit`a di Torino
Torino, Italy
e-mail: ferraro@to.infn.it
Sara Lorio
LREN, Departement des Neurosciences Cliniques
CHUV, University of Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: sara.lorio87@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper describes a software application based
on statistical methods for the automatic recognition of trafﬁc
sign deterioration. The evaluation of trafﬁc sign degradation
is usually performed by devices applied on top of the road
sign surface, measuring color parameters such as chromatic
coordinates and the luminance factor. Moreover, the devices can
only check a small fraction of the trafﬁc sign surface at a time,
requiring several acquisitions on the same trafﬁc sign. In order
to reduce the costs related to monitoring and have a periodic
control of the trafﬁc sign status, we propose a fast automatic
method based on video acquisition and processing that can be
easily operated in patrolling vehicles provided with a camera. A
pattern detection algorithm based on color and texture features
is applied to the images extracted from the acquired videos in
order to detect the trafﬁc signs ROIs, which are analyzed using
a statistical approach based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence
and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Making use of a control sample
of not deteriorated trafﬁc sign images, a comparison between the
acquired and the reference images is performed. Both statistical
methods have been used to compare 150 pairs of trafﬁc signs,
achieving high precision and recall, proving that the proposed
approach can be a good candidate solution for automatic trafﬁc
sign deterioration analysis.
Keywords—trafﬁc sign recognition; automatic video processing;
image deterioration; Kullback-Leibler divergence; Kolmogorov-
Smirnov statistical test
I.
INTRODUCTION
Usually, quality of the trafﬁc sign surface concerning the
reﬂectance and color value is evaluated remeasuring color
parameters such as chromatic coordinates and the luminance
factor. This requires the application of measurement devices
and equipments in contact with the trafﬁc sign surface, which
cannot be performed automatically.
Moreover, these devices can only check a small fraction of
the trafﬁc sign surface at a time, requiring several acquisitions
on the same trafﬁc sign. In order to reduce the costs related
to monitoring and have a periodic control of the trafﬁc sign
status, we propose a fast automatic method based on video
acquisition and processing that can be easily operated in
patrolling vehicles provided with a camera.
Many approaches have been proposed and are available in
the literature that aim at automatically recognize the trafﬁc sign
patterns within digital images making use of well established
image processing and pattern recognition techniques; see, for
example, [1][2] and references therein. In [3], a method for
the measurement of degradation based on retroreﬂectivity
has been proposed, where the authors have computed the
photometrical response function for each pixel in order to
establish a threshold for identiﬁcation of damaged trafﬁc signs.
The statistical measurement we are presenting here enables the
calculation of a threshold at a more global level, measuring
differences between two probability density functions.
In this paper, we present two methods to asses signal degra-
dation by comparing degraded trafﬁc signs with a reference
sample of non-deteriorated signs. This comparison has been
carried out with two methods: a divergence measure based
on the Kullback-Leibler [4] distance and the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov [5][6] statistical test that, to the best of our know-
ledge, are the only available in literature for this kind of
analysis and comparison.
We have taken into account the protocols for evaluating the
deterioration of trafﬁc signs provided by italian public institu-
tions such as the Ministry of Public Works and Transport [7],
and ANAS [8], responsible for the trafﬁc sign maintenance
and control.
This paper is organized as in the following: Section II
describes the image processing approach, whilst Section III
reports the statistical methods analyzed and applied; Section IV
provides the experimental results based on a sample of 150
trafﬁc signs; ﬁnally, Section V summarizes the results and
possible future work.
II.
IMAGE PROCESSING
As mentioned in the introduction, we have made use of two
separate image sets: one set of non-deteriorated trafﬁc signs
adopted as reference sample and one set of trafﬁc signs whose
degradation must be evaluated.
The reference sample has been created by manually ac-
quiring digital images trafﬁc signs that appeared in good
conditions, and examples of degraded trafﬁc signs have been
been from roads in Turin. A patrolling vehicle with a camera
has provided a series of images of trafﬁc signs (mjpeg [9]) with
the associated geospatial references stored in the EXIF [10]
image format. Hence a software already developed (and tuned
for high recall) [1] has recognized the trafﬁc signs, making
use of Haar cascades [11][12] for regions of interest (ROI)
detection and a MPEG-7 [13] feature-based classiﬁer for trafﬁc
sign identiﬁcation.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Fig. 1.
Sample (left) and deteriorated (right) trafﬁc signs
For each recognized trafﬁc sign, the ROI has been extracted
and normalized to a reference size. Finally, it has been split up
into three color channels (RGB), analyzed separately in order
to evaluate the pixel color level distribution.
The application has been written in C++ language and
using the OpenCV [14] libraries for image manipulation.
Summarizing, the image processing ﬂow is made up of the
following ﬁve steps:
1)
Image acquisition by a patrolling vehicle provided
with a camera.
2)
Trafﬁc sign recognition for the acquired images
3)
Image cropping for ROI selection and normalization
4)
Trafﬁc sign ROI split into RGB planes
5)
Pixel color level distribution evaluation
In order to have the statistical distributions of not dete-
riorated trafﬁc signs to be used as control sample, we have
performed the overall processing chain to the new and unused
trafﬁc signs images acquired manually.
The information about the pixel color level distribution for
both samples has then been used as input for the statistical
analysis.
III.
ANALYSIS METHODS
In order to evaluate the level of degradation of trafﬁc
signs, we have taken into account the color distributions of the
pixels. We adopted a statistical approach for the analysis, based
on the Kullback-Leibler [15] divergence and Kolmogorov-
Smirnov [16] test. A comparison of the two methods has been
performed in order to select the most appropriate one as a good
solution for automatic recognition of road signs degradation.
The probability P(px, ch) that a generic pixel px belonging
to a N×M image has a given color level ℓ (with ℓ = 0, ..., 255)
in a speciﬁc color channel ch (where ch = R, G, B) is given
by:
P(px, ch) =
(nℓ)ch
(N × M)ch
(1)
where (nℓ)ch is the number of pixels having color level ℓ.
In order to compute the probability function of the control
sample, an average value of P is evaluated using all the images
representing a speciﬁc trafﬁc sign. These values are compared
with the probability function computed for each actual trafﬁc
sign image acquired.
Here, we have compared the probability functions associ-
ated to the same color channel of the trafﬁc signs acquired as
mentioned above and the control sample.
A. Kullback-Leibler divergence
The Kullback-Leibler divergence Dkl, associated with two
probability distributions f(x) and g(x), is deﬁned as follows:
Dkl(f ∥ g) =
Z
f(x) log f(x)
g(x) dx
(2)
where x is a random continuous variable.
In our analysis, the random variable x is associated to the
digital color levels, moving from continuous to discrete, and
f(x), g(x) are the probability distributions associated to the
same color channel of the two images to be compared (the
sample and deteriorated sign). Moreover, the equation (2) is
not symmetric.
In order to use discrete variables and symmetric functions,
the Kullback-Leibler divergence deﬁnition given in (2) can be
rewritten in a symmetric form Skl as:
Skl(f ∥ g) = Skl(g ∥ f) =
= Dkl(f ∥ g) + Dkl(g ∥ f) =
=
N
X
x=0

(f(x) − g(x)) log f(x)
g(x)

.
(3)
In order to remove the singularity for g(x) = 0, every g(x)
is added a small value ǫ chosen as:
ǫ = gmax
N
=
1
256
(4)
where N is the total number of color levels. Using the
transformation g′(x) = g(x) + ǫ, equation (3) becomes:
Skl(f ∥ g′) =
N
X
x=0

(f(x) − g′(x)) log f(x)
g′(x)

(5)
Skl is calculated for each probability distribution pair related
to the same color channel. The three evaluated divergences
are summed up to a total divergence Stot
kl . If the overall
amount exceeds a threshold value T, the trafﬁc sign is declared
deteriorated (Stot
kl > T).
B. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
The other method used is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
for two samples, which compares two cumulative distribution
functions, related to two data sets, in order to estimate if they
belong to the same distribution which can be unknown.
We have experienced that applying the test to all the pixels
of the image, we overestimate the degree of freedom of the
test because many pixels are correlated to their neighbors. Pixel
correlation is evaluated to the images converted to greyscale
values and applying the following algorithm:
g(x, y) = w(x, y) · f(x, y) =
=
a
X
s=−a
b
X
t=−b
w(s, t) · f(x + s, y + t)
(6)
where f(x, y) is the greyscale value of the pixel (x, y), w(x, y)
is the weight of the m × n correlation mask, g(x, y) is the
correlation level, a = m−1
2
and b = n−1
2
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

If g(x, y) is null there is no variations between pixel at
(x, y) and its neighbors.
In order to reduce number of correlated pixels, we have
applied the Canny [17] edge detector and considered solely
ﬁltered pixels. Canny edge detector provides greyscale conver-
sion, noise reduction, correlation evaluation, minimal gradient
suppression, hysteresis threshold.
The two cumulative distribution functions for each image
have been calculated using only the pixels belonging to the
edges, separately for each color channel:
Fch = {Fc, c = 0, ..., 255}ch
(7)
Gch = {Gc, c = 0, ..., 255}ch
(8)
Fc =
c
X
ℓ=0
hℓ
(9)
Gc =
c
X
ℓ=0
hℓ
(10)
where hℓ and h′
ℓ are the color level frequencies. Given Fch
and Gch, the maximum distance can then be calculated:
Dks = max | FchGch |
(11)
The output of (11) can be compared to a threshold value λ,
thus determining whether the two distributions are signiﬁcantly
different. Giving J as the following value:
J =
NcNd
Nc + Nd
(12)
where Nc is the total number of pixel in a good image channel
and Nd is the total number of pixel in a deteriorated image
channel, we can compare the equation (11) to:
Dks ≥
λ
√J
(13)
If the inequality (13) is not satisﬁed, we can say that the distri-
butions are signiﬁcantly different with a level of signiﬁcance
associated to the threshold level λ. It means that the evaluated
trafﬁc sign is deteriorated and should be replaced.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Both methods described in the paper, the Kullback-Leibler
divergence and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, have been ap-
plied on 150 trafﬁc signs pairs (the sample and the dete-
riorated). According to the analysis procedure described in
Section III-A, the threshold T has been chosen evaluating the
distribution of Stot
kl corresponding to the 150 trafﬁc signs pairs.
Fig. 2 shows the Gaussian ﬁt to the data, whose mean µ and
standard deviation σ are calculated. The threshold value has
been chosen as T = µ − σ = 2.5. We obtained a χ2 value
equal to 4.618 with 11 degrees of freedom and the Gaussian
distribution hypothesis can be accepted with a signiﬁcance
level of α = 0.05. We also tried to ﬁt the data with a Poisson
distribution, which gives a χ2 = 3.201 with 12 degrees of
freedom (α = 0.05) and the obtained threshold T = 2.8 does
not change signiﬁcantly.
χ2 / ndf 
 4.618 / 11
Constant 
 21.79 ± 2.72
Mean     
 4.939 ± 0.234
Sigma    
± 0.253
 2.433 
tot
kl
S
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Number of pairs
0
5
10
15
20
25
χ2 / ndf 
 4.618 / 11
Constant 
 21.79 ± 2.72
Mean     
 4.939 ± 0.234
Sigma    
± 0.253
 2.433 
T
T = Mean - Sigma
Fig. 2.
Stot
kl
with ﬁt results using a Gaussian distribution and the chosen
threshold T.
Color level
0
50
100
150
200
250
Cumulative distribution function
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
c (control sample)
F
Gc (deteriorated sample)
ks
D
Fig. 3. Cumulative distribution functions Fch and Gch for the control sample
(blue) and deteriorated sample (red) with the chosen Dks after applying the
edge ﬁlter
According to the analysis method discussed in Sec-
tion III-A, Fig. 3 shows the cumulative distribution functions
Fch and Gch for the trafﬁc sign samples with the application
of the edge ﬁlter where the selected value of Dks is also
displayed.
Precision, recall and accuracy are evaluated according to
the following equations:
precision =
tp
tp + fp
(14)
recall =
tp
tp + fn
(15)
accuracy =
tp + tn
tp + tn + fp + fn
(16)
where tp are the true positive, tn are the true negative, fp are
the false positive and fn are the false negative values.
The calculated values are reported in Table I. It shows
that both methods have good accuracy, precision and recall.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE I.
RESULTS FOR A SAMPLE SET OF 150 TRAFFIC SIGN PAIRS
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Kullback-Leibler
0.80
0.88
0.79
Kolmogorov-Smirnov
0.88
0.93
0.89
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov method appears to give a better
performance, with 89% recall and 93% precision.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Values in Table I show that both Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test achieve high accuracy,
precision and recall parameters, so both methods can, in
principle, be used.
However, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results in the highest
values of statistical parameters; indeed the Kullback-Leibler
divergence gives only a measure of the distance between two
distributions, and cannot capture the statistics of the samples
as done by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
The method presented here could be, for instance, applied
to automatic monitoring of trafﬁc sign deterioration: a camera
could be installed onto public transportation vehicles patrolling
the roads and acquiring the digital images [1] that then could
be processed. A trafﬁc signs catalogue could thus be generated
enabling to determine in advance (before their scheduled
expiring time) the trafﬁc signs to be replaced.
A possible improvement of the proposed approach that the
authors would like to implement as future work, is the use
of HSV (Hue Saturation Value) color space instead of RGB,
because the distance between two colors in HSV dimensions is
closer to the human eye color perception. Hence, the presented
statistical methods should result in a better evaluation of
color deterioration. Since HSV has a clear separation between
luminance and colors, it is more suitable to appraise the color
variations, even in case of large changes of luminance. Never-
theless, it should be considered that the hue (H) component
which holds color information in HSV color space depends
on distance, weather conditions, and age of trafﬁc sign [18].
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Allasia, C. Culeddu, M. Ferraro, F. Gallo, and M. Vigilante,
Automatic video processing for trafﬁc sign recognition, In Proceedings
of the 5th IASTED European Conference on Internet and Multimedia
Systems and Applications EuroIMSA 2009, Cambridge, UK, ACTA
Press, Jul. 2009, pp. 99-103
[2]
A. Soetedjo and K. Yamada, A new approach on red color thresholding
for trafﬁc sign recognition system, Journal of Japan Society for Fuzzy
Theory and Intelligent Informatics, volume 19, number 5, Oct. 2007,
pp. 458-465.
[3]
P. Siegmann, R. Javier Lpez-Sastre, P. Gil-Jimnez, S. Lafuente-Arroyo,
and S. Maldonado-Bascn, Fundaments in Luminance and Retroreﬂec-
tivity Measurements of Vertical Trafﬁc Signs Using a Color Digital
Camera, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, Vol.
57, No. 3, Mar. 2008
[4]
S. Kullback and R.A. Leibler, On Information and Sufﬁciency, Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, Vol. 22, No. 1, 1951, pp. 7986
[5]
M. Hazewinkel, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, Encyclopedia of Mathemat-
ics, Springer, 2001
[6]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer,
2006, pp. 55-58
[7]
Ministero dei Lavori Pubblici, Decreto Ministeriale 31 marzo 1995, n.
1584 (g.u. n. 106 del 9.5.1995), 1995.
[8]
Centro Sperimentale Stradale di ANAS SPA,
Segnaletica stradale
verticale: normativa, materiali, caratteristiche tecniche e metodologie
di controllo, Nov. 2007.
[9]
Joint Photographic Experts Group, ISO/IEC 15444-3:2007, JPEG 2000
image coding system: Motion JPEG 2000, 2007.
[10]
Japan Electronics and Information Technology Industries Association,
Exif 2.2 (exchangeable image ﬁle format), http://www.exif.org/Exif2-
2.PDF, [retrieved: March, 2013].
[11]
R. Lienhart and J. Maydt. An extended set of haar-like features for
rapid object detection,
In Proc. International Conference on Image
Processing, volume 1, 2002, pp. 900-903.
[12]
P. Viola and M. Jones, Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade
of simple features, In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, volume 1,
2001, pp. 511-518.
[13]
Moving
Picture
Expert
Group,
MPEG-7
ISO/IEC
15938,
Information Technology Multimedia Content Description Interfaces,
http://www.chiariglione.org/mpeg/standards/mpeg-7/mpeg-7.htm
[retrieved: March, 2013].
[14]
G. Bradski and A. Kaehler, Learning OpenCV: Computer Vision with
the OpenCV Library, O’Reilly Media, 1st edition, Sept. 2008.
[15]
P. Piro, S. Anthoine, E. Debreuve, and M. Barlaud, Image retrieval
via Kullback-Leibler divergence of patches of multiscale coefﬁcients in
the knn framework, In CBMI 2008. Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing, IEEE, London, UK,
Jun. 2008, pp. 230-235.
[16]
H. Srinivasan, S. N. Srihari, and M. J. Beal, Signature veriﬁcation using
kolmogorov-smirnov statistic, 2005.
[17]
R. Sun, J. Jia, H. Li, and M. Jaeger, Image-based lightweight tree mod-
eling, In VRCAI ’09: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Virtual Reality Continuum and its Applications in Industry, New
York, USA, ACM, 2009, pp. 17-22.
[18]
Z. T. Kardkovcs, Z. Parczi,V. Endre, A. Siegler and P. Lucz, Real-time
trafﬁc sign recognition system, In Proceedings of CogInfoCom2011,
2nd International Conference on Cognitive Infocommunications, Bu-
dapest, Hungary, Jul. 2011, pp. 1-5.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

