The Research of Critical Success Factors for Performance-oriented Electronic
Support Systems - Resource-Based View
Lee, Jhen-Shien
Department of Information
Cathay Bank
Taipei, Taiwan
email: lucifer9978@gmail.com
Yen, Wan-Hsuan
Dept. of Technology Application & Human Resource
Development
NTNU
Taipei, Taiwan
email: gordonwyen@gmail.com
Yu, Chin-Cheh
Dept. of Technology Application & Human Resource
Development
NTNU
Taipei, Taiwan
email: jackfile991@gmail.com
Abstract—Intensive competition has driven enterprise to look
for more effective methods to increase performance. The
Electronic Performance Support System (EPSS) has been
proposed to
provide instant
performance whenever and
wherever needed. However, due to its difference to traditional
e-learning mindset, the adoption and design of EPSS is still at
the early stage. This research aims to find the critical success
factors of EPSS adoption through Resource-Based View
(RBV). Six companies that adopted EPSS were interviewed
and the success factors were identified. The results show that
organizational needs, knowledge management and renewal,
training materials and top management support are among the
most
cited
factors
for
success.
Finally,
specific
recommendations for companies in different adoption phases
are given for better success rate.
Keywords-
electronic performance support system (EPSS);
performance support (PS); performance centered design (PCD);
resource-based view (RBV); critical success factor (CSF).
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the advancement of the current market, the
importance of human resource and its productivity can not be
over
emphasized.
Business
owners,
human
resource
development
specialists,
and
information
technology
professionals are putting their best efforts to enhance the
competence and performance of modern workers. However,
traditional training and developing concepts still focus on
making “teaching” and “learning” more effective, even
though this may take a longer time and the transfer from
learning to workplace may not always be efficient, requiring
numerous repetitions and a lot of practice.
The idea of Performance Support System (PSS) aims at
solving this very issue. It improves workers’ behavior, then
their performance, by providing the needed instruction and
information at the right place and the right time. Ideal
performance support is to provide workers mandatory
information or instruction whenever and wherever needed,
without the workers having to memorize numerous rarely-
used data or processes. It can also shorten the training period,
as workers can get immediate support after taking their
positions.
Gangano [33] stressed the necessity to align the learning
activity with the performance. Many professionals have
claimed Electronic PSS (EPSS) can effectively improve
individual’s efficacy and organization’s competing ability.
Many real world cases have also demonstrated how the
performance support system integrates various resources and
helps employees fulfill job requirements. [13][21][30]
EPSS has served as software a tool to help workers
complete their jobs even before the millennial [27]. With the
rise of the Internet, it has become natural to use networks as
media to deliver training. However, with the fast changing
pace and the increasing competition, modern workers need
faster and more precise information to help them handle the
tasks. Since these tasks and the circumstances might change
from time to time, the need for a fast transformation from
various customer demands and complicated knowledge to a
satisfactory result is growing quickly. As a result, the
development
of
PSS
has
regained
attention
and
a
performance centered design methodology is also being
emphasized.
Along with the advancement of wireless and networking
technology, Mobile Performance Support System (MPSS)
extends the applicable circumstance without being limited to
a workstation, like traditional EPSS. The increment of
bandwidth
allows
more
data
to
be
transmitted
simultaneously, which makes the support and simulation
more vivid to reduce the transfer gap between knowing and
doing.
The progress of technology and the need to catch up with
the market demand both trigger the ongoing interests of PSS.
On the other hand, the obvious different approach from
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

traditional
instruction
design
---
learner-centered
or
instructor-centered --- to performance-centered design not
only constrains the available resources from the market, but
also requires a paradigm shift for the professionals involved
in the field.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the
earlier research results about the definition and utilization of
Critical Success Factor (CSF) along with the evolving of
electronic PSS are presented to set the foundation of the
importance of this research. The research method, including
the
background
of
interviewees
and
the
categorized
interview content, are presented in Section III. The reflection
on the six cases presented and the suggestion for application
are discussed in Section IV. The conclusion is in Section V.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A.
Critical Success Factor
In order to help organizations adopt the new tool and
widely utilize it so that efficiency can be increased,
fulfillment of the critical factors for successful adoption are
needed. Critical success factors are the items that have
positive effects on the operation while also increasing the
competing ability for the company. Critical success factors
vary under different circumstances.
The idea dates back to Commons’ “Limited Factor” [9]
which applies it on management and negotiation. Barnard [3]
adopted the idea and stated “Strategic Factors”, which are
factors people are looking for when making an analysis
during decision processes. Daniel [10] considered “Success
Factors” as elements filtered by three to six critical criteria
that vary from domain to domain. These elements are
influential to the success or failure of the industry and
companies need to put more resources on such impactful
areas. The optimization of the above elements can make
companies more successful.
Leslie and Richard [18] proposed eight critical success
factors for the adoption of information technology. Imtiaz et
al. [16] summarized 15 factors by reviewing articles from
1999 to 2012. Upon the research, they hypothesized 7 factors
such as: Top Management Support, Leadership, Clear Goals,
Team Capability, Effective Communication, Customer/User
Involvement, and Adequate Requirement have a strong
effect on the success of IT (Information Technology)
projects.
B.
Resource-based View
To better link the critical success factors for performance
support
system
and
the
assessment
of
readiness
for
enterprises, we utilized Resource-based View (RBV) to
analyze the factors. RBV refers to the fact that competitive
advantages of a firm lie primarily in the application of a
bundle of valuable, tangible or intangible resources at the
firm's
disposal [23][26][29]. Barney [4] re-categorized
resources from the viewpoints of owned or held by
organizations. He then labeled Physical Capital Resources,
Human
Capital
Resources,
and
Organizational
Capital
Resources. A subsequent distinction made by Amit and
Schoemaker [2]
was
that the
encompassing
construct
previously called "resources" could be divided into resources
and capabilities. In this respect, resources were tradable and
non-specific to the firm, while capabilities were firm-specific
and used to engage the resources within the firm. Such
implicit processes were used to transfer knowledge within
the firm [15][19].
Wu [31] suggested resources should be categorized as
tangible capital and intangible capital which can be measured
by a dollarized value, while capabilities can be categorized
as organizational capability and individual capability, which
help organizations become more competitive by better
proceeding resources. Bharadwaj [6] considered IT as an
organizational capability and classified as IT infrastructure,
human IT resources, and IT-enabled intangibles. He also
found firms with high IT capability tend to outperform the
firms with low IT capability.
C.
EPSS
The
operation
of
business
rates
effectiveness
and
efficiency highly. It is no surprise the call for “learning when
working” and “just in time support” is
vastly required by
managers. Business owners and managers always want to put
their resources on the most rewarding area, which reflects the
earlier development of EPSS than E-Learning [27].
Gery [13] proposed EPSS as an integrated electronic
environment available to each employee. It was structured to
provide immediate, individualized on-line access to the full
range
of
information,
software,
guidance,
advice
and
assistance,
data,
images,
tools,
and
assessment
and
monitoring systems to permit job performance with minimal
support and intervention by others. Raybould [34] gave a
shorter definition: a computer-based system that improves
worker productivity by providing on-the-job access to
integrated information, advice, and learning experiences.
Bezanson [5] provided a definition linked to the application
usability and organizational results: A performance support
system
provides
just-in-time,
just
enough
training,
information, tools, and help for users of a product or work
environment, to enable optimum performance by those users
when and where needed, thereby also enhancing the
performance of the overall business.
EPSS shifts the idea of worker as “people who accept
training” to “people who need support when doing their
jobs”. It centers on the tasks on hand. EPSS responds to
questions and requirements when workers are facing new or
complicated situations. A well-designed EPSS can provide
on-time support such as suggestions and aids, blend supports
within the environment, and utilizes technology when
needed [7].
Raybould [25] further suggested EPSS should support all
aspects that might affect workers’ productivity among the
whole production process and embed knowledge seamlessly.
He considered EPSS as an Electronic infrastructure that can
obtain, store, and distribute knowledge capital between the
organization and the individual so workers can achieve the
desired performance level within the shortest period with the
lowest level of other people’s support. The top five perceived
benefits of EPSS are: decreased information overload and
paper
documentation,
reduced
training
time,
increased
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

productivity, improved job performance, and enhanced
employee empowerment [8]. Chang [8] claimed it reduced
external support by 80% and saved half of the training time.
With the huge progress of wireless and networking
technology, the flexibility of data transmission today is far
beyond the imagination of the nineties. The advantages of
adopting mobile technology include flexibility, speed, and
more efficient networking, which allow access to large
numbers of staff throughout the world and a more efficient
working environment, with less manual paperwork – work
can be done faster, more flexibly, and with greater levels of
accessibility. Even more important are more efficient
training, saving time to inform staff about new products and
processes and saving of time and money [24].
Ahmad and Orton [1] considered MPSS has high
potential to improve performance, especially for the works in
isolated time and location. To ensure MPSS is being
optimized
for
the
workplace
performance,
contextual
knowledge is mandatory regarding the ease-to-use and the
design. MPSS is the combination of communication device
and EPSS [28]. It utilizes mobile devices and applications to
facilitate the performance of the job. Tamez [28] proposed
the model of mobile phones as performance support systems
(Figure 1).
Figure 1.
Model of mobile phones as performance support systems [28]
D.
Comparison between EPSS and E-Learning
E-Learning and blended learning have already been well-
known and widely adopted methods to train and develop
workers. However, most ‘learning’ activities require workers
to be away from their work, which not only reduces their
time on the job, but also increases the difficulty for workers
to apply their learning, because of the difference of
circumstances and the delay of time from learning to
application [22]. Accordingly, more emphasis is put on
support performance and learning at the workplace. This
approach not only allows workers to work and learn at the
same time without being limited by time and space, but also
learning at the real working environment and under the
needed situation to achieve the optimal result.
Gottfredson and Mosher [14] stated that, in order to make
a learning system more complete, it was inevitable to include
PS, since “appliance” was the most important issue among
the five learning needs. Although PS had its training
possibility, its biggest value resided in solving professional
problems and not in education [12].
The idea of designing EPSS comes from Performance
Centered Design (PCD). With PCD in mind, the user
interface is structured to execute job assignments and the
activities
should
also
focus
on
optimizing
possible
performances by considering the context and assignments.
Empirical results showed that using PCD for advanced
technology training can be more effective at preparing
learners with self-oriented learning and improve or adapt the
varying working environment than traditional classroom
training [17]. Yu and Yen [32] stated the specialty of PS was
to let workers learn the exact amount rather than a lot, at the
exact time rather than early.
To achieve this desired result, McGraw [20] proposed the
process of PCD: (1) Identify Requirements, (2) Analyze
Requirements and Reengineered Process, (3) Develop Visual
Prototype of Key Functions/Screens, (4) Conduct Formative
Usability Evaluation, (5) Refine Requirements, (6) Design
User Interface Screens, (7) Develop User Interface Screens,
(8) Conduct Summative Usability Evaluation.
The central focus should include: User Characteristics,
Cognitive
Needs,
Performance
Needs,
Performance
problems,
Training
Issues,
System
Functionality,
and
Attitudes [20].
There have already been several cases utilizing EPSS in
the western world which brought sound results. The
application situation varies from healthcare usage to fast
food chains. The purpose of it can also be very different,
from coast security to car manufacturing. However, the
application is still not too widely explored in Asia. To
retrieve the critical success factors, further research should
be conducted.
III.
RESEARCH METHOD
We chose semi-structured interviews to understand the
strategy
used
by
case
companies
as
well
as
their
consideration to extract the possible success factors for
adopting EPSS. This method provides a framework of data
collection and also gives the possibility to reveal more in-
depth information. The interview guide is designed based on
RBV and earlier researches to cover the resource and ability
required to successfully adopt EPSS within the organization.
The interview is recorded with the permission of the
interviewee and the transcript is reviewed with the original
interviewee to ensure correctness. The approved transcript is
then coded for categorization and analyses.
Six case companies were interviewed in this research. As
we looked for the successfully adopted cases, only the
companies with EPSS in place for more than one year are
considered. Since EPSS is not a common tool used yet, the
cases are chosen by snow-bowling. To really extract the
success factors of EPSS, the decision maker or the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

professionals
who
are
highly
connected
to
the
adoption/usage of EPSS are interviewed. Shown in Table I
below are the backgrounds of the case companies and
interviewees.
TABLE I.
BASIC INFORMATION OF CASE COMPANIES AND INTERVIEWEES
Basic
Informati
on
Company Symbol
A
B
C
D
E
F
Industry
E-
learning
system
OEM of
IT
product
Informati
on
Service
Human
Resource
Service
OEM of
IT/Teleco
m
product
Digital
Contents
Fouding
time
2000
1984
1979
1997
2001
2000
EPSS
adoption
years
2 years
6 years
5 years
16
years
7 years
2 years
Title
of
interview-
ee
Manager
Senior
Director
Group
Leader
Consulta
nt
OD and
HR
System
Manager
General
Manger
Deprtment
of
interviewee
Sales and
Marketing
Research
Engineering
Training and
Development
Consulting
Human
Resource
General
Manager’s
Office
Gender
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Seniori
-ty
3 years
11
years
11
years
1 year
9 years
14
years
A.
Analysis
We categorize the transcripts into four constructs:
tangible assets, intangible assets, individual capability and
organizational capability. The constructs and the coding are
listed below in Table II.
TABLE II.
CODING TABLE OF CSF OF EPSS
Construc
ts
Axial Coding
Optional Coding
Tangible
Assets
A01 IT
Infrastructure
A0101 Organizational Needs
A0102 Individual Mobile Device
Needs
A02 Quality of IT
System
A0201 Easy-to-use
A0202 IT Security
Intangible
Assests
B01 Knowledge
Assets
B0101 Need Assessment and
Planning
B0102 Knowledge Management
and Renewal
Individual
Capability
C01 Promotion and
Training
C0101 Seminars
C0102 Training Materials
C02 Willingness and
Motivation
C0201 Communication
C0202 Compensation
Organizati
onal
Capability
D01 Change
Management
D0101 Culture and Environment
D0102 Top Management Support
1)
Tangible Assets Construct: This construct is set to
evaluate the effect of tangible assets owned by the
organization on the adoption of EPSS. We can further label
them into two categories: IT Infrastructure and Quality of IT
System.
These
tangible
assets
include
hardware
and
software such as Internet structure, system platform, device
and carriers. Networking technology, cooperation between
hardware and software, quality of the system and IT security
all affect the success or failure of the adoption.
a) IT Infrastructure (A01): Whether the infrastructure
provided by the organization can pass the minimum
requirement and whether the device used by the individual
is suitable will affect the ease to get online and reduce the
barrier to support users.
•
Organizational
Needs
(A0101):
Most
interviewees
considered having networking environment, servers, and
personal computers as basic requirements to support the
adoption of EPSS.
‘A server is needed for sure, if there is no server, then
there must be a self-built or cloud server in place. There
must be databases and relating servers as well. People
can then access relevant learning materials.’(S01-03-10)
‘IT
infrastructure
needs
to
be
provided
such
as
computers,
networks,
servers,
and
application
softwares’(S02-02-09)
‘Networks, softwares, and infrastructures need to be
provided’(S03-02-08)
‘I reviewed the system requirement and it is not too hard
to achieve. Basically a server is still needed.’(S04-03-
09)
‘The basic computers, databases, and server network are
“musts”. With the basis of the hardware, all personal
data must be loaded onto the system so the rights of
people can be changed accordingly.’(S05-03-06)
•
Individual Mobile Device Needs (A0102): With the
advanced of wireless technology, many interviewees
also mentioned that the adoption of mobile devices is
more and more popular.
Because our company emphasize the potential of mobile
technology, we wish there were some wireless network
device or the normal users can own something like
laptops, pads, or smartphones to allow them to connect
to the net as well.’(S01-03-12)
‘Every member of the staff has a PC and a workstation
according to their job nature, so they can access the
network anytime they want.’ (S02-02-09)
‘Laptops, tablets, and even cell phones should always
work since you should be able to use it no matter where
and when’ (S03-02-08)
‘Since it is basically operated under a PC, as long as you
have PC, you are able to log in and operate.’ (S04-03-
10)
‘I think those sales persons cannot even work without
tablets. In addition, if it is not connected to the network,
it is as if the device is not functioning . That’s why all
the sales persons are equipped with network connecting
tablets’ (S06-05-09)
b) Quality of IT system (A02): The design of the
system should consider user’s needs and also the security of
enterprise IT system. A well-designed system can reduce the
learning curve while also preventing major risks of the
enterprise IT system.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

•
Easy-to-use (A0201): Most interviewees mentioned, the
user interface should consider the factors of easy-to-
operate and easy-to-understand, so users can quickly
understand and achieve expected goals.
‘When dealing with a more complicated case, the sales
team and customer support team can have timely
support from the system. It is like having an expert
system.’ (S01-02-05)
‘We need to make them feel the developers really knew
the demands and are great help.’ (S02-04-19)
‘Need to fill the job needs of users which can really help
users during their design times. Need to be sensitive to
needs, … Need to have passion to serve.’ (S02-04-17)
‘Easy-to-use and also the user’s habit should be
considered. How to make people develop such habit is
also quite important.’ (S04-05-19)
‘I think if we consider mere local office, the biggest
issue might be in language as the system is mainly
displayed in English which brings more difficulties to
us.’ (S04-05-18)
‘(When filling out system requirement form,) sometimes
the coordinator only cares about whether the form is
completely filled while IT people only care about
whether I completed all the specs required by the user.
However, this system will be used under different kinds
of circumstances. Whether these possibilities and twists
are considered or not is a big issue.’ (S05-09-19)
‘It needs to be an easy-to-use system. Easy-to-use
means, the function and usability fits the needs of their
company. You should not develop something of non-
value.’ (S06-06-11)
•
IT security (A0202): Some interviewees considered
management of access rights and the control of IT
security are both important topics need to be paid
attention to.
‘We operate under flexible hours and the employees can
connect back to the office through VPN. That’s why IT
security is a must for us.’ (S02-02-09)
‘We need to consider IT security when using the system
to help on assignments’ (S03-02-08)
‘Talking about security, we will regulate different rights
according to different purposes and requirements. Take
PS as an example, all of our company’s platform can let
employees log in with their employee ID. The HR
system manager has additional ID so he can use another
identity to manage the system.’ (S05-04-07)
‘That system has its own password. In our company,
each different system requires control and certificate
whenever people try to log in.’ (S05-04-08)
‘I think, in order to make EPSS valuable, it must be
connected to the network, be it intranet or internet.
However, if the network is connected, it is unavoidable
to have security issues. This is always a challenge to a
big company and people will likely stick with intranet
only.’ (S06-02-03)
2)
Intangible Assets Construct: This construct refers to
how the intangible assets owned by an organization affect
the implementation of EPSS. The knowledge base itself, the
updates of the content and knowledge management and
integration can all influence the success rate of the system.
The relating transcripts are listed below:
a) Knowledge Assets (B01): There must be a fit
between the task and the aid provided to make the system
really helpful. The integration of knowledge management
and the construction of knowledge database can also help
others maximize the benefits of knowledge.
•
Need for Assessment and Planning (B0101): Most
interviewees stated that it is necessary to analyze the
goal of users to provide information that fits the
circumstance and really have the links with users. Only
through the value of the system is maximized.
‘The key learning needs for the new sales person is on
how to get new accounts. If we can provide new
information about our product and also the knowledge
of the competitor (through the system), then the sales
can utilize the more up-to-date information.’ (S01-01-
04)
‘Each department needs different things. Since they
have different requirements, thus they need different
tools for each of them. The system used here will not be
provided to all other units.’ (S02-02-07)
‘Needs analysis is mandatory when adopting a system.
During needs analysis, different processes will be
analyzed. (For instance,) if the system is for the use of
HR, then the process of HR is analyzed.’ (S05-06-13)
‘The idea is, when the employee has some questions,
then he or she does not need to ask anyone but can get
the correct answer from the system.’ (S06-02-01)
•
Knowledge Management and Renewal (B0102): Most
interviewees mentioned the company will reorganize
data into useful information along with the evolving of
time, so the system users can obtain a more suitable
knowledge.
‘We will update the system through time. We usually
check every six months to see if it is necessary to
update.’ (S02-02-10)
‘We will review the content and take out the outdated
material and purchase new material that fits our current
needs.’ (S03-03-09)
‘The reference materials, such as system databases will
be updated whenever there is a need. I think it will be
updated for sure. I am just not certain how often.’ (S03-
03-10)
‘We update the system regularly ever since it was
developed.’ (S04-02-06)
‘In the beginning we set up only one universal database
for all managers. Since 2007, we began setting up new
management competence for different management
levels, which meant we changed and improved the
system by the requirement of the company.’ (S05-05-
08)
‘If it is not updated , then I bet it will soon be forgotten
like an unmaintained website. As a result, I always think
the best chance resides in a mobile solution, as it is
portable and can trigger more interests to update. I think
only the combination of mobile devices, content of
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

mobile spirit and structure of wiki can construct a
continuous updated EPSS. If a company can do this, this
will be a great help to that company.’ (S06-03-04)
3)
Individual Capability Construct: This construct refers
to the human resource and capability of the organization to
the effect of successful adoption of EPSS. The perception of
people and how enterprises help people to use the system to
obtain the required skill and ability are all related. These
include the seminar of system being placed, training
materials for users, surveys and feedback collection from
users.
a) Promotion and Training (C01): Proper training and
promotion can increase familiarity of employees with the
new system, reduce trial and error so users can smoothly use
the system to help their job.
•
Seminars (C0101): When using systems from vendors,
seminars can make employees better understand the idea
and relating policy about the new system.
‘We are sales people. Not only do we use this system
but also sell this system. As a result, we got an idea of
how this works when we took product training.’ (S01-
04-18)
‘For the customer, we still need to tell them how this
system works to make it easy for them.’ (S01-04-19)
‘The vendor will host seminars to demonstrate how to
use this system prior to implementation’ (S03-03-13)
‘There will be a public announcement when the system
is put online. Afterwards, we will set mandatory classes
for different groups of people according to the different
fields of each system’ (S05-07-14)
•
Training Materials (C0102): For global companies,
using digital training materials can help employees get
used to the new system without being limited by time
and space.
‘It all depends on the complexity of the system. If it is
quite complicated, then there will be training sessions.
However, if the system is not that complicated, a
handbook or SOP will be enough. Besides, we have all
those on-line as well.’ (S02-03-13)
‘We will host seminars and aid with some relating
documents. Vendors will prepare their presentation and
email to us.’ (S03-04-15)
‘Relating introduction and demo, it can be found within
the intranet.’ (S04-04-15)
‘We will try to put some idea of SOP inside the system.
There will be explanations on how to use the system
within the system itself. Users can then check the use of
different function when they want to.’ (S05-07-15)
b) Willingness and Motivation (C02): The employee is
one of the most valuable assets of an organization.
Performance of employees is key to the competitively of a
firm. An implementation strategy and optimization system
that adjust according to the feedback from users can help
increase willingness to use the system while, suitable
compensation can boost motivation even further.
•
Communication (C0201): Interviewees responded that
user feedbacks are critical factors that drive system
adjustment.
Regular
communication
and
collecting
feedbacks can make the system even better.
‘Not only do we listen to employees, but also to
customers and adjust our system accordingly.’ (S01-04-
15)
‘We do user survey every six month.’ (S02-03-11)
‘Our survey aims at department and not just at the
managers. All levels are welcome.’ (S02-03-12)
‘We will regularly ask, at least once a year, about the
satisfaction with the system.’ (S03-03-11)
‘When purchasing a new system, we will go back and
ask which should be preserved and which should be
thrown away.’ (S03-03-12)
‘I know they will adjust the system and have a certain
way to measure it.’ (S04-04-14)
‘All of our systems have a service window. For instance,
there is (the contact window’s) information within the
system. If you have any opinion about the system, you
can contact the corresponding person and all feedback
from user will be taken into consideration.’ (S05-05-10)
‘We will consider the impact and priority first, then we
arrange time for the modification.’ (S05-05-11)
‘The feature of the mobile world is “fast”, so you cannot
put a system there and never change a thing forever. For
instance, one of our customer’s systems has new
material
every
week.
When
there
are
needs
for
adjustment, one perspective is from the management
view and the other is from the survey, looking at what
the sales person’s needs as what they can do for the next
stage, no matter the function or the content.’ (S06-03-
05)
•
Compensation (C0202): Most interviewed companies
used and consider it is a more effective way to
compensate rather than to punish employees to motivate
them to adopt the new system.
‘We used compensation to encourage employees using
the system and the effect is not too bad.’ (S04-04-17)
‘The culture of our company is open policy: If the
system is not used by someone, we will not force
him/her nor punish him/her.’ (S02-04-16)
‘We will use event or reward gift to motivate employees
and we don’t have any punishment policy. However,
there are something an employee has to do otherwise he
or she will not be able to do his/her job properly.’ (S03-
04-19)
‘From our own experience, if there is no special
incentive, then the utilization rate will be lower. Unless
this system fits perfectly with the users need when
designing, then there is no need for special promotion.’
(S06-05-09)
‘We need to encourage content generation and the use of
the contents. In the end, if there is content but no one is
using it, the content will simply be a waste. That’s why I
think knowledge management was in the situation of no
user. This situation is improved with wiki. As a result, I
think it is important to include a broad encouraging
initiative so we can have the content coming out
continuously.’ (S06-05-08)
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

4)
Organizational Capability Construct: This construct
refers to the effect on change management within the
organization to the adoption of EPSS. We discussed the
influence from operation, organizational environment and
degree
of
digitalization.
Factors
including
supervisor
support, management ideas, and organization culture all
affect the success rate of a system.
a) Change Management (D01)
•
Culture and Environment (D0101): The interviewed
companies usually face change with an open attitude,
while not forcing employees to follow.
‘The company is not a forceful entity that is driven by
the boss. I think it is because of the differences between
cultures. There is no special mechanism. If someone
thinks something is needed to be done then just go ahead
and do it. If there is something that needs to be fixed,
then just have it fixed.’ (S02-04-15)
‘There are some systems that, if you don’t use them, you
are not able to complete your job properly. As a result,
you must go consult someone and learn.’ (S03-04-18)
‘Since our company belongs to Hi-Tech industry, we are
highly digitalized. There is no need for special training
about how to use computer and we can figure it out
pretty much by just looking at it.’ (S03-04-15)
‘To make it a habit, you internalize it.’ (S03-05-22)
•
Top Management Support (D0102): Interviewees think
the supportive gesture taken by high level managers can
help promote overly and change the atmosphere of the
company.
‘This is the policy of our company, since we are going
to sell this as well. It is a decision from the boss himself,
thus his support is a really big driver for this.’ (S01-04-
17)
‘Top managers surely communicated with the directors
and managers of my department already. We need to
have top management support to continue on this.’ (S03-
04-14)
‘Emphasize from top management level is the most
critical factor. He or she needs to personally link to your
projects.’ (S03-05-20)
‘They are totally supportive of the decision of the
company. However, the support might come in a
different size and shape. One of the most common ways
is he will tell us what might make the system even
better.’ (S05-07-16)
‘The support from top management is surely important. If
there is no command from the top management,
normally no one will care for this thing.’ (S06-04-06)
These CSFs are summarized according to the response of
case companies. As we can see by the numbers of being
mentioned: all six companies view IT infrastructure a must
and all data need to be able to be accessed through networks.
In addition, the management and especially the updates of
the knowledge content are also important for all responders.
Almost all companies reported training materials and top
management support are critical to the success of the
adoption of EPSS. While seminars, communication, need for
assessment and planning, and individual mobile device needs
follow on the most counted list.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
With RBV, a framework to analyze the CSFs of
enterprise adopting EPSS is proposed. Out of the four
constructs, “Intangible Assets” is considered the most critical
one by the average counting of its items. All six companies
highlight the belonging factor “Knowledge Management and
Renewal”.
This
coincides
with
the
trend
of
modern
“Knowledge Economy Era”. In this era, the creation and
storage of knowledge and skill is crucial. This critical asset
can create wealth of individual to nation as well as drive
economy activity. Knowledge becomes a strategic resource
of
enterprises
and
its
management
is
important.
All
innovation relies heavily on knowledge, thus the content of
the platform must be rich and relative to facilitate users to
obtain suitable information and access to relating knowledge.
Employees can then handle their own task and extend their
professions at the same time. As a result, the efficiency of a
person
is
increased
and,
in
sum,
the
organization’s
performance is also increased.
Since EPSS is the system that helps workers when they
are in need, the system itself needs to be kept up-to-date at
least to the status-quo to be effective. “Need Assessment and
Planning” is also an important factor under that construct as
the system needs to really solve the problems of users. This
will also affect the willingness and the culture, as one of the
most obvious cases is a person might not even work well
without the help of the system, such as transcript S03-04-18.
On the other hand, the axial “IT Infrastructure” under the
construct “Tangible Assets” is also critical based on the
response of the interviewees. The proper setup of server and
network is the foundation, while suitable mobile flexibility
should be provided to employees. The mention of server and
networking in “Organizational Needs” does not bring too
much information to us as most companies have the
infrastructure in place, be it self-constructed or hosted by
vendors. On the other hand, whether mobile network can be
accessed and utilized truly depends on the policy and
strategy of the company. Some companies even provide
mobile devices intentionally to help their employees.
The axial “Quality of IT System” was mentioned by fifty
percent of the interviewees. Although both Easy-to-use and
IT security are important issues, the influence from them
seems to be moderate compared to the other factors. This
might be because these factors are less relative to a specific
system, but rather an integration of consideration of a whole.
From the aspect of “Capability”, interviewees mentioned
the axial “Promotion and Training” most frequently. Both
“Seminars” and “Training Materials” are referred to as CSFs
by more than 60% interviewees. This reminds us although
EPSS system tries to reduce the workers’ down time due to
the necessity for off-site training, it is still unavoidable to
employ mandatory opportunities. However, one must be very
careful when designing the course and system as this extra
learning due to the additional system should not reduce the
productivity of employees when considering all the pros and
cons. If the system builds in itself self-guided or clear
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

instruction, then this could reduce the needed time and effort
to utilize the system.
While “Seminars” and “Training Materials” both have an
effect on communication between providers and users, the
factor “Communication” covers more aspects than that. To
make the system best serve the employees, feedbacks from
employees should also be considered. To collect feedback
from users for the regular modification or purchase of the
new system is a common practice among the interviewees.
An
organization
that
does
well
on
both
side
communications can make known the purpose and benefits
of the change, while also collecting opinions from the field
more quickly. Elving [11] stated, “Communication is vital to
the effective implementation of organizational change” and
the adoption of a new system is certainly one kind of change.
Prior to the introduction of the system, it is better to consider
the communication policies and programs to achieve the best
result.
Last but not least, the support from top management is
also vastly mentioned within the survey. The support can
help on various aspects, such as monitoring the progress and
motivating the involvement of employees. If there is a
communication problem among different departments or
internal communities, the help from top management can
also facilitate the discussion and agreement among groups.
Most companies responded that they took a step-by-step
approach such that, once the adoption project gains the
approval from managers, a small group will first adopt as
trial. Once the benefits of the system emerge, the necessity
for the vast promotion will decrease significantly while other
departments would eager to adopt the system as well.
To recommend companies to successfully adopt EPSS in
the future, we propose the following suggestions:
1) Companies considering but not yet adopting EPSS:
•
Draft proposal: Evaluate the needs of the organization
and compare the status quo of the company to the CSFs.
If the benefit is better than the effort, construct the
proposal in an easy to understand way and gain the
support from top management.
•
Search for external support: Project team should consult
other companies who already adopted the system to
learn from their experience and current situation. It can
also try the vendors system for further evaluation about
the cost and benefit of in-house development or external
procurement.
2) Companies just adopted EPSS:
•
Focus area of the project team: The project team needs
to ensure it has sufficient representatives from key
departments such as IT, HR, and top managers. The
project team can then evaluate which will be the
quickest area for rewards and focus on realizing the
benefit.
•
Complete promotion and reward: The communication
for the users and managers should be considered and
well-prepared for better integration between them.
Proper reward can boost awareness and motivate the
early adopters.
3) Companies using EPSS:
•
Management
of
knowledge
assets:
A
continuous
improvement mechanism needs to be put in place and
executed so that not only the users feel that the
information is beneficial and helpful today but also
increase the habit to look it up when difficulties arise.
•
Follow-up of the usage and effect of the system: The
comparison of performance and behavior change do not
always require much to trace. A simple indicator can be
used to examine the possible effect of EPSS. The result
can also provide another source of improvement for a
more beneficial system.
One of the limitations of this research is that the sample
size is small and the surveyed industry is concentrated since
EPSS is yet at its starting stage in Taiwan. Due to the
industry nature of the island and the characteristic of the
applied system itself, there are more applications in high
knowledge density places such as high tech and consulting
industry than the others. Whether the CSFs are identical to
those of other industries is yet to be understood.
The other direction for the future approach is to add the
quantitative aspect for more depth to the research. Although
the number of counting is used as an index of relative
importance but it might not truly reflect the real impact of
such factor. If a weighting system can be considered to
calibrate the response, the final result could be more
indicative to the key factors of successful implementation.
As an organization is a holistic entity where each part is
connected to one another, the CSFs are also not isolated
either. For instance, with the “Top Manager Support”, it is
easier to fulfill “Organizational Needs” and the resource for
“Seminars” and “Training Materials” are easier to obtain as
well. With the better usage of the system, “Communication”
for the better modification of the system will raise the
tendency to “Knowledge Management and Renewal”. This
shows all the CSFs are not just critical solely but will have
effect on one another. One should consider a more thorough
planning
when
implementing
EPSS
to
increase
the
possibility of successful adoption.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Ahmad, and P. Orton, Smartphones Make IBM Smarter,
But Not As Expected. Training & Development, journal of
the American Society for Training & Development, vol. 64,
no. 1, 46-50, 2010.
[2]
R.
Amit,
and
R.
Schoemaker,
Strategic
assets
and
organizational rent, Strategic Management Journal, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 33-46, 1993
[3]
C. S. Barnard, Organization and Management. Cambridge,
Harvard University Press, 1948.
[4]
J.
Barney,
Firm
resources
and
sustained
competitive
advantage. Journal of Management, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 99-120,
1991.
[5]
W. Bezanson, Performance Support Solutions: Achieving
Goals
Through
Enabling
User
Performance.
Trafford
Publishing, 2006
[6]
A.
S.
Bharadwaj,
A
resource-based
perspective
on
information technology capability and firm performance: an
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly, vol.24, pp.169-196,
2000
[7]
L.
A.
Brown,
Designing
and
developing
electronic
performance systems. Boston, MA: Digital Press. American
Journal of Small Business, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 49-57, 1996.
[8]
C. Chang, The relationship between the performance and the
perceived benefits of using an electronic performance support
system
(EPSS).
Innovations
in
Education
&
Teaching
International, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 343-363, 2004
[9]
J.
R.
Commons,
Institutional
economics.
New
York:
Macmillan, 1934
[10] D.W.
Daniel,
Management
Information
Crisis.
Havard
BusinessReview, pp. 111-121, 1961
[11] W. Elving, The role of communication in organisational
change, Corporate Communications: An International Journal,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 129-138, 2005.
[12] E. Gal, and R. Nachmias, Implementing on-line learning and
performance support using an EPSS. Interdisciplinary Journal
of E-Learning and Learning Objects, vol. 7, pp. 213-224,
2011.
[13] G. Gery, Electronic performance support systems. Cambridge,
MA: Ziff Institute, 1991.
[14] C. Gottfredson, and B. Mosher, Innovative Performance
Support:
Strategies
and
Practices
for
Learning
in
the
Workflow, McGraw Hill Professional, 2010.
[15] D.G. Hoopes, T.L. Madsen, and G. Walker, Guest Editors’
Introduction to the Special Issue: Why is There a Resource-
Based View? Toward a Theory of Competitive Heterogeneity.
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 24, pp. 889–902, 2003.
[16] M.A.
Imtiaz,
A.S.
Al-Mudhary,
M.T.
Mirhashemi,
R.
Ibrahim, Critical Success Factors of Information Technology
Projects,
International
Journal
of
Social,
Behavioral,
Educational, Economic, Business and Industrial Engineering,
vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 2880-2884, 2013.
[17] D. Keegan, and N. Mileva, Mobile learning performance
support
system
for
vocational
education
and
training,
Bulgaria, University of Plovdiv and Spain, the UNED, 2010
[18] W. Leslie, and S. Richard, The role of the CIO and IT
function in ERP. Communications Of The ACM, vol. 43, no.
4, pp.32-38, 2000.
[19] R. Makadok, Toward a Synthesis of the Resource-Based
View and Dynamic-Capability Views of Rent Creation.
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 22, no.5, pp. 387–401,
2001.
[20] K.
McGraw,
The
performance-centered
design
and
development
methodology.
New
Work:
Cognitive
Technologies, Inc., 2009
[21] S. E. McKenney, Computer support for science education
materials
developers in Africa: Exploring potentials. USA:
University of Twente, 2001.
[22] K. O’Leonard, Performance support systems. CA: Bersin &
Associates, 2005.
[23] E.T. Penrose, The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, New
York: Wiley, 1959.
[24] K. Peters, m-Learning: Positioning educators for a mobile,
connected future. International Review ofResearch in Open
and Distance Learning, vol. 8, no.2, 2007. Retrieved Mar,
2017,
From:
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/viewArticle/350
/894.
[25] B. Raybould, Performance support engineering: An emerging
development
methodology
for
enabling
organizational
learning. Innovations in Education and Training International,
vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 65-69, 1995
[26] D.P. Rumelt, Towards a Strategic Theory of the Firm.
Alternative theories of the firm; 2002, vol. 2 pp. 286–300,
Elgar Reference Collection. International Library of Critical
Writings in Economics, vol. 154. Cheltenham, U.K. and
Northampton,
Mass.:
Elgar;
distributed
by
American
International Distribution Corporation, Williston, Vt., 1984.
[27] K. Ruyle, EPSS ： A 20-Year Retrospective. Performance
Xpress , ISPI, 2004.
[28] R. Tamez,, A Model for Mobile Performance Support
Systems as Memory Compensation Tools, Learning and
Performance Quarterly, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 19-30, 2012.
[29] B. Wernerfelt, The Resource-Based View of the Firm.
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 171–180,
1984.
[30] M.
Wild,
Designing
and
evaluating
an
educational
performance support system. British Journal of Educational
Technology, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 5-20, 2000.
[31] S. H. Wu, Thenature of the strategy, 3rd ed., Taipei, Face
Publishing, 2000
[32] C. Yu, and W. Yen, Performance Centered Design for
Training Resource: The Development and Application of
Electronic
Performance
Support
Systems
and
Mobile
Performance Support Systems, T&D Fashion, vol. 158, pp. 1-
29, 2013.
[33] S. Gangano, Using performance–based learning to drive
business outcome, paper presented at American Society of
Training
and
Developing
International
Conference
and
Exhibition, Denver, CO, 2012
[34] B. Raybould, An EPSS Case Study: Prime Computer. Paper
presented at the Electronic Performance Support Conference,
Atlanta, GA, 1991.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-548-7
MMEDIA 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

