Safe Route Navigation Using Traffic Volume Estimated by Noise Data 
 
Kenji Tsukamoto 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Tokyo, JAPAN 
e-mail: tenbook223@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Tokyo, JAPAN  
e-mail: tatsuo@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—The focus of this research is on the new possibilities 
of map-based pedestrian navigation applications. Currently, 
many map-based pedestrian navigations can only display the 
shortest path. However, it is not always appropriate for typical 
users. We propose a map-based pedestrian navigation 
application which presents a path that can reduce the fear of 
crime for the pedestrians. In other words, we propose a safe 
route navigator. Our research question is whether it is useful for 
the user that the application shows a safe path. We have created 
a prototype application that suggests a safe path and we also 
evaluate the usefulness of the application. We consider that a 
busy road is typically a safe road; however, estimating human 
density to indicate busy road is not easy. We propose a method 
of using the environmental noise as an easy way to estimate 
human density. Compared to the human density, the noise level 
can be easily measured. Then, we show that the proposed 
application can reduce the user's fear of crime. This means that 
future map-based pedestrian navigation application should 
show not only the shortest route but also a safe route. 
Keywords-route navigation; map application; safety; noise 
level. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, smart devices, such as smartphones have 
become widespread. Further, various applications for these 
devices have become available. A map-based pedestrian 
navigation application is one of such applications. Many of 
such applications also have a route navigation function, 
which is used to find a route to the destination. Such map 
applications often suggest the shortest path to the user. 
However, valuable paths other than the shortest routes exist. 
For example, in railway transfer guidance in Japan, a route 
with a low fare or a route with a small number of transfers is 
displayed in addition to the shortest route. The research by 
Quercia et al. [1] presents a route navigation for walking. It 
proposes a beautiful route, a quiet route, and a happy route. 
Each route made a different impressions on the users. 
In this paper, we created a map-based pedestrian 
navigation application that proposes routes with attributes 
other than shortest distance like Figure 1. The attribute we 
focused on is “Safety”. In this paper, “Safety” means that the 
route is less susceptible to crime and does not take into 
account the dangers of traffic accidents. The research in [2] 
is as an example of a route guidance also focusing on 
“Safety”. The authors created a system that uses a database 
that records the locations where crimes actually occurred. By 
using this database, they search for path with fewer crimes, 
and propose them to users. However, it is not easy to create a 
database of how many crimes have occurred in the past for 
all roads. According to Ohno et al. [3], the crime rate is low 
in Japan and the total amount of crime data is small. 
Therefore, it is difficult to accurately evaluate safety by 
simply comparing the number of crimes on each road. For 
this reason, in Japan, such an evaluation is often based on fear 
of crime and not the actual number of crimes. This paper also 
does not focus on the actual number of crimes but, rather, 
evaluates the perception of the crime rate.  
 
Figure 1.  Safe Route Navigation 
We conducted two experiments. Experiment 1 shows the 
relationship between noise level and traffic in Tokyo, where 
noise level means the loudness of environmental noise. We 
studied people living in Tokyo and investigated the 
relationship between the noise level and the traffic. As a 
result of this study, we found that traffic is busy in areas 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

where noise level is high. This result means that human 
density can be measured more easily. 
Experiment 2 shows that the traffic information estimated 
in Experiment 1 is applicable, and that the route guidance that 
presents a busy route is useful. In experiment 2, we used the 
results of Experiment 1 to estimate the human density and 
created a map application that suggests a path with high 
traffic. The experiment consists of two sub-experiments. In 
Experiment 2-1, we showed that the sense of security 
estimated by the map application matches users’ perceptions. 
Thus, the traffic information estimated by using the noise 
level is useful. In Experiment 2-2, we explored whether the 
safe path presented by the proposed application is useful for 
users and demonstrated the utility of this. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we 
compare the proposed approach with existing research. In 
Section III, we show the usefulness of this research using 
assumed use cases. In Section IV, we survey people living in 
Tokyo and confirm that there is much traffic in a noisy place. 
Based on what is shown in Section IV, we create a map 
application that proposes a path with much traffic as a safe 
route, and show that it is useful for users in Section V. In 
Section VI, we present the findings and future prospects 
obtained through this study. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
When do people feel fear of crime while walking? 
According to Ferraro et al. [4] and Braungart et al. [5], people 
feel this fear when there are no people around, although there 
are differences depending on gender and age. In isolated 
areas, fear increases because no other individuals are nearby 
to help if a person becomes the target of a crime. In other 
words, a place where there is little sense of fear of crime is a 
place that is easily noticeable, that is, a place with busy 
traffic. The fear of crime can be alleviated by navigating 
through a busy place. 
 To find busy places, pedestrian traffic data is needed. It 
is used in many situations, such as when the government 
decides on a city plan. On the other hand, it is difficult to 
actually measure pedestrian traffic, and data cannot be easily 
collected. Therefore, methods for estimating pedestrian 
traffic rather than actually measuring it have been studied. 
 One example of these studies is a method using Global 
Positioning System (GPS) [6]. GPS is a system that detects 
the position of a person using artificial satellites and can 
accurately acquire data on the position of the person. There 
is already research on using GPS for other services [7]. In this 
research, there is a method of measuring how many people 
are on each road and estimating the traffic volume of 
pedestrians. However, in urban areas with many high-rise 
buildings, it is difficult to receive radio waves from artificial 
satellites, and GPS may not provide accurate position. We 
can detect the number of devices that have GPS functions by 
this method, but it is not possible to determine the exact 
number of people. In addition, it is not possible to distinguish 
between people in a car and pedestrians. Therefore, it is 
difficult to estimate an accurate pedestrian traffic volume. 
 Another method of estimating pedestrian traffic is to use 
images or videos [8]. In this method, pedestrian traffic is 
estimated by analyzing road images or videos. The methods 
presented in [9]-[11] estimate the density of crowds; thus, we 
can estimate the pedestrian density even when there is a large 
amount of traffic. However, it is necessary to install a camera 
on the road to collect images or videos. It is difficult to collect 
images or videos because data cannot be collected from 
places where cameras are not installed. Thus, while 
information on pedestrian traffic is useful, it is difficult to 
estimate it. Therefore, we considered a method for estimating 
pedestrian traffic more easily and that is, the method using 
noise level. 
 It is easy to collect data of the noise level. For example, 
a smartphone has a built-in microphone. By using this, we 
can easily record and measure the volume of noise anywhere. 
By mapping this data, it is possible to know how much noise 
is generated in each place. 
 There is already a method for mapping noise data to a 
map. NoiseSpy [12] proposes two methods for displaying 
noise data on a map. The first method is called journey-based 
visualization, which displays the noise level along a specific 
route on the map. The second is city-based visualization, 
which divides the map into squares of a certain size and 
displays how much noise is generated in each area by color. 
By using these methods, noise data can be mapped. 
 We thought that pedestrian traffic volume could be 
estimated from mapped noise data. Many of the causes of 
noise in an urban area can be attributed to people. In other 
words, it can be estimated that a place in the city with many 
people has much noise. We can evaluate the noise level of 
each route by mapping the noise. We propose a method for 
estimating pedestrian traffic more easily by finding the 
relationship between noise level and pedestrian traffic. 
III. 
SCENARIO AND REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS 
In this section, we consider the situation in which the 
application that suggests a safe route, as proposed in this 
research, and determine if this suggestion is useful. 
 
A. Scenario 
Ms. Miya is a female university student. She was working 
on research at the university on a weekday at 7 p.m. She was 
tired of working at the university and decided to continue her 
work somewhere else. She searched for a new place to work. 
She found a new cafe approximately 10 minutes by foot from 
the university. She tried to go there by searching for a route 
to the café by using a map-based pedestrian navigation 
application. However, the road to the cafe was dark and quiet. 
She was worried about walking alone on the road and decided 
not to go to the cafe. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

B. Requirement Analysis 
The problem with this scenario is that the map-based 
pedestrian navigation application presented only the shortest 
route. If the application had presented a safe route, Ms. Miya 
would not have given up on going to the destination. Our 
application can present a safe route in addition to the shortest 
route. Therefore, it is possible to propose a route that allows 
users to reach the destination without fear of crime. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 1 
We conducted a survey to determine the relationship 
between noise data and pedestrian traffic in cities. The target 
city for the survey was Tokyo. To determine whether there 
are many people in a noisy place, we conducted a noise 
questionnaire for people living in Tokyo. We received 31 
responses from people in their teens and 20s. Questionnaires 
used in the experiment are shown in Table 1. The results of 
the questionnaires are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3. 
TABLE I. QUESTIONS INCLUDED IN THE QUESTIONNARIE 
Question 
number 
Question 
1 
Where was the path noisy? 
2 
What was the source of noise? 
3 
At that time, how many people 
were there around you? 
 
 
Figure 2.  Results of the question 2 
Figure 2 shows the responses to the question about the 
source of noise. The most common source of noise was from 
people, comprising 45 % of the total. The second most 
common cause was trains, comprising 32 % of the total. 
Other causes of noise included stores’ advertisements, cars, 
factories, and large version. People were the most common 
cause of noise but made up less than half of the total noise. 
 Figure 3 shows how many people were around when the 
area was perceived as noisy. The largest number of 
respondents said that there were too many people to count, 
accounting for 61 % of the total. The second most common 
answer was approximately 10 people, making up 26 % of the 
total. The total of these two answers is 87 %. This result 
indicates that in more than 80 % of the places where noise 
occurred, there were more than 10 people in the surrounding 
area. 
 
Figure 3.  Results of the question 3 
 These results are summarized as follows. First, less than 
half of the urban noise was caused by people. On the other 
hand, it is clear that there are many people in areas that tend 
to be noisier. Therefore, it can be said that people do not cause 
much of the noise in the city, but pedestrian traffic is often 
found in a noisy place. In other words, we were able to show 
the relationship between noise level and pedestrian traffic, 
which is the purpose of this experiment. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 2 
We 
created 
a 
map-based 
pedestrian 
navigation 
application that suggests routes that people can walk without 
fear of crime using pedestrian traffic estimates based on noise 
level. In this application, a place with much noise is treated 
as a busy place based on the result of Experiment 1. This 
application presents the user with a route through a noisy 
place, which is assumed to be a busy place and a place where 
one can walk without fear of crime. Figure 4 shows the 
processing flow of the application. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Processing flow of the map application 
 We conducted Experiment 2 in Takadanobaba in Tokyo 
shown in Figure 5. The size of the test area is approximately 
200 m by 150 m. We divided the roads in the test area into 33 
roads at each intersection. The noise was measured for each 
road and the pedestrian traffic volume was estimated. All 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

measurements were taken between 7 p.m. and 8 p.m. Noise 
was measured using an iPhone. The application used for the 
measurement is a sound meter [13]. The measurement was 
performed at the midpoint of each road, and the average noise 
value for 30 seconds was calculated. The weather at the time 
of measurement at each point was cloudy and the wind speed 
was less than 5m; thus, we considered that the measurement 
value was not affected by the weather. 
The experiment was divided into two parts. Experiment 
2-1 presents the user with pictures of multiple roads that are 
judged to have different perceptions of safety depending on 
the application. We investigated whether there is actually a 
difference in the user's feeling of safety. In Experiment 2-2, 
the application presents the user with a fast route, a fast and 
safe route, and a safe route. We investigated whether the 
route indicated by this application is useful for users. 
 
 
Figure 5.  A map of evaluated area 
The test subjects were 16 people in their 20s, of which 8 
were male and 8 were female. Subjects are the same in 
Experiment 2-1 and Experiment 2-2. 
A. Map-based Pedestrian Navigation Application 
Our application presents the user with three routes: the 
shortest path, the shortest and safest path, and the safest path. 
We classified the road into three noise levels based on the 
noise measurements. Table 2 shows the noise level 
classification. 
 We set the coefficient a for each noise level and 
calculated the weighted distance L of each road based on this 
value and the actual road length l. The coefficient a increases 
as the noise decreases, which means that the weighted 
distance L increases as the road becomes quieter. In addition, 
by using the coefficient n that indicates how much emphasis 
is placed on security, it is now possible to search for routes 
that take both speed and safety into consideration and routes 
that take only safety into account. The coefficient n is 0 when 
searching for the shortest route, and increases as safety is 
emphasized. The formula used for the calculation is as 
follows. However, the route number is i and the noise level is 
j. 
 
Li = li (1 + aj ∗ n) 
 
TABLE II. NOISE LEVEL CLASSIFICATION 
Noise level 
Volume 
Number of roads classificated 
Level 1 
0-19Hz 
11 
Level 2 
20-29Hz 
10 
Level 3 
30-Hz 
12 
Our map application uses L to search the route from the 
current location to the destination. By searching for a route 
that minimizes L, it is possible to guide the route through a 
road with much noise (which also means that there is much 
traffic). 
B. Experiment 2-1 
The purpose of this experiment is to verify whether the 
degree of security estimated by the application is close to the 
user's perception. We presented three roads with different 
noise levels to the subjects and investigated how they felt on 
each road. The subjects were shown videos of three roads and 
asked about their impressions of each road. The videos were 
all approximately 15 seconds and were shot between 7 p.m. 
and 8 p.m. 
 
Figure 6.  Result of Q.1, “Do you feel fear of crime if you go alone on this 
road?” 
 After showing the video to the subject, we asked the 
subject two questions. Figure 6 is the result of Q. 1, “Do you 
feel fear of crime if you walk alone on this road?” Answers 
are given on a four-level Likert scale, in which 4 is “I don't 
feel afraid” and 1 is “I feel afraid”. It can be seen that as the 
noise level decreases (i.e., the road is estimated to be less 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

busy), more subjects tend to fear crime. Figure 7 is the result 
of Q. 2, "Do you think you might walk alone on this road at 
the same time as this video?" Answers are given on a four-
level Likert scale, in which 4 is “I think I will pass” and 1 is 
“I don’t think I will pass.” It can be seen that the lower the 
noise level is, the fewer subjects that want to follow the 
suggested route. 
 
Figure 7.  Result of Q.2, "Do you think you might walk alone  
on this road at the same time as this video?" 
 From these results, it can be seen that the subjects do not 
fear crime and do not hesitate to walk on the road that the 
application has estimated to be the safest (that is, the road 
where the noise level is high). On the other hand, on the road 
that the system estimates to be less safe, the subject tends to 
feel afraid of crime and want to avoid the road. From this 
result, it can be said that the degree of security estimated by 
this application is close to the user's feelings. This means that 
the purpose of this experiment has been confirmed. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The three routes suggested by our proposed application 
C. Experiment 2-2 
The purpose of this experiment is to make sure that the 
secure route proposed by the proposed application is 
beneficial to the user. Three routes searched by the 
application were presented to the subjects, and we 
investigated which route was selected. The three routes are a 
fast route, a fast and safe route, and a safe route. The three 
routes are shown in Figure 8. 
We presented the scenario to each subject before starting 
the experiment. We examined which route each subject took 
when he/she was placed in the scenario situation. The 
scenario is as follows. 
 
D. Scenario 
You are working at a university doing research. Today is 
a weekday, and the current time is 7 p.m. After growing tired 
of working at the university, you decide to move to a coffee 
shop in Takadanobaba. Because you are worried about 
walking alone on the road at night, you search for a route you 
can walk with confidence for your safety using a map-based 
pedestrian navigation application. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Result of Experiment 2-2 
 
Figure 10.  Result of Experiment 2-2 (male) 
 
Figure 11.  . Result of Experiment 2-2 (female) 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

E. Results and Considerations 
The results of the experiment are shown in Figure 9. Ten 
people chose a fast and safe route or a safe route. This means 
that 10 people chose route options that are unique to this 
application. In addition, we asked subjects who chose the 
shortest route whether they would choose a different route if 
they were in a city with which they were not familiar or in a 
foreign country. Five subjects (out of 6) chose routes unique 
to this application depending on the situation. Thus, the 
application's unique routes are valuable for 15 out of 16 
subjects. This means that the purpose of this experiment has 
been confirmed. 
 The results by gender are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 
11. The application's unique routes were chosen by 4 of the 
males and 6 of the females. This finding indicates that the 
functionality of this map application is more valuable for 
females than for males. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Through this research, we were able to show that a map-
based pedestrian navigation application that presents a safe 
route is valuable. The application that we created changed the 
way a certain number of users evaluated routes and reduced 
fear of crime. It was also verified that noise level data can be 
used as a criterion for judging safe routes. 
 In the future, it is necessary to confirm that this 
application would be of value to many people. In Experiment 
2, we investigated the usefulness of our application, but all 
subjects were in their 20s. It is necessary to determine what 
kind of result is produced for people from other generations. 
We should also evaluate the relationship between traffic and 
noise in different cities. In this study, only the Tokyo city was 
investigated, but it is necessary to confirm whether the 
relationship between the traffic and the noise exists in other 
cities.  
We can also think of using a threshold on noisiness. With 
the route searching algorithm suggested in this paper, very 
quiet and dark street can be accepted. However, it is not 
desirable. By using threshold on noisiness, we will be able to 
avoid suggesting quiet and dark route completely. 
We also have to consider a new way to create a data set for 
noise information. In Experiment 2, we created a data set 
manually, but in the future, we can easily collect a data and 
create a data set by using crowdsourcing. This will help us to 
easily introduce the proposed system to other cities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Quercia, R. Schifanella, and L. Maria Aiello, “The shortest 
path to happiness: recommending beautiful, quiet, and happy 
routes in the city,” HT '14 Proceedings of the 25th ACM 
conference on Hypertext and social media, pp.116-125, 2014 
[2] S. Shah, F. Bao, C.-T. Lu, and I-R. Chen, “CROWDSAFE: 
crowd sourcing of crime incidents and safe routing on mobile 
devices,” GIS '11 Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL 
International Conference on Advances in Geographic 
Information Systems, pp.521-524, 2011 
[3] R. Ohno and Mi. Kondo, “The amount of visual radiation and 
the sense of safety from crime, A study of the site planning of 
multi-family housing considering the residents’ mutual visual 
interactions (Part 1),” Journal of Environment Engineering 
(Transactions of AIJ), No.467, pp.145-151, 1995 
[4] K. F. Ferraro and R. L. Grange, “The measurement of fear of 
crime, Sociological Inquiry,” Volume 57, Issue 1, pp.70-97, 
1987 
[5] M. M. Braungart, R. G. Braungart, and W. J., Hoyer, “Age, 
Sex, and Social Factors in Fear of Crime, Sociological Focus,” 
Volume 13, No. 1, pp.55-66, 1980 
[6] A. K. Brown and M. A. Sturza, “GPS tracking system,” United 
States Patent, 1995 
[7] S. van der Spek, J. van Schaick, P. de Bois, and R. de Haan, 
“Sensing Human Activity: GPS Tracking,” Sensors 2009, 9, 
pp.3033-3055, 2009 
[8] H. Chao and R. Gupta, “Image and Video based pedestrian 
traffic 
estimation,” 
United 
States 
Patent 
Application 
Publication, 2013 
[9] A. N. Marana, S. A. Velastin, L. F. Costa, and R. A. Lotufo, 
“Automatic estimation of crowd density using texture,” Safety 
Science, Volume 28, Issue 3, pp.165-175, 1998 
[10] R. Watson and P. Yip, “How many were there when it 
mattered? Estimating the sizes of crowds,” Royal Statistical 
Society, 2011 
[11] D. Ryan, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, “Scene 
Invariant Crowd Counting”, Digital Image Computing, 2011 
[12] E. Kanjo, “NoiseSPY: A Real-Time Mobile Phone Platform for 
Urban Noise Monitoring and Mapping,” Mobile Networks and 
Applications; New York Volume 15, Issue 4, pp.562-574, 2009 
[13] Sound 
Meter. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://apps.apple.com/jp/app/sound meter / id1093419762 
2019.12.25 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

