Towards Distributing Multimedia Applications on a Virtualized Cloud 
Infrastructure 
 
Mak Shama 
Birmingham City 
University 
Birmingham, UK 
mak.shama@bcu.ac.uk  
 
David Newell 
Software Systems Research 
Group 
Bournemouth University 
Bournemouth, UK 
dnewell@bournemouth.ac.uk 
Philip Davies 
Faculty of Technology 
Bournemouth and Poole College 
Bournemouth, UK 
pdavies@bpc.ac.uk 
Benjamin Todd 
Postgraduate Research 
Student 
Bournemouth University 
Bournemouth, UK 
bwtodd@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—We examine some technological aspects of cloud 
computing, focusing on virtualization applied to various data 
types including multimedia and identify the benefits & security 
concerns for a modern IT infrastructure. An experiment to 
migrate a live company server consisting of Microsoft Exchange 
e-mail and file server to a cloud infrastructure is conducted. The 
initial findings are that each process step needed to overcome 
security issues of server migration.. The writers will propose 
improved approaches for modelling cloud-hosted multimedia 
applications, semantics and abstract data models. 
  
Keywords – Multimedia, Virtualization; Cloud Computing; 
Server Migration; Security. 
INTRODUCTION 
In a previous paper [1], we evaluated an adaptive 
multimedia presentation system with contextual supplemental 
support media. In this paper we will be considering the 
requirements for operating this adaptive system from a cloud 
based infrastructure. ‘Cloud Computing’ is a term for a 
multitude of online services allowing in-house computing 
services to migrate to rented online infrastructures. ‘Software, 
Platform or Infrastructure as a Service’ are concepts for 
processing, developing or hosting application and data on 
demand. Improved speed and reliability of network connections 
fuel the explosion of portable, hand-held devices by reducing 
organisational IT costs. 
The Virtualization and Evolution to the Cloud Survey [2] 
found that 75% of global organisations are positively 
considering 
migration 
to 
a 
virtualized 
/hybrid 
cloud 
environment. However, 44% of CEOs and 46% of CFOs still 
have concerns about migrating their applications and services. It 
was also suggested that once organisations move their critical 
applications to virtualized or hybrid cloud environments then 
they find many benefits. 
The current ad-hoc methodology to migrate a company 
server or application to the cloud uses an infrastructure, storage 
vendor, or a software service provider. The security aspects are 
built around the vendor, measures built into the customers own 
systems and how the data centres operates, for example, on a 
multi-tenant basis [3]. There are additional security measures 
that need to be implemented over virtual, public cloud networks 
that are discussed in this paper. 
A small survey of ten local SMEs was undertaken by the 
writers to find out what services they run. Results confirm the 
industry trend towards virtualization and migration to the cloud 
raised security concerns for organisations. The main findings 
are summarized in Fig. 1. 
Most businesses run four essential business applications: e-
mail, file storage & printing, application serving and databases. 
It was found that these businesses have a desire to migrate to 
the cloud but their primary concerns are confidence in security 
compared with their on-premises solution, and worry about 
overall control of business data when required. It is clear from 
these results that companies, including those involved in 
multimedia data types, need to be shown how their data is 
secure in the cloud and the many advantages to be gained from 
migration. 
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 gives a 
brief survey of current methodological approaches to 
virtualisation. Section 3 reports on a case study of an actual 
small company migration. Section 4 discusses findings, 
including use of a novel multimedia application in an 
educational setting and finally, Section 5 concludes with a 
discussion of future work. 
 
METHODS AND APPROACHES 
Virtualization is a term given to the creation of a virtual 
computer within a larger more powerful computer. The more 
powerful computer is often known as a Virtual Machine (VM) 
host that runs software known as a hypervisor [4]. 
The hypervisor is a layer of software that controls and 
monitors the resource allocation of the host hardware - memory, 
processor and drive space - to the VMs that run on it. The VMs 
on the hypervisor are called instances; many of these instances 
can be run on one hypervisor, limited only by the hardware of 
the host system, which is usually designed to run multiple guest 
VMs. This has been illustrated in Fig. 2. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Summary of Survey Results 
 
 
Figure 2. Virtualization Hypervisor Layer (Source: Virtuatopia, 2009) 
There are many virtualization platforms available. The most 
commonly used are compared in Fig. 3. They offer comparable 
features, run on different specification hardware and are 
available for use on different physical computer system such as 
Windows, Linux or Macintosh host server platforms. [5]. 
Virtualization offers organisations advantages such as 
reduced operating costs, freeing up resources so users can 
instantly launch new servers within minutes, improving the 
flexibility of IT architectures [4]. 
Modern organisations are moving to a functioning cloud 
computing model where applications are virtualized and 
become ‘always available’ online, rather than the traditional 
systems, where all IT infrastructures are stored and maintained 
within a physical location of an organisation. 
The general approach to migration to the cloud initially, is 
for an organisation to migrate to server virtualization followed 
by other types of virtualization such as storage and 
desktop/endpoints, and then finally private storage-as-a-service 
and private/hybrid clouds [6]. 
Virtualization is an important factor of modern day 
computing that has three distinct benefits to organisations. 
Firstly, it offers substantial cost reductions. Using virtualization 
allows organizations to consolidate their data centres and non-
mission critical applications down to less than a quarter of their 
current data centre requirements, moving servers that are 
running at 20% capacity to shared servers that run at 70% 
capacity. Secondly, it offers speed of deployment and scalable 
resources to an organisation needing to launch IT infrastructure. 
For example, to go with the launch of a new product, increases 
in customer demands can easily be achieved in a matter of 
hours instead of weeks on the old model. Finally, it offers 
organisations a way to manage expertise and skill sets to easily 
manage multiple different applications with reduced staff to 
maintain the network[2]. 
A small organisation may virtualize just the servers in their 
office for consolidation, which becomes a small private cloud 
that they can access internally and externally. Larger 
organisations can go so far as to create complete virtual 
networks, using multiple VMs on different cloud infrastructure 
providers, and create virtual switches and connections with 
VLANs for their networks. As complexity increases, so may 
security concerns. With a network that is so complex, there 
needs to be a way to monitor all VMs that are running correctly 
[2]. 
 
Virtualization 
Platform 
Provider 
Host OS 
Citrix Zen 
XenSource 
NetBSD, Linux, 
Solaris 
Virtual Server / 
Hyper-V 
Microsoft 
Windows Server 
Virtual PC 
Microsoft 
Windows 
Parallels 
Parallels 
Macintosh 
Virtual Box 
Sun 
Microsystems 
Windows, Linux, 
Macintosh, Solaris 
VMware / ESX 
Server 
VMware 
Windows, 
Hardware (no host 
OS) 
Figure 3. Comparison of Virtualization Platforms 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
There are benefits of virtualization in large organisations 
with thousands of computers otherwise requiring hardware 
rollouts, patching and maintenance [7]. Each desktop no longer 
needs individual licences for antivirus or productivity software 
as this will reside on the main hypervisor desktop virtualization 
server. 
Virtualization is also eco-friendly and saves money in the 
long run. In the future, organisations will move more towards a 
virtualized desktop, and some examples of this can already been 
seen in third-world counties developing Virtual Learning 
Environments (VLE’s) that allow students access to online 
resources without the need for a powerful local computer [8]. 
Terminal services such as Citrix have had a multi-user 
operating system environment for some time. Virtual Desktop 
Infrastructure (VDI) works in a very different way. Instead of 
having a server which can be used by multiple users at the same 
time, the server is running many virtualized single user 
operating systems which all act independently of each desktop 
system due to the function of the hypervisor [7]. 
An example of desktop virtualization using VDI is shown in 
Fig. 4. It makes use of a thin client at each user work desk. The 
virtual desktops are stored in a secure environment on the 
server. Thin clients use less energy, need less maintenance, and 
updates can all be performed much quicker on the VDI server. 
VDI is designed to allow the use of desktop operating systems 
such as Windows as well as Linux in a virtual environment that 
is easy to deploy, secure and manage with everything stored in 
the data centre [7]. 
Virtualisation can be extended to cloud computing. [9] 
Broadly, there are three levels of service that cloud computing 
provide: 
 
A. Software as a Service (SaaS) 
Applications are available online. For example, e-mail, 
online file storage, web hosting image banks, online software to 
perform virtually any task on multimedia data and more. 
Google Docs, or Sales-Force.com are current examples. There 
is not much control other than over data, but with no control 
over routers, firewalls, IPS or WAFs. 
 
B. Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
Application platform used for development of online 
services. For example, client relations management database, 
online developer tools, web site creation services and more. 
Combinations of different components managed by someone 
else allow use of databases or application services. Microsoft 
Azure is an example.[10] 
 
C. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
Provision of an online infrastructure. For example, online 
server hosting, virtual servers, direct access to physical servers 
in the cloud, web hosting and data centre. Amazon EC2 and 
Savvis (enterprise cloud) are examples that give users a lot 
more control. Raw virtualization with a good service layer 
could move a WAF or Gateway to this service. Users 
themselves start to assert a level of control of the cloud. 
 
 
Figure 4. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (Image Source: [7]) 
 
THE CASE STUDY 
We perform an experiment to observe the migration of a 
company e-mail and file server to a cloud infrastructure to 
evaluate a strategy for transfer and to analyse the security 
implications. E-mail is moved over to a cloud service to be 
available on all devices everywhere and reduces costs. The 
experiment will test the migration of the Exchange Server from 
a physical server and make a comparison of options. 
We consider the case of a local business which has an e-
mail server at their head office in Bournemouth and they would 
like to move to cloud services. Their current server 
configuration is Microsoft Exchange for e-mail and the same 
server to store files. This server has anti-virus software for 
which the licence needs to be renewed each year. The desired 
result is to remove this server completely. Microsoft offer 
Exchange online as an alternative to hosted exchange, the web 
interface to migrate the exchange to online services. A second 
option is to migrate to Google Apps for business online that 
offers E-mail, Calendar, Contacts and Notes. It also offers file 
storage. A third option is to image the entire server, which 
currently stands at 200Gb of data, to a file and then upload this 
image to an online virtual server. The same software that was 
on the physical server will continue to be run on the online 
virtual server. 
Some minor network re-configuration is needed and a 
redirect of the MX record for the e-mail domain. The shared 
drives can be mapped using Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
tunnelling. A drawback with this method is that the 200GB file 
will take a long time to upload at current upload speeds of 1.5 
Mbps. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
An alternative solution is an online service with a plug in 
application for the physical server. [11] This plug in application 
would selectively upload and replicate the data over to the 
online vendor with application integrity checking to ensure that 
the data is transferred correctly. Fig 5 illustrates how this 
application would function. 
Currently, the organisation has Exchange for e-mail and 
VPN access for file shares. Email access is available through 
Outlook Web Access, IMAP or Exchange Message Application 
Programming Interface (MAPI) – one of the benefits of using 
Microsoft MAPI is that you also can use Calendar, Contacts, 
Tasks and E-mail all together with one protocol. A cloud 
provider should be able to support these extra functions. Google 
Apps for business supports this with an application that 
synchronises the contacts, calendar and tasks to Google cloud 
servers. Microsoft Exchange online simply performs all the 
exchange features that a local Exchange server would perform. 
The methods available are to virtualise the server, upload it 
in its entirety and then make some small adjustments to the 
network connectivity, or to export the database then import it 
into an online providers system. 
The server migration options are shown in the comparison 
table in Fig. 6  including security issues. 
 
FINDINGS 
The experiment was performed with the server migrated 
online with all three options evaluated. Although it was found 
that Exchange Online and Google Apps were good choices, it 
ultimately depends on individual organisation preference. All e-
mail features are available to computers at the office and to all 
portable devices with very little reconfiguration. However, the 
virtualized server resulted in a very large data file of 200 GB 
which takes a long time to upload. The user file is relatively 
efficient to upload as it is not sending a copy of the entire 
computer system to the cloud provider but there could still be 
compatibility issues with the image file when it reaches the 
online provider. The customer data was exported. For 100 
users, the size of the exported file was quite small at 100MB. 
This file is very fast to upload to the online provider. Import 
problems could still arise with correct allocation of data fields. 
The data would need to be looked at to ensure its integrity. 
Mission critical applications, as well as data are migrating to 
the cloud. A recent example of small cloud application is 
canp.me. [8] Providing a virtual desktop and storage facility 
using the local desktop processing power, the application 
provides synchronising data with the application. Hence it is 
possible to load an application to any PC from the cloud and 
authenticate the user from data stored on a USB key/dongle. 
Only one software copy is needed and one license. [12] 
Deployment times are greatly reduced as the cloud will only 
contain the latest data and latest copy of the application state. 
When a cloud based application is called, a minimum set of the 
appropriate Data Link Libraries (DLLs) are loaded and the 
remaining application is not loaded until it is required.  
The fundamentals of the technology are based around the 
application’s ability to compress, encrypt and transmit desktop 
applications into smaller parts to the cloud, and then to 
intelligently rebuild them from the cloud on the virtual desktop 
in real-time. This saves on bandwidth, because the application 
and data both reside locally until the data is to be saved and the. 
 
Install plug in 
application on 
server
DATABASE 
ONLINE
User access
ACCESS IN 
PARRALLEL with 
old and new 
server
DATABASE 
SERVER
PHYSICAL
Pluig in app 
updates online 
vendor on the fly
Check online 
vendor is up to 
date
NO
END physical 
server access and 
fully migrate to 
vendor
YES
 
 
Figure 5. Server Upload Application Flowchart 
 
Action 
Method 
Security 
Concern 
Hardware 
Server 
Stay at the 
physical server and 
update all 
components. 
Security can 
always be 
improved: 
firewalls, IPDS, 
WAF all cost 
extra money to 
run and maintain. 
Exchange 
Online 
Install the client 
exchange transfer 
connecter module 
from Microsoft 
and it will upload 
automatically. 
Security depends 
on Microsoft, 
however, they are 
a large vendor 
and their 
reputation is 
dependent on 
security for their 
service. 
Google Apps 
for Business 
Install the Google 
transfer module 
and exchange 
mailboxes are sent 
to Google. 
As secure as 
Google cloud. 
Google has 
introduced a 2 
step verification 
to add extra 
security. Also 
security features 
can be managed 
by Organisation 
Google accounts 
over and above 
individual Google 
accounts. 
Figure 6. Comparison of Migration and Security Issues 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
application closed. Similar to Citrix XenDesktop, users can 
appear to travel with their virtual desktop anywhere by creating 
widgets 
In summary, the applications such as cnap.me [8] offers 
users the possibility of a virtual desktop, synchronised storage, 
and updated software application, i.e. a low cost managed cloud 
solution. 
EVALUATION 
As cloud computing evolves and bandwidth increases, the 
nature of network connections change. The demand for 
migrating critical applications including multimedia into a 
cloud infrastructure will increase rapidly, as will services 
demanded of online security vendors. 
This paper has presented evidence that migrating and 
storing data in the cloud can be as secure as retention on 
premises. [13] However, adequate attention to security 
measures is needed. It is recommended that any organisation 
considering migration should so do so at the earliest opportunity 
and take advantage of enhancing security provision. 
Users concerned about cloud vendor failure should deploy a 
solution with failover between different cloud providers to 
provide access if one provider goes down or has lower costs. 
This may also be useful for a large organisation that wishes to 
separate applications in the event of partial failure. [14] Clearly, 
service level agreements are required for cloud provision. 
Therefore, each individual case will require evaluation and 
assessment as a superior service will attract a premium, 
however, failover, recovery and backup should be provided. 
The cloud can offer many advantages over on-premises IT 
infrastructure. It has the potential to be flexible and cost 
effective for organisations to use. Security concerns raised can 
be solved using methods that secure the core aspects of data, 
identities and devices on an infrastructure. Using this across 
virtualization platforms will provide a secure network IT 
infrastructure. 
Cloud infrastructure has the potential with appropriate 
security implementation, to be a better architecture than the old 
physical model. Virtual security should be much better than 
physical security. 
Security issues are wide ranging and should  include 
securing printer ports that are connected to networks possibly 
using mac-address based port security authentication. VLANS 
on virtual networks play a role in the security solution. Access 
control lists need to function across multiple segments of the 
network but only allow users access to authorised areas. 
NAT, PAT, DNS and DHCP and security are critical 
network components that still need to be configured locally. 
A necessary start for business executives for deployment of 
virtualized networks is to conduct a full requirements analysis 
and audit of the current infrastructure, and build a network to 
provide a future path for migration of physical networks to 
cloud ones. Plans have to include data, applications and 
infrastructure. 
A major advantage of cloud based solutions is the rapid 
deployment of a reconfigured service or set of services such as 
cnap. For example, in the rapidly changing educational 
environment when a new department is set up, users can be 
simply added to an existing group policy or set up as a new 
group. Each user will have access to the applications already 
present with the inherent security privileges. If a separate server 
is required for this department, no new hardware is needed; the 
IT team can request or create a new virtual server within 
minutes ready to be deployed  [15] [16]. 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
A variety of methods and approaches have been identified to 
achieve a successful migration producing a documented 
strategy for implementation in an organisation with minimum 
disruption to business functions. 
Using physical servers takes up valuable resources and 
requires a team of technicians to configure monitor and apply 
patches. There are clear financial and environmental advantages 
in the use of virtualization and migration to the cloud. A major 
advantage is rapid time for infrastructure deployment because 
there is no need to purchase additional hardware. 
As more infrastructures are moved into the cloud, 
organisations can make use of additional services such as 
multimedia rich media streaming, sharing, and similar services. 
The reducing costs of infrastructure will open up new markets 
and opportunities for collaboration. 
Plans by the writers will clarify requirements of the 
network, applications and data to take specific account of 
ubiquity and the pervasive nature of future multimedia 
applications & data.  
Future goals will be identified for multimedia data models 
for applications and infrastructure hosted in the cloud. For 
example, experiments will be undertaken concerned with 
infrastructure performance to host cloud applications such as 
cnap.me [8], as a large scale multimedia Virtual Learning 
Environment (VLE) vehicle in a University. The vision is to 
clarify data models and requirements for a Cloud-based Virtual 
learning Environment (CAVE) as a logical evolution of the 
writers’ current research area [1]. Future work will explore 
migration of a multimedia presentation system to the cloud by 
combining centralised with cloud-based Virtual Learning 
Environment (VLE) applications 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cutts, S., Davies, P., Newell, D. and Rowe, N., (2009) ‘Evaluation of an 
Adaptive Multimedia Presentation System (AMPS) with Contextual 
Supplemental Support Media’. Proceedings of the MMEDIA 2010 
Conference, Athens, Greece. 
[2] Symantec. 2011. Virtualization and Evolution to the Cloud Survey: 
Global 
Results.https://www4.symantec.com/mktginfo/whitepaper/Virt_and_Ev
olution_Cloud_Survey_060811.pdf [September 2011]  
[3] Morrison, K. S., Chenxi W., Managing the Cloud: An Enterprise 
Migration Roadmap. Layer 7 Webcast. June 2011. 
[4] Rule, D,. and Dittner, R. 2007. The Best Damn Server Virtualization 
Book Period: Including Vmware, Xen, and Microsoft Virtual Server. 
Burlington:Syngress. 
[5] Virtuatopia. 2009. An Overview of Virtualization Techniques. Available 
from 
http://www.virtuatopia.com/index.php/An_Overview_of_Virtualization
_Techniques [Accessed December 2011] 
[6] VMware,. 2011.VMware Overview. California: VMware. Available 
from: http://www.vmware.com/files/pdf/VMware-Company-Overview-
DS-EN.pdf [Accessed September 2011]. 
[7] Rouse, P,. 2010. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) Overview. Quest 
Software. Available from: http://www.virtualizationadmin.com/articles-
tutorials/vdi-articles/general/virtual-desktop-infrastructure-
overview.html [Accessed December 2011]. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
[8] CNAP. 2011. About cnap.me. Available from: 
http://www.cnap.me/content/about [Accessed October 2011] 
[9] IBM. N.d,.Cloud computing: Paradigm shift or just hype? Available 
from: https://www-
304.ibm.com/businesscenter/cpe/html0/158782.html[Accessed October 
2011] 
[10] MSDN,. 2011. Definition of Federated Security. Available from: 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms730908.aspx [Accessed 
December 2011]. 
[11] InfoTech Spotlight, 2011. Gizmox Debuts Instant CloudMove, an 
Automated Tool-Based Solution. Available from: 
http://it.tmcnet.com/topics/it/articles/136729-gizmox-debuts-instant-
cloudmove-an-automated-tool-based.htm [Accessed September 2011]. 
[12] Lombardi, F,. Di Pietro, R,.2010. Secure Virtualization for Cloud 
Computing. Elsevier Ltd. 
[13] Global Knowledge., 2010. Top 10 Security Concerns for Cloud 
Computing. Available from: 
https://www.infosecisland.com/blogview/5300-Top-10-Security-
Concerns-for-Cloud-Computing.html [Accessed September 2012]. 
[14] ISO/IEC 27001. 2005. Information Technology Security Techniques: 
Information security management systems requirements. 
[15] ISSAUK. 2011. Information Systems Security Association – UK 
Chapter. Available from: http://www.issa-uk.org/ [Accessed October 
2011]. 
[16] Miller. 2008. Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability (CIA). 
Available from: http://it.med.miami.edu/x904.xml [Accessed December 
2011] 
 
 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

