Changing the Middleware System for IPTV Services Telecom Operators Based on 
the Methodology of the Change Management Process
Anel Tanovic
Department for IT development of multimedia services
BH Telecom d.o.o. Sarajevo
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
anel.tanovic@bhtelecom.ba
Fahrudin Orucevic
Department of Computer Science and Informatics
University of Sarajevo, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
forucevic@etf.unsa.ba
Abstract – Managing the change plays the most important role 
in any IT business organization.
Managing changes is 
important for strategic components of the existing IT service. 
One of such strategic components is the alteration of the 
Middleware system in the IPTV service of the Telecom 
Operator. The Middleware system is a central system which 
controls all other IPTV systems of the Telecom Operator: 
Video on Demand system, Encrypting system, Headend system, 
Monitoring system and Database system. That is why, before 
we uninstall the old and install the new Middleware system we 
require a set of activities which have to be clearly stated. The 
reason for swapping the Middleware system can be the 
common problems and also the inefficiency in the function of 
the old system. This document describes the steps which need 
to be implemented in the process of changing the Middleware 
system in the IPTV system of BH Telecom, the leading 
Telecom Operator in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The result of 
the work should be a reflection upon the improvements of the 
quality parameters of the IPTV system of BH Telecom which 
are a contribution of the newly implemented Middleware 
system, which is as a final result going to lead to a increase of 
users and profit income. This work represents the continuation 
of the investigation in BH telecom which are conducted with a 
goal to improve the management over the IT servers. 
Keywords-Service Management; ITIL V3; ISO 20000; Change 
Management; IPTV
I. INTRODUCTION
    Today’s management of alterations is one of the biggest 
challenges in the IT industry [1]. Replacement in the IT 
industry occurs as a result of external needs and problems 
which have been created in the common operation of the 
existing IT service [3], [4]. Every successful IT organization
has to define how to manage all changes regardless of being 
operative or strategic. That is why it is needed to define the 
process of managing all changes (Change Management 
process) [2].  
    Various standards of Service Management praxis 
differently define the Change Management process. ITIL 
V3 defines Change Management as „ a process which as a 
goal has to assure that standardized  methods and 
procedures use for an efficient and quick management of all 
changes which as a goal has to decrease the impact of 
incidents linked to the change of service quality“ [2], [3], 
[4]. ISO 20000 defines Change Management as „ a process 
which has to assure that all made changes have to be 
evaluated, confirmed, implemented and reviewed in a 
controlled way“ [5], [6]. A important thing to emphasize is 
that the Change Management isn't a process of identifying
strategies or IT service designs, but rather the process of 
implementation of the IT service. Regardless of the 
standards the key activities of the Change Management 
process are [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [9], [11]:

Controlling and managing the process of changing.

Recording, evaluating, confirming and rejecting 
admitted requests.

Assembling team meetings for the implementation
of the change.

Coordination 
of 
the 
development 
and 
implementation of change.

Evaluation of results made by change and approach 
to the finalization of change if it has been 
successfully completed.
    Earlier published contributions from this research area 
are: [7] and [8]. These contributions were written as a part 
of the implementation of ITIL V3 processes in BH Telecom, 
the leading Telecom Operator in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The result of the first contribution is a description of the 
implementation of ITIL V3 Service Design processes in an
information system of Telecom Operator, and the result of 
the 
second 
contribution 
is 
a 
percentage 
of 
the 
implementation of ITIL V3 Supplier Management process 
in IPTV/VoIP system of BH Telecom.
    This contribution is connected to Multimedia conference 
because the paper was submitted under topic: “Multimedia 
applications” because Middleware system has all IPTV 
applications for: Live TV, Radio, Internet, Video on 
104
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

Demand, EPG, TV Mosaic, Interactive chat and Messaging 
and this document describes the changing of Middleware 
system (or in other words: Changing Middleware 
applications). Middleware is the heart of IPTV service, and 
IPTV service is the main Multimedia system in every 
Telecom Operator – Today Telecom Operators offer their x-
play services (Dual-play, Tripple-play etc.) in the way that 
IPTV is the central module of some x-play service.  
    The second chapter explains nine steps which BH 
Telecom should implement towards the change of the old 
with a new Middleware system. In the conclusion a list of 
improvements is presented which should guides us into a 
new Middleware system of the IPTV service of BH 
Telecom and also a time table for completing all nine phases 
[7]. The conclusion also contains a description of the testing 
process of the change of Middleware system in BH 
Telecom’s IPTV service which has been done by using test 
Middleware software versions of some Middleware vendors. 
II. ALTERATION OF THE OLD MIDDLEWARE SYSTEM WITH A 
NEW MIDDLEWARE SYSTEM
    Because of the replacement with the old Middleware 
system with a new Middleware system it is needed to 
implement the following 10 steps, where an external 
company is responsible for the realization of the step 4:
1.
The specification of the new database has as a goal 
to define their compatibility with older data bases
2.
Define user and administrator lists of specifications 
which the new Middleware system has to have 
3.
Criteria for the choice of a external company that is 
going 
to 
design 
and 
implement 
the 
new 
Middleware system 
4.
Defining specifications of the network plan and 
installation of the new Middleware system by the 
hand of the external company
5.
Implementation of the new Provisioning system 
towards connecting the new Middleware system 
with the centre
informational system of the 
Telecom Operator
6.
Implementation of the new Billing system
7.
Testing the new Middleware system with other 
IPTV systems
8.
Data migration from the old to the new 
Middleware system
9.
Releasing into production the new Middleware 
system
A. Specification of the new database towards the 
identification of its compatibility with older database
    Figure 1 shows database scheme of the new Middleware 
system [15]. The number of tables in this database scheme is 
20 and main tables are: subscriber, channel, device, 
vod_contents, program and billingiptv.  
          Figure 1. Database scheme of the new Middleware system
    
    The new Middleware system should have an identical 
database as the old system. The assignment of the team is to 
specify the design of the new database which has to be 
compatible with the old database as show on Figure 1. Next 
to this specification, the teams task is to expand this 
database with new functions which are defined through
consumer and administrative listings of specifications which 
need to have the new Middleware system [12], [13], [14], 
[15].
B. Defining the user and administrator listing specification 
that the new Middleware system has to have  
    In this phase two teams should be working: one for 
defining user specifications of the new Middleware system 
and a team for defining administrative specifications of the 
new system [7]. 
    The team for defining user specifications of the new 
Middleware system should be defining the following listed 
specifications [8], [10], [15], [16]: 

Enable emitting live TV channels as well as SD 
channels. The new platform should have unlimited 
number of channels which can be configured. The 
platform should be secured by arranging the TV 
channels into certain categories like: all channels, 
favourite channels, domestic channels, regional 
channels, informative channels, sports and music 
TV channels.  
105
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8


Enable browsing shows which are defined in 
Electronic Program Guides (EPG). The module for 
browsing has to be realised so that on demand with 
a minimum of 2 characters with which the search is 
going to take place in the EPG. The search results 
should give information about: starting time of the 
show, exact name of the show and the name of the 
TV channel to which the searched show belongs. 

Realize Electronic Program Guide (EPG). EPG 
should be support for all TV channels. The time 
period of the EPG should be a minimum of 10 days 
prior and 10 days in advance. EPG should enable 
recording all shows from all TV channels. The 
maximum playing time of one recording should be 
6 hours. All shows which have passed should be 
automatically taped. For all shows in the EPG 
certain features should be defined like: the name of 
the show, starting time, ending time, show 
description and total playing time.

Support the existence of TV Mosaic. TV Mosaic
should give the possibility to watch many different 
TV channels on the same screen at the same time. 
The TV Mosaic needs to enable defining an 
unlimited number of even TV channels on one 
screen.

Realize the module Video library in which movies 
need to be categorized in certain categories like: 
action, 
adventure, 
animated, 
children, 
documentary, domestic, drama, history, horror, 
crime, science fiction, comedy and thriller movies. 
Every category has to have a unlimited number of 
movies. Every movie has to have their price, 
playing time, producers name, main actors name 
and a short description listed. The purchase of a 
movie should be made based on the identification 
PIN which is given to every user. 

Enabling the option of direct recording of TV 
shows using remote control. Direct recordings will 
be stored in a file named recordings. Maximum
playing time of one recording should be 6 hours. 
For all recorded shows an option of moving and 
stopping shows should also be enabled. For all 
taped shows an option should be enabled so the 
user can start and stop the recording. All taped 
shows stay permanently encrypted for one user on 
his Set Top Box.

Enable additional option on a user menu like: 
Radio channels, Internet which enables access to 
contents from the menu and games where the user
can save unlimited number of interactive 3D 
games.

Realising the option Settings where the user will 
have a opportunity to change his PIN, set parental 
control on a chosen TV channel, set the language 
on which the TV channel will be emitting, restart 
their Set Top Box and also have basic settings 
about their account as well as what an STB IP 
address is, STB MAC address is and also the name 
of the software which can be found on his STB.

Enable the option Help where the management of 
the IPTV service will be explained. The option 
help should be full of unlimited help content.

Enable the option Telephone where all the calls of 
a user will be inputted which he received on his 
VoIP (If he is next to being a IPTV user also a 
VoIP user). Option that he should have are: all 
calls, outgoing calls, missed calls and received 
calls.

Realization of the option Address book where 
inputting, editing and erasing telephone contacts 
which number should be infinite is possible.

Implement the option Messaging where every user 
that has a VoIP telephone will be able to exchange
messages with other users that also have engaged a 
VoIP telephone service option. The Messaging 
option should include options of creating new 
messages, viewing existing once and viewing 
received messages. The number of existing and 
sent messages should be unlimited.

Implementation of the option Chat that should 
enable the users to between themselves exchange 
messages. Identification parameter by which the 
users are going to differ from each other is 
subscriber_uid that every user has to get when they 
activate the service. The option Chat should have a 
realized option of authentication respectively the 
possibility of accepting and rejecting users for chat. 
In this option a listing of all chats which one user 
had till a certain point should be found.

Support the option of exhibiting the VoIP number 
on the TV for all users which have the additional 
option of VoIP. The VoIP number should be shown 
on the TV when the user is receiving a call from 
another user.

Support the option of Message Waiting Indicator
(MWI) that should enable displaying textual 
messages on the TV when a user leaves it on the 
VoIP telephone which supports the option of 
leaving voice mails.
    The team for assigning administrative specification to the 
new Middleware system should define the following list of 
specifications [16]: 

Enable all defined provisioning functions.

Enable adding, editing and erasing TV and Radio 
channels. 

Enable adding, editing and erasing TV and Radio 
channel packages. 

Enable the option of marking TV channels which 
can be recorded. 
106
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8


Enable adding, editing and erasing movie contents 

Enable 
adding, 
editing 
and 
erasing 
movie 
categories.

Enable adding, editing and erasing priced movie 
categories.

Enable adding, editing and erasing the movie 
distributors.  

Enable the option of adding, editing and erasing 
contents linked to the Electronic Program Guide 
(EPG).

Enable the option of adding, editing and deleting 
interactive games. 

Enable the option of adding, editing and erasing 
contents linked to the Help option attended for the 
users.

Enable the option of adding, editing and deleting 
contents linked to the Internet option.
C. Criteria for the choice of an external company that 
needs to design and implement the new Middleware system
   In the purpose of choosing a external company which is 
responsible for the implementation of the new Middleware 
system it is needed to release a public announcement that 
consists from two phases: phase of prequalification and the 
phase of the final partner company choice. In the phase of 
prequalification all candidates have to satisfy all legal and 
economic conditions [8]. In regards to the technical and 
professional requirements, the partner companies have to 
satisfy the following requirements:

A minimum of 20 employed IPTV consultants.

A minimum of one reference of implementation of 
the IPTV system in the telecom industry.

A minimum of one reference regarding the 
exchange of the Middleware system in some IPTV 
system in the telecom industry.

A statement that the new Middleware system basis 
is going to be compatible with the existing basis 
which is defined in Figure 1.

A statement that the new Middleware system is 
going to have a specification listing that is going to 
be defined in chapter III.

A statement that the partner company has its own 
hardware and software infrastructure which is 
enough for the realization of this project.

A statement that the partner companies new 
Middleware system is compatible with the Set Top 
Box of the following 5 manufacturers: Motorola, 
Amino, 
Milinet, 
Albis 
Technologies 
and 
Technotrend which are already certified for the old 
system. 
    The final choice of partner companies that pass the 
prequalification stage should be conducted on the basis of 
the following three parameters: the lowest price (with a 
percentage share of 50%), the total number of changes of 
IPTV Middleware systems in the telecom industry systems 
(with percentage share of 30%) and the total number of 
realization IPTV systems in the telecom industry (with a 
percentage share of 20%). The company, which is first in 
terms of these parameters should get a contract to change 
the Middleware system. In the event that two or more firms 
were to have the same number of points, the contract is 
awarded to the firm which has a large number of references 
to change the Middleware System.
D. Defining the specification of the network plan and the 
installation of a new Middleware system by foreign firms 
    Figure 2 shows the relationship between the Middleware 
system and other systems of the IPTV service: Video on 
Demand system, Real Time Encryption system, Verimatrix 
system, RAC system, Load Balancing system and 
Monitoring system [8]. The scope of the IP address is 
10.120.0.x where x is the number indicated for each server in 
Figure 2. The team for the installation of a new Middleware 
system must do so by the same scheme indicated on Figure 
2. 
Figure 2. Relationship between a new Middleware system and other 
systems of the IPTV service
    
    BH Telecom should form a special team to monitor the 
installation of the system which is being worked on by a 
foreign firm. 
E.  Implementation of the new Provisioning system
    The Provisioning system represents a link between the 
central information system of the Telecom Operator and the 
new Middleware System. The new Provisioning system 
must support the following operations: 
1.
Adding new Set Top Box's
2.
Changing existing Set Top Box's
3.
Deleting existing Set Top Box's
4.
Creating a new user
107
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

5.
Assigning a basic package of channels to the end 
user
6.
Assigning an additional package of channels to the 
end user
7.
Assigning a package of HD channels to the end 
user
8.
Suspension of users (temporarily turned off)
9.
Reconnection of users
10. Permanently delete users
11. Deleting an additional package of channels for the 
end user
12. Deleting an end users HD channel packages
13. Changing the name of the user
14. Changing the surname of the user 
15. Changing the address of the user
16. Changing the location of the user 
17. Changing the postal code of the user
18. Changing subscriber_uid of the user
19. Adding a VoIP number for the user
20. Changing the VoIP number of a user
21. Deleting the VoIP number of a user
22. Adding a fax for the user
23. Changing the fax of a user
24. Deleting the fax of a user 
25. Adding a phone number for the user
26. Changing the phone number of a user
27. Deleting the phone number of a user
28. Adding a mobile phone number for the user
29. Changing the mobile phone number of a user
30. Deleting the mobile phone number of a user
31. Turing on the option for leaving VoIP voice 
messages on a TV
32. Turing off the option for leaving VoIP voice 
messages on a TV
F.  The implementation of a new Billing system
    The basic value changes depending on whether you 
choose to go with IPTV along with the VoIP service, ADSL 
service, VoIP and ADSL service, or VoIP, ADSL and 
mobile services together, which is already defined in the 
existing Billing system and is not necessary to change when 
you change the Middleware ( Table I).
    On the final value of consumption Video on Demand 
(VOD) service for one of the users indicated in the table 
billingvod impact parameters from the tables: subscriber, 
vod_subscriber_package, vod_subscriber_contents and cdr. 
In the cdr table are written records of each individual 
purchase of a movie.  A software script goes through the 
database tables and based on the prices defined in Table I 
form a final price for VOD consumption in one month for 
one user (Table II). The program script needs to take into 
consideration during calculations, that every fifth purchase 
of a movie in one month by one user is free.
   The final consumption value of the IPTV services 
indicated in the table billingiptv are affected by the data in 
tables: subscriber, billingvod, ch_subscriber_package and 
whose values are indicated in Table II. Adding values from 
the tables billingvod and ch_subscriber_package for each 
user from the table subscriber you get the total value of 
consumption of IPTV services, which are kept in the table 
billingiptv. 
TABLE I. PACKAGES FOR VIDEO ON DEMAND SERVICES
vod_subscriber_
package_name
vod_subscriber_
package_uid
vod_subscriber_
package_price
Category A
VOD_package_a
0.25 E
Category B
VOD_package_b
0.50 E
Category C
VOD_package_c
1.00 E
Category D
VOD_package_d
1.50 E
TABLE II. PACKAGES FOR IPTV SERVICES
ch_subscriber_
package_name
ch_subscriber_
package_uid
ch_subscriber_
package_price
Basic
basic
12.50 E | 27.50 E | 
32.50 E | 47.50 E 
Plus
plus
4.00 E
HD
hd
3.00 E
G.  Testing the new Middleware system with different IPTV 
systems
    The new Middleware system must be fully compatible 
with all IPTV systems: Video on Demand system, Real 
Time Encryption system, Verimatrix system, Monitoring 
system, RAC system and Headend system [8].
    From the central information system all the provisioning 
functions and all billing scenarios must be thoroughly tested  
depending on the combination of all the VOD packages 
(Table I) and IPTV packages (Table II). 
H.  The migration of information from the old to the new 
Middleware system 
    The overall data migration from the old to the new 
database needs to be done in order for the following tables: 
subscriber, 
device, 
device_type, 
program, 
channel, 
channel_type, 
ch_subscriber_package, 
vod_contents, 
vod_contents_package, iptvvod, vod_subscriber_package, 
subscriber_status, game, cdr, instant_record, message, 
messaging_profile, billingvod, billingiptv, vod_region. 
What needs to be manually configured during this migration 
is that the value of the id_ch_subscriber_package field 
needs to be marked CH_SCP_1, the value of field 
id_vod_subscriber_package is marked as VOD_SCP_1, and 
the value of field id_subscriber_package is marked as 
SCP_1. These three values are required, together with data 
for ch_subscriber_package_name and for Video on Demand 
field vod_subscriber_package_name, which are defined in 
108
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

Tables I and II. All other data can be automatically switched 
from one system to another system.
   
I. Releasing into production the new Middleware system  
    If all test results from phase G were positive, a new 
Middleware 
system 
can 
be 
put 
into 
production. 
Coordination of the release of the new system into 
production needs to be done by a special team composed of 
3-5 IT professionals.
III.  CONCLUSION
    The newly implemented Middleware system should solve 
some existing problems that exist in BH Telecom's IPTV 
service, and implement some additional functionality [15]: 

The Middleware system's resistance to failure due 
to the changes that have occurred in other systems 
of the IPTV service.

Display a callers VoIP number on TV.

Display the option Messaging Waiting Indicator on 
TV.

Continuous operation of all provisioning functions.

Interactive chat between users.

Interactive message exchanging between users.

Unlimited number of users and TV channels with 
the option of recording.

Increasing the bitrate level output signal from the 
headend of the system from 2.5 Mbps to at least 
4.0 Mbps.
    Each of the nine-defined phases that need to be changed 
from the old to the new Middleware system requires 
formation of an independent team [7]. Each team starts with 
their activities once the previous team has finished their 
activities. Previous Middleware systems realizations and 
other supporting systems such as Provisioning and Billing 
systems showed that a longer period is needed for the 
implementation of the phases. Activities of the first team 
should last one month, and the other team a maximum of 15 
days. Activities of the third team should last for 3 months in 
which time the whole period until the final partner company 
is chosen and the signing of a contract with them is 
included. The time frame for the fourth phase is 1 month 
and 15 days in which time 15 days are included to define the 
specifications of the network plan and one month for the 
installation of the new Middleware system. Phases 4 and 5 
should take 2 months each because of the complexity of 
connecting a new system with a central information system. 
The testing phase of the new system and data migration 
from the old to the new system should each last 15 days. 
The last phase, the phase of commissioning the new system 
into production, is purely informative and should last 1 day.
   The total time for the realization of the nine phases is 11 
months. However, this temporal analysis does not include 
non-working days, which means that the total time for the 
realization of these phases should be extended 1 month, so 
the total time for the realization of the project is 12 months.
    The testing process of the change of Middleware system 
in BH Telecom’s IPTV service has been done by using test 
Middleware software versions of some Middleware vendors 
and these test software versions have included only 10 IPTV 
users. The test results fully agree with the expected results 
of a new Middleware system.      
    Further research in this area is related to the Problem 
Management process, where any incidents or problems that 
may arise with the IPTV service after the implementation of 
a new Middleware system should be investigated [8].      
Research should be done at least 6 months after installing 
the new system and should show the level of efficiency of 
the new system compared to the old system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
    The authors wish to thank experts from some of the 
leading manufacturers of Middleware systems such as 
Nokia Siemens Networks, Ericsson, BeeSmart, Dreampark 
and Zapware for advice during this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. van Bon, A. de Jong, A. Kolthof, M.Pieper, R. Tjassing,  A. van der 
Veen and T. Verheijen, ”Foundations of IT Service Management 
Based on ITIL V3”, Third edition, September 2007.
[2]
S.Taylor, S. Lacy and I. Macfarlane, “ITIL Version 3 Service 
Transition”, First edition, The Office of Government Commerce,  
May 2007.
[3]
I. Menken and G. Blokdijk, “The Change Management Guide: The 
Missing it Change Management Planning, Process, Theory and Tools 
Guide – Itil Compliant”, Second Edition, December 2009.
[4]
I. Menken and G. Blokdijk, “Software Testing and Quality Assurance 
with It Change Management Transition”, First Edition, December 
2008.
[5]
J. Dugmore and S. Taylor, “ITIL V3 and ISO/IEC 20000”, First 
Edition, March 2008. 
[6]
J. v. Bon, M. Nugteren and S. Polter, “ISO/IEC 20000”, First Edition, 
May 2006. 
[7]
A. Tanovic and F. Orucevic, “Implementation of the Information 
System of the Telecom Operator Using the ITIL V3 Methodology for 
the Service Design Phase”, 2nd
International Conferences on 
Advanced Service Computing, pp. 82 – 91, November 2010. 
[8]
A. Tanovic and F. Orucevic, “Comparative analysis of the practice of 
Telecom operators in the realization of IPTV systems based on ITIL 
V3 reccomendations for the Supplier Management Process”, 6th
International Conference on Systems ICONS 2011, pp. 115 – 121,
January 2011. 
[9]
U. K. Tripatji, K. Hinkelmann and D. Feldkamp, „Life Cycle for 
Change Management in  Business Processes using Semantic 
Technologies“, Journal of Computers, vol. 3, pp. 24-31, January 
2008. 
[10] J. Kramer and J. Magee, “The evolving Philosofers Problem: 
Dynamic Change Management”, IEEE transactions on software 
engineering, vol. 16, pp. 1293 - 1306, November 1990. 
[11] H. Cheng, Y. Xia and X. Hu, “Requirements Change Management of 
Information System Based on the Keyword Mapping”, 6th Wuhan 
109
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

International Conference on E-Business, vol. 3, pp. 135 – 140, May 
2007. 
[12] S. Ahn and K Chong, “Requiremets Change Management on Feature-
Oriented Requirements Tracing”, Computational Science and Its 
Applications – ICCSA, vol.10, pp. 296-307, May 2007. 
[13] R. Weber, T. Helfenberger and R. K. Keller, „Fit for Change: Steps 
towards Effective Software Maintenance“, 21st IEEE International 
Conference on Software Maintenance, vol. 10, pp. 26-33, September 
2005.
[14] S. Adesola and T. Baines, “Developing and evaluating a methodology 
for business process improvement”, School of Industrial and 
Manufacturing Science, Cranfield University, vol.11, pp. 37-46, May 
2005.  
[15] K. Oh, Y. Park and S. Park, “Middleware Architecture of Hybrid 
Digital Cable Receiver for Cable Broadcast and IPTV Service based 
on OCAP”, International Conference on Consumer Electronics 2008, 
ICCE 2008, pp. 1-2, January 2008. 
[16] G. M. Lee, C. S. Lee, W. S. Rhee and J. K. Choi, “Functional 
Architecture for NGN-Based Personalized IPTV Services”, IEEE 
Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 55, pp. 329 – 342, June 2009. 
110
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

