Technique for Protecting Copyrights of Digital Data for 3-D Printing,  
and Its Application to Low Infill Density Objects 
 
Masahiro Suzuki, Piyarat Silapasuphakornwong, 
Hideyuki Torii, Hiroshi Unno, Kazutake Uehira 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
E-mail: msuzuki@ctr.kanagawa-it.ac.jp, 
silpiyarat@gmail.com, torii@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp, 
unno@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp, uehira@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
Youichi Takashima 
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories 
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation 
Yokosuka, Japan 
E-mail: takashima.youichi@lab.ntt.co.jp
 
 
Abstract— We evaluated our previously proposed technique to 
protect copyrights of digital data for 3-D printing. The 
technique embeds copyright information into not only digital 
data but also fabricated objects and enables the information to 
be reads to reveal possible copyright violations. In this study, 
copyright information was embedded into low infill density 
objects by constructing their inside with high infill density 
areas, and thermography was used for readout. An experiment 
was conducted to examine whether high infill density areas can 
be recognized from thermal images. The results indicated that 
they can be. We demonstrated that our technique is applicable 
to low infill density objects. 
Keywords-digital fabrication; 3-D printing; 3-D printer; 
copyright; digital watermarking. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Three-dimensional (3-D) printers have become popular 
with consumers. People who have 3-D printers can easily 
fabricate products by simply obtaining the digital data for 3-
D printing. Hence, many people believe that 3-D printers 
will change the ways in which manufacturing and physical 
distribution will be carried out in the near future [1] [2]. 
However, such benefits of 3-D printers mean that anyone 
can easily manufacture bootleg products if he or she abuses 
digital data for 3-D printing. Such copyright violations will 
obviously cause serious economic damage. Thus, techniques 
to protect the copyrights of digital data for 3-D printing are 
essential for the healthy development of markets for 3-D 
printers. 
Although techniques to prevent illegal copying or illegal 
printing are of course important to protect the copyrights of 
digital data for 3-D printing [3]–[6], techniques to divulge 
such violations are additionally crucial in cases in which 
these violations occur. Digital watermarking is common to 
all kinds of digital data to disclose copyright violations; 
however, 
conventional 
techniques 
can 
only 
embed 
watermarks into digital data but not into actual objects 
fabricated with 3-D printers. Copyright information needs to 
be embedded into fabricated objects so that the information 
can be read to reveal any violations. For example, when a 
company that is not allowed to use digital data held by the 
copyright holder is selling illegally fabricated objects, the 
copyright holder can expose the company by detecting the 
copyright information embedded into the sold objects and 
can assert his or her just rights. Thus, techniques to reveal 
copyright violations, i.e., techniques to embed copyright 
information into fabricated objects and have the information 
be readable, are essential to protect the copyrights of digital 
data for 3-D printing. 
We have previously proposed a technique to embed 
copyright information into fabricated objects and to have that 
information be readable and demonstrated its feasibility [7] 
[8]. With this technique, the inside of objects is constructed 
with small areas, which have physical characteristics that are 
different from the areas surrounding them, to embed the 
information. 
These 
small 
areas 
are 
detected 
using 
nondestructive inspections, such as X-ray photography or 
thermography, to reveal the embedded information. Our 
previous studies demonstrated that information embedded 
with small cavities inside objects can be read. Thus, 
information can feasibly be embedded into objects and be 
read. 
Although we have evaluated our technique using objects 
fabricated with high infill density, i.e., 100% [7] [8], objects 
with low infill density are often fabricated for practical use. 
For example, when users want to save time or materials, they 
fabricate objects with low infill density. In our previous 
studies, we embedded copyright information into high infill 
density objects with small cavities inside because they did 
not have any other empty spaces; however, low infill density 
objects have many empty spaces inside, and embedding the 
information into them is difficult. Thus, methods applicable 
to low infill density objects are required for practical use 
with our technique. 
This paper presents a method of applying our technique 
to low infill density objects. In Section 2, we first describe 
the basic concept of the technique and the principle of the 
methods previously applied to high infill density objects then 
describe the principle of our method for low infill density 
objects. In Section 3, we describe the methodology, explain 
the results, and provide discussion of an experiment to 
evaluate the feasibility of our method. In Section 4, we 
conclude the paper. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

II. 
OUR TECHNIQUE AND ITS APPLICATION TO LOW 
INFILL DENSITY OBJECTS 
Figure 1 is an illustration showing the basic concept of 
our technique. Digital data for 3-D printing are created with 
3-D modeling software, such as 3-D CAD, and copyright 
information is embedded into the data. When actual objects 
are fabricated using the data, the information embedded into 
the data is also embedded into the objects. This information 
is made readable using nondestructive inspection, such as X-
ray photography or thermography, which enable the 
detection of copyright violations, such as making bootleg 
products. Thus, the copyrights of digital data for 3-D printing 
are protected by embedding copyright information into not 
only digital data but also fabricated objects for readability. 
Figure 2 is an illustration showing the principle of our 
technique. In our previous studies, copyright information, 
which was expressed using ASCII, was encoded with small 
cavities inside high infill density objects [7] [8]. For example, 
the existence and nonexistence of cavities at certain positions 
were represented as “0” and “1,” respectively (see Figure 2-
A). The objects, which had cavities inside them, were heated 
using electric equipment, such as halogen lamps, and the 
surface temperature of the objects was measured using 
thermography (see Figure 2-B). The surface temperature at 
positions where the cavities existed became higher than that 
at other positions because the cavities blocked thermal flow 
(see Figure 2-B). Previous studies demonstrated that the 
existence or nonexistence of cavities can be detected from 
thermal images and that the embedded information can be 
decoded from the detected cavities [7] [8]. Thus, 
thermography can feasibly be used to read copyright 
information embedded into high infill density objects by 
constructing their insides with small cavities. 
However, because low infill density objects have many 
empty spaces inside, the aforementioned method cannot be 
applied. For example, the low infill density objects shown in 
Figure 3 have a honeycomb structure inside, and each space 
inside the honeycomb is empty. If we embed copyright 
information into such objects with small cavities inside and 
heat them, the surface temperature in the cavities would not 
differ from other positions because not only the cavities but 
also the empty spaces would block thermal flow. Thus, other 
methods are required for applying our technique to low infill 
density objects. 
We present a method for embedding copyright 
information into low infill density objects and having that 
information be readable. Figure 4 is an illustration showing 
the principle of this method. Copyright information 
expressed using ASCII is encoded with high infill density 
areas, i.e., pillars, inside low infill density objects. The 
 
 
Figure 3. Photographs of inside low infill density objects. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Illustration showing principle of method for applying our 
technique to low infill density objects. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration showing basic concept of our technique. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Illustration showing principle of our technique. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

existence and nonexistence of the pillars is represented as “0” 
and “1,” respectively. The objects are heated, and the surface 
temperature is measured using thermography. The surface 
temperature at the positions where the pillars exist becomes 
higher than that of the other positions because the pillars do 
not block thermal flow, even though empty spaces do. The 
existence or nonexistence of pillars is detected from thermal 
images, and the embedded information is decoded from the 
detected pillars. Thus, copyright information is embedded 
into low infill density objects by constructing their inside 
with high infill density areas and the information is made 
readable using thermography. 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
A. Methodology 
An experiment was conducted to examine whether high 
infill density areas, i.e., pillars, inside low infill density 
objects can be recognized from thermal images. The 
recognition rate was calculated using the following equation:  
Rrecognition(%) = Ndetected
Nembedded
×100 ,                  (1) 
where the Rrecognition is the recognition rate, the Nembedded is the 
number of existing or non-existing pillars used to embed 
copyright information, and Ndetected is the number of existing 
or non-existing pillars correctly detected. The Ndetected was 
determined by analyzing thermal images of two test samples, 
which were fabricated from black polylactic acid filament 
using a fused deposition modeling 3-D printer, i.e., a 
MakerBot Replicator. The first test sample had 1% infill 
density, and the second test sample had 10% infill density 
(see Figure 5). Each test sample had four arrays of pillars, 
and each array corresponded to each of four conditions: two 
conditions of pillar size (1 and 2 mm) × two conditions of 
space between the pillars (1 and 2 mm) (see Figure 6). In an 
analysis of the thermal images, a still image was extracted 
from a video image for each frame, and each still image was 
binarized using adaptive thresholding [9]. A logical 
disjunction among binarized images was calculated for each 
position where copyright information was embedded, and 
Ndetected was defined as the number of positions where the 
logical disjunction accorded with the existing or non-existing 
pillar. The thermal images were taken using Testo 875. Two 
halogen lamps, positioned at 16 cm and 60 degrees left and 
right, were used to heat the test samples. In each trial of 
taking the thermal images, the test samples were first heated, 
then the lamps were turned off. The test samples were then 
cooled to their initial temperature. The thermal images from 
turning the lamps off were used for the analysis. Thus, the 
recognition of high infill density areas inside low infill 
density objects from thermal images was examined by 
calculating the recognition rate. 
 
 
Figure 6. Schematic of test samples. (A) Array of pillars under 1-mm size × 
1-mm space condition. (B) Array of pillars under 2-mm size × 1-mm space 
condition. (C) Array of pillars under 1-mm size × 2-mm space condition. 
(D) Array of pillars under 2-mm size × 2-mm space condition. 
 
（A） 
 
 
(B) 
 
Figure 5. Photographs of inside test samples. (A) Inside of test sample 
whose infill density was 1%. (B) Inside of test sample whose infill density 
was 10%. Note that test samples actually used in experiment were black. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

B. Results and Discussion 
Figure 7 shows the thermal images, and Table 1 
summarizes the recognition rate. All four arrays were 
completely recognized under the 1% condition, and the two 
arrays with the 2-mm space were completely recognized 
under the 10% condition. These results suggest that 
copyright information can be embedded into low infill 
density objects by constructing their inside with high infill 
density areas and be readable using thermography. Thus, our 
technique can feasibly be applied to low infill density objects. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We evaluated our technique to protect copyright 
information of digital data for 3-D printing. This technique 
embeds copyright information into low infill density objects 
by using our method of constructing their inside with high 
infill density areas and makes the information readable using 
thermography. We conducted an experiment to examine 
whether high infill density areas inside low infill density 
objects can be recognized from thermal images. The results 
indicated that they can be. Thus, we demonstrated that our 
technique is feasible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 15H02707. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Berman, “3-D printing: The new industrial revolution,” 
Business horizons, vol. 55, no. 2, March–April 2012, pp. 155–
162. 
[2] B. Garrett, “3D printing: new economic paradigms and 
strategic shifts,” Global Policy, vol. 5, no. 1, February 2014, 
pp. 70–75. 
[3] P. R. Alface and B. Macq, “From 3D mesh data hiding to 3D 
shape blind and robust watermarking: a survey,” Transactions 
on Data Hiding and Multimedia Security II, 2007, pp. 91–115. 
[4] T. Modegi, “A proposal of 3D-printing regulation technique 
for fabricating hazardous devices or copyright violating 
objects using by polygon matching algorithm,” IEICE 
Technical Report, vol. 114, no. 33, May 2014, pp. 23–28. 
[5] T. Modegi, “Proposal for 3D-printing regulation technique in 
fabricating dangerous devices,” Bulletin of the Technical 
Association of Graphic Arts of Japan, vo. 51, no. 4, 2014, pp. 
246–255. 
[6] K. Wang, G. Lavoue, F. Denis, and A. Baskurt, “A 
comprehensive 
survey 
on 
three-dimensional 
mesh 
watermarking,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 10, no. 
8, December 2008, pp. 1513–1527. 
[7] A. Okada et al., “Non-destructively reading out information 
embedded inside real objects by using far-infrared light,” Proc. 
SPIE 9599, Applications of Digital Image Processing 
XXXVIII, September 2015, pp. 95992V-1–95992V-7. 
[8] M. Suzuki, P. Silapasuphakornwong, K. Uehira, H. Unno, and 
Y. Takashima, “Copyright protection for 3D printing by 
embedding information inside real fabricated objects,” 
International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and 
Applications, 2015, pp. 180–185. 
[9] T. R. Singh, S. Roy, O. I. Singh, T. Sinam, and K. M. Singh, 
“A new local adaptive thresholding technique in binarization,” 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 8, no. 6, 
November 2011, pp. 271–277. 
 
 
 
(A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B) 
 
 
Figure 7. Results of thermal images of test samples. (A) Thermal image of test sample whose infill density was 1%. (B) Thermal image of test sample whose 
infill density was 10%. 
TABLE 1. RESULTS OF THE RECOGNITION RATE (%) 
 
Infill density 
1% 
10% 
Size 
Size 
1 mm 
2 mm 
1 mm 
2 mm 
Space 
Space 
Space 
Space 
1 mm 
2 mm 
1 mm 
2 mm 
1 mm 
2 mm 
1 mm 
2 mm 
100 
100 
100 
100 
88 
100 
96 
100 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-452-7
MMEDIA 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

