Multimedia and Serious Games in Education 
 
Carlos Oliveira 
Department of Informatics 
IFRJ 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
carlos.roberto@ifrj.edu.br 
 
 
Abstract—According to recently studies, people spend many 
hours a day using entertainment applications on the Internet. 
It poses a great opportunity for serious games that can be used 
on education. This is a recent research area that needs to be 
addressed. This paper presents an educational game and the 
tools that are being used to developed this game. The idea is to 
move away from the traditional textbook approach and make 
learning pleasurable. In a near future, this game will be 
evaluated by history and geography teachers and students. 
Keywords-serious game; history and geography learning; 
online game; development tools. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We live in an era in which we are surrounded by 
information. Each day more information is produced and 
disseminated. This information is from different subjects and 
come from different sources, such as TV, newspapers and 
Internet. Nevertheless, Internet is the growing media in terms 
of user's interesting and access. If well used, information can 
aggregate value to products and also to people who has 
specific knowledge. Despite of the large amount of 
information received, people are quite poor at understanding 
and remembering information they have received out of 
context or too long before they can make use of it [1][2][3]. 
Thus, it poses a problem. How to assure the information will 
be remembered later?  
 
Different from what happens in schools, games give 
information on demand, just in time and not out of the 
context of the game purposes. According to Gee [4], good 
games find ways to put information inside the worlds the 
players move through, and make clear the meaning of such 
information and how it applies to the world. 
 
It is possible to use games to enhance learning at schools. 
Young people stay plugged on computers and other devices 
many hours a day. This public is very enthusiastic with 
technologies. They are also heavy information consumers. It 
is also important to consider that, in general, players read 
about a given subject not only inside the game, but also 
outside the game on websites, books, etc. 
 
The goal of this paper is to present a game that is being 
developed to be used on schools. The game aim to help 
teachers on teaching subjects concerned to geography and 
history. Thus, it is presented the game's story and the tools 
used on the game development. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The game is 
presented in Section II. In Section III, it is presented the tools 
used to develop the game. Aiming to give a general idea of 
the game codification, it is also presented part of the Java 
script that contains the code to control the character of the 
game. Section IV concludes the paper and outlines future 
directions. 
II. 
GAME 
The game's story takes place on Earth after an alien has 
an accident with his ship and fall down on our planet. In their 
search for the key parts of his vehicle, the character passes 
through well-known touristic points of our planet and knows 
a bit of our culture. Therefore, the aim of the game is to find 
the parts of the ship. During this quest, the player will go 
through different cities on the planet. When the character 
goes through Rio de Janeiro, for example, the player gets 
information about the city's history, climate, traditional 
festivals, among other information that helps the player to 
know the city. In this game the player also listen to popular 
songs on the cities where the character is. 
 
It would be impossible to show graphics and information 
on all touristic cities on Earth. Thus, the game focus on 
major world cities, such as New York, Rio de Janeiro, 
London, Paris, Berlin, Rome, Jerusalem, Moscow, Tokyo, 
Beijing and Sydney. 
 
We believe that the game may be used to facilitate the 
approach of some subjects in disciplines such as history and 
geography. Furthermore, the development of the game back 
interesting with regard to computer programming, graphs for 
the development of the game and the game logic creation of 
challenges. 
III. 
TOOLS 
 
The game is being developed as presented in Figure 1. 
The game has a component that stores several songs. The 
second component stores scenarios and their objects. The 
third component gives intelligence to the game. Because of 
this component, songs are played according to the visited 
city. Also, it gives intelligence to the characters. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 To develop the game songs, we used the program Fruity 
Loops [5]. The program Blender [6] was used to create the 
character and objects of the game. The Unity3D [7] was 
used to render the scenarios, to put the objects on the 
scenario, and to make the logic of the game. 
 
In this section, these tools and screenshots of them are 
presented.  
 
Figure 1. Game architecture. 
 
 
A. Fruity Loops 
Fruity Loops Studio resembles a complete recording 
studio for multimedia projects which is ideal for music 
demos, songs and any means of audio production. This 
virtual studio processes audio using an internal 32-bit 
floating-point engine. It can support sampling rates up to 192 
khz either WDM or ASIO enabled drivers. The Mixer 
interface allows users for channel configurations and mixing 
2.5, 5.1, or 7.1 surround sound possible. In addition, Fruity 
Loops studio also comes with a variety of plug-ins and 
generators (synthesizers) written in the program’s own native 
plug-in architecture. However, first time users might be 
overwhelmed with its unlabeled icons and confusing file 
browser which makes the learning curve steeper. Once the 
users are already familiar with the program, they can make 
music in no time. A Fruity Loops screenshot is presented in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Fruity Loops Screenshot. 
B. Blender 
Blender is a professional free and open-source 3D 
computer graphics software product used for creating 
animated films, visual effects, art, 3D printed models, 
interactive 3D applications and video games. Blender's 
features include 3D modeling, texturing, raster graphics 
editing, rigging and skinning, fluid and smoke simulation, 
particle simulation, soft body simulation, sculpting, 
animating, match moving, camera tracking, rendering, video 
editing and composing. Alongside the modeling features it 
also has an integrated game engine. A Blender screenshot is 
presented in Figure 3. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
Figure 3. Blender Screenshot. 
C. Unity3D 
Unity is a cross-platform game creation system including 
a game engine and integrated development environment. It is 
used to develop video games for web sites, desktop 
platforms, consoles, and mobile devices. With an emphasis 
on portability, the graphics engine targets the following 
APIs: Direct3D on Windows and Xbox 360; OpenGL on 
Mac, Windows, and Linux; OpenGL ES on Android and 
iOS; and proprietary APIs on video game consoles. The 
game 
engine's 
scripting 
is 
built on 
MonoDevelop 
\cite{mono}, the open-source implementation of the .NET 
Framework. Programmers can use UnityScript (a custom 
language with ECMAScript-inspired syntax, referred to as 
JavaScript by the software).  
 
Uniy3D is used to deal with the codification of the game. 
Unity combines the character, songs, objects and the 
codification of the game. A Unity3D screenshot is presented 
in Figure 4. The variables declaration that permits all 
character movements on the game are shown below. 
 
 
Figure 4. Unity3D Screenshot. 
D. Scripts 
In this subsection, parts of the game code are presented. 
Figure 5 presents initial values that defines the speed of the 
character when walking, running or jumping. The variable 
presented in Figure 6 is configured to follow the character 
during the game. Thus, the player controllers the character as 
a third-person game. 
 
 
Figure 5. Variables. 
 
Figure 7 presents the variables that allow the character to 
make two axis movements on the maps. All maps have 
collision objects that the player needs to detour. Collisions 
are allowed because of the variable presented in Figure 8. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
Figure 6. Camera's code. 
 
 
Figure 7. Character's movement. 
 
 
Figure 8. Collision flags. 
 
      Jumping makes possible to detour from collision 
objects. Initially the character is not jumping. Jumping is 
allowed by the variables presented in Figure 9. The 
character can jump on different heights. The height of 
jumping is defined on the variable presented in Figure 11. 
The height of jumping is calculated taking into account the 
last jump. Thus, the value of the last jump is stored on a 
variable presented in Figure 10. Figure 10 also presents 
variables that permits to show the character when jumping 
or making other movements. 
 
 
Figure 9. Jump button. 
 
 
Figure 10. Camera's movement. 
 
 
Figure 11. Jumping. 
 
 
Figure 12: Speed 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We are now finishing the game development. The game 
aims to facilitate the teaching of different subjects, such as 
geography and history. We argue that it is possible to use 
games to enhance learning at schools because young people 
stay plugged on computers and other devices that run games. 
In this game, we also aim to allow users to modify existing 
maps and create others. This will permit players to produce 
information (knowledge) and not only consume. Our goal is 
to allow users to change the game with no programming 
knowledge. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author acknowledges financial support from Federal 
Institute of Rio de Janeiro during the work presented in this 
paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Barsalou: Language Comprehension: Archival Memory or 
Preparation for Situated Action? In: Discourse Processes, 1999, pp. 
61–81.  
[2] A. L. Brown: The advancement of learning. Educational researcher, 
1994,  pp. 4–12.  
[3] A. M. Glenberg,  D. A. Robertson: Indexical understanding of 
instructions. Discourse Processes, vol. 28, no. 1, 1999, pp. 1–26. 
[4] J. P. Gee: What video games have to teach us about learning and 
literacy. Computers in Entertainment (CIE), v. 1, n.1, 2003, p.20-20. 
[5] Introducing FL Studio 11, http://www.image-line.com/flstudio/ 
(Accessed 03/05/2015) 
[6] Blender, http://www.blender.org/ (Accessed 03/05/2015) 
[7] Unity3D, https://unity3d.com/ (Accessed 03/05/2015) 
[8] MonoDevelop, http://monodevelop.com/ (Accessed 03/05/2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

