Determinants of Behavioral Intention to Mobile Banking 
Case From Yemen 
 
Rashed, Abdullah, Santos, Henrique 
Algoritmi Centre, 
 University of Minho, 
Guimarães, Portugal 
 rashed, hsantos@dsi.uminho.pt 
 Al-Eryani, Arwa 
IT Faculty, 
Saba University 
Sana’a, Yemen 
 arwa_y@hotmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Nowadays, new tools and technologies are emerging 
rapidly. They are often used cross-culturally before being 
tested for suitability and validity. However, they must be 
validated to ensure that they work with all users, not just part 
of them. Mobile banking (as a new technology tool) has been 
introduced assuming that it performs well concerning 
authentication, among all members of the society. Our 
research aimed to evaluate authentication mobile banking user 
acceptance, through Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), in 
Arabic countries, namely Yemen. The results confirm the 
previous studies that have shown the importance of perceived 
ease of use and perceived usefulness. Furthermore, perceived 
ease of use plays a determinant role. 
 Keywords- Technology acceptance models; Mobile Banking; 
Arabic culture. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Technologies make our lives easy but not secure [19] 
especially for financial issues. Most organizations already 
provide the services via the Internet and mobile appliances 
[18]. Furthermore, during the last ten years, the improvement 
of mobile communication technologies has changed the 
banking industry, as users are able to conduct banking 
services at anyplace and at any time [5] via mobile phones. 
Mobile Banking provides many services to the customers 
such as: requesting the balance and the latest transactions; 
transferring funds between accounts; buying and selling 
orders, for the stock exchange; and receiving portfolio and 
price information [2]. For individuals it would be difficult to 
remember their user names and PINs [14]. For that reason, 
many users select easy to remember passwords [3], which 
are considered a security trade-off. Security specialists are 
looking for more advanced techniques that would improve 
its performance [13]. 
Mobile Banking is still in a development phase in most 
countries especially middle-east, where small markets with 
few users have been reported. This is due to lack of customer 
acceptance and poor time response services [2]. In the other 
hand, mobile payments are mainly used with popular mobile 
services since there are few alternative payment solutions 
available [10].  
There are three types of authentication [15]: 
1) Something you know: a PIN, a password, or a 
passphrase. 
2) Something you have: a passport, key, ATM card or 
cell-phone [6]. 
3) Something you are (Biometrics): fingerprints, 
signature, ear shape, keystroke, voice, finger geometry, iris, 
retina, DNA, hand geometry [11] and odour [16]. 
Acceptance of technology is a milestone [20]. It is very 
important to predict users’ intention to use mobile banking 
[5] so various alternative approaches have been used to 
analyze customer’s acceptance phenomenon. Within this 
context, TAM is one of the most widely accepted tools 
among information systems researchers [2].  
In this paper we investigate the acceptance of mobile 
appliances, focusing in authentication effectiveness, in 
Arabic countries. The rest of the paper is organized as 
following: in Section 2 we overview the previous studies, as 
literature review; in Section 3 we describe our methodology 
and discuss results. We conclude and present future work in 
Section 4. 
II. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW  
Khanfar et. al. [8] conducted the customer satisfaction 
with internet banking web site for a bank. Their covered 
factors were: customer support, security, ease of use, digital 
products/services, transaction and payment, information 
content, and innovation. The results found a narrow-based 
satisfaction with internet banking in all factors. They found 
that all factors have a positive impact on the customer 
satisfaction. Moreover, they found that there was no relation 
between all demographics data and customer satisfaction due 
to the high computer literacy among customers.  
 Gaurav et. al. [4] discussed Automatic Teller Machine 
(ATM) authentication techniques. They aimed to propose 
solution that uses the personal mobile devices to interact 
with the service outlets. They used public key Infrastructure 
for mutual authentication of the service and the personal 
device in their model. Their idea depends on the following 
policy:  
- After users’ registration, their mobile carries the public 
key whereas their smart card contains the private key.  
- Mobile phone authenticates itself to ATM. 
- Mobile phone establishes a session key using standard 
key exchange protocols such as Diffie-Hellman key 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

exchange along with an integrated authentication to avoid 
man-in-middle attack.   
- Users would access the service of the ATM using the 
signed application either loaded by the bank during 
registration or by the ATM.  
So users need to carry only their personal devices to 
access various services. They did their simulation on 
different platforms. 
AlZomai et. al. [1] discussed the authentication problems 
of security in online banking of using SMS for transactions. 
Their experiment aimed to simulate the online bank using 
website to do the transactions. They suggest enhancing 
online banking security by focusing on usability more than 
security technical and mechanisms. They suggested SMS 
authorization scheme. They attacked their approach to make 
sure that it would work properly. Their attack succeeded in 
21%. They justified that as user should have more 
experience.  
Gu et. al. [5] examined and validated the determinants of 
users’ intention to mobile banking. They used a structural 
equation modeling (SEM) to test the causalities in the 
proposed model. They verified the effect of perceived 
usefulness, trust and perceived ease-of-use on behavioral 
intention in mobile banking. The results indicated strong 
support for the validity of proposed model with 72.2% of the 
variance in behavioral intention to mobile banking. The 
study also found that self-efficiency was the strongest 
antecedent of perceived ease-of-use, which directly and 
indirectly affected behavioral intention through perceived 
usefulness in mobile banking. In addition, they found that 
structural assurances were the strongest antecedent of trust, 
which could increase behavioral intention of mobile banking.  
Hua et. al. [7] investigated the factors affect mobile 
commerce adoption in China and the United States. They 
conducted a survey on 190 individual mobile commerce 
users in China and USA. Results showed that there are 
several significant cultural differences   on consumer 
intention to use mobile commerce. 
 Yaseen et. al. [21] used TAM model to study the m-
commerce 
technology 
deployment 
in 
Jordan. 
They 
distributed 210 questionnaires to mobile commerce users in 
Stock Exchange for Brokers and Investors. Their factors 
were trust, perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, 
social and cultural values and economic issues that influence 
a decision maker intention to adopt this type of technology in 
doing business. Their results showed that perceived trust, 
perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, social and 
cultural values had significant association with intention to 
deploy mobile commerce technology while economical issue 
is not significant.  
Maiyaki et. al. [9] studied determinants of consumer 
behavioral intention in Nigerian commercial banks. They 
investigated the influence of perceived service quality, 
perceived value, corporate image and switching cost on the 
consumer behavioral intention in the context of commercial 
banks in Nigeria.  They found that the service of quality, 
customer perceived value and image of the corporate had 
significant influence on customer behavioral intention. 
 Barati et. al. [2] studied the factors that affect acceptance 
of mobile banking. They presented a set of factors that could 
potentially positively affect the success of mobile banking 
and should be taken into account by banks while adopting 
mobile technology as shown in Figure 1. They found that 
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are 
significant. Moreover they found that role of facilitating 
conditions in acceptance of mobile services is very 
important. 
  
 
Figure 1: Acceptance model for Mobile Banking [2] 
Ramayah et. al. [12] studied and examined the intention 
to use an online bill payment among part time MBA students 
in University Sciences Malaysia, Penang. They developed 
and modified the extended TAM and Social Cognitive 
Theory to identify factors that would determine and 
influence the intention to use an online bill payment system. 
They conducted a survey that involved 120 students. They 
found that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are 
the significant drivers of intention to use the online bill 
payment system. In addition to that, they found that 
subjective norm, image, result demonstrability and perceived 
ease of use were to be the key determinants of perceived 
usefulness whereas perceived risk was found to be 
negatively related to usefulness. Moreover, computer self-
efficacy played a significant role in influencing the perceived 
ease of use of the online bill payment system. 
III. 
 METHODOLOGY AND DISCUSSION 
TAM has two pillars that determine the users’ acceptance 
of a new technology: perceived ease of use and perceived 
usefulness. Perceived ease of use is defined as the degree to 
which the users expect that the target system would require a 
low effort to learn to use, while perceived usefulness is 
defined as “the individuals’ subjective probability of using a 
specific application system, will increase their job 
performance within an organizational context” [17]. 
Table 1 shows the research variables required by TAM 
and its characterization. Perceived ease of use and perceived 
of usefulness act as independent and dependent variables at 
the same time. Besides, the demographic factor is considered 
as independent, while intension to use acts as dependent as it 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

depends on perceived ease of use and perceived of 
usefulness. 
The research hypotheses are: 
H1: Perceived ease of use will have a positive effect on 
intention to use Mobile Banking. 
H2: Perceived usefulness will have a positive effect on 
intention to use Mobile Banking. 
H3: Demographic factor will have a positive effect on 
intention to use Mobile Banking. Perceived performance is 
defined as the degree to which users expect that the target 
system would support the performance perceive. Saving time 
and effort is defined as the degree to which the users expect 
that the target system would save the time and effort when 
comparing with the old method. Social and cultural factors 
are defined as the degree to which the users expect that the 
social and cultural factors will affect its decide to use the 
target system. We directly asked the respondents about the 
mentioned factors to measure their intention and behaviour. 
TABLE 1: RESEARCH VARIABLES 
Variable 
Type 
Scale 
Technology 
acceptance 
Dependent 
Discrete 
(1-5) 
1: 
Extremely 
Likely 5: 
Extremely  
Dislikely 
  
  
Perceive ease 
of use 
Independent/Dependent 
Perceived 
usefulness 
Independent/Dependent 
Demographic 
factor 
Independent 
The factors affecting acceptance of Mobile Banking as a 
new technology in financial payments and transactions are 
presented in Table 2. The model expands TAM with 
innovation resistance, performance perceive saving time and 
effort, and social and cultural factors. Moreover, proposed 
model includes experience that represents the familiarity of 
the mobile device and ATM, technology use skills, etc. 
Descriptive Analysis 
As shown in Table 2, our sample consisted of 76% males 
and 24% females. The majority of the sample were young 
(48%) in the interval [21-30], 6% were less than 21. 33% 
were within the interval [31-40]. 47% of the respondents 
have post graduate degrees, 41% bachelor degree and most 
of them (54%) are proficient IT users. 89% of the 
respondents use ATM machines and 98% preferred to use it 
rather than dealing with a human being clerk. 78% of the 
respondents liked the idea 20% did not decide.  74% of the 
respondents considered using mobile banking easy 10% 
considered it as difficult and 16% did not decide.  
87% of the respondents considered using mobile banking 
as a brilliant idea and 15% did not decide whether they 
considered mobile banking as good or bad idea. 5% 
considered it as a stupid idea. 45% intended to use mobile 
banking and 40% did not decide. 83% perceived the 
usefulness of using mobile banking and 15% did not decide. 
90% of the respondents think that using Mobile Banking will 
improve the performance in their lives. 89% considered the 
idea would help in exploiting the time.    
TABLE 2: SAMPLE PROFILE 
 Variable  
 
Frequency 
Gender 
Female 
76 
Male 
24 
Race 
Yemenis 
79 
Arab 
21 
Age 
15-20 
6 
21-30 
48 
31-40 
33 
More than 41 
13 
Specializations 
IT 
54 
Finance 
5 
Administration 
10 
Medicine 
7 
Engineering 
13 
Others 
11 
Jobs type 
Public Sector 
23 
International organizations 
5 
Private Organization 
41 
Family business 
3 
Other 
28 
Figure 2 shows our proposed model for Mobile Banking 
acceptance. This model expands TAM adding factors such 
as experience, Innovation, performance, social factors, 
saving time. The experience of using mobile would affect 
the responses and similar technologies would help users to 
perceive both ease of use and usefulness. 
 
 
Figure 2: Proposed framework 
The review showed that the demographic characteristics 
have an impact on the adoption of mobile technology. 
However, we find that age has no effect on intension to use 
mobile in financial transactions. Furthermore, we found that 
gender has significant effect as males have strong intention 
to use the new technologies more than females. Experience 
factor is significant. Social and cultural factors are important 
in acceptance of mobile banking. Mobile services are 
innovation and each innovation comes with resistance of 
consumers.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Our sample consisted of young educated individuals. 
Moreover, most of them were frequent users of ATM 
machines and preferred to use technologies rather than the 
old methods. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Our results confirm the previous studies results. 
However, they conflict with some of them. Our results find 
that both perceived ease of use and perceived of usefulness 
are significant factors. However, the results show that 
perceived ease of use plays the most significant role. 
From our results, it can be concluded that many of 
participants accept mobile banking for reasons such as 
saving time and improvement of their daily life.  
Most of participants think it is easy to use mobile 
banking and some think they need some help. The result 
shows the gap between accepts the new technology as an 
idea and the actual use of it. We recommend awareness 
campaign that leads to user perceptions for new 
technologies. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was funded by FEDER through Programa 
Operacional Fatores de Competitividade – COMPETE, and 
by national founds through FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e 
Tecnologia, 
under 
project: 
FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-
022674. 
  
REFERENCES 
[1] AlZomai M., AlFayyadh B., Audun Jøsang A. and cCullagh 
A.(2008), An Experimental Investigation of the Usability of 
Transaction Authorization in Online Bank Security Systems, 
Proceedings of the sixth Australasian conference on 
Information security - Volume 81, Wollongong, NSW, 
Australia , pp:65-73,  ISBN ~ ISSN:1445-1336 , 978-1-
920682-62-0 
[2] Barati S. and Mohammadi S. (2009), An Efficient Model to 
Improve 
Customer 
Acceptance 
of 
Mobile 
Banking, 
Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and 
Computer Science 2009 Vol. II WCECS 2009, October 20-
22, San Francisco, USA. 
[3] Coventry L., De Angeli A. and Johnson G. (2003), Usability 
and Biometric Verification at the ATM Interface, Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, ISBN:1-58113-630-7, 
pp: 153 - 160. 
[4] Gaurav A., Sharma A., Gelara V. and Moona R.(2008) Using 
Personal Electronic Device for Authentication-based Service 
Access, IEEE International Conference on Communications 
(ICC2008), Beijing, 19-23 May 2008. 
[5] Gu J.,  Lee S. and Suh Y. (2009), Determinants of Behavioral 
Intention to Mobile Banking,  Expert Systems with 
Applications: An International Journal, Vol. 36 ,  Issue 9  
(November 2009): 11605-11616. 
[6] Herzberg A. (2003), Payments and Banking with Mobile 
Personal Devices,   Communications of the AC, Volume 46, 
Issue 5, 2003, ISSN: 0001-0782, pp: 53 - 58.  
[7] Hua D. and Prashant P. (2009), Mobile Commerce Adoption 
in China and The United States: A Cross-Cultural Study, 
ACM SIGMIS Database, Vol.40, Issue 4  (November 2009): 
43-61 
[8] Khanfar K., Rashed A., Elzamly, A. and Elmasri, A. (2005) 
Customer Satisfaction with Internet Banking Web Site (Case 
study 
on 
the 
Arab 
Bank), 
the 
4th 
International 
Multiconference on Computer Science and Information 
Technology CSIT 2006, Amman, Jordan. ISBN: 9957 - 8592 
- 0 -X, National Number: 2129/9/2005 
[9] Maiyaki A. and Mokhtar S.(2010), Determinants of Consumer 
Behavioural Intention in Nigerian Commercial Banks, 
International Conference on Business and Economic Research 
(ICBER 2010), Malaysia (15 - 16 March 2010) 
[10] Mallat N., Rossi M. and Tuunainen V. (2004): Mobile 
banking services. Commun. ACM 47(5): 42-46. 
[11] Prashanth 
C. 
, 
Ganavi 
S., 
Mahalakshmi 
T. 
,Raja 
K.,Venugopal K. and Patnaik L. (2009), Iris Feature 
Extraction Using Directional Filter Bank, for Personal 
Identification, Proceedings of the 2nd Bangalore Annual 
Compute Conference on 2nd Bangalore Annual Compute, 
Article No. 6, ISBN:978-1-60558-476-8 
[12] Ramayah  T., Chin Y.L., Norazah, M. and Amlus, I. (2005), 
Determinants of Intention to Use an Online Bill Payment 
System among MBA Students, E-Business, Issue 9, pp. 80-
91. 
[13] Rashed A. and Santos H. (2010a), Odour User Interface for 
Authentication: Possibility and Acceptance: Case Study, The 
International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer 
Scientists 
2010 
(IMECS2010), 
(The 
2010 
IAENG 
International Conference on Bioinformatics), Hong Kong. 
[14] Rashed A. and Santos H. (2010b), Multimodal Biometrics 
and Multilayered IDM for Secure Authentication, accepted, 
ICGS3 6th International Conference for on Global Security, 
Safety and Sustainability, 1-3 September 2010, Braga, 
Portugal. 
[15] Rashed A. and Santos H. (2010c), OTM Machine 
Acceptance: in the Arab Culture, accepted, ICGS3 6th 
International Conference for on Global Security, Safety and 
Sustainability, 1-3 September 2010, Braga, Portugal. 
[16] Rashed A. and Santos H.(2010d), Validating TAM with 
Odour Interface in ATM Machines, Global Journal of 
Computer Science and Technology GJCST Vol. 10 Issue 7: 
July/August,2010.  
[17] Röcker C. (2009), Perceived Usefulness and Perceived Ease-
of-Use of Ambient Intelligence Applications in Office 
Environments, HCD 09 Proceedings of the 1st International 
Conference on Human Centered Design: Held as Part of HCI 
International. 
[18] Segev A., Porra J. and Roldan M. (1998), Internet Security 
And the Case of Bank of America, Internet security and the 
case of Bank of America, Volume 41, Issue 10, 
1998,ISSN:0001-0782, pp: 81 - 87. 
[19] Sukhai N.(1998), Access Control & Biometrics, Proceedings 
of the 1st annual conference on Information security 
curriculum development, Kennesaw, Georgia,  ISBN:1-
59593-048-5, pp: 124 - 127 
[20] Szajna B. (1996), Empirical Evaluation of the Revised 
Technology 
Acceptance Model, Management Science, 
INFORMS, 42(1): 85-92. 
[21] Yaseen S. and Zayed S. (2010), Exploring Critical 
Determinants in Deploying Mobile Commerce Technology, 
American Journal of Applied Sciences 7 (1): 120-126.
 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

