Technique for Embedding Information in Objects Produced with 3D Printer Using 
Near Infrared Fluorescent Dye 
*Piyarat Silapasuphakornwong, **Hideyuki Trii, 
**Kazutake Uehira 
Human Media Research Center 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
E-mail: *silpiyarat@gmail.com,  
**{torii, uehira}@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
Masahiro Suzuki 
Department of Psychology 
Tokiwa University 
Mito, Japan 
E-mail: masuzuki@tokiwa.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—This paper provides a novel technique to embed 
information in objects fabricated with a 3D printer using a 
near infrared fluorescent dye. To embed information inside an 
object, regions containing a small amount of fluorescent dye 
are formed inside the object as it is fabricated, and these 
regions form a pattern that expresses certain information. 
When this object is irradiated with near-infrared rays, they 
pass through the resin but are partly absorbed by the 
fluorescent dyes, and the fluorescent dyes emit near-infrared 
fluorescence. Therefore, by using a near-infrared camera, the 
internal pattern can be captured as a high-contrast image and 
the embedded information can be nondestructively read out. 
We conducted experiments to confirm the principle of the 
technique and demonstrate its feasibility. A sample was 
prepared using a two head fused deposition modeling-type 3D 
printer. On the basis of the experimental results, it was 
determined that a bright and high-contrast image could be 
taken if the pattern was formed at a depth of 1 mm or less 
from the surface, demonstrating the feasibility of this 
technique. 
Keywords-3D printer; information hiding; near infrared 
light; fluorescent dye. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, 3D printers have spread rapidly because 
they have become smaller and cheaper. If consumers have a 
3D printer in their own home or office, they can easily obtain 
a product that they want just by buying the 3D model data 
through the Internet and print it. Therefore, it is expected that 
3D printers may bring a revolution in the manufacturing 
industry and logistics [1]-[3]. 
Moreover, 3D printers use a process called additive 
manufacturing in which thin layers are formed one by one to 
form an object. This makes it possible to form a fine 
structure inside the object. Using this process, we have been 
studying techniques that can embed information inside an 
object by forming fine patterns that express information in 
the object while it is fabricated. We have also been studying 
techniques 
that 
can 
read 
out 
such 
information 
nondestructively from the outside. 
The embedding of information inside 3D printed objects 
will enable extra value to be added to 3D printed objects, 
expanding their applications. For example, we can embed 
information that usually comes with newly purchased 
products (e.g., user manuals) into the objects. We can also 
embed watermarks to protect the copyright of the original 3D 
model data. Although this is similar to conventional 
watermarking for digital content [4], the final product is not 
digital data but a real physical object. Therefore, a 
watermark needs to be embedded into it. Moreover, it will be 
also possible to use the object as a “thing” of Internet of 
Things (IoT) connecting the Internet. 
To develop a nondestructive information readout 
technology, we examined a method using thermography [5] 
[6] and a near infrared camera [7] [8]. We formed small 
cavities inside an object as fine patterns at shallow depths 
from the surface using thermography. Since a cavity has a 
very low thermal conductivity, the temperature of the surface 
above them becomes higher than other areas when the 
surface is heated, therefore, we can know where cavities are 
in the object and read out the information. 
We formed the fine patterns using a resin that has a high 
reflectivity or high absorption rate for infrared light when 
using an infrared camera. We can obtain the pattern in this 
case too because most resin materials transmit infrared rays. 
As related work, the technique of embedding information 
inside 3D printed objects using a thin plate with a cutout 
pattern has been studied in recent years. Willis and Wilson 
[9] first created some product parts, one of which had a 
visible pattern, and then assembled these parts into one 
product so that the patterned part was inside it. They read out 
the patterned information inside by using terahertz 
wavelength light. However, in practical terms, it was too 
complicated to apply it to common 3D printing. In contrast, 
the fine patterns in our technique are integrally formed using 
the body-utilizing additive manufacturing process of 3D 
printers, which eliminates any additional processes. 
In this paper, we propose a new technique for forming an 
inside pattern containing a small amount of fluorescent dye. 
In Section 2, we describe the principle of the proposed 
technique. Since the dye emits fluorescence, it is expected 
that high-luminance, high-contrast pattern image can be 
captured. This paper also describes the experiment we 
conducted to confirm the feasibility of this technique in 
Sections 3 and 4. We conclude this paper in Section 5. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

II. 
INFORMATION EMBEDDING USING FLUORESCENT DYE 
Figure 1 shows the basic principle of the proposed 
technique. This technique assumes that the resin is used as an 
object material. Pattern regions inside the object are formed 
using the same resin as that of the other regions, but they 
contain a small amount fluorescent dye. Since resin has high 
transmittance for near infrared, when the object is irradiated 
with near-infrared rays from the outside, the rays reach the 
internal fluorescent dyes. The light source irradiates light 
with wavelength λE, which excites the fluorescent dye. The 
fluorescent dye is excited and emits fluorescence. Therefore, 
a bright image of the patterns inside the resin object can be 
captured. 
Since wavelength λF of the dye's fluorescence differs 
from wavelength λE of the irradiated light, only light the 
fluorescent dye emits enters the camera, using an optical 
filter that blocks the light from the light source. In our 
previous studies where near infrared rays were used, 
reflective light from the object surface also entered the 
camera as noise. This decreased readability of the embedded 
information. In contrast, since the technique in this study can 
block such reflective light from the surface, it is expected 
that a low noise image of the pattern can be obtained, 
enhancing the readability. 
Using the same color of resins for the body and internal 
patterns, the patterns cannot be seen from the outside even if 
they are formed in a very shallow position from the surface. 
This is because the amount of the fluorescent dye contained 
in the resin is very small, and this hardly changes the color of 
the resin. This is important for applications requiring 
embedded information to remain hidden. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS  
A. Sample preparation 
Figure 2 shows the designed layout of the sample. In 
many practical cases of fabricating an object with a resin 
material, its inside is hollow as shown Figure 2, requiring 
only thin walls to maintain the strength of its body (the 
walls are omitted in this figure). Therefore, even in this 
study, samples whose insides are hollow were prepared. As 
shown in the figure, the internal patterns contact the inner 
wall of the outer shell. The sizes of the internal pattern and 
spaces between them were changed as experimental 
parameters as listed in Table 1. The thickness of the outer 
shell of the main body was also changed from 0.5 to 2 mm 
as an experimental parameter. 
Figure 3 shows a photo of the 3D printer used to fabricate 
the samples. We used a fused deposition modeling (FDM)-
type dual-nozzle 3D printer, Mutoh Value3D MagiX 2200D, 
to use two materials for one single object. 
 The body structure was fabricated using pure 
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) resin, and the inside 
patterns were formed using the same color of ABS resin as 
that for body, however, it contained a small amount of 
florescent dye (less than 1%). Figure 4 shows an example of 
the samples whose outer shell thickness t is 0.5 mm, in 
which the internal patterns cannot seen from the outside at all.  
Near infrared camera 
Near infrared light source 
3D Printed object 
Inside pattern region 
containing fluorescent dye 
Near infrared light with 
wavelength  lL from light source 
Optical filter 
Near infrared light with wavelength  lF 
emitted by fluorescent dye 
Figure 1. Basic concept of proposed technique 
t=0.5, 1.0, 1.5 mm 
Figure 2. Layout of sample 
(a)
Top view 
(b) Cross section 
Group A 
Group B 
Group C 
Group D 
Positions where pattern exists 
Positions where no pattern exists 
1.0 mm 
50 mm 
50 mm 
Group A 
Group B 
Group C 
Group D 
Size 
Space 
TABLE 1 LAYOUT PARAMETERS OF PATTERNS IN SAMPLE 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
(mm) 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

   
B. Capture of near infrared image 
Figure 5 illustrates the layout of the equipment used to 
capture a near infrared image. We used two sets of LED 
arrays as near infrared light sources. A CCD camera with 
2048 x 1088 pixels, which was sensitive to light with 
wavelengths up to 1100 nm, was set at the same side as 
above the sample, between the LED arrays. An optical filter 
was placed in front of the camera.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 6 shows the images captured with CCD camera. 
For all groups in the sample with t=0.5 mm, we can clearly 
determine the presence or absence of internal patterns at 
predetermined positions. For the sample with t=1.0 mm, 
although the image is blurred, it can barely be determined 
whether there is a pattern at a predetermined position. 
However, we cannot determine the presence or absence of 
any patterns in any group of the sample with t=1.5 mm due 
to the large degree of blur in the image. From this result, it 
can be seen that binary information can be read out if the 
distance from the object surface to the pattern is within 1 mm 
and the pattern size and the interval are 1 mm or more. 
The captured images shown in Figure 6 have low noise 
and high contrast. These make it easy to distinguish whether 
(a)
t=0.5 mm 
(b) t=1.0 mm 
(c)
t=1.5 mm 
Figure 6. Captured images with CCD camera 
Figure 5. Layout of equipment to capture near infrared images 
LED array 
Sample 
LED array 
CCD camera 
Optical filter 
Figure 4. Example of samples. 
ABS containing florescent dye 
Pure ABS 
Figure 3. 3D printer used in experiment to fabricate samples 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

or not a pattern exists. This demonstrates that the proposed 
technique using a fluorescent dye has the effect we expected. 
The blur in the image occurs because the near infrared 
rays are scattered as it passes through the ABS resin. 
Therefore, as the path becomes shorter, the blurring becomes 
less, that is, in order to reduce blurring, it is necessary to 
shorten the distance from the surface of the object to the 
region containing the fluorescent dye. Since thinning the 
outer shell decreases the strength of the object's body, a 
method of forming a region containing a fluorescent dye in a 
part of the outer shell without reducing the thickness of the 
outer shell can be a candidate countermeasure. Verification 
of the effectiveness of this idea is a future task. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We have studied a technique of forming an internal 
pattern region in a 3D printed object with ABS resin 
containing a very small account of fluorescent dye to 
enhance contrast and decrease noise in images of the 
patterns and to enhance readability of the embedded 
information the patterns express. 
From the experiments we conducted, we clarified that 
bright and low-noise images of the internal pattern could be 
captured as expected and it enhanced readability for 
embedded binary information. 
In future work, we will decrease image blur of internal 
patterns by shorten the distance from the object surface to 
the internal pattern to enable higher density information 
embedding. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research 
15H02707. Moreover, we would like to thank DIC 
Corporation for providing the fluorescent dye contained in 
the ABS resin in this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Berman, “3-D printing: The new industrial revolution,” Business 
horizons, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 155–162, March–April 2012. 
[2] 
B. Garrett, “3D printing: New economic paradigms and strategic 
shifts,” Global Policy, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 70–75, February 2014. 
[3] 
C. Weller, R. Kleer, and F. T. Piller, “Economic implications of 3D 
printing: Market structure models in light of additive manufacturing 
revisited,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 164, 
pp. 43–56, June 2015. 
[4] 
F. Hartung and M. Kutter, “Multimedia watermarking techniques” 
Proc IEEE, Vol. 87, No. 7, pp. 1079-1107, 1999. 
[5] 
M. Suzuki, P. Silapasuphakornwong, K. Uehira, H. Unno, and Y. 
Takashima, “Copyright protection for 3D printing by embedding 
information inside real fabricated objects,” International Conference 
on Computer Vision Theory and Applications, pp. 180–185, March 
2015. 
[6] 
M. Suzuki, et al., “Embedding Information into Objects Fabricated 
With 3-D Printers by Forming Fine Cavities inside Them”, 
Proceedings of IS&T International symposium on Electronic Imaging, 
Vol. 2017, No. 41, pp. 6-9, 2017 . 
[7] 
P. Silapasuphakornwong, et al., “Nondestructive readout of copyright 
information embedded in objects fabricated with 3-D printers”, The 
14th International Workshop on Digital-forensics and Watermarking, 
Revised Selected Papers, pp.232-238, 2016. 
[8] 
K. Uehira, et al., “Copyright Protection for 3D Printing by 
Embedding Information Inside 3D-Printed Object”, The 15th 
International Workshop on Digital-forensics and Watermarking 
Revised Selected Papers, pp.370-378, 2017. 
[9] 
K. D. D. Willis and A. D. Wilson, “Infrastructs: Fabricating 
Information Inside Physical Objects for Imaging in the Terahertz 
Region”, ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 138-1–
138-10 July 2013. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

