A Learning Platform for 3D Digital Single Lens Reflex (DSLR) Camera 
 
Seow Hui, Saw 
Department of Computer Science 
Faculty of Information and Communication Technology 
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman 
Kampar, Perak, Malaysia 
e-mail: shsaw@utar.edu.my 
Win Khai, Cheah 
Department of Information Systems 
Faculty of Information Communication Technology 
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman 
Kampar, Perak, Malaysia 
e-mail: marcuscheah831@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The use of Digital Single Lens Reflex (DSLR) 
camera is becoming increasingly popular. However, the selling 
price for these cameras is relatively high, especially for users 
who are on a tight budget and just getting started with 
photography. Therefore, we have developed a multimedia 
learning platform for Digital Single Lens Reflex (DSLR) 
camera to provide an interactive environment between users 
and the camera before they make their purchasing decisions. 
The main contribution in our platform is the modeling of a 3D 
DSLR camera equipped with the necessary lens and operation 
buttons that allows a realistic experience for users in real-time 
interactions with a mouse. Furthermore, a visual simulator is 
built into the platform to show how different aperture and 
shutter settings affect the outcome of a digital photo. First, the 
3D DSLR model is constructed using 3Ds MAX, a professional 
modeling software. It is then exported to a Virtual Reality 
Markup Language (VRML) file format supported by the 
powerful 3D interactive software called WireFusion. Finally, 
the entire object is published on the internet with additional 
learning tools and multimedia resources to enhance learning 
delivery. Several screenshots of the platform are also presented 
in this paper. 
Keywords-3D DSLR Camera; interactive visualization: 
multimedia application; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Digital Single Lens Reflex camera (DSLR) cameras have 
become popular since the existence of digital photography in 
1975 [12]. People like to capture and preserve their precious 
memories in high quality with this gigantic yet powerful 
device. Nevertheless, the features of Digital Single Lens 
Reflex (DSLR) camera are complicated to master in order to 
take good photos, and users, generally, lack of hands-on 
experience before they decide to purchase any devices. 
Moreover, selling prices are relatively high for the beginner 
who lives on a tight budget.  
In response to these issues, the existing online learning 
platform consists of two types of contents: (1) online lessons 
and tutorials [2][4], (2) online lessons and tutorials, a virtual 
simulator that allows user to control the settings, for example, 
the shutter speed, in order to dictate the desire effects and 
outcomes of the given photos [15], and (3) online lessons 
and tutorials, a virtual simulator with some instant advices 
and tips to review the chosen settings of the camera in order 
to improve the quality of the capture photo [14].  
Although these developed platforms are effective, a 
DSLR camera is displayed in a 2-dimensional picture, or, in 
other words, image. A plain image does not provide an 
interactive visualization for the user. Hence, a virtual testing 
on the camera is impossible before the purchasing decisions. 
This paper presents a combination of multimedia, 3-
dimensional graphics visualization and a web-based 
application in order to provide a realistic experience with 
easy access for the user in haptic interaction using only 
mouse operations [13]. Users are able to visualize the 3-
dimensional DSLR camera by rotating it in different angles. 
The main components for the camera, such as Universal 
Serial Bus (USB) port can be operated and controlled by a 
simple click to view the descriptions (Fig. 3).  
Furthermore, we have included both the tutorials and 
simulation tools to be in the same platform to facilitate the 
learning process, so users have an in-depth understanding of 
the respective functionalities. The users are able to operate 
and control the buttons of the three-dimensional model by 
setting different functions of the camera and capture photos 
to see the effects.  
In addition, the platform also provides an instant 
feedback to the users on the improvements they would do to 
make the photos better. This is an effective and efficient way 
to learn and improve their skills rather than reading from 
reference books. 
The 3-dimensional DSLR is first modeled with the 
famous professional modeling software called 3Ds MAX 
including the camera accessories, such as lens and a tripod. 
The created 3-dimensional model is then exported as Virtual 
Reality Markup Language (VRML) (.wrl) to be used and 
designed in WireFusion. WireFusion is an authoring tool for 
creating 3-dimensional interactive presentations that are 
supported in any web browser in order to provide easy 
access to users anywhere and anytime.   
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 summarizes the previous platforms 
and 
implementation relevant to our approach. Section 3 explains 
the details and the interfaces of our platform. Users’ surveys 
are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper and 
refers to future work. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

92%
8%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Yes
No
Will you utilize our platform before 
making any  purchaing decision?
 
Figure 1. The first page of our platform [13]. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There are several learning platforms for DSLR camera 
that can be found in the literature. These are the common 
online methods to teach beginners how to use DSLR cameras.  
A survey report [1] has proposed that the best way to 
teach the students is through online learning. The reason is 
because the course materials are accessible all year long and 
can be shared globally across different time zones. 
 As described in Section I, there are several online 
learning platforms. McHugh [2] provides a comprehensive 
and all the necessary resources to guide users on the 
terminologies, concepts and techniques for photographing 
with a DSLR camera. These resources include tutorials, 
photography tools and fora among users to share their 
technical knowledge. This online platform is suitable for the 
beginners, while [4] is mainly for advance users since their 
tutorials focus on photographing skills. However, both of the 
online platforms lack of interaction features and simulator.  
There are a few online sites combined both tutorials and 
an additional virtual simulator which allows user to control 
the basic settings and view the outcome of the photo without 
providing any instant feedback to compare the used settings 
[14][15].  
Wendzich [14] offers a simple yet straightforward 
tutorials about the concepts and terminologies of DSLR 
camera. In addition, they have a real-time visual feedback so 
user is able to see the results of their changes without 
committting to the shutter. Unfortunately, user has no option 
to change the photo and no advices are provided in the 
simulator. 
The proposal in [15] allows user to control only the light 
of the camera: shutter and aperture to view the effects of the 
capture photo. Although this online platform offers a very 
valuable teaching but an incomplete virtual simulator. 
Similarly, the solution in [16] has a very simple 
explanation for the features of camera, very limited controls 
for the settings and offered only three images in their virtual 
simulator. 
On the other hand, CameraSim [3] consists of a virtual 
simulator that displays the effects of the photo under various 
settings such as the aperture, shutter speed, International 
Standards Organisation (ISO) speed and etc. Nonetheless, 
they are lack of teaching contents, no proper advices for the  
 
Figure 2. 92% of the respondents are interested to utilize our platform 
before making the purchase of a DSLR. 
 
settings in the virtual simulator unless the user purchases the 
licences, and a limited number of example shots. 
Canon [17] developed an online website to describe the 
basic manual settings for visual effects. They provide only 
one image to dictate the outcome and effects of the basic 
settings of DSLR camera. However, they give a detailed 
review and feedback for the capture photo. 
As summarized above, the existing online platforms 
implemented the necessary contents  to train the beginners 
and give them a grasp of the photographing foundation. 
Nevertheless, there is no integration between the user and the 
DSLR camera that can enhance their tactile involvement and 
intutive understanding before they make a purchasing 
decision. Our platform [13] includes complete tutorials, the 
virtual simulator with extra features, and the highlight of the 
platform is the interactive 3D DSLR camera for the 
visualization assistance. 
Sun et al. [5] describe a method for designing and 
developing a 3D virtual DSLR camera based on VRML and 
JavaScript languages. The authors built a 3D model by using 
3Ds Max, professional modeling software, and exported it to 
a document supported by VRML. The purpose of this is to 
publish the program online for users to access anytime. 
Although the mentioned 3D model is available in this online 
learning platform, there is no visual simulator to visualize the 
effect of the captured photos. In addition, the platform lacked 
of guidance regarding the features for 3D DSLR cameras. 
Recently, Moser et al. [6] presented a tangible 
photography education system that invites people to explore 
and learn about the technical settings involved in DSLR 
cameras. The user can physically manipulate and explore 
how these settings interact with one another to produce 
different types of photographic expressions. However, it 
would be more instructional for the the user to physically 
experience the 3D DSLR camera instead of in an online, 
electronic (and, thus, indirectly) context.  
III. 
INTERFACES 
A survey was conducted before the platform is 
established to determine the usefulness of 3D DSLR 
learning platform. Based on the results collected from 50 
people, 92% of them will utilize the 3D DSLR learning 
platform before they decide to purchase a real one, as shown 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Model 3D DSLR camera 
Export 3D model to VRML 
Design 3D virtual interaction 
Publish to internet (online use) 
 
in Fig. 2. Furthermore, a learning platform equipped with a 
3D DSLR is yet a novel idea. Thus, we decided to develop 
this web application, as shown in Fig. 1. 
A. Home 
A user is able to interact with 3D DSLR camera 
displayed in Fig. 3 by rotating and zooming operation with 
the mouse. The 3D DSLR camera is first modeled by 3Ds 
MAX that can be downloaded for free [7] to be used for 
educational purposes. There are many tutorials and 
references which can be found in [8] and [10]. Actually the 
3D DSLR camera is created based on the guidance in [9] and 
texture is added to the created model for a realistic effect. 
Whereas the bitmap image used for texturing is created with 
the use of Adobe Photoshop. The position for both texture 
image and the 3D DSLR camera must be matched exactly. 
Following this, a diffuse bitmap is selected in the material 
editor map of 3Ds MAX to diffuse the bitmap image on 
certain components in the 3D DSLR camera. 
The second step involves, exporting the 3D content that 
was created into VRML97 (.wrl) file format that is supported 
by WireFusion 5.0. This is powerful software that is 
privately held by Demicron [11], a Swedish company 
dedicated to create an interactive 3D technology for used to 
visualize products and market them on the internet using 
Java programming language. It is a visual tool with event-
driven programming. Users are able to download the manual 
from [11] and to learn the fundamental through a series of 
hands-on examples.  
When users click the “Start” button shown in Fig. 3, the 
hotspot labels for camera components are presented as seen 
in Fig. 1.  A brief description and a short animation are 
displayed when one of these hotspots is selected. For 
instance, the lens, mode dial, USB, lens release button and 
others are being labeled. Thus, users are able to gain an 
insight into the functionality of these components. These 
interactivities are completed using WireFusion 5.0. 
Lastly, the end product of 3D DSLR camera is deployed 
as Java Applet in a Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) 
file in order to publish to internet after all the necessary 
adjustment. 
B. Tool Kits 
This new tab page called “Tool Kits” is included in our 
learning platform that is not able to be found in other 
existing DSLR websites (see Fig. 5). Apart from DSLR 
camera, there are various accessories that can be used to 
improve the quality of photographs. The most common 
DSLR accessories including extra batteries, Ultra Violet 
(UV) filter, cleaning kits, lens, tripod and etc. 
This page offers an interactive environment with 
descriptive tutorials that are useful for effectively 
understanding the functions of these accessories. Users are 
able to attach or change them by simply a mouse click. For 
instance, in Fig. 6, when user clicks on either macro lens or 
normal lens, the changing process is shown in real time. In 
order to see the effects of these lenses, user is required to 
 
Figure 3. Several components of 3D DSLR camera are labeled with 
hotspots. 
Figure 4. Several components of 3D DSLR camera are labeled with 
hotspots. 
 
Figure 5. Toolkits: Lens tutorial for normal lens and macro lens. 
 
press the button with camera icon. The background of the 
resulting photo is blurred and the subjects are sharped when 
macro lens is used as shown in Fig. 7 (left). Macro lens is 
suitable for portrait capturing. On the other hand, normal 
lens is suitable to capture a neutral photo as shown in Fig. 7 
(right). 
Apart from the lenses, users are able to navigate with the 
tripod (see Fig. 8). Fig. 9 shows the differences between 
photos taken with tripod and without tripod during nighttime. 
Thus, users are able to make a decision whether to purchase 
these additional accessories without actually visiting the 
shops. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
 
Figure 6. The changing process: (Left) Macro lens is changed. (Right) 
Normal Lens is changed. 
Figure 7. (Left) Using macro lens and the subjects are sharper than the 
background. (Right) Using normal lens.  
 
Figure 8. Tool Kits: Tripod tutorial. 
Figure 9. Picture taken at night. (Left) With tripod. (Right) Without tripod 
C. Tutorials 
The essential part of developing an intuition for 
photography is to master the use of camera exposure. A 
photograph’s exposure determines how light or dark an 
image will appear when it’s been captured by the camera. 
This is determined by just three camera settings or in other 
words the exposure triangle defined as follows: 
 
Aperture: A camera’s aperture setting controls the 
area over which light can pass through the camera 
lens. It is specified in terms of f-stop value, which 
can at times be counterintuitive, because the area of 
the opening increases as the f-stop decreases. In 
photographer slang, when someone says they are 
“stopping down” or “opening up” their lens, they are 
referring to increasing and decreasing the f-stop 
value, respectively. 
 
Shutter Speed: A camera’s shutter determines when 
the camera sensor will be opened or closed to 
incoming light from the camera lens. The shutter 
speed specifically refers to how long this light is 
permitted to enter the camera. Shutter speed and 
exposure time refer to the same concept, where a 
faster shutter speed means a shorter exposure time. 
 
ISO: The ISO speed determines how sensitive the 
camera is to incoming light. Similar to shutter speed, 
it also correlates 1:1 with how much the exposure 
increases or decreases. However, unlike aperture and 
shutter speed, a lower ISO speed is almost always 
desirable, since higher ISO speeds dramatically 
increase image noise. As a result, ISO speed is 
usually only increased from its minimum value it the 
desired aperture and shutter speed aren’t otherwise 
obtainable. 
The visual simulator is included in the tutorial to improve 
users’ skills. With this simulator, users are not only limited 
to the facts and definitions for these settings, but they have 
the opportunity to visualize the effects that are caused by 
these exposure triangle.  
As described above, aperture and shutter speed are 
closely related to each other. Thus, we placed their settings 
in the same page as shown in Fig. 10. Their settings are 
contradictory to get a perfect shot for the photo (see Fig. 11). 
In addition, the visual simulator furnishes with an 
evaluator that gives useful advices and comments based on 
the chosen settings for further improvements. For instance, 
the resulting photo is dark when the user slide to F/ 22 for 
aperture and 1/ 1000 seconds for shutter speed using 
respective slider buttons (see Fig. 12). The evaluator advised 
user to decrease the aperture value and increase the shutter 
speed for a better shot, as shown in Fig. 11. 
On the other hand, the resulting photo is bright, as shown 
in Fig. 13, when user selects F/ 5.6 for aperture and 1/ 125 
seconds for shutter speed. In this situation, the evaluator 
suggested user to increase the shutter speed.  
Technically, we applied the straightforward if-then-else 
logical operators for these evaluations. The following lists 
out all the advices and comments in the learning platform.  
 
1) 
Oopps! The exposure is too long until the photo looks blank and 
bright. You should adjust higher aperture value and higher shutter speed 
value. 
2) 
The exposure is too long due to low shutter speed value. Windmill: 
look dim. Background building: disappeared. You should adjust higher 
shutter speed value. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

3) 
The exposure is too long due to low shutter speed value. Windmill: 
look ambiguous. Background building: disappeared. You should adjust 
higher shutter speed value. 
4) 
The exposure is too long due to low shutter speed value. Windmill: 
look ambiguous. Background building: bright and unclear. You should 
adjust higher shutter speed value. 
5) 
The exposure is too long due to low shutter speed value. Windmill: 
Hardly visible and ambiguous. Background building: bright and unclear. 
You should adjust higher shutter speed value. 
6) 
The exposure is too long due to low shutter speed value. Windmill: 
Visible but out of focus. Background building: bright and unclear, yet 
better. You should adjust higher shutter speed value. 
7) 
Not bad, the photo look nice! But…Windmill: look ambiguous and 
out of focus. Background building: clear but bright. You should adjust 
higher shutter speed. 
8) 
The exposure is too long! The photo is too bright. Windmill: bright 
and out of focus. Background building: clear but bright. You should adjust 
higher shutter speed value. 
9) 
Good! But the photo is too bright. Windmill: look bright and out of 
focus. Background building: clear but bright. You should adjust higher 
shutter speed value. 
10) Great! You are achieving the correct exposure, but…Windmill: out 
of focus. Background building: clearest. You should adjust higher shutter 
speed to freeze the windmill movement. 
11) Well done! The photo looks perfect. You are achieving the correct 
exposure and the motion of windmill is frozen. Windmill and building 
background: Look clearer and sharper. 
12) Perfect! The photo looks perfect. You are achieving the correct 
exposure and the motion of windmill is frozen. Windmill and building 
background: look clearer and sharper. 
13) Not bad! You have freeze the motion of the windmill, but the photo 
looks dark due to underexposed. Windmill and building background: Look 
clearer and sharper, the darker. You should adjust lower aperture value. 
14) Great! You have freeze the motion of the windmill. Windmill and 
building background: Look clearer and sharper, but it looks dark. You 
should adjust lower aperture. 
15) Great! The photo looks perfect. You are achieving the correct 
exposure and the motion of windmill is frozen. Windmill and building 
background: look clearer and sharper.  
16) The photo looks dark due to the area over which light can pass 
through the camera lens is small, thus, underexposed. You should be 
decreasing the f-stop value/ adjust to lower aperture value to increase light 
passes through the camera lens. 
17) Wow, feel like raining?! The photo looks dark due to the area over 
which light can pass through the camera lens is small, thus, underexposed. 
You should be decreasing the f-stop value/ adjust to lower aperture value 
to increase light passes through the camera lens. 
 
Table I summarizes the comments that will display when 
the user selects the respective camera settings. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE COMMENTS AND ADVICES BASED ON THE CAMERA 
SETTINGS. 
CAMERA EXPOSURE 
Shutter speed 
(in seconds) 
Aperture
Comments/ Advices 
Less than or 
equal to 1/8 
F/5.6 
1) 
F/8.0 
2) 
F/11.0 
3) 
F/16.0 
4) 
Less than or 
equal to 1/30
F/5.6 
F/8.0 
 
5) 
F/11.0 
6) 
F/16.0 
F/22.0 
4) 
Less than or 
equal to 1/60
F/5.6 
F/8.0 
4) 
F/11.0 
F/16.0 
F/22.0 
7) 
Less than or 
equal to 
1/125 
F/5.6 
8) 
F/8.0 
9) 
F/11.0 
F/16.0 
F/22.0 
10) 
Less than or 
equal to 
1/500 
F/5.6 
11) 
F/8.0 
12) 
F/11.0 
14) 
F/16.0 
F/22.0 
13) 
Less than or 
equal to 
1/1000 
F/5.6 
12) 
F/8.0 
15) 
F/11.0 
16) 
F/16.0 
F/22.0 
17) 
Meanwhile, there is a separate visual simulator for ISO 
settings, as shown in Fig. 14 (left). As described above, ISO 
is to determine the amount of incoming light of the camera. 
Users are able to adjust the ISO values using the main 
command dial of 3D DSLR camera as displayed in Fig. 14 
(Right). Furthermore, there are two types of the sample 
photos: indoor and outdoor. Fig. 15 (left) visualizes the 
effects of ISO 200 which caused darkness for this indoor 
photo. The evaluator suggested that user should use higher 
ISO values for a better picture, whereas in Fig. 15 (right) 
illustrated the effects of ISO 3200 that were too high for the 
outdoor photo. In this situation, the evaluator adviced to 
lower the ISO value for a balanced effects. The evaluations 
and comments for indoor and outdoor pictures are listed in 
Table II. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE II.  
THE COMMENTS BASED ON THE ISO SETTINGS FOR 
INDOOR AND OUTDOOR PICTURE. 
ISO 
Settings 
INDOOR PICTURE 
OUTDOOR PICTURE
Comments/ Advices 
Comments/ Advices 
200 
Not Bad! But for indoor low 
light, you might want to 
adjust a higher ISO values. 
Well done! ISO 200 is 
suitable for outdoor 
picture. 
400 
Well Done! ISO 400 is 
suitable for indoor picture. 
Perfect! For outdoor 
with low light, ISO 400 
is the most suitable. 
800 
Perfect! ISO 800 is the most 
suitable for indoor low light 
Hmmm, this photo 
considered okay, but 
looked bright, you might 
want to lower down the 
ISO value 
1600 
Hmmm, this photo is 
considered okay, but 
consists of high ISO noise; 
you might want to adjust 
lower ISO values. 
The photo is bright; you 
might want to lower 
down the ISO value. 
3200 
You should lower down the 
ISO values; the photo is too 
bright and noisy. 
You should lower down 
the ISO value; the photo 
is too bright and noisy. 
6400 
Opps, ISO is too high! You 
should lower the ISO values 
for a better picture. 
Opps, ISO value is too 
high! The photo is too 
bright and noisy. You 
should lower down the 
ISO values for a better 
picture. 
 
 
Figure 10.  A visual simulator with aperture and shutter speed slider buttons. 
 
Figure 11.  A perfect shot with aperture F/2.8, shutter speed 1/1000 seconds. 
 
Figure 12.  An example of bad settings (too dark) of aperture F/22 and 
shutter speed 1/1000. 
 
Figure 13.  Another example of bad settings (too bright) of aperture F/5.6 
and shutter speed 1/125 
 
Figure 14.  A visual simulator with ISO settings. (Left) The starting page. 
(Right) Use the main command dial to adjust the ISO values. 
 
Figure 15.  (Left) An indoor photo with low ISO values. (Right) An outdoor 
picture with high ISO values. 
The sample photos in the visual simulator are taken 
using the real DSLR camera. Therefore, the quality and the 
accuracy of the photos are preserved. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

IV. 
USERS’ SURVEYS – RESULTS 
We have collected only 10 participants for the survey due 
to time limitation. Based on the results, 100% of them 
thought they’ll have better learning about DSLR cameras 
through our website [13].  
Moreover, we have compared our platform with several 
existing platform that has a visual simulator [3], [15], [16] 
and [17] and found out that, 89% agreed that they’ll learn 
better if the website furnishes with a 3D model. Furthermore, 
the tools provided are very useful to them and, 64% enjoyed 
it since we have additional tools tutorials and more reality 
with a 3D model.  
89% will visit our website before they decide to purchase 
a real one while 67% will revisit our website again after 
they bought a DSLR camera for tutorial purposes. 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In summary, our 3D DSLR learning platform [13] 
provides an interactive environment for users especially the 
beginners. This platform allows them to gain experience in 
photographing and the opportunity to test the virtual DSLR 
before their purchasing decision is made.  There is a local 
company which runs a mentorship-driven startup accelerator 
for student entrepreneurs in Asia attracted to this 
benchmarking and claimed that it has a great potential as a 
gateway for the DSLR camera manufacturers to advertise 
their model in three-dimensional. They can utilize this 
platform to advertise their new model/s and attract their 
buyers.  
This platform can be furthered enhanced by adding more 
features such as video tutorials and, higher levels of 
photography lessons since this platform is targeted to the 
beginners. Additionally, more tools can be added to the tool 
kits page such as flashlights, memory cards, batteries and 
others.  
Besides the extension in commercialization, there is also 
a research value in this platform. We can have an 
investigation into modifying the software’s presentation 
according to the user’s experiences with the camera 
incorporating some learning algorithm. We also hope to 
increase the number of participants for our surveys in order 
to obtain a stronger justification.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project implementation belongs to the Bachelor 
Degree student, Cheah Win Khai for his completion of the 
Final Year Project. This is supported by the Faculty of 
Information and Communication Technology in Universiti 
Tunku Abdul Rahman. He graduated with distinction in 
April 2013. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Tinti-Kane, J. Seaman, and J. Levy, “Social Media in 
Higher Education: The Survey,” Babson Survey Research 
Group, Massachusetts, 2013. 
[2] S. McHugh, “Cambridge in Colour: A Learning Community 
for 
Photographers,” 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cambridgeincolour.com. [Retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[3] J. Arnold, “CameraSim: DSLR Photography Demystified,” 
2012. 
 
[Online]. 
Available:http://www.camerasim.com. 
[Retrieved: May, 2012]. 
[4] G. Laing, “DSLR Tips: Support this site by shopping via our 
partner 
stores,” 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.dslrtips.com/support/Support_DSLR_Tips.shtml. 
[Retrieved: May, 2012]. 
[5] Y. Sun, L. Liu, Q. Li, “Design and Development of 3D 
Virtual DSLR Camera Based on VRML and JavaScript,” 
Computer Science and Education (ICCSE 2010), 5th 
International Conference,  Aug 24– 27, 2010, pp. 1380– 1384, 
doi: 10.1109/ICCSE.2010.5593752. 
[6] K. Moser, M. Kiechle, K. Ryokai, “Photocation: tangible 
learning system for DSLR photography,” Proc. CHI EA ’12 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
2012,  pp. 1691– 1696, doi: 10.1145/2212776.223694. 
[7] Autodesk support center, “AUTODESK: Download center,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://students.autodesk.com/?nd=download_center. 
[Retrieved: January, 2013]. 
[8] Autodesk Media and Entertainment Education Video Series, 
“3ds 
Max 
Learning 
Channel,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.youtube.com/user/3dsMaxHowTos. 
[Retrieved: 
January, 2013]. 
[9] C. Hayes, “Model a Detailed, High-Poly Camera in 3ds 
Max,” 
2nd 
July 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://cg.tutsplus.com/tutorials/autodesk-3d-studio-
max/model-a-detailed-high-poly-camera-in-3ds-max/. 
[Retrieved: January, 2013]. 
[10] Autodesk Media and Entertainment Education Video Series, 
“Learning 
Center,” 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.students.autodesk.com/?nd=learning_center. 
[Retrieved: January, 2013]. 
[11] Learning Center Group, “Demicron: INTERACTIVE 3D, 
Learning 
Center,” 
1996-2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.demicron.com/support/learning/index.html. 
[Retrieved: January, 2013]. 
[12] D. Prakel, “The Visual Dictionary of Photography,” AVA 
Publishing, 2010, pp. 91. [Retrieved: 24 July 2013]. 
[13] W.K. Cheah, “3D DSLR Learning Platform, “ 2013. [Online]. 
Available: 
http:// 
www.webkhai.com/html_New/app/home/home.html. 
[Retrieved: October 2013].  
[14] L. Wendzich, “Building a DSLR Simulator,” 16th June 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://writing.ludwignz.com/post/building-a-dslr-simulator. 
[Retrieved: 10 December 2013]. 
[15] Photonhead, “Digital Camera Tips and Reviews: The Essence 
of Modern Film and Digital Photography,” June 2004. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.photonhead.com. [Retrieved: 
12 October 2013]. 
[16] T. Strand, “Aperture, shutter and ISO value, “ 2008-2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.kamerasimulator.se/eng/. 
[Retrieved: 12 October 2013]. 
[17] Canon Canda Inc, “Learn | Canon Explains Exposure” 2011. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.canonoutsideofauto.ca/learn/. 
[Retrieved: December 2013]. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

