Development of an Adaptive Learning System 
 
Philip Davies 
Software Systems Research Group 
Bournemouth University  
Bournemouth, UK 
daviesp@bournemouth.ac.uk 
 
 
David Newell 
Software Systems Research Group 
Bournemouth University  
Bournemouth, UK 
dnewell@bournemouth.ac.uk 
 
Abstract - We investigate the requirements for an 
adaptive learning system. A conceptual model is explored 
which links together a student model, a tutor model and a 
knowledge model. We further consider the use of an 
adaptive engine which allows the system to respond to the 
needs of individual students, present learning objects 
according to the preferences of individual tutor styles, 
allows automatic self-exploration at the level of student 
maturity and encodes the curriculum in a form that is 
accessible to the adaptive engine. Our model accurately 
represents both the structure and content of learning 
objects in contrast with less structured data models 
implicit in ontological hierarchies.  
 
Keywords–e-learning; adaptive; metadata; semantic; 
ontology. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   
In previous work [1], we proposed an Adaptive 
Multimedia Presentation System (AMPS) to provide a 
semi-automated tool for learning that adapts to students’ 
needs. A prototype was constructed and evaluated in a 
real class environment in the Cisco Academy at 
Bournemouth University [2]. This showed that 
undergraduate students benefited from using the AMPS, 
but preferred a more ‘adaptive’ system – one that met 
their individual needs better with less tutor intervention. 
These results led the writers to consider how this might 
be undertaken in a systematic way.  The principal aim 
of this paper is to look further at the conceptual, 
semantic, and ontological modelling issues involved in 
making a more rigorous adaptive learning system. 
 
In section II, we set out our overview of the 
Adaptive Learning System and indicate the relation of 
its component parts. In section III, we look at the 
student model and indicate its possible structure. In 
section IV, we look at the tutor model and the demands 
placed upon the system by allowing tutors to teach in 
their own idiosyncratic ways. In section V, we discuss 
the knowledge model which we use to hold both the 
knowledge structure in a multi connected ontology as 
well as the learning objects themselves. In section VI 
we discuss the adaptive engine which links together all 
these components, while in section VII we conclude by 
reflecting on the limitations of the model and the role of 
adaptation in learning. 
 
II. THE ADAPTIVE LEARNING SYSTEM 
 
As in nature, so in computing adaptation can take 
many forms. But it is important to realise that adaption 
is always in response to a particular stimulus. As the 
external factors change so the system adapts its 
response. This is no less true in education in the case of 
a learning environment; a student is presented with a 
range of stimuli and a range of responses are observed. 
Table 1. Students may be presented with learning 
materials which are too hard or too easy, students may 
learn from the learning object and accommodate the 
new learning as new knowledge which is incorporated 
into their own knowledge or they may not. Any learning 
system needs to adapt to these responses of the student. 
TABLE 1 ADAPTION METHODS 
Stage 
Stimulus/state 
Adaption 
Method 
1 
Student learns 
from new material 
Next stage of 
material presented 
Automatically 
determined from 
subject ontology 
2 
Student fails to 
learn from new 
material 
Reinforcement 
material presented 
Automatically 
determined from 
subject ontology 
3 
Student ability 
tested with new 
material 
General IQ test 
Real-time 
response 
4 
Student pre-
knowledge 
Subject knowledge 
test 
pre-lesson test 
5 
Student learning 
styles 
selection of 
appropriate formats  
Learning style 
analysis 
 
In normal education systems the adaption is performed 
with varying degrees of success by the tutor. Possible 
contributions to the student state will include student 
prior knowledge, student ability and student learning 
styles, which we call the basic “student signature”.  
 
 
 
The system needs to be able to mimic the adaption of the 
tutor and response of the student as well as contain all 
the structure of the knowledge system in the form of an 
INTERFACE
Adaptive Engine
Student Model
Knowledge Model
Fragmentation Model
Tutor Model
Tutor
Student
Administrator
Figure 1 Adaptive Learning System 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Student 
Signature
Educational 
Approach
Pedagogic 
Approach
Androgogic 
Approach
Heutagogic 
Approach
Student Model
Knowledge 
status
Prior 
Knowledge
Speed of 
Apprehensio
n
motivation
Maturation
Mental 
Developmen
t
environment
Time 
available
Learning 
Skills
Figure 2 Student Model 
ontology together with all the teaching material in 
different forms to match appropriate learning styles.  
The structure of the adaptive system with these features 
is shown in Figure 1. 
 
III. THE STUDENT MODEL 
 
The student is the course subscriber, or person 
learning the course content and committed to 
completing a course. Once all courses to which the 
student has subscribed are complete the student ceases 
to be a student.  The level of knowledge attainment that 
the student has reached during any point in the course 
has to be recorded and tracked. This means linking the 
attainment level to the subject ontology. The 
determination of whether a particular subject node has 
been assimilated is through the answering of test 
questions. The successful answering of these will 
update the student signature to record which subject 
nodes have been accessed and mastered. The 
component of the student model are shown in Figure 2 
and will be elaborated below. 
 
Part of the initial processing of the student will 
require an assessment of the pre-knowledge that the 
student comes to the course with and this will involve 
initial testing. The results of this will indicate the 
present level of knowledge of the student and this will 
be entered into the student profile or “student signature” 
as we call it here.  
 
Other factors which determine the way learning is  
adapted to individual student needs will be include the 
motivation level of the student which will affect the 
degree of independence the student is given and the 
amount of reinforcement and checking on the student 
activity. Student ability will also be assessed to measure 
the speed and intelligence level at which a student is 
able to work.  
 
These and other factors will be incorporated into the 
student signature which will be assigned to each student 
and which forms a central part of the Student model. 
The student signature proposed here is summarised in 
Table 2 which lists the parameters of the signature in 
the form of a data model structure. 
TABLE 2 STUDENT DATA MODEL 
Data Element 
Data Type 
Present Knowledge Status 
Number 
Ability Level 
Number 
Independence Level 
Text 
Student Signature Level 
Text 
Motivation Level 
Free 
Pre-knowledge Level 
Number 
Test Results 
Text 
Subject nodes accessed 
Number 
Subject nodes mastered 
Number 
Preferred Learning styles 
Text 
Student number ID 
Text 
 
IV. THE TUTOR MODEL 
 
The tutor determines the intended delivery, format 
and content of courses, lessons and learning objects. As 
such the tutor is responsible for mapping out the 
ontology structure and knowledge learning map that 
shows what is to be learned and the relationship of the 
items being learned.  
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

The tutor is also largely responsible for determining 
the direction that learning should take through the 
knowledge field. The general educational approach that 
is taken with any student also depends on more general 
educational factors. Our tutor model is shown in Figure 
3 and is designed to encompass the three educational 
approaches known as pedagogy, andragogy and 
heutagogy.  
A. Pedagogy  
Pedagogy is the usual approach adopted in learning 
institutions in which adults teach children. In this 
environment, it is recognized that the student has 
limited critical skills and even less experience. In this 
circumstance, the flow of knowledge is almost 
exclusively one way, from the teacher to the student.  
B. Andragogy  
As the student starts to take more responsibility for 
their learning [2] the teacher moves to a supportive role 
in assisting the student with their own learning.  In the 
andragogical approach, learners are actively involved in 
identifying their needs and planning how they will be 
met [3].  
C. Heutagogy  
Heutagogy (from the Greek for “self”) was defined 
by Hase and Kenyon in 2000, as the study of self-
determined learning [5]. Heutagogy extends learning to 
allow the student to dictate where and when the learning 
takes place and to choose the path to the learning 
objectives within the learning environment.   
 
 
 
 
 
The student has the autonomy to choose not only 
content of the learning but also the order and format of 
the learning too. the way these ideas are incorporated 
into the adaptive model is to give the student a high 
degree of autonomy. This is at the discretion of the tutor 
who determines the amount of self-learning that would 
benefit a particular student. At the lowest level 
(pedagogical), the student has no say in what is learned. 
In the next level (andragogical), the student has the 
autonomy to choose which area to study next. In the 
final level (heutagogical) not only content is chosen but 
the form of learning object is chosen too. 
The tutor model must contain mechanism then to 1. 
Determine the order in which the content is delivered to 
the student and it what format and 2. The degree of 
autonomy allowed to the student in choosing the 
learning direction. Different tutors may arrive at 
different assessments of students’ needs and different 
directions through the knowledge map. 
The tutor signature is summarised in in the tutor data 
model Table 3 which indicates the basic parameters 
which define each individual tutor and their style of 
teaching.  
TABLE 3 TUTOR DATA MODEL 
Date element 
Data Type 
Present Knowledge Status 
Type 
Pedagogy 
Number 
Androgogy 
Text 
Heutagogy 
Text 
Knowledge presentation order 
Free 
Tutor Number ID 
Text 
  
 
   
V. THE KNOWLEDGE MODEL 
 
The curriculum to be delivered is to be stored in the 
adaptive system. The curriculum comprises three parts. 
First the structure of the knowledge shown in Figure 4 
and its related parts which is contained in an ontology. 
Second the content of the learning which is the 
knowledge to be learned. Third, the different containers 
which hold the content. This is the form in which the 
knowledge is supplied and may be in text form, audio, 
video, PowerPoint, etc. The same knowledge may be 
presented in different formats to suit the student. In 
addition there is a requirement for test questions related 
to the curriculum. 
 
It is necessary to define ontology metrics to provide 
measures of attributes such as complexity, level of 
detail or closeness of subject areas. The first step to 
defining these metrics is to provide each node with a 
unique address which defines its location on the ordered 
tree. Thus a body of knowledge is divided into section, 
sub-section, sub-sub-section etc. and so we adopt an 
addressing system which corresponds to this knowledge 
hierarchy where each address is correspondingly 
specified by sections, sub-sections, sub-sub-sections etc.   
 
We use an ordered tree for this description where the 
branches from each node are ordered so that the sub-
nodes have an order of preference. [8] This structure is 
then used to label an ontology where fragments of 
knowledge have an order determined by their pre-
requisites. 
This model distinguishes between a 
taxonomy, ontology and what we call an anthology.  
Tutor 
Signature
Educational 
Approach
Tutor Model
Pedagogic 
Approach
Androgogic 
Approach
Heutagogic 
Approach
Figure 3 The Tutor Model 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Taxonomy, Ontology and Anthology 
Taxonomies specify the hierarchical relationships 
between concepts. Ontologies add to this attributes, 
properties and methods of the concepts. Anthologies 
take this and add to it the content of the information that 
the concepts specify. Ontologies are a way of sharing a 
common understanding of the structure of information. 
What Anthologies add to this is the content of the 
information itself.  
B. Anthology Formats 
We define Anthologies to be collections of 
information arranged in a hierarchical order. Where the 
taxonomy may be likened to the contents page of a 
book, the ontology is a detailed breakdown of the 
contents and the anthology would be likened to the 
whole book itself. The anthology should be understood 
as also containing the information for each section 
along with the headings. The data in each section can 
take the form of text, as may be found in a textbook, or 
a media file, video presentation etc. where the content 
that is stored is useful for teaching purposes. Thus we 
see taxonomies as a subset of ontologies and ontologies 
a subset of anthologies. 
C. Test Questions 
Test questions are used to test the students’ 
knowledge of the content of a section of the 
curriculum.  That section may be based on the course or 
lesson level.  There may be many questions and many 
answers for each subject area using a Multiple Choice 
Question format.  A dynamic set of questions is formed 
to become a student specific test for progress in a lesson 
or course.  Questions and answers are determined and 
designed by the tutor.   
 
TABLE 4 DATA MODEL FOR THE KNOWLEDGE SYSTEM 
Data Element 
Data Type 
Node address 
Number 
Title 
Text 
Subtitle 
Text 
Content/Link 
Free 
Format 
Video/audio/text/PP/other 
Questions 
Text 
Tutor ID 
Text 
 
However it should be noted that this data model 
requires that the knowledge tree (or subject ontology) is 
contained within a relational database structure along 
the content-backbone where a unit is part of a course, 
and a lecture part of a unit and a segment part of a 
lecture. Segments can include learning objects. 
 
COURSE-UNIT-LECTURE-SEGMENT 
 
D. Linking of Learning Objects 
Breaking up knowledge into learning objects based 
on the content structure highlights the importance of 
two aspects of the presentation of materials. Boyle [4], 
describes the learning object as a wrapper around 
content. The wrapper describes the structure of the 
object and includes the metadata about the object. The 
learning object is packaged in a standard container 
format which can be stored in a database. The included 
metadata permits fast effective searches to retrieve 
learning objects suitable for a particular purpose. Other 
data elements associated with the knowledge system are 
as follows. 
 
 
E. Segment 
A segment is defined as a learning node together 
with all its sub-nodes. The total number of nodes in a 
segment is a measure of the amount of detail contained 
within a segment of knowledge and can be associated 
with a node in the subject ontology. 
Text Based 
Material
Audio Based 
Material
Video Based 
Material
Knowledge Model
Knowledge 
Domain 
Ontology
Curriculum 
Content
Learning Objects
Test Question 
Database
Figure 5. The Knowledge Model 
Figure 4: Knowledge hierarchy corresponding to an ordered tree 
1 
 
1.1 
 
1.2 
 
 
1.2.1 
 
 
1.2.2 
 
 
1.2.3 
 
1.3 
2 
 
2.1 
 
 
2.1.1 
 
 
2.1.2 
 
2.2 
 
2.3 
3 
 
3.1 
 
3.2 
 
3.3 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

F. Complexity 
We define complexity of a knowledge node to be 
equal to the degree centrality minus 1which is the 
measure of the number of sub-nodes that are connected 
to a given node. Thus a knowledge node composed of 
many sub-nodes or subdivisions is deemed to be more 
complex than one with fewer subdivisions and is 
defined as a measure of difficulty of the knowledge 
node.  
G. Level   
We designate the term level applied to each node by 
the position it occupies in the representation.  We say 
that the level of a knowledge node is equal to its 
importance and represents the level of detail that a 
knowledge node contains.   
H. Distance  
The distance or separation of one node from another 
is a measure of how close two knowledge segments are 
related to the subject ontology. For a tree network this is 
a unique value determined by the number of steps 
between the nodes. Distance is a measure of the 
strength of connection between two nodes. The 
knowledge model structure is seen in Figure 5. 
 
VI. THE ADAPTIVE ENGINE 
 
The purpose of the adaptive engine is to choose the 
next node of learning for the student and the way it is 
presented. The way the adaptive engine works is by 
using the student signature and the tutor model to 
determine the next learning object, present it to the 
student in the appropriate form and to test its 
effectiveness. This is performed by reference to metrics 
attributed to the student signature with direction 
indicated by the tutor model. The student is guided to 
the next knowledge node on the subject ontology and is 
provide with subject content in a form which is most 
suitable to the individual student. The student signature 
will contain a measure of the prior knowledge of the 
student 
to 
enable 
adaption 
of 
content, 
form, 
independence of choice, test questions etc. 
 
If 
pre-assessment 
shows 
that 
a 
degree 
of 
independent learning is appropriate for the student then 
a range of choices will be available to the student for 
them to make a choice themselves as the direction they 
can go in their learning within bounds set by the tutor. 
The adaptive engine is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6 The Adaptive Engine 
Student presented 
with material
Understood?
Select next learning 
object
Select alternative 
material
No
Yes
No
Has the learning 
section ended
yes
End Learning 
Session
Tutor Model
Update the Student 
Signature
Start the Learning 
Session
Student Model
Test Student 
knowledge
Ontology 
Knowledge 
System
Test 
question 
database
Ontology 
Knowledge 
System
Student Model
Tutor Model
Material Selected 
for Student
Ontology 
Knowledge 
System
Student Model
Tutor Model
Ontology 
Knowledge 
System
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

The adaptive engine will use the student signature to 
determine what has already been learned and what is 
still left to learn, It will use the tutor model to determine 
which elements need to be presented to the student to 
study next. We expect the segment entity to hold such 
attributes as Level (a measure of the importance of the 
segment) and Complexity (a measure of the difficulty 
of a knowledge node) as well as Strength of nodal links 
(a measure of the ontological proximity of the 
knowledge areas). Figure 1 depicts the rudimentary 
model of the Adaptive Learning System. Each of these 
three metrics are determined through an ontology 
calculus discussed in a previous paper. [2]  
 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Investigations into semantic models and semantic 
modelling should be strictly logical explorations into 
how data models and integrity constraints can be 
modified without rendering the database contents (facts, 
meanings, and intelligent interpretations) uncertain or 
meaningless. 
 
Meta-learning by the Adaptive Learning System 
requires awareness that it is participating in a learning 
process and therefore needs an explicit, built in ‘tutor 
model’. The Adaptive Learning System presented here 
implicitly assumes there is a real-life tutor who will 
perform the role of the tutor model, which involves 
intelligent and experienced selection of learning objects 
appropriate to the student.  
In future, we need to construct a full, robust tutor 
model to automate the segmentation process, which 
needs detailed investigation of the nature of meta-
learning [14] [15]. Our vision is to build this into a 
novel abstract conceptual data model encompassing all 
the properties that are needed to make explicit the 
qualities of an effective ‘tutor model’. 
Finally, although work discussed in this paper 
answered research questions posed in previous papers, it 
has indicated further questions. In particular we would 
ask what further adaptation features are required and 
how are they to be evaluated? Also we need to further 
consider how should the adaptive engine structure be 
modelled and evaluated? Can fuzzy logic or data mining 
techniques be candidates for a useful algorithm? And 
finally we continue to explore how we determine the 
appropriate definition of an API, possibly by means of 
an IDL, between the ontology, the adaptation engine 
and the system’s user interface? We leave these 
questions to further papers. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Cutts, S., Davies, P., Newell, D. and Rowe, N., 2009. 
Requirements for an Adaptive Multimedia Presentation 
System with Contextual Supplemental Support Media, 
Proceedings of the MMEDIA 2009 Conference, Colmar, 
France. 
[2]  Rowe, N., Cutts, S., Davies, P., and Newell, D. 2010  
Implementation and Evaluation of an Adaptive 
Multimedia 
Presentation 
System 
(AMPS) 
with 
Contextual Supplemental Support Media. Proceedings 
of the MMEDIA 2010 Conference, Athens, Greece. 
[3]  IEEE. 2001. IEEE Learning Technology Standards 
Committee (LTSC) IEEE P1484.12 Learning Object 
Metadata Working Group; WG12 Home page. 
[4]  Boyle, T., 2003. Design Principles for Authoring 
Dynamic, Reusable Learning Objects. Australian 
Journal of Educational Technology. 
[5]  McGreal, R. (Ed.), 2004. Online Education Using 
Learning Objects. London:Routledge, 59-70. 
[6]  Protégé (2009) Protégé Ontology Editor, Stanford 
University California, USA. http://protege.stanford.edu/ 
[Accessed online 28 January 2010] 
[7]  Gruber, T., “A Translation Approach to Portable 
Ontology Specifications”, Knowledge Acquisition, 5(2), 
199-220, 1993. 
[8]  Newman, M., E., J., “Networks, An Introduction”, 
Oxford University Press, 2010 
[9]  Codd, 
E.(1970). 
‘Data 
Models 
in 
Database 
Management, ’ACM SIGMOD Record 11, No. 2 
[10]  Date C.J. (2000). ‘WHAT not HOW: The Business 
Rules Approach to Application Development’ Addison-
Wesley.  And Date, C. (2004). ‘Introduction to Database 
Systems’, 8th Ed., Pearson. 
[11] Progress 
(2010) 
Objectstore, 
http://documentation.progress.com/output/ostore/7.2.0/p
df/user1/basicug.pdf  (Last Accessed Dec 2010) 
[12] Lamb, Charles, Landis, Gordon, Orenstein, Jack, 
Weinreb, Dan., (1991). ‘The Objectstore Database 
System’, Communications of the ACM 34 (10): 50–63. 
[13] Date, C., Darwen, H. & Mcgoveran, D. (1998). 
‘Relational Database Writings 1994-1997’, Addison 
Wesley. 
[14] Chen, P. ‘The Entity-Relationship Model-Toward a 
Unified View of Data’ (1976), ACM Transactions on 
Database Systems 1/1/1976, ACM-Press. 
[15]  Chen, P. (2007). ‘Active Conceptual Modeling of 
Learning: Next Generation Learning-Base System 
Development’,  with Leah Y. Wong (Eds.). Springer. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-400-8
MMEDIA 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

