Virtual Reality Technology used to Support the Buildings Inspection Activity 
 
 
Alcínia Z. Sampaio, Augusto M. Gomes 
Dep. Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: zita@civil.ist.utl.pt, augusto@civil.ist.utl.pt 
 
 
Ana Rita Gomes, Daniel P. Rosário 
Dep. Civil Engineering and Architecture 
Technical University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail:ritagomes05@hotmail.com, 
derosario@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— A Virtual Reality model was created in order to 
help in the maintenance of exterior closures and interior 
finishes of walls in a building. It allows the visual and 
interactive transmission of information related to the physical 
behavior of the elements, defined as a function of the time 
variable. To this end, the basic knowledge of material most 
often used in walls, anomaly surveillance, techniques of 
rehabilitation, and inspection planning were studied. This 
information was included in a database that supports the 
periodic inspection needed in a program of preventive 
maintenance. The results are obtained interactively and 
visualized in the virtual environment itself. This work brings 
an innovative contribution to the field of maintenance 
supported by emergent technology. 
Keywords- Construction, Maintenance, Inspection Virtual 
reality, Human-Interaction  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The main aim of a research project, now in progress at 
the Department of Civil Engineering of the Technical 
University of Lisbon, is to develop virtual models as tools to 
support decision-making in the planning of construction 
management and maintenance. A first prototype concerning 
the lighting system has already been completed [1]. A 
second prototype concerning the maintenance of the closure 
of walls, both interior walls and façades, is now being 
developed. This paper describes this part of the project. 
The interactive model integrates Virtual Reality (VR) 
technology, the EON system [2], and an application 
implemented in Visual Basic (VB) language. The model 
allows interaction with the 3D geometric model of a 
building, visualizing components for each construction. It is 
linked to a database of the corresponding technical 
information concerned with the maintenance of the materials 
used as exterior closures and interior finishes. The principal 
objective of the interactive VR prototype is to support 
decision-making in the maintenance domain. 
The present project aims to bring important contributions 
to this domain, through the implementation of virtual models 
able 
to 
relating 
the 
behavior 
of 
materials, 
their 
characteristics, anomalies and repair work to each other. 
During this work the basic knowledge of the topics involved, 
such as aspects related to the materials, the techniques of 
rehabilitation and conservation and the planning of 
maintenance is outlined and discussed in addition, methods 
of interconnecting this knowledge with the virtual model are 
explored. 
The prototype for walls was trialed in a concrete project. 
This kind of building element has a continuous lifestyle, so 
requires the study of preventive maintenance (the planning of 
periodical local inspections) and of corrective maintenance 
(with repair activity analysis). The model facilitates the 
visual and interactive access to results, supporting the 
definition of inspection reports.  
Actually, the VR technology is presented in works 
concerning construction, but there is a lack in the application 
of this technique in maintenance. Two VR models were 
developed supporting the maintenance activity. They are 
innovative applications in this subject.  
II. 
VR IN CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
The performance of the maintenance of a building has 
been increased through the application of new modeling 
concepts, particularly the incorporation of VR techniques 
and the addition of time as a factor to be considered in the 
strategy of building conception. In the same way, 3D models 
have been developed, related to the time parameter, 
designated 4D models [3], focused in the beginning, 
basically, on planning the construction process. The 
geometric model of construction is presented as a 
progression of steps in its physical evolution following 
planning. The University of Stanford [4], and the Finnish 
Centre of Investigation VTT [5], have presented concrete 
applications in the design phase with considerable befits 
relevant to communication between specialists, constructors 
and promoters. In the construction domain, the VR models 
are used to show the physical evolution of the building, 
through 4D models, in different phases of its construction 
following specific planning [6] and the simulation of the 
operational evolution of the associated construction 
processes [7]. In the area of architecture, VR models are 
generally applied to the visualization of static physical 
models in the definition of itineraries of walk-through, as a 
means of transmitting the functional and geometric aspect of 
the building. 
In addition, VR technology has also been applied as a 
complement 
to 
3D 
modeling, 
leading 
to 
better 
communication between the various stakeholders in the 
80
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

process, whether in training or in professional practice. This 
task is particularly relevant to the presentation of processes 
which are defined through sequential stages as generally is 
the case in the learning of new curricular subjects. In 
professional 
contexts, 
note 
the 
contribution 
in 
Architecture/Engineering, 
to 
support 
for 
conception, 
presenting the plan or following the progress of construction 
[8].  
In the maintenance domain some researches have been 
including visual interaction: Anna-Liisa Linholm describes 
the creation process of an interactive model for identifying 
the added value of corporate real estate management and 
implement it in a case organization, testing whether it works 
in practice [9]; Visualization of building maintenance 
through time is the topic of the researching activity of Rad 
[10]; Khosrowshahi focus the research VR application on 
lighting and paintings of interior wall maintenance [11]. 
One of the more recent targets of investigation is in fact, 
research into the sharing of data between applications, which 
can be manipulated by means of a common interface, as a 
way of rendering 4D tools efficacious and of wide use. 
Virtual reality is seen today as an integrating technology, 
with great potential for communication between project 
participants, and most recently, as a tool for the support of 
decision-making, made possible by the integration of distinct 
computer applications in the virtual model. In this context, 
the present work presents the development of a system 
concerning maintenance based on VR technology, involving 
knowledge of the physical aspects of materials, in particular, 
those which refer to wear and tear (a function of time, use 
and environmental factors), integrating them in digital spatial 
representations. In this way, the indisputable advantage of 
the ease interpretation and perception of space provided by 
the visualization of 3D models, and the technical content 
underlying the real characteristics of the observed elements 
are brought together. 
III. 
INTERACTIVE AND COLLABORATIVE MODELS 
Virtual Reality technology can support the management 
of data that is normally generated and transformed or 
replaced throughout the lifecycle of a building. This 
technology 
becomes 
an 
important 
support 
in 
the 
management of buildings allowing interaction and data 
visualization. At present, the management of building 
planning can be presented in a 3D form and various 
materials can be assigned to the fixtures and furnishing 
enabling the user to be placed in the virtual building and 
view it from inside as well as outside. This study 
contemplates the incorporation of the 4th dimension, that is, 
time, into the concept of visualization. The focus of the work 
is on traveling through time: the ability to view a product or 
its components at different points in time throughout their 
life. It is envisaged that the incorporation of the time 
dimension into 3D visualization will enable the designer/user 
to make more objective decisions about the choice of the 
constituent components of the building. In maintenance the 
time variable is related to the progressive deterioration of the 
materials throughout the building’s lifecycle. 
The present prototype incorporates interactive techniques 
and input devices to perform visual exploration tasks [12]. 
To support this system a data base was created which 
included a bibliographic research support made in regard to 
the closure materials used in the interior and exterior walls of 
a building, anomalies concerning different kinds of covering 
material, and corrective maintenance. Repair activities were 
also studied. The programming skills of those involved in the 
project had to be enhanced so that they could achieve the 
integration of the different kinds of databases needed in the 
creation of the interactive model. 
The 3D model linked to a database concerning 
maintenance produces a collaborative virtual environment, 
that is, one that can be manipulated by partners interested in 
creating, transforming and analyzing data in order to obtain 
results and to make decisions. For example, inspection 
reports can be defined and consulted by different 
collaborators. The process of developing the prototype 
interface considers these purposes [13]. The developed 
prototype associates the characteristics of the coating 
component of the exterior and interior walls to activities 
concerning the maintenance of buildings (Fig. 1). 
 
Figure 1.  3D model of the house: coating elements of exterior and interior 
walls. 
IV. 
WALL MAINTENANCE PROTOTYPE 
Façade coatings play an important role in the durability 
of buildings, since they constitute the exterior layer that 
ensures the protection of the wall against the aggressive 
actions of physical, chemical or biological nature. Naturally, 
they should also give the façade the required decorative 
effect. Since this building component is exposed to bad 
atmospheric conditions it frequently shows an evident degree 
of deterioration, requiring maintenance interventions. To 
perform maintenance activities a survey of failures in the 
building must be conducted in order to arrive at the best 
solution for repair and maintenance. 
In order to better understand the operation of façade 
coating, bibliographic research of materials usually applied 
to façade coatings was carried out and a table of 
characteristics of these was drawn up. Subsequently, a 
81
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

survey was made of anomalies, probable causes, solutions 
and methods of repair for each of the coatings studied. 
The visualization of the maintenance data of a building 
and the impact of time on the performance of these exterior 
closure materials require an understanding of their 
characteristics [14] (Fig. 2): 
• 
Types of material: painted surfaces, natural stone 
panels and ceramic wall tiles; 
• 
Application processes: 
stones (panel, 
support 
devices, adherent products, … ); ceramic tiles (fixing 
mechanism, procedures, …); painted surfaces (types 
of paint products, prime and paint scheme surface, 
exterior emulsion paints, application processes); 
• 
Anomalies: dust and dirt, lasting lotus leaf effect, 
covering power, insufficient resistance to air 
permeability or weatherproof isolation, damaged 
stones or ceramic tiles, alkali and smear effect, 
efflorescence, fractures and fissures ….; 
• 
Repair 
works: 
surface 
cleaning, 
wire 
truss 
reinforcing, cleaning and pointing of stonework 
joints, removing and replacement of ceramic wall 
tiles, removing damaged paint and paint surface, 
preparing and refinishing stone panels, ... 
 
Figure 2.  Different type of materials applied as façade coatings. 
A. Characteristics of the Materials used in Façades 
Depending on the role that the façade coatings play on 
the wall as a whole they can be classified as finishing, 
sealing or thermal insulation. The most frequent materials 
used as coating finishes are painting, tiling and, as sealing 
coating of the natural stone: 
• 
Paint coating contributes to the aesthetic quality of 
the building and its environment and also protects 
the surface of the exterior wall against corrosion, 
deterioration and penetration of aggressive agents 
[15]. In order to obtain a good performance as an 
exterior coating, several aspects must be considered, 
such as covering power and resistance to water, 
sunlight, chemical products and to the development 
of micro organisms; 
• 
The ceramic coating consists essentially of tiling 
panels, cement and adhesive and the joints between 
the slabs. The application of ceramic tiling to 
building façades has considerable advantages 
particularly as some degree of waterproofing is 
afforded by the glazed surface along with a great 
resistance to acids, alkalis and vapor. Other 
advantages are that it does not need painting and that 
it can be easily applied or substituted during repair 
work [16]; 
• 
The use of natural stone in the coating of façade 
surfaces is a good solution both technically and 
aesthetically. The stone coating is composed of slabs 
of stone attached to the wall by a support system. 
The principal characteristics of the stones are: 
reduced water absorption, sufficient mechanical 
resistance to bending and impact, abrasion and 
shearing parallel to the face of the slabs [17]. 
B. The Database 
The most frequent anomalies that occur in the coated 
façades were analyzed in order to create a database linked to 
the virtual model that could support planning of inspections 
and maintenance strategies in buildings. The database 
contains the identification of anomalies that can be found in 
each type of material used in façades and the corresponding 
probable cause. For each kind of anomaly the most adequate 
repair solutions are also selected and included in the data 
base. The following example concerning deficiencies in tiles 
presents the methodology implemented in this virtual 
application (Tab. 1). 
The characteristics related to anomalies, causes, repair 
solutions and rehabilitation tasks were included in a database 
of each type of material and linked to the 3D model of the 
building. Thus, the virtual model gives users the ability to 
transmit, visually and interactively, information related to the 
closure properties of exterior walls, allows them to analyze 
the anomalies observed in an inspection of the real building 
and to predict the corresponding repair work. The 3D virtual 
model can be seen, therefore, as an important tool for 
anomaly surveillance in structures and for supporting 
decision-making based on the visual analysis of alternative 
repair solutions. 
C. The Interface 
The implementation of the prototype system makes use 
of graphical software programming, Visual Basic 6.0 
Microsoft, software to establish an adequate database, 
Microsoft office access, graphical drawing system, AutoCAD 
Autodesk and VR technology based software, EON Studio. 
Human perceptual and cognitive capabilities were taken 
into account when designing this visualization tool so the 
model is easy to use and does not require sophisticated 
computer skills, as many potential users are not computer 
experts. It uses an interactive 3D visualization system based 
on the selection of elements directly within the virtual 3D 
world. Furthermore, associated with each component, there 
are integrated databases, allowing the consultation of the 
required data at any point in time.  
 
82
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

Table 1. Example of anomalies and the associated repair solution. 
Anomaly 
Specification of the 
anomaly 
Repair 
solution 
Repair methodology 
Detachment 
 
Fall in areas with 
deterioration of 
support 
Replacement of 
the coat (with 
use of a repair 
stand as 
necessary) 
1º Removal of the tiles by cutting grinder with the aid of a 
hammer and chisel; 
2º Timely repair of the support in areas where the 
detachment includes material constituent with it; 
3º Digitizing layer of settlement; 
4º Re-settlement layer and the tiles. 
Cracking / Fracturing 
 
Failure of the support 
(wide cracks with 
well-defined 
orientation) 
Replacement of 
the coat (with 
repair of cracks 
in the support) 
1º Removal of the tiles by cutting grinder; 
2º Removal of material adjustment in the environment and 
along the joint; 
3º Repair of cracks, clogging with adhesive material 
(mastic); 
4º Settlement layer made with cement in two layers 
interspersed with glass fiber; 
5º Re-settlement layer and the tiles. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The main interface of the interactive application. 
 
The interface is composed of a display window allowing 
users to interact with the virtual model, and a set of buttons 
for inputting data and displaying results (Fig. 3). 
For each new building to be monitored the characteristics 
of the environment (exposure to rain and sea) and the 
identification of each element of the façades must be defined. 
The data associated to each element are the building 
orientation, the type of exterior wall (double or single), and 
the area and type of coating. 
Once each monitored element has been characterized, 
several inspection reports can be defined and recorded and 
thereafter consulted when needed. An inspection sheet is 
accessed by the main interface (Fig. 4). 
  
Using the drop-down menus allowed by the interface, the 
user can associate the characteristics of the observed 
anomaly to: a façade element; the type of anomaly, the 
specification, details and the probable cause of the anomaly, 
an adequate repair solution and pictures taken in the 
building. After completing all fields relating to an anomaly, 
the user can present the report as a pdf file. 
D. The Case Study 
First, the 3D geometric model of a building case was 
created. The building consists of a ground-floor, a 1st floor 
and an attic with dwelling space shown. The coating 
elements of the walls were then modeled as independent 
geometric objects (Fig. 5). In this way, each element can 
Characteristics of a façade 
83
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

then support characterization data of the applied material and 
different kinds of information related to maintenance. 
 
Figure 4.  Inspection sheet interface. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Steps of the geometric modelling process. 
The 3D model is previously created and then inserted 
into the EON studio software in order to prepare each 
building component (3D object) that is going to be 
monitored for the analysis survey propose. 
All coatings studied were considered in this case-study. 
Thus it was assumed that the main façade is covered with tile 
and the remaining façades are painted while hall façades are 
of natural stone. Fig. 6 shows how to identify a façade in the 
virtual model of the building. The Fig. 7 includes the 
inspection report of the anomaly considered in Table 1. 
 
Figure 6.  Identification of a façade element. 
Repair methodology 
Natural stone 
Go to the element 
Anomalies and causes 
methodology 
84
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

 
Figure 7.  Inspection sheet report. 
An inspection to the building local is usually report only 
as an anomaly survey and based only in paper sheets. The 
degree of deterioration is reported and some photos are 
usually obtained to support the diagnostic. After that a 
management plane is established. It includes the type and 
quantity of rehabilitation work and an estimated cost. 
Frequently it is realized at office by other collaborators. The 
presented virtual model support: 
• 
An interactive identification of the element in 
analyses over the 3D model (the type of material 
applied in the element, the geographic orientation 
and the characteristics of the environment are 
automatically associated to the selected element); 
• 
Consequently the anomalies that, in the database, 
were linked to that closure material type are listed in 
the PC of the collaborator, in the building place. In 
addition a predict cause is also listed. It supports the 
collaborator to choose the most adequate anomaly; 
• 
In addition, an adequate solution and repair 
methodology are associated to the selected anomaly. 
An estimated cost is also provided and digital photos 
can be taken are inserted in the VR inspection sheet. 
• 
A final report of the inspection visit to the local can 
be then obtained included the anomalies observed in 
all the analyzed building façades. 
So, the benefits of using this VR model are evident. The 
database includes an oriented, vast and accurate knowledge 
(support in specialized bibliography) concerning the 
identification of anomalies and the most adequate 
rehabilitation work. The VR help the specialist to link the 
survey anomaly to a specific part of the building and allows 
a better communication (supported in visualization and 
interaction) with the building owner and other partners. 
V. 
THE INTERIOR WALLS 
An identical analysis of the characteristics, anomalies 
and repair works concerning the interior finish materials was 
carried out. With this information a database was created 
(Fig. 8). 
 
Figure 8.  Painted coating of interior walls of the building and the 
inspection interface. 
Another inspection interface was defined for the painted 
surfaces of interior walls, also associated to repair solutions 
and corresponding methodologies of rehabilitation. 
In addition the model identifies the period of time 
between the application of new paint and the predicted time 
when the next paint will be needed. The color changes 
between white (new) and red (when an area needs to be 
painted again, Fig. 9. 
 
Figure 9.  Changing colours related to the maintenance of the painted 
interior wall. 
Inspection report 
85
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

The data of periodic on-site inspections included in 
preventive maintenance is taken into account for each 
monitored element of the interior wall (Fig. 10). Thus, when 
the date of interaction with the prototype is compared with 
the date predicted for the new paint application, the 
correspondent RGB (red, green and blue) values are 
calculated. 
 
Figure 10.  Changing date of interaction and the correspondent RGB values. 
Different RGB values generate different color, using this 
virtual model. Therefore, by using data visualization 
supported by this VR technology, it is possible to estimate if 
the wall needs painting immediately or not 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A VR model to support the maintenance of walls in a 
building was developed within a research project. It enables 
the visual and interactive transmission of information related 
to the physical behavior of the elements, defined as a 
function of the times variable. The model shows the 
characteristics of each element of the building in the model 
and the information related to inspection, anomalies and 
repair works. As the 3D model is linked to a database in an 
interactive environment and has a friendly interface to deal 
with this knowledge, it allows a collaborative system. The 
work is still in progress. With this application the user may 
fully interact with the program referring to the virtual model 
at any stage of the maintenance process and analyze the best 
solution for repair work. It can also support the planning of 
maintenance strategies. The developed software is easy to 
handle and transport for on- site inspections and comprises 
information of the causes, solutions and methods for 
repairing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support 
of the Foundation for Science and Technology, a 
Governmental Organization for the research project PTDC/ 
ECM/67748/ 2006, now in progress. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.Z. Sampaio, M.M. Ferreira and D.P. Rosário, “Interactive virtual 
application on building maintenance: The lighting component”, Proc. 
IRF2009, 3rd International Conference on Integrity, Reliability and 
Failure: Challenges and Opportunities, Symposium Visualization and 
human-Computer Interaction, Porto, Portugal, July 20-24, 2009, 
abstract pp. 221-222, paper 11 pgs. 
[2] Introduction to working in EON Studio. EON Reality, Inc.  
http://www.eonreality.com/ [Accessed May 03, 2010]. 
[3] M. Fisher, J,. Haymaker and K. Liston, “Benefits of 3D and 4D 
models for facility managers and AEC service providers", in book: 
4D CAD and visualization in construction: developments and 
applications, A.A. Balkema Publishers. Lisse, pp. 01 – 32, 2003. 
[4] Stanford University, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
Group 
4D 
CAD 
Research, 
accessed 
on 
March 
2011.. 
http://www.stanford.edu/group/4D/projects/projects.shtml,  
[5] VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Building & Built 
Environment, http://www.vtt.fi/services/cluster6/index.jsp, accessed 
on March 2011. 
[6] J Leinonen and K.A.A. Kähkönen, “New construction management 
practice based on the Virtual Reality technology”, in book: 4D CAD 
and visualization in construction: developments and applications, 
A.A. Balkema Publishers. Lisse, pp. 75 – 100, 2003. 
[7] F. Petzold , O. Bimber and O. Tonn, “CAVE without CAVE: on-site 
visualization and Design Support in and within existing building”, 
Proc. eCAADe 07, 25th Conf. of Education and Research in Computer 
Aided Architectural Design in Europe, Frankfurt, Germany, 
pp. 161-168. 2007. 
[8] A. Khanzode, M. Fisher and D. Reed, “Challenges and benefits of 
implementing virtual design and construction technologies for 
coordination of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems on large 
healthcare project”, Proc. CIB 24th W78 Conference, Maribor, 
Slovenia, pp. 205-212, 2007. 
[9] A.L. Lindholm, ” A constructive study on creating core business 
relevant CREM strategy and performance measures”, in Facilitie 
journal, 26(7/8), pp. 343-358, 2008.  
[10] H. N. Rad, “Visualisation of building maintenance through time”, 
Proc. of the IV'97, IEEE 1st International Conference on Information 
Visualisation, 308-314, 1997. 
[11] F. Khosrowshahi and E. Banissi, “Visualisation of the degradation of 
building flooring systems”. IEEE, Information Visualisation & 
Computer Society, pp. 507-513, 2001. 
[12] A.Z. Sampaio and P.G. Henriques, “Building activities visualized in 
virtual environments”, Proc.eCAADe 07, 25th Conf. of Education 
and Research in Computer Aided Architectural Design in Europe, 
Frankfurt, Germany, pp. 85-89, 2007. 
[13] A.R. Gomes, “Virtual Reality technology applied to the maintenance 
of façades”, Integrated Master Degree Thesis in Construction, TU 
Lisbon, Portugal, 2010. 
[14] A.M. Gomes and A.P. Pinto, “Didactic text of construction 
materials”, Technical University of Lisbon, IST, Lisbon, Portugal, 
2009. 
[15] C. Lopes, ” Colour anomalies in painted closure of exterior walls”. 
Integrated Master Degree Thesis in Construction, TU Lisbon, 
Portugal, 2008. 
[16] L. Ferreira, J. Coroado, V. Freitas and I. Maguregui, “Causes of the 
fall aplied in exterior walls (1850-1920)”, Conf. Patorreb, 3º Meeting 
of Pathologies and Rehabilitation in Buildings, Porto, Portugal, 2009. 
[17] M. Veiga and S. Malanho, ”Closure in natural stone: Methdology of 
diagnostic and rehabilitation”, Conf. Patorreb, 3º Meeting of 
Pathologies and Rehabilitation in Buildings, Porto, Portugal, 2009. 
 
 
Actualizing date 
RGB values 
86
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

