Effects of Lower Frame Rates in a Remote Tower Environment 
 
Jörn Jakobi 
Institute of Flight Guidance, Dep. of Human Factors, 
German Aerospace Center, DLR e.V. 
Braunschweig, Germany 
email: joern.jakobi@dlr.de 
Maria Hagl 
SHS - Sciences de l’Homme et de la Société Psychologie 
Université Grenoble-Alpes 
Grenoble, France 
email: maria.hagl@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
 
 
Abstract— In the field of aviation, “Remote Tower” is a 
current and fast-growing concept offering cost-efficient Air 
Traffic Services (ATS) for aerodromes. In its basics it relies on 
optical camera sensor, whose video images are relayed from 
the aerodrome to an ATS facility situated anywhere, to be 
displayed on a video panorama to provide ATS independent on 
the out-of-the-tower-window view. Bandwidth, often limited 
and costly, plays a crucial role in such a cost-efficient system. 
Reducing the Frame Rate (FR, expressed in fps) of the relayed 
video stream is one parameter to save bandwidth, but at the 
cost of video quality. Therefore, the present article evaluates 
how much FR can be reduced without compromising 
operational performance and human factor issues. In our 
study, seven Air Traffic Control Officers watched real air 
traffic videos, recorded by the Remote Tower field test 
platform at the German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.) at 
Braunschweig-Wolfsburg Airport (BWE). In a passive shadow 
mode, they executed ATS relevant tasks in four different FR 
conditions (2 fps, 5 fps, 10 fps & 15 fps) to objectively measure 
their visual detection performance and subjectively assess their 
current physiological state and their perceived video quality 
and system operability. Study results have shown that by 
reducing the FR, neither the visual detection performance nor 
physiological state is impaired. Only the perceived video 
quality and the perceived system operability drop by reducing 
FR to 2 fps. The findings of this study will help to better adjust 
video parameters in bandwidth limited applications in general, 
and in particular to alleviate large scale deployment of Remote 
Towers in a safe and cost-efficient way. 
Keywords-Remote Tower; air traffic control; low frame rate; 
video update rate; detection performance; physiological stress; 
perceived video quality; perceived system operability. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
According to several authors, operating regional airports 
in Germany [29] or elsewhere, e.g., in Australia [4], is 
already outdated due to high financial deficits. However, a 
promising alternative, called Remote Tower, invented in 
2005 at German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.) in 
Braunschweig [13] [14] is already on its way. The main idea 
consists in enabling ATS decoupled from the Out-of-The-
Window (OTW) view  from a conventional aerodrome 
tower. Video cameras capture the aerodrome scenery and 
relay the video stream to an ATS facility where it is 
displayed on a video panorama presentation. The new ATS 
facility can still be located at the Tower building but actually 
is independent on that location and can be sited anywhere. 
The gained advantages are manifold. Cameras can provide 
additional view points of the aerodrome, supplementary 
infrared cameras can look through fog or darkness or new 
augmentation features improve the former OTW view, which 
contributes to safety. Costly constructions of new Towers or 
maintenance of existing Tower buildings can be saved. The 
core idea, however, is that more than one aerodrome can be 
connected to this remote ATS facility. A so called Remote 
Tower Center (RTC) has the advantage that the ATCOs can 
switch between aerodromes or can provide ATS to more than 
one aerodrome simultaneously providing their service when 
and where it is actually needed. As a main effect, their 
working time would be exploited much more efficiently [15] 
and, as a side effect, human errors due to underutilization at 
work would be diminished [40].  
In 2015 the first RTC went in operation. Swedish ATCOs 
control air traffic of Sundsvall and Örnsköldvik airport from 
the RTC in Sundsvall [35]. Despite this first success, 
ambitions to improve the Remote Tower concept run high. 
Thus, new modalities for controlling a pan-tilt-zoom camera 
[16] or to augment the video panorama vision [17] are 
developed and adapted to various operational needs 
dependent on the operational context. For instance, an 
ATCO without any approach radar support would need a 
very high video resolution to detect traffic at far distances. 
Instead, an ATCO who controls traffic movements on the 
aerodrome maneuvering area would probably need a 
sufficient Frame Rate (FR) to precisely judge about the 
velocity of the traffic. In fact, both, resolution and FR are 
important operational quality parameter but also bandwidth 
consuming parameters and therefore cost-driving factors in 
Remote Towers systems. Thus, new Remote Tower 
implementations aim to optimize these parameters to a better 
benefit-cost ratio. With this in mind, we focus on the effects 
of reduced FR in a Remote Tower context. Certainly, FRs 
below the critical flicker frequency (CFF) could contribute to 
a perceived loss of movement fluidity, which might result in 
perceived loss of video quality. But does lower FRs also 
evoke negative effects, such as reduced ability to detect 
traffic movements on the displayed video panorama or even 
cause physiological stress in ATCOs and lower system 
operability?  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

This paper addresses therefore the following research 
question: What are the effects of lower FRs in a Remote 
Tower environment on: 
 
1) Visual detection performance, 
2) Physiological stress, 
3) Perceived video quality, 
4) Perceived System operability? 
 
The paper is structured in the following parts: Section II 
aims at presenting theoretical background concerning the 
perception of movement, distortions that can appear during 
video transmissions and a review of scientific literature about 
the impact of low frame rates on the operator. Linking these 
three aspects together allows us to specify the research 
question and the hypotheses. Section III explains the chosen 
methods and the procedure of the study. Then, in Section IV 
we will present the obtained results in descriptive and 
inferential statistics. In Section V these results will be 
explained and discussed based on theoretical findings and the 
research question. Section VI draws explicit conclusions by 
illustrating how the results of the conducted study contribute 
to science and future Remote Tower implementations. 
 
II. 
THEORETHICAL BACKGROUND 
A. Motion perception 
In order to understand better the meaning of reduced FR 
for humans, we will firstly explain the importance for human 
beings to perceive motion and, secondly, explain how fluid 
motion is perceived by humans.  
 
1) Importance of motion perception for human beings 
The perception of moving objects is a phenomenon that 
humans take for granted. In fact, since the earliest childhood, 
a baby’s attention is guided towards moving objects [26]. 
According to [33], motion perception permits humans to 
anticipate what he calls “collision time” to estimate the 
velocity of stimuli. Furthermore, he suggests that the utility 
of perceiving motion leads to perceiving objects in a 
tridimensional environment. Other reasons that underline the 
importance of motion perception consist in distinguishing a 
stimulus from its background and understanding different 
textures of objects [33]. For instance, if a gray airplane is in 
front of a gray cloud, it might be difficult to distinguish the 
flying object from its background. A light penetration from a 
different angle can be perceived when the plane moves. In 
conclusion, we can state that motion perception permits the 
observer to get to know more about the details of the 
environment s/he’s in. In order to understand to which extent 
a movement appears to be fluid, some basics of 
psychophysics and cinematography are necessary and will be 
explained in the following section.  
 
2) Fluid motion perception  
In psychophysics, psychologists refer to absolute 
threshold if the minimal intensity necessary to perceive a 
stimulus is perceived by 50% of the observers [21]. As in 
[39], the CFF is described as the frequency at which the 
flickering of a flash is not distinguishable from a constant 
light source. In reality, this threshold can vary by the 
luminosity of the discontinuous light [21]. According to [24], 
the sensibility of CFF can also depend on the contrast 
between the stimulus and its environment. Therefore, the 
human eye is more sensible to temporal frequencies in high 
contrast situations between 15 and 20 Hz. The idea of a CFF 
is also used in cinematography. In cinematographic history, 
13 presented images per second were identified as being 
critical for creating the sensation of fluid movement [23]. 
Concerning the first movies, 16 frames per second (fps) were 
not sufficient for showing fluid movements because of the 
visually perceived intermittent time between each frame. 
Therefore, cinematographs found a solution by showing the 
same image two or three times in a successive manner. In 
total, this means a presentation of 32 or 48 images per 
second [23] from which 16 are different. More precisely, 
movies were presented at 16 fps with a refresh rate of 32 Hz 
or 48 Hz. It’s important not to confuse these two notions. 
Nowadays, the regular FR in cinemas and TV is either 24 fps 
or 30 fps [23]. FR and refresh rate are two important notions 
to understand the meaning of human perception of fluid 
movements in virtual environments. However, perceived 
fluidity of movements is not the only factor that contributes 
to an almost perfect presentation of the outer world when it 
comes to cinematography. Therefore, the next section will 
treat distortions likely to appear during tele transmissions.  
 
B. Reality distortions through tele transmission  
Despite the similarities between an optical sensor camera 
and the human eye, no camera can represent what we see 
with our proper eyes. Perceiving the world around us in a 
stereoscopic manner is already a limit for most conventional 
cameras that render a monoscopic image. Further, image 
resolution plays an indispensable role [2]. It allows us to 
perceive objects from a far distance in a detailed manner. 
The higher the image resolution, the better we can 
discriminate stimuli at bigger distances. The human eye has a 
visual acuity of ca. 1 arc minute [25]. In other words, from a 
distance of 1 km, the human eye can discriminate two points 
with a distance of 28 cm. However, conventional Remote 
Tower camera systems dispose of a medium image 
resolution [36] lower than 1 arc minute. With 2 arc minutes 
for instance, a camera could only discriminate two pixels 
with a distance of 56 cm from a distance of 1 km. 
Latency or lag can be another distortion appearing in 
real-time tele-transmission systems caused by different 
sources (e.g., transmission problems, data conversion 
problems). They are expressed by a temporal delay between 
the input of information into a system and the output as a 
presentation of the information to the operator [5]. When we 
face different latency times in between of the presented 
frames, we talk about jitter.  
Finally, the presented FR can result in a distortion of 
reality. By its reduction, the fluid perception of the 
movement drops as well. As we have seen it in the previous 
section, 13 fps are judged as being necessary in order to 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

perceive fluid movement. This estimation is not absolutely 
correct, since the threshold can vary between several 
parameters, for instance the radial velocity of the perceived 
object. Another distortion related to FR refers to frequency 
interferences [2], like the well-known wagon-wheel-effect. 
In a Remote Tower environment, this effect can appear 
wherever periodic movements are faced, e.g., rotor blades of 
an aircraft or blinking lights. Some blinking lights need time 
to light up and are only at their maximum of luminance for a 
few instants. Hence, by reducing FR, the probability to 
capture an image during the maximum of luminosity 
diminishes as well. This could be critical particularly at night 
or low visibility. 
 
C. Review of low FR effects on the operator  
Limited bandwidth made several concerned parties study 
impacts of low FR on operators [7] [36] [38]. Due to high 
data transmission costs, researchers have investigated several 
parameters in order to reduce bandwidth. In the next section, 
we will present studies that focus on the effects of low FR on 
performance, psycho-physiological health of operators, as 
well as on perceived video quality.  
 
1) Effects of low FR on operator visual detection 
performance  
In the context of a Remote Tower environment, in a 
research study DLR investigated effects of low FR in a real-
time tower simulation scenario: 6 fps, 12 fps and 24 fps were 
tested in order to evaluate the performance of ATCOs to 
visually discriminate and predict in real-time if aircraft after 
touchdown is in danger of a runway overrun due to low 
braking. Then, they were asked about how sure they were 
about their answer. Results show that by reducing FR, the 
level of certitude decreases. Further, the authors recommend 
a FR greater than 30 to achieve a maximum visual 
discriminability for dynamic events [10] [18]. Another study 
about unmanned ground vehicles and aircraft showed that 
the performance of detecting obstacles does not decrease by 
reducing the FR from 30 fps to 5 fps [7]. Reference [20] 
obtains similar results in a study about target detection in a 2 
fps and 25 fps condition. By reducing FR, the participants’ 
performance did not change in a significant manner. Thus, 
divergent results can be found. One possible explanation is 
that not only FR is a factor affecting performance. By a 
meta-analysis on existing studies in the field of effects of low 
FRs on performance [6] it was concluded that the effect of 
low FR on performance of participants is above all task-
dependent. Moreover, they have identified an interaction of 
FR with image resolution. The authors suggest that the right 
balance between FR and image resolution can help to 
perceive depth accurately and hence increase the perception 
of movement in the areas that are farer away from the 
observer. They also suggest that performance depends on the 
participants’ characteristics, too.  
Thus, experienced participants in virtual environments 
might be less affected by FR reduction. However, not only 
performance is an important factor to consider when 
reducing FR. The operator’s well-being is an essential 
parameter to study before lower FRs can be applied. 
Therefore, the next section will treat impacts of low FRs on 
psycho-physiological health of operators.  
 
2) Effects of low FR on psycho-physiological health of 
operators  
Regarding to psycho-physiological health, the effects of 
low FR have been evaluated very rarely. Reference [7] refers 
to a study at which they tested physiological stress in terms 
of cyber sickness about several unmanned ground vehicles 
and aircraft in different FR conditions. The used 
questionnaire (Simulator Sickness Questionnaire, SSQ) has 
been validated within a sample of 4000 pilots who 
participated in trainings in different flight simulators [27]. 
Nowadays, the SSQ is also used for evaluating cyber 
sickness in other virtual environments [28]. In study [7] the 
effects of low FR were non-significant. Thus, participants 
did not feel sicker in a simulation at 5 fps than at 30 fps. 
Another study [9] tested spatial stability in a virtual 
environment by varying the FR (6 fps, 12 fps & 20 fps). As a 
result, more participants felt sick by reducing FR. Reference 
[20] did not find significant results. Even though participants 
at 2 fps expressed higher workload and frustration, the 
expressed psycho-physiological stress was not significantly 
higher than at 25 fps. Furthermore, adverse health effects 
associated with low FRs do not appear in the occupational 
disease lists [3]. Taking into account these outcomes, 
divergent results can be found again.  
 
3) Effects of low FR on perceived video quality 
In scientific literature, we found several studies 
evaluating perceived video quality in different FR 
conditions. The perceived quality is often evaluated from 
acceptability and personal preference. In the context of a 
study concerning the performance in first person ego 
shooters, a study varied FR (3 fps, 7 fps, 15 fps, 30 fps & 60 
fps) and image resolution (320x240 pixels, 512x384 pixels & 
640x480 pixels) [8]. The results clearly indicate a significant 
preference for higher FRs and even more for a higher image 
resolution. Surprising effects have been found in a study that 
aimed to evaluate the video quality under different FR 
conditions (6 fps, 10 fps, 12 fps, 15 fps, 18 fps, 20 fps & 24 
fps) and two image resolution conditions (low & high). A 
significant difference of video acceptability was not found 
between different FRs. Moreover, participants preferred 
higher image resolution to higher FRs [32]. In a study testing 
the video acceptability in different FR conditions (5 fps, 10 
fps & 15 fps), it was stated that video acceptability decreases 
by reducing FR [1]. In reference [31] the type of motion is 
stressed: “The type of motion in a sequence was important 
when considering the effects of FR on subjective quality”.  
To conclude, it is difficult again to find an appropriate 
FR threshold to guarantee the spectator’s satisfaction in 
terms of video quality. As the previous studies already have 
suggested, it is very likely that not only FR plays a 
determinant role for acceptance of video quality.  
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

4) Effects of low FR on the perceived operability  
Until now, we have presented studies that examined 
effects of lower FR on performance, operator health and 
perceived video quality. However, these three parameters 
seem to be insufficient to evaluate if a Remote Tower system 
can be operated in a safe and efficient manner. If the user is 
not convinced of the system operability, errors can emerge 
by expressed mistrust in the system. According to [30], 
confidence in a system and emerging risks can play a 
mediator role in the system reliability. A system can seem to 
be perfect but is not if the user does not have a good feeling 
about it.  
 
D. Research question 
The general aim shared by all Remote Tower actors is to 
develop a system that allows remote air traffic control in the 
best cost-efficient ratio. Regarding this aim, a known limit is 
bandwidth. Nowadays, data transmission is still expensive 
and can be a financial threat if resources are not used 
efficiently. According to [2], crucial factors concerning 
bandwidth are field of view, image resolution, color depth, 
FR and data compression, which seem to be widely accepted, 
but opinions diverge largely when it comes to image 
resolution and FR. Some stakeholders believe that higher FR 
is preferable to higher image resolution. In fact, they believe 
that low FRs can decrease performance and operator health. 
However, so far there is no scientific proof that justifies 
these two presumptions. As it has already been expressed in 
the theoretical part, effects of low FRs on performance are 
likely to be task dependent [6] and do not give us clear 
information about operator health. Yet, impact of low FRs in 
Remote Tower environments has never been thoroughly 
tested with an experimental design. On the basis of context 
analysis and preexisting scientific literature, we will now 
propose six hypotheses. 
 
E. Hypotheses 
H1,1: By reducing the FR from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps or 2 
fps, the adequate assessment of moving objects by ATCOs 
decreases. 
H0,2: By reducing the FR from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps and 
2 fps, the operator’s performance in visual detection tasks 
will not decrease. 
H0,3: ATCOs’ performance in visual tracking tasks does 
not decrease significantly by reducing the FR from 15 fps to 
10 fps, 5 fps or 2 fps. 
H0,4: The physiological stress of operators does not 
increase significantly when FR is reduced from 15 fps to 10 
fps, 5 fps or 2 fps. 
H1,5: The ATCOs’ perception of the video quality will 
decrease when the FR is reduced from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps 
or 2 fps. 
H1,6 The ATCOs’ perceived system’s operability will 
decrease when the FR is reduced from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5fps 
or 2 fps.  
 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Tested variables 
The independent categorical variable corresponds to the 
chosen FR that will be presented in a video at four 
modalities: 2 fps, 5 fps, 10 fps, and 15 fps. Concerning the 
dependent variables, the first is to measure the participants’ 
visual performance in three different dimensions: “Adequate 
Assessment 
of 
Moving Objects” 
(AAMO), 
“Visual 
Detection Tasks” (VDT) and “Visual Tracking Tasks” 
(VTT). The second dependent variable evaluates the 
participants’ “physiological stress”, the third one the 
ATCOs’ “perceived video quality”, and the fourth one the 
ATCOs’ “perceived operability of the low FR system”.  
 
B. Participants 
Seven male ATCOs between 31 and 58 years (M = 41.7, 
SD = 12.0) and five pseudo ATCOs (four men, one woman) 
between 26 and 52 years (M = 44.0, SD = 10.42) took part in 
the experiment. Their nationalities were German, English, 
Hungarian, Norwegian, Romanian and Swedish. We chose 
pseudo ATCOs as a non-expert control group in order to 
control potential motivational bias concerning physiological 
stress. ATCOs were directly invited by an invitation letter. 
All ATCOs and pseudo-ATCOs were familiar with the 
Remote Tower concept.  
 
C. Preparation of the study equipment 
1) Video material collection, selection and edition 
For the experiment the DLR Remote Tower field test 
platform at Braunschweig-Wolfsburg Airport (BWE) was 
used. Fig. 1 shows the camera sensors on the roof of the 
DLR building surveying BWE aerodrome (left). On the right 
hand side the ATCO working position is depicted. The 
research prototype is operated with 2 arc minute image 
resolution and a FR of 30 fps. 
Several hours of audio and video material have been 
recorded via the platform, assessed and selected. Firstly, only 
records which complied with EUROCAE [12] standard test 
conditions were selected. Further, it was checked for broad 
traffic diversity and other relevant visual occurrences (e.g., 
flock of birds). This step was supported by four ATCOs. In a 
third step, the final 30-fps video stream was computed to 
four content-identical streams with 2 fps, 5 fps, 10 fps and 15 
fps and a length of 80 minutes each. 2, 5, 10 and 15 fps were 
chosen as 30 fps is a multiple of them, which helps to avoid 
the maximum of jitter. 2 fps as the lowest FR was chosen 
since this FR corresponds to the minimum standard of FR 
tolerated in a Remote Tower environment [12]. To complete 
the construction, the video material had to synchronize with 
the external sound and the radio transmissions. Finally, the 
jitter was measured in each experimental condition to ensure 
that it lies below the maximum tolerated value of 0.5 seconds 
[19].  
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

 
 
Figure 1.  DLR Remote Tower field test platform at Braunschweig-
Wolfsburg Airport (BWE) (left: Camera sensors; right: ATCO working 
position). 
 
2) Construction of the mid-run visual performance 
evaluation grid  
In a first step, we chronologically listed events that refer 
to ATC relevant visual tasks, and associated them with the 
visual requirements stated by the interviewed ATCOs and 
those in the requirements for EUROCAE Remote Tower 
specifications [12]. These events were divided into three 
different categories of questions: the AAMO, VDT, and 
VTT. As for the AAMO, we mainly took into account the 
ATCOs’ fears of not being able to properly assess the 
velocity or the stimulus’ movement direction. Thus, an 
exemplary task is to evaluate whether a flashing light can be 
perceived in a safe and efficient manner. Other tasks include 
the assessment of flying birds’ direction, wind direction and 
movements of aircraft propellers and human beings on the 
aerodrome. An exemplary task for VDT consists in detecting 
an aircraft in the final approach area or in the traffic pattern 
as soon as possible. Perceiving an aircraft in those positions 
represents visual requirements according to the interviewed 
ATCOs. Regarding VTT, the instruction consists in 
following an aircraft during the take-off phase and hitting a 
buzzer when it was not noticeable anymore. After classifying 
all possible tasks, we created and selected a list of possible 
questions that follows the chronology of occurrences.  
 
3) Construction of the post-run questionnaire 
In order to measure the physiological stress of the 
participants, we concentrated on mentioned symptoms in the 
interview, such as fatigue, nausea, headache, eye strain or 
dizziness, which are consistent with the items in a SSQ 
questionnaire to evaluate cyber sickness [27]. It contains 16 
items and the scale is divided into three subscales which 
measure the dimensions “Nausea”, “Oculomotor” and 
“Disorientation”.  
The second part of the post-run questionnaire consists in 
rating the perceived video quality and the perceived 
operability on a 7-point Likert scale.  
 
4) Pretest 
A pseudo-ATCO and two ATCOs participated in the 
pretest to verify that the scenario did not contain 
inconsistencies that the tasks relate to an ATCO’s daily 
routine, and that the questionnaires are comprehensible. 
They accepted the setting and confirmed that the number of 
tasks was enough not to be bored and that the variety of tasks 
corresponds well to the different visual requirements that 
ATCOs have to face during their daily work.  
D. Experimental Procedure 
The study took place between May 15th 2017 and June 
12th 2017. The procedure of the study was structured in two 
parts. The briefing phase represented the part in which 
ATCOs were informed and prepared for the actual 
experiment. The experimental phase corresponded to the 
video session and the completion of the post-run 
questionnaire. The written and spoken language was English. 
The participants were informed that they will see the same 
video four times at four different FRs. They were left 
unaware of the FRs to be tested in order to avoid potential 
effects of previously formed attitudes. They were explained 
that the order of the videos was randomized for 
methodological reasons and that they had to complete the 
SSQ questionnaire before the actual experiment to avoid 
methodological biases. The ATCO’s eyes’ position was  
2.1 m distance from the 56’’ HD screens in order to 
standardize experimental conditions and to guarantee the 
necessary visual acuity. The experimenter sat at the 
participant’s right side. The different FR modalities were 
ordered in a Latin square, in order to randomize the 
observations. After the last session, the participants answered 
a supplementary questionnaire in which they gave 
demographic information about themselves and classified the 
watched videos in order of preference. Finally, they were 
asked to give their general opinion on Remote Tower in 
order to reduce potential motivational biases followed by a 
general debriefing session. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Results concerning visual performance 
1) Adequate assessment of moving objects 
In order to evaluate AAMO, the ATCOs’ answers were 
coded as “1” when the movement is perceived “safe and 
efficient” and vice versa as “0” when the movement was 
perceived as “neither safe, nor efficient”. It was observed 
that the movement of five objects was perceived as being 
“safe and efficient” by all ATCOs in each of the four FR 
modalities. These objects correspond to the propeller of three 
different aircraft on the apron, to a flag from which the 
ATCOs had to assess the wind direction and the direction of 
a flock of birds. Concerning the flock of birds, the ATCOs 
added that it was easy to identify the objects as birds and to 
deduce their direction.  
The other category of objects corresponds to the flashing 
lights of three vehicles: a fuel truck, a black airport vehicle, 
and a follow me car. Concerning the fuel truck and the black 
vehicle, we observed that most ATCOs judged the visibility 
of the flashing light as being perceivable safe and efficient in 
the 5 fps, 10 fps and 15 fps conditions but not in the 2-fps 
condition. This tendency appeared especially regarding to the 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

follow-me vehicle’s flashing lights. In the 2-fps condition, a 
safe and efficient perception is only admitted one time out of 
21 instances over all ATCOs. By comparing all means of all 
flashing lights instances (35 in total per FR over all 7 
ATCOs), we observe that the flashing lights are perceived as 
being least visible in a safe and efficient manner in the 2-fps 
condition (M = 0.17, N = 7, SD = 0.21), followed by the 10-
fps condition (M = 0.77, N = 7, SD = 0.34) and the 5-fps 
condition (M = 0.8, N = 7, SD = 0.31). In the 15-fps 
condition, flashing lights were perceived as the being most 
visible in a safe and efficient manner (M = 0.85, N = 7, SD = 
0.25). A chi-square test supports this tendency: The 
perception of flashing lights decreases significantly when the 
FR drops from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps and 2 fps (χ²(df = 3, N = 7) 
= 1, p < .01). But these results can only be found for flashing 
lights.  
Thus H1,1 is only partially assumed, i.e., by reducing the 
FR from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps or 2 fps, the adequate 
assessment of flashing lights decreases but others remain 
unaffected. 
 
2) Visual Detection Tasks 
The mean detection times, centered on the mean to each 
of the four FR conditions, show that ATCOs take on average 
less time detecting an aircraft in the approach area at 10 fps 
(M = -1.4, N = 7, SD = 6.33) than at 15 fps (M = -0.04, N = 
7, SD = 5.85), at 2 fps (M = 0.21, N = 7, SD = 5.36) or at 5 
fps (M = 1.5, N = 7, SD = 4.32). However, a Friedman test 
did not show significant difference between ATCOs’ 
reaction time at the four FR conditions (χ²(df = 3, N = 7) = 2.14, p 
= .54). Thus, the reduction of FR does not appear to decrease 
the ATCOs’ performance to detect an aircraft in the final 
approach area which supports our H0,2 to retain the H0.  
Furthermore, all aircraft in different traffic pattern 
positions, as well as all human beings on the movement and 
maneuvering area were perceived by ATCOs in each FR 
condition. In addition, some ATCOs add that the jerky 
movements perceived in the 2-fps and 5-fps condition helped 
them to detect the aircraft quicker. According to them, the 
jerky movements cause a blinking effect and thus attract 
more attention than an aircraft that moves more smoothly at 
10 fps or 15 fps. 
 
3) Visual Tracking Tasks 
The measured times of VTT, again centered on the mean 
of each of the four FR conditions, indicate that on average, 
ATCOs could visually track departing aircraft longer at 15 
fps (M = 1.48, N = 7, SD = 3.95) than at 2 fps (M = -0.05, N 
= 7, SD = 4.98) or at 5 fps (M = -0.35, N = 7, SD = 8.44), 
worst at 10 fps (M = -1.06, N = 7, SD = 4.75). Again, the 
Friedman test could not reveal significant difference of 
ATCOs’ performance to visually track aircraft in all tested 
four different FRs (χ²(df = 3, N = 7), p = .62), which supports our 
H0,3 to retain the H0.  
 
B. Results concerning physiological stress 
After each test run, participants answered the 16 SSQ 
items on a Likert scale ranging from “0 = none”, “1 = 
slight”, “2 = moderate” to “3 = severe”.  
At the beginning, we checked whether the results of the 
experimental ATCO group differ significantly from the 
pseudo-ATCO control group to exclude systematically 
effecting variance in terms of possible motivational biases on 
behalf of the ATCOs caused by their general attitude towards 
the Remote Tower concept. A t-test for independent samples 
for the Total Sickness Score (TSS) shows that there is no 
significant difference found between both groups (t(10) = 
0.59, p = .56). Thus, only results of the expert group are 
taken into account for all analyses. Fig. 2 depicts that with a 
mean TSS of 1176 we observed only under averaged TSS 
means for all four test conditions: 15 fps (M = 24.3, N = 7, 
SD = 19.56), 10 fps (M = 37.5, N = 7, SD = 44.66), 5 fps (M 
= 50.03, N = 7, SD = 71.94), 2 fps (M = 147.06, N = 7, SD = 
213) (for the exact calculation of the TSS refer to [27]).  
Still marginal, but the highest TSS is measured at 2 fps 
(see Fig. 2). A Friedman test could not reveal significant 
difference between “base” and the four test conditions 
neither for the TSS (χ²(df = 4, N = 7) = 5.89, p = .21), nor for the 
subscale “Nausea” (χ²(df = 4, N = 7) = 8.88, p = .06), the subscale 
“Oculomotor” (χ²(df = 4, N = 7) = 3.93, p = .42), or for the 
subscale “Disorientation” (χ²(df = 4, N = 7) = 5.29, p = .26). As 
postulated, H0,4 is to be retained: The psychological stress of 
operators did not decrease significantly when FR is reduced 
from 15 fps to 10 fps, 5 fps or 2 fps. 
 
C. Results concerning the perceived video quality  
Via a 7-point Likert scale ranging from “1 = totally 
unacceptable”, 
“2 
= 
unacceptable”, 
“3 
= 
slightly 
unacceptable”, “4 = neutral”, “5 = slightly acceptable”, “6 = 
acceptable” to “7 = perfectly acceptable”, ATCOs perceived  
 
 
Figure 2.  Total Sickness Scores before (base) and for four different FR 
test conditions. 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

the video quality as being more acceptable at 15 fps (M = 
5.71, N = 7, SD = 1.25, Min = 3, Max = 7) than at 10 fps (M 
= 4.86, N = 7, SD = 2.67, Min = 1, Max = 7), 5 fps (M = 
4.29 , N = 7 , SD = 1.8 , Min = 1 , Max = 6) or at 2 fps (M = 
3, N = 7, SD = 1.53, Min = 1, Max = 5). 
The more the FR is reduced, the more ATCOs judge the 
quality of the video as being less acceptable. In the 2-fps 
condition, the quality was even rated below the average 
“neutral”. This tendency is supported by a Friedman test that 
revealed significant difference (χ²(df = 3, N = 7) = 12.05, p < .01). 
As postulated in H1,5, the perceived video quality in terms of 
FR decreased with the reduction of the FR. 
After each test run, the ATCOs were asked to estimate 
the FR of the just watched video. Surprisingly, ATCOs 
always believed that the FR is superior to what it actually 
was: Answers after the 2 fps conditions referred to 3.14 fps 
by average, 5 fps to 6.29 fps, 10 fps to 15.29 fps, and 15 fps 
to 20.14 fps. By average they overjudged the FR by 53.9%. 
After having completed all test runs, the ATCOs were 
asked to rank the watched videos in their order of preference. 
Most of them ranked 15 fps at the top. The second rank is 
mostly shared by videos at 5 fps or 10 fps. The last rank is 
notably reserved for the 2 fps.  
 
D. Results concerning the perceived operability of a low 
FR system 
On a 7-point Likert scale from “1 = totally disagree”, “2 
= disagree”, “3 = somewhat disagree”, “4 = neither agree nor 
disagree”, “5 = somewhat agree”, “6 = agree” to “7 = 
strongly agree”, the ATCOs should answer the following 
statement: “I would be able to control the air traffic with the 
given FR.”. The perceived operability increased with the 
increase of FR. Thus, the system operability was perceived 
least at 2 fps (M = 2.86, N = 7, SD = 1.57, Min = 1, Max = 
5). It increases over-averaged with 5 fps (M = 4.14, N = 7, 
SD = 1.87, Min = 1, Max = 6), 10 fps (M = 4.86, N = 7, SD = 
1.57, Min = 1, Max = 7) and finally with 15 fps (M = 5.71, N 
= 7, SD = 1.25, Min = 3, Max = 7). A Friedman test revealed 
this difference as significant (χ²(df = 3, N = 7) = 12.68, p < .01). 
Even though only the 2-fps condition is judged below 
acceptable, H1,6 is to be assumed: The lower the FR, the less 
ATCOs consider the system as being operable.  
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The effects of lower FRs on the performance of an 
adequate assessment of moving object tasks are multilayered 
and cannot be judged generically. Surprisingly, all propeller 
movements, the wind flag and the flock of birds, as well as 
the movement of human beings on the aerodrome were 
perceived by all ATCOs in all four FR conditions in a safe 
and efficient manner. Most ATCOs commented that the 
rapid disappearance of the bird flock over the runway made 
them worry much more than their jerky movement, which 
refers rather to an image resolution problem than to a lower 
FR. Concerning the flashing lights, most ATCOs judge 
flashing lights to be perceivable safely and efficiently down 
to 5 fps but when further reduced down to 2 fps the capturing 
of the rotating beacon at its full brightness decreased and the 
perception was no longer perceived as being safe and 
efficient by the majority of ATCOs. Those negative effects 
in 2 fps was expected and could be covered by using flashing 
lights with obscure/luminous phases that interfere less with 
the chosen FR. 
As postulated, with respect to the performance in visual 
detection tasks inferential statistics do not indicate a 
significant difference between the four FR conditions. Apart 
from the impression that aircraft seem to move jerkier at 
lower FRs, especially when they are close to the camera, FR 
does not seem to play an essential role in detection tasks. In 
particular planes in the final approach or departure area do 
not have great lateral movements at all. ATCOs therefore 
perceive only a point that grows bigger when the plane 
approaches or shrinks at departure. The concern of not 
visually detecting an approaching or departing aircraft or an 
aircraft right downwind due to lower FRs seems therefore be 
unjustified. In addition, it seems more logical to detect an 
approaching aircraft earlier or to see an aircraft leaving the 
aerodrome longer by increasing the image resolution instead 
of higher FRs. Moreover, even if the movement seemed 
jerky at times, several ATCOs noticed that the “jumpy” 
aircraft even attracted their attention.  
Physiological stress was tested via the SSQ after each 
run. As presumed, the inferential results show that no 
negative effects with respect to physiological stress could be 
measured. All TSS were under averaged low. Only in the 2 
fps condition the severity of the symptoms increased slightly 
for some ATCOs, but far from any significance. Someone 
could argue that these findings are biased by very positive 
beliefs or attitudes towards lower FR system. This potential 
side effect could be mitigated by using a pseudo-ATCO 
control group who performed the entire experiment but by 
definition had a neutral attitude towards lower FRs since 
they were not involved in the Remote Tower business: Both 
groups did not significantly distinguish in their SSQ scores. 
Thus, a systematical effect of bias for the experimental group 
could be excluded. For the correct interpretation of these 
results, it is also important to note that the study was dealing 
with a small sample one can refer to as a sample of experts 
[11]. In other words, they share some personality 
characteristics and very specific professional skills, as well 
as specialized selection and education criteria. Thus, it is 
very likely to transfer the results found in the inferential 
statistics to other ATCOs. For an implementation of a 
Remote Tower with a medium image resolution and low FRs 
from 2 fps to 15 fps, it can be stated that effects expressed by 
physiological stress will most likely not appear.  
As expected, the perceived video quality decreased 
significantly with the reduction of FR. These results are not 
that surprising since air traffic control requires high visual 
performance and reducing the FR is an obvious loss in terms 
of video quality. But in the real Remote Tower 
implementation world, this obvious loss of video quality 
could be compensated by an increase of image resolution. 
Since lower FRs seem not to impair detection performance 
nor induce physiological stress, this trade-off between FR 
and image resolution seems to be a valid approach to keep 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

bandwidth consumptions low but better adapt the visual 
presentation to the air traffic service operators’ task: For 
detecting small aircraft in a far-view distance, high image 
resolution is needed and FR is not this important. To assess 
the velocity of aircraft in a near-view distance on the 
taxiways or apron, higher FRs are essential and image 
resolution would not play such a significant role. As stated 
before, this compensation approach could not be realized in 
the experimental setting, but it can be assumed that the 
ATCOs’ perceived video quality would have been more 
balanced over the different FR conditions if have done so. 
Similar to the results of perceived video quality are the 
ones concerning the perceived system operability. By no 
surprise, also a significant difference between the four FR 
conditions was found. The average of ATCOs “disagree” or 
“somewhat disagree” about thinking to be able to handle air 
traffic at 2 fps. At 5 fps and 10 fps, ATCOs expressed to 
“slightly agree” being able to manage air traffic and at 15 
fps, they expressed to “agree”. Like already stated above, the 
experimental setting neglected compensation in terms of 
image resolution which would probably have balanced the 
ATCOs’ attitude as well.  
To conclude the discussion on our findings, we can 
affirm that according to our results, a system at lower FR is 
justifiable at least starting from 5 fps. Thus, between 5 fps 
and 15 fps, the air controllers’ visual performance is 
maintained at the same level. If one wants to set up a lower 
FR system, one should pay particularly attention to the used 
flashing lights at the aerodrome in order to choose some 
which do not interfere with the FR.  
Concerning physiological stress, we did not find a 
significant increase of the scores when the FR is reduced 
from 15 fps to 2 fps. However, the comparison of the means 
in the descriptive statistics suggests a slight increase in the 
TSS at 2 fps. To avoid physiological stress at a system 
similar to the one at BWE, we recommend rather 5 fps, 10 
fps or 15 fps.  
With respect to the perceived video quality, the ATCOs 
preferred higher FRs to lower FRs. They were mostly 
opponent against 2 fps. In summary, if one wants to operate 
Remote Tower at a low FR, it is important to develop 
convincing strategies to increase the tolerance towards low 
FR. From a psychological point of view, it is not advisable to 
put ATCOs in front of a 2-fps system hoping that they will 
accept it. The user centered approach teaches us how 
important it is for users to experience positive emotions in 
order to raise acceptability for a new product [34]. Once the 
video quality of the low FR system is accepted by the 
ATCOs, the fear of getting sick could be taken away from 
them and self-efficiency for performance could rather be 
perceived. By consequent, it is likely that the attitude 
towards the perceived system operability is expressed more 
positively.  
Further operational simulation and field trials with the 
operator in the loop are recommended to increase confidence 
in low FR systems and to gain additional feedback from 
ATCOs to develop bests designed Remote Tower solutions 
for the given operational environment. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The optimal FR in Remote Tower environments is 
debated amongst many actors of the Remote Tower 
community: It must not be too low to endanger safety or 
operators’ health, but also not be too high to increase the 
consumption of bandwidth or to compromise other 
parameters like image resolution. The results of this study 
can mitigate the concerns regarding lower FR settings. The 
major conclusion of this study is that the visual performance 
and physiological stress were not affected by lower FRs in 
between of 15 down to 2fps. In particular, these findings will 
allow more degrees of freedom in the design process of a 
Remote Tower implementation to best adapt a local solution 
to their operational environment. In future research, it 
remains to be studied how a trade-off between lower FRs 
and compensation by higher image resolution would be 
judged by the ATCOs. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. T. Apteker, A. A. Fisher, V. S. Kisimov and H. Neishlos, 
“Distributed multimedia: User perception and dynamic QoS,” 
Conference of International Symposiom on Electronic 
Imageing: Science and Technology, San José, USA, pp. 226-
234, 1994. 
[2] B. O. Bakka, Remote Tower Optical Presentation, [Power 
Point Slides], Kjeller: Kongsberg, 2017, unpublished. 
[3] Bundesgesetzblatt. BGBI: List of occupational diseases, 3rd 
proclamation for amendment of occupational diseases. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/aviation/regional-
airports-under-strain-acil-aallen-report-for-aaa/news-
story/e95d864f60135d044b5212865ccabae4 2018.03.13 
[4] M. Bingemann, Regional airports under strain, ACIL Aallen 
report for AAA, The Australian. [Online]. Available from: 
www.theaustralian.com.au/business/aviation/regional-
airports-under-strain-acil-aallen-report-for-aaa/news-story/ 
, 
2017.05.05 
[5] S. Bryson, Effects of lag and FR on various tracking tasks, 
Paper presented at SPIE 1915, Stereoscopic Displays and 
Applications III, San José, USA, pp. 155-166, 1993.  
[6] J. Y. C. Chen and J. E. Thropp, “Review of Low FR Effects 
on Human Performance,” in IEEE Transactions on Systems 
Man and Cybernetics – Part A Systems and Humans 37(6), 
pp. 1063-107, 2007.  
[7] J. Y. C. Chen, P. J. Durlach, J. A. Sloan, and L. D. Bowens, 
“Robotic operator performance in simulated reconnaissance 
missions,” Technical report ARL-TR-3628, Hum. Res. Eng. 
Dir., Army Research Laboratory, Abberdeen Proving Ground, 
Maryland, 2005. 
[8] K. T. Claypool and M. Claypool, “On FR and player 
performance in first person shooter games,” in Springer 
Multimedia Systems Journal (MMSJ) 13(1), 2007, pp. 3-17.  
[9] S. R. Ellis, B. D. Adelstein, S. Baumeler, G. J. Jense and R. 
H. Jacoby, “Sensor spatial distortion, visual latency, and 
update rate effects on 3D tracking in virtual environments,” 
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality, Houston, Texas, pp. 
239-265, 1999. 
[10] S.R. Ellis, N. Fürstenau. N., M. Mittendorf, “Frame Rate 
Effects on Visual Discrimination of Landing Aircraft 
Deceleration: Implications for Virtual Tower Design and 
Speed Percep-tion”, Proceedings Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, 55th Annual Meeting, Sept. 19-23, 2011, 
Las Vegas, NV USA, pp. 71-75. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

[11] I. Etikan and K. Bala, “Sampling and Sampling Methods,” 
Biometrics & Biostatistics International Journal 5(6), 00148, 
2017. 
[12] European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment. 
EUROCAE: 
Minimum 
aviation 
system 
performance 
specification for remote tower optical systems, ED-240, 
EUROCAE, Malakoff: September 2016.  
[13] Fürstenau, N., Rudolph, M., Schmidt, M., Werther, B., 
Hetzheim, H., Halle, W., & Tuchscheerer, W. (2008, 12). 
Flugverkehr-Leiteinrichtung (Virtueller Tower). European 
Patent EP1791364, application date 2005. 
[14] N. Fürstenau, Introduction and Overview, In N. Fürstenau 
(Ed), Virtual and Remote Control Tower (p. 6), Cham (ZG): 
Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2016a. 
[15] N. Fürstenau, Preface, In N. Fürstenau (Ed), Virtual and 
Remote Control Tower (p. xii). Cham (ZG): Springer 
International Publishing Switzerland, 2016b. 
[16] N. Fürstenau, Introduction and Overview, In N. Fürstenau 
(Ed), Virtual and Remote Control Tower (pp. 14-15). Cham 
(ZG): Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2016c. 
[17] N. Fürstenau, M. Schmidt, M. Rudolph, C. Möhlenbrink and 
W. Halle, In N. Fürstenau (Ed), “Virtual and Remote Control 
Tower,” (p. 17). Cham (ZG): Springer International 
Publishing Switzerland, 2016. 
[18] N. Fürstenau, M. Mittendorf and S. R. Ellis, “Videopanorama 
FR requirements derived from visual discrimination of 
decerleration during simulated aircraft landing,” In: N. 
Fürstenau (Ed), Virtual and Remote Control Tower (pp. 115-
137), 
Cham 
(ZG): 
Springer 
International 
Publishing 
Switzerland, 2016. 
[19] N. Fürstenau and M. Schmidt, “Remote Tower Experimental 
System with Augmented Vision Videopanorma,” In N. 
Fürstenau (Ed), Virtual and Remote Control Tower (p. 180), 
Cham (ZG): Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 
2016. 
[20] V. Garaj, Z. Hunaiti and W. Balachandran, “Using Remote 
Vision: The Effects of Video Image FR on Visual Object 
Recognition Performance,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics Society 40(4), pp. 698-707, 2010. 
[21] E. Greene, Evaluating letter recognition, flicker fusion and the 
Talbot-Plateau law using mcrosecond-duration flashes, PLoS 
One 10(4), 2015. 
[22] H. Hagendorf, J. Krummenacher, H.-J. Müller and T. 
Schubert, 
“Psychophysics,” 
in 
H. 
Hagendorf, 
J. 
Krummenacher, H.-J. Müller & 
T. Schubert (Eds). 
Allgemeine Psychologie für Bachelor: Wahrnehmung und 
Aufmerksamkeit (pp. 43-45), Berlin Heidelberg: Springer 
Verlag, 2011. 
[23] J. Hess, The History of FR for Film, 2 February 2015 
[Online], Available from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mjYjFEp9Yx0 
2018.03.13.  
[24] M. Kallonatis and C. Luu, “Temporal Resolution,” In H. 
Kolb, E. & R. Nelson (Eds), The Organization of the Retina 
and Visual System. Salt Lake City (UT): University of Utah 
Health Science Center, 2007a. 
[25] M. Kallonatis and C. Luu, “Visual Acuity,” In H. Kolb, E. & 
R. Nelson (Eds), The Organization of the Retina and Visual 
System, Salt Lake City (UT): University of Utah Health 
Science Center, 2007b. 
[26] P. J. Kellman, Ontogenesis of space and motion perception, In 
W. Epstein & S. Rogers (Eds), Handbook of perception and 
cognition (Vol. 5 p. 394), New York: Academic Press, 1995. 
[27] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum and M. G. 
Lilienthal, “Simulator Sickness Questionnaire: An enhanced 
Method 
for 
Quantifying 
Simulator 
Sickness” 
The 
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3(3), 203-220, 
1993. 
[28] E. M. Kolasinski, Simulator sickness in virtual environments, 
(Technical 
Report 
1027: 
Army 
Project 
Number 
2O262785A791 – Education and Training Technology). 
Alexandria, Virginia: United States Army Research Institute, 
1995. 
[29] T. Kotowski, The mistake with regional airports, Frankfurter 
Allgemeine. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/unternehmen/kleine-
flughaefen-scheitern-wirtschaftlich-14302627.html 
2016.06.23  
[30] J. D. Lee and K. A. See, “Trust in Automation: Designing for 
Appropriate Reliance,” Human Factors 46(1). 50-80, 2004. 
[31] M. Masry and S. S. Hemami, “An analysis of subjective 
quality in low bit rate video,” Paper presented at International 
Conference on Image Processing, 2001, Thessaloniki, Greece, 
pp. 465-468, 2001. 
[32] J. D. McCarthy, A. M. Sasse and D. Miras, “Sharp or 
Smooth? Comparing effects of quantization vs. FR for 
streamed video,” Paper presented at Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2004, Vienna, Austria: 2004. 
[33] K. Nakayama, Biological Image Motion Processing: A 
Review, Vision, 25(5), 625-660, 1985. 
[34] M. Richter and M. D. Flückiger, “Usability and UX,” in M. 
Richter & M. D. Flückinger (Eds), Usability and UX kompakt 
(p.12), Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2016. 
[35] SAAB. Remote tower revolutionises air traffic management. 
SAAB. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://saabgroup.com/Media/stories/stories-listing/2017-
02/remote-tower-revolutionises-air-traffic-management/ 
2018.03.13. 
[36] M. Schmidt, M. Rudolph and N. Fürstenau, “Remote Tower 
Prototype and Automation Perspective,” in N. Fürstenau (Ed). 
Virtual and Remote Control Tower (p. 180), Cham (ZG): 
Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2016. 
[37] S. Schwartz, Motion Perception, in S. Schwartz (Ed), Visual 
Perception: A Clinical Orientation (p.219-220), New York 
City: McGraw Hill – Education, 2004. 
[38] A. Tripathi and M. Claypool, “Improving multimedia 
streaming with content-aware video scaling,” Workshop on 
Intelligent 
Multimedia 
Computing 
and 
Networking 
(IMMCN), Durham, NC, USA, 2002. 
[39] E. F. Wells, G. M. Bernstein, B. W. Scott, P. J. Bennett and J. 
R. Mendelson, “Critical flicker frequency responses in visual 
cortex,” Experimental Brain Research 139(1), 106-110, 2001. 
[40] M. B. Weinger, Vigilance, boredom and sleepiness, Journal 
of Clinical and Computing 15(7-8), 549-552, 1999. 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-627-9
MMEDIA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

