CrossTale: Shared Narratives as a New Interactive Medium 
 
Joaquim Colás, Alan Tapscott, Ayman Moghnieh, and Josep Blat 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
C/Tanger 122-140, E-08018 Barcelona, Spain 
{Joaquim.colas, alan.tapscott, ayman.moghnie, josep.blat} @upf.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Through ages, storytelling has been used as one of 
the main ways for transferring knowledge and learning. We 
envision the use of shared narratives as a new kind of social 
media that empowers the collaborative creation of vast 
narrative worlds. For this reason, we identified existing 
information systems related to storytelling, and evaluated how 
they support multi-authored non-linear narratives. Then, we 
conducted a pilot experiment to understand the user 
interaction model with shared narratives more profoundly. 
This model was consequently used as a premise for designing a 
prototypical narrative system called CrossTale, which was 
evaluated to assess the generated user experience. We discuss 
how the results of these experiments show that shared 
narratives have the potential of becoming a distinct type of 
interactive medium supporting a new genre of user experience.  
Keywords-shared narratives; information systems; user 
experience. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, storytelling (from mythological parables 
through literature classics to modern literary fiction best-
sellers) has been associated with the oral and written media, 
the first two channels of information transmission to appear 
in human history. Since then, different models of cultural 
expression had appeared, and those modalities had taken 
profit of technical advances giving birth to the main 
contemporary narrative vehicles such as novels, cinema, TV 
series or comic-books. All those kinds of narrative mediums 
share the trait of linearity, which suits the temporal causality 
of classic narratives. In spite of that, several experiments 
about experiencing narratives in a non-linear way were done 
(e.g., Moholy-Nagy “total theater” [1] and Borges’ tales [2]). 
With the apparition of digital media, new opportunities arise 
for creating and experiencing narratives in new ways. 
Many comtemporary works focus on understanding and 
modeling storytelling as an interactive experience. Mehan’s 
Talespin [3] is a pioneering approach for automatically 
generating stories from atomic parts, and is an instigator of a 
larger body of research focusing on computer-generated 
narratives. On the other hand, other works studied narrartives 
from an HCI perspective, placing user interaction at the 
center: Brenda Laurel’s work on interactive fictions, 
impacting HCI as a discipline by underscoring the properties 
human interaction with information [4]; and Chris 
Crawford’s work on interactive storytelling [5], which 
addresses aspects of game design. A wide range of  actual 
works focus on models for creating non-linear narratives [6] 
[7], but to the extent of our knowledge they don’t adress this 
task from the perspective of user experience and the study of 
the user’s understanding of non-linearity. 
We define a shared narrative space as a set of units or 
scenes each representing a step in a given direction of 
developments, and connected organically to form a non-
linear story. It is a ludic and cultural medium of expression 
and communication, created, developed, and maintained 
through the collaboration of multiple users. It is composed of 
a story and a discourse (storytelling). The story consists of a 
setting in time and space, characters, and events (or plots). It 
is usually thematically unified and logically coherent. Its 
elements are connected through cause and effect relations, 
thus temporal order is meaningful [8].  
This non-linear medium is comparable to the real 
development of events: multiple stories are happening at the 
same time, and each can be told from different viewpoints. 
This points towards the suitability of non-linear narratives 
not only in developing fiction, but also as a way of sharing 
information like in online networks (e.g., forums, chats, and 
communities of creators). Theoretically, the content of social 
networks could be considered a narrative based on the 
sequential groupings of threads as scenes. Each forum thread 
could be regarded as one linear development inside a bigger 
story, and parts of the thread could belong to different ones 
as a cause of this inter-relation. However, the relations 
between threads are usually vague or inexistent, and there is 
a need for a global connection between them to provide 
thematic unification and overall coherence.  
Our purpose is to define the adequate system concepts 
and design to represent and interact with non-linear 
narratives. 
Therefore, 
we 
developed 
two 
empirical 
experiments with paper-based and implemented digital 
prototypes to extract and understand the user’s mental model 
of interaction with a narrative space, as a basis for the 
development of modern interactive systems for narratives. 
This paper is structured as follows. First, we present six 
major types of information systems related to storytelling, 
and evaluate their support for shared narratives as a medium 
of social interaction and communication. Then, we illustrate 
a pilot experiment conducted to extract the user model of 
interacting with a shared narrative space, transduced into 
requirements for informing the design of supporting systems. 
Following, we discuss the development of CrossTale, a 
prototype based on these requirements, and its user 
evaluation showing the feasibility of supporting new 
elaborated user experiences with shared narratives.  We then 
discuss how our results deepen our understanding of the 
characteristics of shared narratives, and argue in support of 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

their potential as new media for social interaction and 
communication. Finally, we conclude by summarizing our 
work and discussing its limitations, and then address their 
implications on future works. 
II. 
CONTEMPORARY 
INTERACTIVE 
SYSTEMS 
FOR 
STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVES  
In [2], Ryan proposed a classification of interactive 
narrative types based on the nature of the user participation: 
users can either experience the narrative acting as an internal 
character of the story, or as an external agent; they can either 
alter the ontology of the narrative through interaction, 
ontologically alter the narrative world through interaction, or 
explore the narrative without inducing any change. This 
classification provides a framework to analyze and 
characterize contemporary systems for interacting with 
narrative by reflecting on how the user experience is 
contributing to the narrative, and how the narrative is 
influencing the user experience.  
We have identified six major types of information 
systems directly related to interactive narratives: The first 
type are adventure books, which comprise a tale where the 
reader follows a character and makes choices that lead the 
story towards distinct developments; the second is tabletop 
role-playing games (or RPGs), in which the player creates a 
character and its story, and then devises the character’s 
actions according to a set of rules; adventure videogames are 
the third type, and they put the player in the role of a 
character that resolves puzzles in order to advance in the 
story; the fourth type is role-playing videogames, where the 
player makes navigation decisions to reach one of several 
possible endings; the fifth type is Forum or chat-based 
RPGs, where players collaboratively create a story (usually 
with a few rules of engagement); the sixth and last type is 
web communities of fiction writers (fan-fiction), that create 
stories in the same fiction world, but not always 
collaboratively. A high number of fan-made wikis can be 
found on the web, compiling formation about events, 
characters, and places concerning those worlds. Harrigan 
gives a wide overview of the complications of maintaining 
these vast narrative spaces, and how the different fan-fiction 
communities address them [9]. These systems are described 
in Table 1 according to Ryan’s framework.  
TABLE I.  
CONTEMPORARY SYSTEMS OF INTERACTIVE NARRATIVES 
System 
Example 
Author 
/reader 
role 
Main 
role 
Author 
interaction 
Reader 
interaction 
Adventure 
Book  
Choose your 
own 
adventure 
Separated Reader 
- 
External 
Ontological 
Tabletop 
RPG 
Dungeons & 
Dragons 
Mixed 
Author 
Internal, 
Ontological 
- 
Adventure 
videogame 
Monkey 
Island 
Separated Reader 
- 
Internal 
Exploratory 
RPG- 
Videogame Baldur’s Gate Separated Reader 
- 
Internal 
Ontological 
Forum / chat 
RPG 
Aelyria.com 
Mixed 
Author 
Internal, 
Ontological 
External 
Exploratory 
Fan-Fiction 
community Fanfiction.net 
Mixed 
- 
External, 
Ontological 
External 
Exploratory 
Seeing the particularities of the informative structure of 
narratives, we point at differences between existing systems 
and interactive storytelling. In particular, none of these types 
of systems entirely supports shared narratives as a medium 
of social interaction. Three of them (books, adventure 
videogames and RPG videogames) are unidirectional 
mediums, created by authors and consumed by other people 
as readers. They support a varied degree of interaction with 
the content, but they do not allow users to contribute. 
Tabletop RPGs and forum or chat RPGs, allows user-
generated content to be added to ongoing discussions, which 
together do not constitute a coherent story that can later be 
consumed as part of the user experience. Only fan-fiction 
Internet communities fully support both the addition of user-
generated content and its consumption as part of the user 
experience. But the lack of collaboration and cooperation 
between contributors tends to divide the narrative space into 
distinct and incoherent flows of events, which only share the 
original work as a point of reference, resulting in 
independent narratives [9].  
The case of fan-fiction communities is the major 
exponent of a multi-authored narrative system where usually 
no one acts as both reader and author to the same shared 
narrative, but each participant is only the author of his 
narrative sub-space and reader of others. A similar handicap 
exists in forum RPGs, where each contribution is by force 
situated directly after the previous one, and is the only 
possible type of contributions.  
In conclusion, none of these systems helps participants to 
contribute efficiently to the shared narrative space, nor to 
collaboratively organize and maintain its overall structure. 
Therefore, there is still a need for supporting the users’ 
ability to understand and navigate the space, allowing the 
narrative to grow in an organic way, and extending its 
contents from any desired point in the narrative flow. This 
will dissociate the story content of the impositions coming 
from the way the users elaborate the narrative discourse. 
III. 
UNDERSTANDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
The first experiment (Fig. 1) was designed to allow users 
to freely create a narrative and the rules that operate it. 20 
subjects (university students) were provided with paper 
sheets as a frame to draw and write scenes and a set of 
elements (fairytale characters and objects) that they could 
paste in the sheets. The narrative was developed on a large 
glass wall where the story was created in the form of paper 
scenes connected by arrows. The subjects proceeded one by 
one to read the story on the glass, and then modify or expand 
it by creating new scenes, posting them in the wall, and 
drawing the connections. Observations were made during 
this process, and the subjects were later asked to fill a 
questionnaire of 18 questions. The questionnaire evaluated 
the story comprehension and congruence as perceived by the 
subjects, and inquired about the reading or navigation 
paradigm that they used (narrative elements and concepts 
they followed throughout the story). It also asked about their 
contributions (number, content, location, etc…), and if they 
added scenes to the narratives or contended in modifying 
existing ones. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
Figure 1.  The settings of the first experiment. 
Observations show that the kind of interaction performed 
is external, as the users do not assume the role of any 
particular character. It is also ontological during the creation, 
and exploratory during the reading. The analysis of the 
resulting story and the questionnaire answers revealed 
several aspects about the nature of the user comprehension 
and interaction with the shared narrative space. These results 
were traduced as a set of requirements (Table II) for the 
design of information systems that support interacting with 
narratives. They are also detailed in the following. 
A. Using storylines and characters to navigate a narrative 
The results revealed that subjects project a “time-space-
development” logic on the narrative. The story is mentally 
situated on a space with a temporal and causal logic, 
represented in two axes: a temporal relationship between the 
scenes, and places where these scenes take place. All 
subjects followed linear sequences (storylines) for reading, 
being a linear/temporal sequence of connected scenes that 
track the development of a specific character or plot. 14 out 
of 20 followed those storylines throughout the narrative 
space, from the first scene to a finishing one before 
backtracking. In addition, 12 of them followed character 
developments, and 10 plot relationships. 
Understanding how users navigate the narrative space 
leads us to consider a visualization that copes with this 
“time-space-development” logic to facilitate the finding of 
storylines, and consequently the user interaction.  
TABLE II.  
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS EXTRACTED FROM THE 
INTERACTION MODEL 
Observations 
Design requirements 
Projection of a logic based 
on time, space and 
developments. 
Organization of the informative space 
based on time and space axis. 
Reading by following linear 
sequences about a character 
or a plot. 
Navigation through suggested plot and 
character storylines. 
Unitary and coherent 
narratives. 
Mechanisms for preserving congruence. 
Global viewpoint for 
comprehending the whole 
story. 
One interface mode for a global view of 
the informative space. 
Reading a storyline through 
a zoom-in viewpoint. 
One interface mode for following 
storylines. 
Focusing on a single scene 
for creating and editing.  
Independent interface mode for scene 
edition. 
B. Preservation of literary consistency 
The results also show that the generated narrative space 
is unitary, coherent, and with a limited divergence. It is 
unitary in the sense that all the scenes are interrelated and are 
part of the same story. In fact, the divergence of the narrative 
space away from the central topic is limited: subjects found it 
easier and socially proactive to expand existing storylines 
instead of creating new ones. This notion of unity is directly 
derived from the fact that the entire story is predefined and 
all the storylines are happening simultaneously in the same 
time stream. This raises consistency issues in the literary 
fabrics of the narrative, which users thrive to treat by re-
ordering scenes or inserting new ones. The literary 
consistency of the narrative is considered fundamental for 
understanding the story, and it is one of the main concerns 
when modifying/ adding scenes to the narrative space: 5 
subjects used their contribution only for correcting 
consistency issues, and in the end of the experiment, only 
5% of the scenes were considered inconsistent with the rest 
of the narrative. For this reason, the system should 
implement mechanisms for helping to preserve literary 
consistency without restricting the non-linearity of the 
narrative. This issue remains outside the scope of this paper. 
C. Three interface modes for three types of interaction 
The subjects’ interaction with the narrative space shows 
that at least three different views for three different purposes 
are needed for a multi-modal interaction with narratives: a 
global view of the space is used to approach and comprehend 
the whole narrative space and its structure, as well as when 
selecting a point in time and place to add a new scene; a 
“zoom-in” view for viewing a scene inside a storyline and 
understanding the other storylines related to it; and a 
composition view that allows users to create and edit scenes. 
These views are illustrated in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Viewpoints related to the interactions with the narrative space 
IV. 
PROTOTYPING SHARED NARRATIVE SPACES  
We developed a prototype named CrossTale based on the 
design requirements extracted from the first experiment to 
reproduce the user experience according to them. CrossTale 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

implements three interface modes defined previously (Fig. 3 
a, b and c). The global view lets users explore the whole 
narrative space, visualized as a grid with the axes of time and 
places, and select characters and storylines. Selecting a 
scene/storyline changes the interface into the reading view in 
which the scene is maximized for reading. In this view the 
user can also navigate back and forward by the current 
storyline. Finally, by selecting an empty frame, the user 
access the creation view where s/he can create a scene by 
arranging characters and objects, and introducing text, and 
indicate the related plotline/s. 
(a) The global view 
 
(b) The reading view 
 
(c) The creation view 
Figure 3.  Three interface modes of the CrossTale prototype
The experiment with the prototype consisted of creating a 
narrative in a similar way to the pilot experiment. A total of 
15 subjects (undergraduate students in media studies) were 
enlisted, and asked to freely use the interface to read and 
create a shared narrative with their own contributions. Each 
subject was briefly introduced to the interface controls, and 
then given an unlimited time to interact and the freedom to 
add as many scenes as wanted. Then, the subject executed 
eight interaction tasks provided by the evaluation team, and 
observations were made. Afterwards, each subject answered 
a questionnaire to rate the rate the experience on Likert scale, 
and evaluate the suitability of the design for reading and 
contributing and the overall user experience. 
The results of the task-driven evaluation are summarized 
in Table III. It describes how many subjects employed each 
interface view for each task. The results show that 11 out of 
15 subjects performed all tasks easily, and the remaining 4 
subjects successfully performed 6 out of 8 tasks. The 
subjects used the global view and/or the reading view to 
identify and comprehend the narrative elements. Similarly to 
the first experiment, some subjects concentrated on 
characters while others on plots, but everyone used one of 
these two paradigms for finding storylines and navigating the 
narrative space. During the contribution task all the 
contributors also used the creation view to compose new 
scenes, but this view was never accessed for performing the 
identification tasks. These results indicate that the design 
supports the modes of interaction identified in the first 
experiment, and that these modes dispose of adequate 
functionalities. However, most subjects prefer having more 
information about the context of scenes while reading them. 
This means that the dissociation between the global and 
reading views could be revisited. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF THE DESIGN ADEQUACY EVALUATION  
Task 
NB 
Task 
Correctly 
executed 
Global 
View 
Reading 
View 
Both 
Views 
Navigating 
with 
Storylines 
1 
Identify the 
beginning 
scenes 
15 
13 
13 
11 
11 
2 
Identify story 
end scenes 
15 
13 
9 
7 
7 
3 
Identify main 
characters 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
4 
Identify 
important 
places 
15 
14 
14 
13 
13 
5 
Identify 
simultaneous 
scenes 
11 
13 
4 
4 
4 
6 
Identify 
scenes in the 
same location 
12 
14 
2 
2 
2 
7 
Approximate 
the duration 
15 
13 
13 
11 
10 
8 
Find any 
inconsistency 
15 
8 
12 
7 
8 
9 
Contribute 
(optional) 
13 
13 
6 
6 
5 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

 
Table IV shows the evaluation results of the user 
experience. All subjects appreciated the experience of 
interacting with narratives through CrossTale. In particular, 
they found that CrossTale supports reading a non-linear 
narrative (4.33/5), contributing to it (4.77/5), and finding and 
correcting inconsistencies (3.92/5). 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF THE USER EXPERIENCE EVALUTION  
Question 
Average Score 
Overall experience 
3,93 / 5 
Found the system entertaining 
4,33 / 5 
Design makes reading easy 
3,93 / 5 
Design helps to maintaining consistency 
3,92 / 5 
Design facilitates contributing 
4,77 / 5 
 
The results of this experiments show that the concepts 
and design of CrossTale, as a prototype for interacting with 
narratives, are highly appreciated by the subjects. However, 
they also point out several issues that need to be addressed in 
future versions. In particular, it was found that users spend 
considerable amount of effort (estimated to 20% of the 
overall activities) to preserve the consistency of the 
narrative, which is important for understanding and 
interacting with it. Future versions could provide means to 
facilitate further the preservation of literary consistency. In 
addition, social interaction between different authors remains 
indirect: users cannot communicate directly and the authors’ 
profiles and their contributions are not discernible in the 
current design. Future versions can include more support for 
this aspect and study its effects on the user experience and 
collaboration. 
Using Ryan’s framework for the classification of 
interactivity with narrative systems, we can say that the users 
of CrossTale performed an external interaction during the 
whole experience, as they took on the role of agents external 
to the story, and read and contributed in it from outside the 
fiction world. This interaction is exploratory during reading, 
in the sense that the readers choose between storylines to 
follow but the reading itself does not change nor affect the 
structure of the narrative space. Finally an ontological 
participation is detected while the user takes the role of 
author and expands or alters the narrative world. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The nature of shared narratives presents several 
challenges over how the inherent information is constructed, 
presented, and accessed. In a sense, non-linear interactive 
storytelling has always faced challenges for having to 
reconcile the sequential nature of narratives with the user 
ability to choose between different threads of reading (the 
paradox of coping “storytelling” with the “non-linear”). In 
this work we provided a first grounding basis for addressing 
these challenges and developing shared narratives as new 
social media. Our research is a first step for consolidating a 
standardized system for sharing and collaboratively 
constructing narratives, given we extracted, understood, and 
evaluated the user mental model associated with this 
interaction.  
We can illustrate our vision of shared narratives as new 
social media through an example such as the October 2011 
global protest movements in Europe and North America. 
Social networks have proven to be an important 
infrastructure of support for these movements, where 
participants behaved as authors, actors, and divulgators of 
the actual events. These participants leave digital imprints of 
their experiences [10]: many sources of scattered information 
can be found on Facebook or Twitter as collections of 
narrations, opinions and images taken. These events can be 
understood on a high-level by following one single storyline 
(e.g., watching the news bulletin), but it is more interesting 
to explore them from the different points of view of 
participants whom witness interrelated events taking part 
simultaneously within the movements, starring thousands of 
different people. 
By using tools for shared narratives similar to CrossTale, 
the participants could collaboratively draw a detailed 
narrative world around their movements. In other words, 
what if these participants could compose collaboratively the 
stories behind these events by describing and positioning 
their individual experiences in concrete time and place, and 
relating them with the experiences of others? The resulting 
structure would suit better the nature of the associated 
information, and it would provide a new closer way for 
interacting with it, which virtually could amount to 
participating in the physical events themselves.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In modern literature and fiction worlds, it is common to 
have multiple stories set in a complex chronology inside a 
common setting, such as in fiction franchises where 
narratives are constructed through the contributions of 
multiple professional authors. Tools based on the CrossTale 
interaction model would be capable of organizing all this 
encyclopedic knowledge in a structured narrative space that 
suits better the temporal, causal, and multi-lineal nature of a 
narrative, empowering the authors to contribute easily to 
expand the vast fiction worlds and empowering the readers 
to explore them naturally. With such tools, narrative spaces 
grow organically and collaboratively; the proactive role of 
participants consequently diffuses the mono-directionality of 
the author/audience relation. In that sense, non-linear 
interactive narratives can become a new kind of media of its 
own, suitable for collaboration, information sharing, and 
learning. 
By experimentation, we learnt how users perceive and 
procreate the narrative space into a unitary and congruent 
way and how they mentally structure the informative space 
in terms of time and place and navigate it following 
structured sequences of character and plot-related scenes. 
This model was used as the basis for designing a functional 
prototype, CrossTale, which was subsequently evaluated 
with users. These evaluations show the success of the 
adopted approach in supporting complex interactions with 
narrative spaces, which assimilate its non-linearity. It 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

provides a validation for further investigations on the 
potential of shared narratives as new media. 
This work also has several limitations. In our 
experiments, the literary traits of the narrative space were 
somewhat pre-defined, especially the main characters 
(prince, pricess, witch…) and places (tower, castle, 
woods…). This discouraged users to think about expanding 
the literary reach of the narrative space with few exceptions. 
In online social role-playing games, some people perform the 
role of content generators, creating more story elements 
(characters, objects, places…) to the space rather than adding 
scenes. Such behaviour should be studied further in the 
future.  
There are also some limitations inherent to the nature of 
the 
prototype 
and 
the 
experimental 
settings: 
the 
visualizations used have functional limitations (e.g., 
visualizing all related scenes to a selected one), and several 
improvable design issues, mostly usability-related, were 
identified during the evaluation (e.g., the composition view 
is not user friendly). Finally, the development of the 
experiment in a controlled environment does not reflect 
intimately interactions with shared narratives, nor the 
collaboration phenomenon (performed in an indirect way 
through te experiment), as ought to take place online and 
during a greater amount of time. 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
With this model and prototype as a starting point, our 
future step consist of shifting the system deployment from 
our isolated environment to the web. In addition, we will 
develop features for adding user-generated story elements (as 
characters and places). Expanding and deploying the system 
in a network environment would allow us to study how the 
narrative space grows when users share a common social 
network, and study the nature of the resulting interaction and 
narrative structure under those conditions, as well as the 
potential of shared narrative spaces to empower long-term 
collaboration. 
A complementary part of this research, concerning the 
mechanisms of consistency preservation, remained outside 
this study. Our experiments pointed that consistency between 
all the story elements and scenes is the main conception that 
readers use to understand the narrative space, and one of the 
main concerns when expanding the space by adding new 
scenes. We will explore how a support for the preservation 
of consistency can be provided through the introduction of 
rules (e.g. not allowing the same character to be used in two 
scenes happening at the same time). Currently, several steps 
have been taken in this direction, and a complete strategy for 
managing the consistency of shared narratives will be 
included and evaluated in future prototypes.  
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Moholy-Nagy, "Theater, Circus, Variety" (1924), in 
Multimedia, from Wagner to Virtual Reality, R. Packer and 
K. Jordan, Ed. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2001, 
pp. 16-26. 
[2] ML. Ryan, “Beyond myth and metaphor: The case of 
narrative in digital media”, Game Studies, 2001. 
[3] J. R. Meehan, “TALE-SPIN, An Interactive Program that 
Writes Stories”, in Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1977. 
[4] B. Laurel, “Computers as Theatre”, Addison-Wesley, 1991. 
[5] C. Crawford, “Chris Crawford on Interactive Storytelling”, 
Brkeley, Calif.: New Riders, 2005. 
[6] Y. Cao, R. Klamma, and M. Jarke, “The Hero’s Journey – 
Template-Based  Storytelling for Ubiquitous Multimedia 
Management”, Journal of Multimedia, vol. 6, no. 2, Apr. 
2011, pp. 156-169, doi: 10.4304/jmm.6.2.156-169. 
[7] Y. Cao, R. Klamma, and A. Martini, “Collaborative 
Storytelling in the Web 2.0”, in Proceedings of the First 
International Workshop on Story-Telling and Educational 
Games, 2008. 
[8] S. Chatman, “Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in 
Fiction and Film”, Cornwell University Press, 1990. 
[9] P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin, “Third Person: Authoring 
and Exploring Vast Narratives”, MIT Press, 2009. 
[10] F.Girardin, 
F. 
Calabrese, 
and 
F.D. 
Fiore, 
“Digital 
footprinting: 
Uncovering 
tourists 
with 
user-generated 
content”, Pervasive Computing, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

