Influence of Culture in Multimodal Interfaces  
Gesture behavior between Anglo-Celtic and Latin Americans 
 
Karime Nasser Alvarez 
Department of Computing 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
Karime.nasser-alvarez@mq.edu.au 
Manolya Kavakli 
Department of Computing 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
manolya.kavakli@mq.edu.au
 
 
Abstract— In multimodal interfaces, hand gestures often help 
convey meaning to the spoken word; therefore, the cultural 
background of the gesturing person might be an influential 
factor in the interaction with these interfaces. This paper 
presents an empirical study aimed at singling out basic cultural 
differences in hand gesture performance between two cultures: 
Anglo-Celtics and Latin Americans. The focus in this paper is 
given to the video analysis of the two cultures describing two 
objects with their hands. The purpose is to use gesture 
segmentation to define predominant hand gestures by culture. 
Conclusions are drawn from the experiment and are linked to 
cultural attributes proposed by theorists like Hall and 
Hofstede. The findings state that cultural differences exist in 
the description of the object, which might have implications for 
the development of gesture-based multimodal interfaces. As 
Anglo-Celtics are low context cultures, they used more words 
and gestures in longer time. On the other hand, Latin 
Americans, which represent the high context culture, had more 
frequent gestures, but performed fewer ones, in shorter time. 
We also found that as the complexity of a task increases, so 
does the use and type of gestures. The performance of a 
multimodal interface will not only be affected by the task being 
performed, but by the cultural background and language skills 
of the user.  
Keywords- Gesture recognition; HCI; culture; Anglo-Celtics; 
Latin Americans; gesture based interaction; performance; 
frequency. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is 
making the interactions as natural as possible, as if 
communicating with another human [1]. Gestures, such as 
pointing, are where language, culture and cognition meet [2].  
Humans have an innate need to use gestures; since they 
complement our ideas, to such an extent that humans are 
known to gesture even when talking on the phone [3].   
The significance of this study relies on the intention of 
defining the gesture variances from one culture to another 
and relating them to cultural traits. Culture has been studied 
by anthropologists all over the world, and these have arrived 
to the science behind stereotypes. Our intention is to identify, 
if any, the cultural influences that may possibly affect the 
representations of hand gestures. Our approach follows the 
experiment conducted by Bischel et al. where a designer is 
required to describe a mechanical device to another designer 
[4]. In this case, the participants of each sample were 
recorded depicting two different chairs with their hands. 
These videos were recorded for later segmentation and used 
timestamps to assess the cultural influence via metrics such 
as frequency and the quantity of certain gesture types.   
The paper is structured as follows. First, there is a 
summary of related works. Second, we describe the 
experiments conducted. Third, we analyze the data collected 
and conclude with a discussion of the findings. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The means to communicate with computers has evolved 
from classic mouse input, to rich multimodal data [5]. 
Multimodal interfaces have combined various user input 
modes beyond the known keyboard and mouse input/output 
[6], and now include a wide range of possibilities; such as 
hand gestures, both static and dynamic, speech, head and 
eye tracking. Apart from usual voice interaction, advances 
like sensory output have also been developed in 
videogames. 
Games and infotainment are not, however, the only use 
for gesture based interfaces. The Intuitive Surgical da Vinci 
surgical system, for instance, is an example of a system for 
the capture of subtle motions of the surgeon, to teach 
complex procedures [7]. One may assume that in tasks such 
as the manipulation of objects, cultural implications might 
not be of considerable importance, but in the context of 
cultural and physical differences between surgeons, the 
subject calls for more attention [8]. 
Gesture-based interfaces enable freer, more intuitive, and 
richer digital interactions, than conventional user interfaces 
[9], leading to better idea generation [10].  When 
developing 
multimodal 
interfaces 
and 
applications, 
developers and designers work together to understand what 
types of gestures are used for what tasks, as well as the 
frequency, the importance, and ease of use of the interface. 
Therefore, there have been many attempts to design an 
appropriate 
gesture 
classification 
and 
segmentation 
“dictionaries”.  
A. Gesture classification and segmentation 
Gesture offers versatility when representing objects, or 
qualities of these in the scientific field. The main problem 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

here is that there is no common database of gestures used 
between developers and scientists.  The most recognized 
gesture classification, and the one referred to from now on, 
is the one established by McNeill in 1992 [11]. McNeill 
classifies 4 types of gestures; iconic (resemble what is being 
talked about, e.g., flapping arms when mentioning a bird), 
metaphoric (abstractedly pictorial, e.g., drawing a box shape 
when referring to a room), beat (gestures that index a word 
of phrase e.g., rhythmic arm movement used to add 
emphasis), and deictic (gestures pointing to something, e.g., 
while giving directions).  
The iconic ones are of particular interest to HCI and 
developing technologies as they allow accurate depiction of 
objects encountered by the user. The cultural background 
might be an influential factor in the design of gesture-based 
interfaces.  Metrically, culture could be reflected in the 
interactivity, symbol variety, re-hearsability and pre-
processability of gestures. 
 
B. Culture 
As defined by Hofstede [12] “Culture is the collective 
programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of 
one group or category of people from another”. Through the 
appropriate design of support-focused interfaces how we 
obtain maximum usability. Technology has been conceived 
in ‘prosthetic’ terms, as an extension to the body, or support 
for tasks [13] and given the global diversity, cultures will 
perceive 
these 
tasks 
differently. 
Language 
and 
representation are critical elements in the study of culture, 
because we are locked into our cultural perspectives and 
mindsets [14]. 
1) Culture and Interfaces 
We communicate and exchange information with a 
system or a device through interfaces. The more familiar or 
intuitive an interface is, the higher its usability.   
Cultural preferences determine the type of layout, texture, 
pattern and color [15] in website portals. Certain colors are 
offensive or uncomfortable for certain cultures, for instance, 
red is bad luck for Koreans, therefore, Korean websites 
might avoid the use of red. These examples illustrate the 
need to adapt interfaces to attract the targeted market, or in 
this case, culture. Culture does not exist as a computational 
term in HCI, even though there are efforts like tailored 
interfaces to a targeted culture. With every use of the 
technology, the success depends on the capabilities 
embedded in a persona who is “programmed” in a specific 
way. The mental “coding” of this persona will affect the 
usability.  
The cultural behavior is visual, but it is not always 
evident until there is an interaction. One instance is Rehm, 
Bee, and André [16] try to identify the culture of the user so 
that the behavior of an interactive system can be adapted to 
culture-dependent patterns of interaction. This was achieved 
via a Bayesian network model that based itself on gesture 
expressivity via speed, power or spatial extent. 
In our globalised reality, there is also the implication of 
remote international collaboration. Here, each participant 
has their own symbolic, iconic and metaphoric influence on 
their gestures [16]. As Hofstede concludes in writing about 
the influence of communication technologies, the software 
of the machines may be globalized, but the software of the 
minds that use them is not [12]. Therefore, the dominance of 
technology over culture is an illusion, and differences 
between cultures exist.  
2) Hofstedes Cultural Dimensions 
The most renowned cultural study involving the 
identification of common attributes is the work done by 
Gert Hofstede [12]. Hofstede developed a set of culture 
build-ups that describe the way in which national societies 
are built and the rules by which people think, feel and act. 
These differences are defined as five dimensions and are 
measured as indexes. The higher or lower the index, more or 
less the culture portrays this feature.  
The Hofstede’s model of dimensions of national culture 
has been applied predominantly in international business; 
marketing and consumer behavior works [18]. Now we 
briefly describe the dimensions by Hofstede.  
 
Power Distance (PDI): is the acceptance and 
expectation of power to be distributed unequally.  
 
Uncertainty Avoidance (UAI) indicates the extent to 
which the members of society feel uncomfortable or 
comfortable in an ambiguous or abnormal situation.  
 
Individualism (IDV) is the extent to which 
individuals are merged into groups. 
 
Masculinity (MAS) refers to the distribution of 
emotional roles between the genders, and also serves 
to classify a culture as assertive/ competitive 
(masculine) or  modest/caring (feminine).   
 
Countries with high Long- Term Orientation (LTO), 
foster pragmatic virtues oriented towards future 
rewards, in particular saving money, persistence, and 
adapting to changing circumstances.  
Now we present the cultures used in our experiments: 
Anglo-Celtic (Australian, British, Irish, New Zealanders) 
and Latin Americans (American countries where Spanish is 
primarily spoken: Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador, Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Peru, 
Uruguay, and Venezuela).  
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

In Fig. 1, we can see a comparison of both samples; an 
average was taken of the indexes of the countries mentioned 
above. As we can see in Fig. 1, the Anglo-Celtic culture had 
a lower PDI (30, 70), and UA (43, 86). On the other hand, 
they have higher IDV (82, 20), MAS (63, 47) and LTO (29, 
23) than the Latin American countries.  
Therefore, we assume that due to the greater equality 
(Low PDI) Anglo-Celtics feel, they are more individualistic 
(High IDV) and can master new challenges (Low UAI) 
better than their fellow Latin American colleagues. Hosftede 
developed a solid foundation for identifying the possible 
complication of cross-cultural interactions, what makes 
cultural differences, and how they would act upon this [12].  
Even though Hosftede is cited by an extensive amount 
of sociologists and anthropologists, for the analysis taken in 
this paper, it is also beneficial to analyze the context 
classification made by the anthropologist Edward T Hall 
[19]. Hall identifies a culture’s use context in routine 
communication and classifies them as High or Low. In a 
high context culture (including much of the Middle East, 
Asia, Africa, and South America), many things are left 
unsaid, letting the culture explain. There is more non-verbal 
communication, a higher use of metaphors, and more 
reading between the lines. In a lower context culture 
(including North America and much of Western Europe), 
the emphasis is on the spoken or written word. They have 
explicit messages, focused on verbal communication, and 
their reactions could be visible, external and outward [19].  
We can say that Anglo-Celtic cultures (e.g. Australian, 
British, Irish, and New Zealanders) categorize as low 
context cultures and Latin Americans (American countries 
where Spanish and Portuguese are primarily spoken) 
correspond to the high context cultures. This classification 
lets us make certain assumptions, like the Anglo-Celtic may 
predominantly use words, while the Latin Americans would 
use gestures.  
These characteristics identified for each of the samples 
will be later referred to in order to understand possible 
influence of these in the gesture performance after the 
experimentation.  
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
In order to explore the influence of culture in gesture 
performance, an experiment was carried out. As following 
up on Bischels’ experiment the participants will be required 
to describe two chairs to the camera. They were sat in front 
of the camera and told to act as if having a video conference 
with someone. This experiment was chosen because it is not 
of interest to determine the types of gestures used to draw 
an object as these may be standardized worldwide, it was of 
interest to know what the user himself would bring to the 
table. Bischels’ experiment also brings together language 
and gesture; both of these being important in defining a 
culture (as stated in Section 2.B). Throughout this study, the 
observational task analysis method will be used. The 
observational technique, via the video footage, will permit a 
careful analysis of gestures occurring at certain timestamps 
during the interaction. This will be helpful in identifying 
individual gesture differences in task performance. 
 
A. Hypothesis 
The hypothesis taken as a base for the analysis is as 
follows:  
“Designers’ culture may affect gesture recognition in 
multimodal interfaces because of variations in gesture type, 
gesture frequency, and gesture occurrence”. 
This hypothesis brings together the subjects of gesture, 
multimodal interfaces, gesture segmentation and culture 
based theories. The three metrics stated in the hypothesis are 
gesture type, frequency and occurrence.   
 
Gesture Type. The gesture type is based on 
McNeill’s classification. It is believed that certain 
types of gestures could be attributed to different 
cultures; therefore, it is important to analyze the type 
of gesture that is mostly performed.  
 
Frequency. The frequency is measured as the number 
of gestures performed by a participant divided by the 
period of the gesture of the same participant. This 
way we obtain the gestures per second which will 
help assess speed of gesture performance and point 
out what gestures are most significant for a gesture 
recognition system.  
 
Occurrence. Occurrence measures the appearance of 
the gestures. This once again tries to identify if 
certain gestures are culture-oriented or task-oriented 
(i.e., related to the task being performed).  
B. Experiment Guidelines 
The task to be performed consists of describing two chairs 
(See Figure 2). Participants were encouraged to use as many 
gestures as possible, just as in [21]. The analysis 
methodology is via video analysis using a video annotation 
tool called Anvil.  
 
Figure 1. Hostedes 5D Model comparing   
Anglo-Celtic and Latin American countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

TABLE 1. WORDS DERIVED FROM VIDEOS  
FOR CHAIR 1 AND CHAIR 2 
Words 
Samples 
Anglo-
Celtic 
Latin 
American 
Both 
Total 
Chair 1 
9 
13 
6 
28 
Chair 2 
13 
10 
5 
30 
 
1) Procedure 
There were a total of 8 Latin American participants and 
11 Anglo-Celtics videotaped, but only the ones with clearer 
hand gestures and comprehension of the task were chosen. 
A criterion for deselecting a video footage for analysis was 
either the lack of gestures, or the lack of iconic gestures 
which are the focus of this study.  
The final selection was 5 participants from each sample 
group, totaling 10 participants. For the purpose of the 
experiment two samples were needed, one with English as a 
first language (Anglo-Celtics, and one with English as a 
second language (Latin Americans). For the second sample, 
it was important that they were sufficiently proficient and 
immersed in an English speaking country (Australia) for the 
past 6 months. 
2) Gesture coding 
In gesture analysis, we first analyzed the videos and 
segmented the video footages. For each occurrence, what 
was recorded was the name of the gesture type (repetition, 
beat, iconic, metaphoric, deictic junk) that was performed 
by the participant. These correspond to McNeill’s 
classification, but the repetition gesture (which is a type of 
deictic gesture) was coded separately because of the 
difference in language. Repetition was considered to be a 
potential factor that reflects culture, as uncertainty in the 
language, or description, could be characterized this way. 
Junk gestures were identified as gestures without a 
particular meaning. This could be a gesture that the user 
takes the gesture back (which is a “mistake”) or made some 
transition movements.  
Gestures are separated by pauses, and a pause is defined 
as a temporary stop in action or speech [22]. The purpose of 
this pause was to eliminate the period of inactivity at the 
beginning of a video, when the participant explains what he 
or she might do, or when the participant states that he or she 
has ended.  
3) Speech Coding 
Words were not a requirement, yet the participants talked 
through their depictions. As a result, the “verbal 
descriptions more significantly used were coded. These 
were classified as adjectives, parts of the chair, verbs, order 
and shapes (See Table 1). It was found that each iconic and 
metaphoric gesture is related to at least one word, reflecting 
the participant’s cognition.  
Finally, we obtained close to 10 minutes of monologue 
object descriptions in a video footage. Seconds were used as 
the time measuring unit.    
IV. 
RESULTS 
Numerically, Anglo-Celtics did not display too much 
variation (SD) between chair descriptions, regardless of the 
second ones unordinary structure (See Table 2). 
The Anglo-Celtic participants used more gestures on 
average to describe Chair 2. On the contrary, the Latin 
Americans used less number of gestures to describe the 
same chair. The reason behind this could be the degree of 
comfort in using a language when describing the abstract. 
This reflects how the language and increase of the 
complication of the task have an influence in cognition.  
Given that the features found in the abstract chair are not as 
common as the features found in the classic chair, this 
sample may have had more trouble in finding a way to 
explain words or shapes in the abstract chair.  
The SD was again higher with the Anglo-Celtics, which 
made it hard to identify a pattern. On the other hand, the 
Latin Americans had a smaller SD and more frequent 
gestures, meaning shorter, concise, and common gestures by 
most of the participants. Their gesture frequency is higher in 
Chair 1, and increases in Chair 2. This could be because 
Latin Americans scored higher results in junk gestures in 
the second Chair. 
Latin Americans had more frequent gestures in both 
chairs meaning that they performed more gestures per 
 
 
Figure 2. Classical chair (left) ,  Abstract chair (right) 
 
TABLE 2.      VIDEO ANALYSIS FOR CHAIR 1 AND CHAIR 2 
Chair 
Metrics 
Sample 
Avg gesture 
duration 
Total no of 
gestures 
Avg gestures 
SD 
Avg gesture 
Time 
Frequency 
Chair 1 
Anglo-Celtic 
1.84 
65 
12.8 
5.63 
22.74 
0.56 
Chair 1 
Latin American 
1.49 
59 
11.8 
2.16 
17.81 
0.66 
Chair 2 
Anglo-Celtic 
1.73 
65 
13 
7.17 
23 
0.56 
Chair 2 
Latin American 
1.67 
43 
8.6 
2.88 
14.22 
0.60 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

second, even though they had fewer gestures in total. The 
smaller count of gestures by Latin Americans is justified by 
the lesser time in which they performed the gestures.  
Given the distribution of gestures, we can see that in 
general, iconic gestures decrease with Chair 2, in contrast, 
junk and deictic gestures appear more.  
The Latin Americans used more words for Chair 1 and 
less in Chair 2 (See Table 1). Less gestures and words in 
Chair 2 could probably mean a better selection of words and 
gestures, or the lack of vocabulary.  The higher words count 
for Chair 1 must mean a higher degree of confidence, or 
more predictable and structured ideas on behalf of the Latin 
Americans. 
 
A.  Findings 
After analyzing the performance of both samples, in this 
section we reveal the results of the metrics stated in the 
hypothesis: gesture type, frequency and occurrence.  
 
1)  Frequency  
Gesture frequency indicates that overall the Latin 
American sample performed more gestures per second; 
however, this evidence is not enough to say that a certain 
sample was more expressive than the other. The use of 
gestures involves various factors, such as the comfort of a 
person had in front of the camera, or the confidence with the 
object being described, as well as the language. Chair 1 had 
Iconic and repetition gestures with higher frequency in both 
samples. Chair 2 on the other hand had an increase in junk 
and metaphoric gestures. The most significant gestures for 
the gesture recognition were the iconic ones as well as 
repetitions, and subsequently they are the ones that convey 
the representation of the chair. 
2)  Occurrence 
There are no junk and deictic gestures in the description 
of Chair 1 for the Anglo-Celtic sample, but they do appear 
in Chair 2. We can see that number of gestures increases in 
Chair 2. This means that the occurrence of gestures was 
related to the task, not to the culture. Since Chair 2 was 
more complex and there was a need for more explanation by 
the user.  
3) Gesture Type.  
The results for gesture types show that in Chair 1, the 
iconic gestures were close to 50% in both sample groups. In 
Chair 2, the iconic gestures diminish and metaphoric 
gestures increase for the Latin American sample group. 
Again, this may be related to the complexity of the chairs.  
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Now we may relate the gesture metrics to the cultural 
attributions made by both Hofstede and Hall (Section 2.2). 
As Anglo-Celtics are low context cultures, they used more 
words and gestures in longer time, since they took time to 
explain the chair in detail. On the other hand, Latin 
Americans, which represent the high context culture, 
performed fewer gestures, in shorter time and used fewer 
words. The element that calls for attention is the higher use 
of metaphoric gestures, as this is a characteristic of a society 
that relies on reading between the lines and letting 
nonverbal cues explain the meaning. 
Continuing with the culture analysis, we will now state 
the relation of the gesture performance with Hofstede’s 
cultural dimensions. The connection between these 
dimension (experiment, cultural aspects, participants, 
results) are displayed in Table 3. As mentioned before, the 
traits that are mostly reflected are IDV, UAI, and MAS.  
 
IDV. This trait could be related in fact that the SD 
between samples is higher with the Anglo-Celtic 
cultures reflecting the societies high individualism 
index (IDV, 82). On the other hand, the low SD with 
the Latin Americans shows the low individualism 
index (IDV, 20).  
 
UAI. This trait could be reflected in the overall 
impression of Chair 2. The Anglo-Celtic sample did 
not vary too much in gesture means and time from 
one chair to another, showing greater comfort with 
adverse situations (UAI, 43). It is possible to say that 
Latin Americans showed their high uncertainty 
avoidance (UAI, 86) since they use less time and 
limited gestures, possibly sticking to “what they 
knew” instead of managing the abstract.  
 
MAS. This trait could be related to the fact that the 
Anglo-Celtics as a low context culture are more 
assertive (MAS, 63), in comparison to the Latin 
Americans that are more human-oriented and 
therefore there is a higher use of metaphors (MAS, 
47) in their descriptions. 
The Latin Americans in this sample have more of an 
advantage with the language as they have been immersed in 
the culture and language for the past 6 months. Regardless, 
TABLE 3.      INTEGRATION OF EXPERIMENT AND CULTURE 
Sample 
Metrics 
Context 
Predominant culture trait 
Metric Evidence 
Predominant Gesture Type 
Anglo-Celtic 
Low 
context  
(assertive, rely con words) 
Individualism 
Masculinity 
High SD 
Constant gestures beween chairs 
More gestures and more time 
Iconic 
Latin 
American 
High 
context  
(rely heavily on non verbal 
communication) 
High Uncertainty Avoidance 
Collectivism 
 
Low SD 
Fewer Gestures in the second Chair 
Fewer gestures in less time 
Metaphoric 
Repetition 
 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

they still performed fewer gestures and chose different 
words.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
A. How these affect multimodal interfaces? 
We started this paper in order to prove if multimodal 
interfaces could be affected by a user’s culture. After the 
literature review, we have seen that any interaction is a 
result of user, task and input. Apart from performance or 
stability issues, multimodal interfaces are subject to a 
context problem. In the international scene, depending on 
where participants are from, their style of communication 
will vary. This analysis arrived to the conclusion that as the 
complexity of a task increases, so does the use and type of 
gestures. The metrics stated in the hypothesis influence 
multimodal interfaces and their performance in the 
following ways: 
 
Frequency may affect the recognition rate 
because of the need for faster, more efficient 
algorithms. 
 
Occurrence also affects interaction due to the 
possibility of absence (zero occurrences) of 
certain gestures that may convey functionality 
(i.e. iconic). 
 
Gesture type, as well as occurrence, also affects 
the goal that the user wishes to attain. 
Identifying and classifying certain gestures due 
to their use during trials would permit the 
identification of type tendencies and will help 
embed differences in the development of the 
gesture recognition tool. 
 
Due to the “freedom” that hand gestures provide, gesture 
based interfaces gain popularity. The aim of HCI is to have 
users strongly prefer to adopt the new technologies for 
interaction because of the usability opportunities they 
provide. Culture influences a user’s openness and a more 
conservative or traditional culture, like the Latin American, 
could take more time to adapt, this was visible with the 
frequency rate difference between the academic and abstract 
chair. The performance of a multimodal interface will not 
only be affected by the task being performed, but by the 
cultural background and language skills of the user. 
Therefore, the design of gesture-based interfaces not only 
requires a multidisciplinary approach, but also a culturally 
sensitive one.  
We acknowledge that future studies need a larger sample 
size. Similarly, future studies may also work on the 
consistency of the annotations by having more than one 
person in charge of coding the gestures. Also, the results 
could have significant variations if the experiment is carried 
out in Spanish, the native language of the second sample. 
Further research studies can also attempt to investigate the 
effects of gender on performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Australian Research 
Council Discovery grant DP0988088 to Kavakli, titled “A 
Gesture-Based Interface for Designing in Virtual Reality”.  
Also, the experiment on which this project was based is 
inspired by Jing Liu’s previous work “Temporal Relation 
between speech and co-verbal iconic gestures in multimodal 
interface design”. Authors are grateful to her for her support 
in sharing data. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wachs, P., Kölsch, M., Stern H., Edan Y. (2011) Vision-Based Hand-
Gesture Applications. Communications of the ACM. vol. 54.  no. 2., 
pp. 60-71 DOI:10.1145/1897816.1897838 
[2] Kita, S. (ed.) (2003). Pointing and Placing. Pointing: Where 
Language, Culture and Cognition Meet. Retrieved April 2012 from 
http://www-
psych.stanford.edu/~herb/2000s/Clark.Pointing.placing.03.pdf 
[3] Bavelas J., Gerwing J., Sutton Ch., and Prevost D. (2008) Gesturing 
on the telephone: Independent effects of dialogue and visibility 
Journal of Memory and Language Volume: 58, Issue: 2, pp. 495-520 
ISSN: 0749596X DOI: 10.1016/j.jml.2007.02.004 
[4] Visser, W., and Maher, M.L. (2011).The Role of gesture in designing. 
Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and 
Manufacturing Vol 25, pp. 213-220. Cambridge University Press 
DOI: 10.1017/S08900604/11 
[5] Gullberg, M., (2010) Methodological reflections on gesture analysis 
in second language acquisition and bilingualism research. Second 
Language 
Research 
26,1 
; 
pp. 
75–102. 
DOI: 
10.1177/0267658309337639 
[6] Karray, F., Alemzadeh, M., Saleh, J., and  Arab, N. (2008) Human-
Computer Interaction: Overview on State of the Art. International 
journal on smart sensing and intelligent systems, 1,1 Retrieved April 
2012  from http://www.s2is.org/Issues/v1/n1/papers/paper9.pdf 
[7] Lanfranco, A., Castellanos, A., Desai, J., Meyers, W. (2004) Robotic 
Surgery. A Current Perspective Ann Surg. 2004 January; 239(1): pp. 
14–21. DOI:  10.1097/01.sla.0000103020.19595.7d 
[8] Purdue University (2011, February 3). Future surgeons may use 
robotic nurse, 'gesture recognition'. ScienceDaily. Retrieved April 
2012, 
from 
http://www.sciencedaily.com-
/releases/2011/02/110203152548.htm 
[9] Van den Hoven, E., and Mazealek, A. (2010). Grasping Gestures: 
Gesturing with physical artifacts. Artificial Intelligence for 
Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing, 25, pp. 255-271. 
DOI: 10.1017/S0890060411000072 
[10] Kim, M.J., and Maher, M.L. (2008). The impact of tangible user 
interfaces on spatial cognition during collaborative design. Design 
Studies 29(3), pp. 222–253 DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.03.031 
[11] Berry, M. (2009) The Importance of Bodily Gesture Example 
1. McNeill’s classification of gesture types Retrieved April 2012 from 
http://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.09.15.5/berry_ex1.html 
[12] Hofstede, G. H.,  Hofstede G. J. ,and Minkov,  M. (2010) Cultures 
and organizations: software of the mind : intercultural cooperation 
and its importance for survival. (3rd ed) McGraw-Hill Professional 
ISBN 0071664181, 9780071664189  
[13] Murphie, A. , and Potts, J. (2003) Culture and Technology. N.Y: 
Palgrave Mcmillan  
[14] Hall, S. (2007) Review: Representation: Cultural Representations and 
Signifying Practices (Culture, Media and Identities Series) London, 
SAGE Publications Limited 
[15] Aaron Marcus and Associates, Inc  (2010) Cross-Cultural User-
Interface Design for Work, Home, and On the Way: Accounting for 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Cultural 
Preferences, 
Acceptance, 
and 
Constraints. 
ACM 
SIGGRAPH ASIA 2010 Courses. DOI 10.1145/1900520.1900525  
[16] Rehm, M., Bee, N.,  and André, E. (2008) Wave like an Egyptian — 
Acceleration 
based 
gesture 
recognition 
for 
culture-specific 
interactions. In Proceedings of HCI 2008 Culture, Creativity, 
Interaction, pp. 13–22, 2008. 
[17] Yammiyavar, P., Clemmensen, T., and Kumar, J. (2008). Influence of 
cultural background on non-verbal communication in a usability 
testing situation. International Journal of Design, 2(2), 31-40. 
Retrieved 
April 
2012 
from 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/313/164 
[18] Hofstede, G. (2011) Dimensions of national Cultures  Retrieved April 
2012 
 
from 
http://www.geerthofstede.nl/culture/dimensions-of-
national-cultures.aspx 
[19] Hall, E.T. (1976) Beyond Culture. Anchor Books  
[20] Changing Minds (2011) Hall's cultural factors. Retrieved April 2012 
from  http://changingminds.org/explanations/culture/hall_culture.htm 
[21] Liu J., and Kavakli, M. (2011) Temporal Relation between speech 
and co-verbal iconic gestures in multimodal interface design. 
Retrieved 
April 
2012 
from 
 
 
http://coral2.spectrum.uni-
bielefeld.de/gespin2011/final/Liu.pdf 
[22] Pause (2011) In Oxford Dictionaries. Retrieved April 2012 from  
http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition/pause 
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

