Efficient and Accurate Label Propagation on Large Graphs and Label Sets 
 
Michele Covell and Shumeet Baluja 
Google Research 
Google Inc., Mountain View CA, USA 
covell@google.com   shumeet@google.com  
 
 
Abstract—Many web-based application areas must infer label 
distributions starting from a small set of sparse, noisy labels.  
Examples 
include 
searching 
for, 
recommending, 
and 
advertising against image, audio, and video content. These 
labeling problems must handle millions of interconnected 
entities (users, domains, content segments) and thousands of 
competing labels (interests, tags, recommendations, topics).  
Previous work has shown that graph-based propagation can be 
very effective at finding the best label distribution across 
nodes, starting from partial information and a weighted-
connection graph.  In their work on video recommendations, 
Baluja et al. [1] showed high-quality results using Adsorption, a 
normalized propagation process. An important step in the 
original formulation of Adsorption was re-normalization of the 
label vectors associated with each node, between every 
propagation step.  That interleaved normalization forced 
computation of all label distributions, in synchrony, in order to 
allow 
the 
normalization 
to 
be 
correctly 
determined.  
Interleaved normalization also prevented use of standard 
linear-algebra methods, like stabilized bi-conjugate gradient 
descent (BiCGStab) and Gaussian elimination.  This paper 
presents a method that replaces the interleaved normalization 
with a single pre-normalization, done once before the main 
propagation process starts, allowing use of selective label 
computation (label slicing) as well as large-matrix-solution 
methods.  As a result, much larger graphs and label sets can be 
handled than in the original formulation and more accurate 
solutions can be found in fewer propagation steps.  We also 
report results from using pre-normalized Adsorption in topic 
labeling for web domains, using label slicing and BiCGStab. 
Keywords-graph propagation, large-scale labeling, stabilized 
bi-conjugate gradient descent, Gaussian elimination, topic 
discovery, web domains. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many different approaches have recently been proposed 
to label propagation across weighted graphs of nodes 
[1,2,3,4,5,6].  These applications share the characteristics of 
having a limited amount of label data, often of uneven 
quality, associated with a large graph of weighted 
connections between many nodes, some unlabeled and some 
partially labeled. 
We build on the work done by Zhu and Ghahramani [2] 
and Baluja et al. [1].  The Baluja paper described Adsorption, 
a graph-based approach to estimating label distributions, 
which 
was 
applied 
to 
providing 
YouTube 
video 
recommendations.  The resulting top-pick recommendation 
was more accurate than the next-best alternative algorithm 
for all users who had watched 3 or more previous videos, 
with accuracy improvements of up to 100% for the most 
frequent watchers. In Adsorption, each node (e.g., each video 
for which we are building a recommendation list) has a 
limited 
capacity 
for 
labels 
(e.g., 
the 
proposed 
recommendations for that video).  Baluja et al. [1] enforce 
this constraint by interleaving a normalization step at each 
node, in between every propagation step.  Without this 
normalization, the solution is not guaranteed to converge. 
The interleaved normalization step is needed for 
convergence but prevents label slicing: under the original 
formulation, we cannot find the estimated distribution of a 
subset of labels without solving for the full set of labels first.  
Furthermore, the interleaved normalization prevents the use 
of most standard linear-algebra techniques, such as Gaussian 
elimination of nodes that are not of direct interest (though 
they still are needed for their effect on the remainder of the 
graph).  Additionally, methods for rapid convergence to the 
final solution, such as stabilized bi-conjugate gradient 
descent (BiCGStab), cannot be used in the original 
formulation. 
This paper presents a formula for pre-normalizing the 
Adsorption graph and label weights, such that there is no 
need for interleaved normalization (Section III).  With this, 
we can use BiCGStab and Gaussian elimination.  Our graph 
size contains more than 10 million nodes and 4 billion inter-
connections (i.e., more than 10 million rows and more than 4 
billion non-zero entries in the corresponding matrix), which 
is more than we can reasonably handle in straightforward 
implementations of these techniques. Instead, we use 
implementations of BiCGStab and Gaussian elimination in 
the 
MapReduce 
framework. 
 
We 
describe 
these 
implementations briefly, in Sections IV and V. Finally, in 
Section VI, we present our results on topic labeling of web 
domains, using a graph based on shared keywords between 
pages across the domains.  We start the paper with a recap of 
the original Adsorption application and mathematical 
description, in Section II. 
II. 
ADSORPTION (WITH INTERLEAVED NORMALIZATION) 
The original formulation of Adsorption [1] can be 
described as an iteration using two systems of equations: 
X n+1 =σ X n + βW X n +
γ L
δ1
!
"
#
$                (1)  
{X n+1
}i* =
{ X n+1
}i*
{ X n+1
}i* 1  
(2)  
where double underlining indicates a matrix of values, a 
single underline is a vector, not-underlined values are 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

scalars, and the tilde indicates a not-normalized set of values.  
The matrix W  holds the connection weights with row i   
giving the incoming connections into the i’th node.  This 
matrix often is symmetric, to start with, but this property is 
not required and will be given up later to allow for pre-
normalization.  The matrix L  holds the weights of the 
injection label information. These are often noisy or 
incomplete label sets based on some prior information, with 
the graph propagation as a way to improve and expand these 
label sets.  In 
, each label is associated with a column and 
the weights for the injection labels for the i’th node of the 
graph in the i’th row of the matrix.  In addition to the true 
labels, in L , Baluja et al. [1] add an abandonment label, 
represented in (1) by the appended column δ1.  The scalar 
δ  can be thought of in many different ways: as the loss in 
certainty about any of the labels that are propagated for one 
hop in the graph; as the number of random walks through the 
graph that end with “abandonment”, giving no final label set; 
as the regularization margin in the system of equations.  The 
other scalars (𝜎, 𝛽, and 𝛾) allow graph-wide balancing of the 
previous (same-node) labels, of the propagated neighbors’ 
labels, and of the injection labels. Finally, the matrix X n  is 
the label distribution estimate, with the i’th row containing 
the estimated labels for the i’th node, including as the last 
column the abandonment label.  In this context, the node’s 
abandonment weight provides a measure, at that node, of the 
label uncertainty. 
Equation (1) creates a new un-normalized estimate of the 
steady-state label distribution across all the nodes using a 
weighted combination of the previous normalized estimate 
for the distribution ( X n ), of a graph-weighted propagated 
version of that same distribution (W X n ), of injection labels  
( L ), and of the abandonment label ( δ ).  Equation (2) 
provides a normalized estimate of the label distribution, by 
dividing each row of the estimate from (1) by the L1 norm of 
the full label set, including the abandonment label. 
Iterating over (1) and (2) together is guaranteed to 
converge to a stable steady-state solution, as long as δ  is 
greater than 0.  Baluja et al. [1] used this algorithm to 
successfully provide video recommendations that, using a 
top-pick-accuracy 
measure, 
outperformed 
alternative 
approaches.  Our goal is to provide a formulation for the 
same Adsorption algorithm that does not require per-
propagation-step normalization, allowing us to use label 
slicing and standard linear-algebra tools. 
III. 
PRE-NORMALIZED ADSORPTION 
We achieve our goal of pre-normalized Adsorption by 
first assuming that all associations in our graph and in our 
label 
injection 
are 
non-negative. 
 
Specifically:
 
sign
{X n
}ij
(
) ≥ 0 , sign
{W
}ij
(
) ≥ 0 , and sign
L
({ }ij
) ≥ 0 . 
This non-negative assumption works well with the 
partial-information applications that are the most common 
ones in large-graph labeling formulations: for example, in 
video recommendation, we can say that two videos are often 
watched together, within a single viewing session, but it is 
much more difficult to say that two videos are negatively 
associated (that watching one means you are significantly 
less likely to watch the other), since we seldom have enough 
training data to make such an assertion with any confidence. 
For those applications where we do have confidence in 
negative label-to-node associations (negative values in L ), 
we can handle these by introducing a negated label column 
and using positive associations with the negated label where 
we would have otherwise used negative associations with the 
positive label.  Handling negative node-to-node connections 
(negative values in W ) is also possible but we omit it here, 
since it is an uncommon use case (and is much more 
complicated). 
Assuming we have non-negative values in our 
component matrices, we can consider the denominator of (2) 
in more detail: 
{ X n+1
}i* 1 =
(σ I + βW
)X n +
γ L
δ1
!
"
#
$
{
}
i* 1
  
 
      (3) 
=
{σ I + βW
}ik X n
{
}kj
k∑
"
#
$
%
&
'
j∑
+
γ L
δ1
(
)
*
+
{
}
ij
j∑
 
      (4) 
=
{σ I + βW
}ik
{X n
}kj
j∑
k∑
+γ
L
{ }ij
j∑
+δ   
 
      (5) 
=
{σ I + βW
}ik
k∑
+γ
L
{ }i* 1 +δ   
 
 
 
      (6) 
=σ + β
{W
}i* 1 +γ
L
{ }i* 1 +δ  
 
 
 
 
      (7) 
Equation (3) simply provides the expansion of the L1 row 
norm using the propagation (1).  Equation (4) makes use of 
the non-negativity conditions that we are requiring, in order 
to remove the absolute values implied by the L1 norm and 
expands the norm summation, as well as the summation 
implicit in the W X n  matrix multiply.  Equation (5) swaps 
the order of summation, allowing us to make use of the unit 
L1 row norm for X n  in (6).  Simplifying the summations and 
noting the use of the row-norm definitions for L  and W  
finally results in (7). 
The useful property of (7) is that 
{ X n+1
}i* 1 depends only 
the initial combination weights and the row norms of L  and 
W .  We can use this property to pre-normalize by first 
defining 
 
λi =σ + β
{W
}i* 1 +γ
L
{ }i* 1 +δ   
      (8)
 
ˆσ i =σ
λi
ˆσ = diag( ˆσ i)                 (9) 
ˆβi = β
{W
}i* 1
λi
ˆβ = diag( ˆβi)             (10)
 
ˆγi =γ
L
{ }i* 1
λi
ˆγ = diag( ˆγi)  
            (11)
 
ˆδi = δ
λi
ˆδ = vec( ˆδi)  
 
            (12)  
and then using these new quantities in a pre-normalized 
Adsorption algorithm. 
 
X n+1 = ˆσ X n + ˆβW X n +
ˆγ L
ˆδ
!
"#
$
%& 
    (13)  
L
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Note that direct use of (13) is exactly the power-iteration 
approach to finding the solution (used in [1]) and will give 
the same solutions at every iteration as the combination of 
(1) and (2): the pre-normalization has the exact same effect, 
even though it is only done once, as the interleaved 
normalizations.  Equation (13), therefore, also is guaranteed 
to converge to a stable solution, just as the original 
Adsorption algorithm is guaranteed. The advantage is that 
we do not need to normalize at each step and, as a result, we 
can compute an incomplete set of labels, while still deriving 
the benefits of the full label set to limit belief within the set 
of labels that are interested in.  This slicing directly reduces 
the computational costs by the same percentage as the 
percentage of dropped labels. Furthermore, with the use of 
(13) as the system of equations for which we want a solution, 
we can use standard linear-algebra tools, like BiCGStab (for 
faster convergence) and Gaussian elimination (for shrinking 
our graph matrix).  We discuss these algorithms and their 
large-graph implementations next. 
 
IV. 
MAP-REDUCE FORMULATION OF STABILIZED BI-
CONJUGATE GRADIENT DESCENT (BICGSTAB) 
In [1], Baluja et al. implicitly use power iteration to solve 
their system of constraints.  For symmetric systems of 
constraints, gradient-descent methods can find solutions in 
fewer iterations, for any given level of accuracy (as 
measured by the average residual error).  However, due to 
the pre-normalization of Adsorption, we no longer have a 
symmetric matrix, and must move to bi-conjugate gradient 
approaches. Since the most direct generalization (biconjugate 
gradient descent) is not numerically stable, we focus on 
stabilized biconjugate gradient descent [7], which has been 
shown to converge more uniformly than power iteration, 
without the numerical issues (not-stablized) bi-conjugate 
gradient descent.  We ran several simulations using power 
iteration and BiCGStab, based on random graph matrices 
with the same level of regularization as we expect to see 
through the abandonment variable in our true graphs.  In 
these tests, when the graph matrix and the beginning label 
estimates were non-sparse, on average, BiCGStab converged 
to the correct solution 12 times faster than the power-
iteration method (e.g., BiCGStab would converge in two 
iterations, requiring only 5 graph-matrix multiplies, while 
power iteration would require 60 iterations, needing 60 
graph-matrix multiplies to converge to the same level of 
accuracy). 
When the graph matrix and the beginning label estimates 
were sparse, there were similar differences in the rate of 
convergence, away from the “wavefront boundary”.  We use 
the term wavefront to emphasize that (for both power 
iteration and BiCGStab), updates are done in such a way that 
non-zero values propagate through the graph according to 
the neighborhood connections.  When the labels are sparsely 
injected, non-zero values move in a “wave”, outward from 
non-zero areas into areas that were zero (due to sparseness). 
Both power iteration and BiCGStab rely on the graph matrix 
to determine the label-estimate update, so both have their 
non-zero wavefronts progress in the same way. 
Due to the size of the graph over which we will be 
operating, 
we 
implemented 
BiCGStab 
using 
three 
MapReduce [8] stages per iteration.  Using the notation from 
the Wikipedia article on BiCGStab [9], we have a distinct set 
of vectors for each of the labels on which we want to 
estimate the final distribution.   We arrive at the BiCGStab 
components A  and b  (at least conceptually) by separating 
ˆγ L  into columns corresponding tob , by separating X n  into 
columns corresponding to xn  and by using 
A = I − ˆσ − ˆβW   
 
         (14) 
We select an initial shadow direction ˆr 0  for each column 
aligned with its first-pass residual vector, r0 . Note that 
computing the first-pass residual 
vector takes one 
MapReduce to compute r0 = b − Ax0 .  (For our applications, 
b itself is often a good initial estimate for x .)   It is this 
separate estimation of each column (where each column 
corresponds to a single label) that makes label slicing so 
simple and powerful in combination with BiCGStab. 
Unlike [9], we mark all our auxiliary variables with the 
iteration on which they were computed, since this makes our 
Reduce processing more uniform and reliable: therefore, we 
use αn , sn
 
and t n  here (instead of their un-versioned form 
from [9]). To allow the remaining framework to operate 
smoothly, starting from the initialization (the 0’th pass), we 
also use the settings for our auxiliary variables that are 
suggested in [9], namely: ρ0 =α =ω0 =1 and ν 0 = p0 = 0 . 
For all iterations after this initialization, there are 3 
MapReduce stages: (A) updating the search direction and its 
projection through A ; (B) updating the shadow direction and 
its projection through A ; and (C) combining the computed 
components to give a new state estimate and residual. 
For all three MapReduce stages, the reduce processing is 
the same: from the set of inputs computed in the Map stage, 
as well as the inputs passed directly through to the Reducer 
from previous stages or iterations, keep and combine the 
results for each variable (auxiliary variables, residual, and 
state estimate) that is marked with the highest iteration 
number observed for that variable, and throw away earlier 
versions. 
A. Updating the search direction and its projection 
1) Map (shared) context: 
a. 
From initial selection: 
0ˆr  
b. From previous iteration: 
 ρn−1 , αn−1, ωi−1, rn−1 , ν n−1 , pn−1  
c. 
From pre-map computation: 
ρn = ˆr 0,rn−1  
pn = rn−1 +
ρn
(ρn−1
)
αn−1
(ωn−1
) pn−1 −ωn−1ηn−1
(
)
 
2) Map computation: 
For each row in A , compute ηn
{
}i = A
{ }i* pn
 
B. Updating the shadow direction and its projection 
1) Map (shared) context: 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

a. 
From initial selection: 
0ˆr  
b. From previous iteration: rn−1  
c. 
From previous stage of current iteration: 
 ρn , ηn  
d. From pre-map computation: 
αn = ρn
ˆr 0,ηn  
sn = rn−1 −αnηn
 
2) Map computation: 
For each row in A , compute tn
{ }i = A
{ }i* sn
 
C. Combining components for residual and state estimates 
1) Map (shared) context: 
a. 
From previous iteration: xn−1 
b. From previous stages of current iteration: 
αn , sn , tn , pn  
2) Map computation: For each label, compute 
ωn = sn,tn
tn,tn  
xn = xn−1 +αn pn +ωnsn  
rn = sn −ωntn 
V. 
MAPREDUCE FORMULATION OF GAUSSIAN 
ELIMINATION 
Label slicing allows us to compute our distributions on 
the subset of labels that are of most interest, while still 
benefiting from the constraints effectively imposed by the 
full label set.  In a similar way, Gaussian elimination allows 
us to compute our distribution on a subset of nodes 
(domains), 
while 
still 
benefiting 
from 
the 
indirect 
interconnections that are formed through the nodes that we 
do not want to explicitly include in our calculation.  The 
computational savings provided by Gaussian elimination is 
linear with the percentage reduction in the number of graph 
connections.  In addition, Gaussian elimination can speed up 
convergence, by effectively increasing the wavefront-
propagation speed through those parts of the graph that were 
originally connected via the eliminated nodes. 
Gaussian elimination is much simpler to implement in 
the MapReduce framework than BiCGStab, requiring only a 
single stage and capable of handling elimination of multiple 
nodes per run.  The Reduce processing in the MapReduce is 
a straight pass-through of the outputs from the map stage.   
To make the description more concise, define 
Akeep = A
{ }i*
Lγ keep =
{ˆγ L
}i*
i ∈
nodes
to be kept
"
#$
%$
&
'$
($  
Aremove = A
{ }j*
Lγ remove =
{ˆγ L
}j*
j ∈
nodes to be
eliminated
"
#$
%$
&
'$
($  
 
Using this notation, the map processing is 
1) Map (shared) context: 
From stored representation: 
 Aremove , Lγ
remove  
2) Map computation: For each row, i, in Akeep  and Lγ
keep  
a) Initialize 
Akeep = Akeep,
Aremove = Aremove 
Lγ
keep = Lγ
keep,
Lγ
remove = Lγ
remove
 
b) Compute the pivot strength, πij , for each 
j ∈ nodes to be eliminated
{
}: 
πij =
{ Akeep
}ij
{ Aremove
}jj  
and select the elimination node, j , with the smallest 
amplitude πij   
c) Eliminate all non-zero entries in the j ’th column in 
{ Akeep
}i*  and  Aremove , with matched operations on 
{Lγ keep
}
i*
 
and Lγ remove
: 
{ Akeep
}ik ←
{ Akeep
}ik −πij
{ Aremove
}jk  
{Lγ keep
}
ik
←
{Lγ keep
}
ik
−π ij
{Lγ remove
}jk  
{ Aremove
}nk ←
{ Aremove
}nk − π nj
{ Aremove
}jk
∀n ≠ j  
{ Lγ remove
}
nk
←
{ Lγ remove
}
nk
− π nj
{ Lγ remove
}jk
∀n ≠ j  
with π nj =
{ Aremove
}nj
{ Aremove
}jj  
d) Remove row j  from Aremove , Lγ remove
 
e) Repeat (b), (c), and (d), until there are no more rows 
(nodes) to be removed. 
f) Output 
{ Akeep
}i*  and
{Lγ keep
}
i*
 
 
VI. 
LARGE-SCALE DOMAIN-LEVEL TOPIC LABELING 
Baluja et al. [1] already showed the usefulness of the 
Adsorption approach in video recommendations.  The pre-
normalized Adsorption algorithm provides identical results 
at a fraction of the computational cost using the new 
formulation with label slicing, Gaussian elimination, and 
BiCGStab. The final computational cost is reduced by the 
product of the savings of all three approaches (label slicing, 
BiCGStab and Gaussian elimination). 
For this paper, we explored using pre-normalized 
Adsorption for topic labeling on web domains, for search 
and advertising.  Many page urls, and even whole domains, 
are poorly classified by standard topic-analysis approaches, 
due to having little in the way of machine-understandable 
content to classify.  A standard example of this problem are 
domains that primarily host images or video – while the page 
url can be examined for clues to the topic, as well as the 
linked-to urls, the results are impoverished and noisy.  If we 
can improve the topic labeling, we could more accurately 
index these pages for search and for content-matched 
advertisement. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

•
Clothing 
o
Women’s, Men’s, Children’s 
o
Athletic, Casual, Formal, Outerwear, Sleepwear 
o
Shoes, Boots 
•
Accessories 
o
Jewelry, Watches, Purses 
•
Toys 
o
Building Toys, Dolls, Stuffed Animals, Ride-on Toys 
•
Gifts 
o
Flowers, Cards, Party Items, Holiday Items 
•
Discounts 
o
Coupons, Loyalty Cards 
 
Figure 1:  Examples from selected 71 commercial topics. 
 
Figure 2: Cumulative residual distribution (by iteration). 
 
Specifically, we created a graph with domains as nodes 
and a measure of shared searches for cross-domain pairs of 
urls as weighted connections between nodes. Our measure 
looked at, for each search term, the click rates for each url 
served in the results and set the strength of the url-url-term 
triple to the lower of the click rates between the paired urls.  
The connection weight between pairs of urls is the sum over 
all triples that terminate at those two urls.  To aggregate from 
url-pair connections, up to domain-pair connections, we sum 
across those url-pair connections where the first of the pair of 
urls is from the first domain and the second is from the 
second domain. Similarly, our injection labeling is based on 
combining topic analysis of the urls within the domain, 
dropping those topics that were based on keywords that 
showed too much within-domain variance in their strength.  
We aggregate the link and topic-label strength up to the 
domain level to improve coverage and reliability of our 
graph connections. Even with this aggregation of urls to 
domain-level nodes and filtering of keyword labels to 
within-domain-stable sets, our initial data provides a graph 
of about 13 million domains (nodes), with about 4 billion 
node-to-node connections based on analysis of more than 
253 million search terms.  Our topic analysis provides more 
than 4,500 general topics, using traditional text-based 
classification. 
From this set of 4,500 topics, we focused on 71 
commercial topics (see Fig. 1 for examples).  The 
computational savings (over the original Adsorption 
approach) for the label slicing alone was a factor of 63 times.  
We do not include this savings in the remainder of this 
discussion, since it is available to both power iteration and 
BiCGstab, as long as we are using the pre-normalized 
Adsorption formulation.  That said, it is the most significant 
source of computational savings, compared to the original 
work [1]. 
We ran this set of 71 labels through two iterations of 
BiCGStab (5 graph-matrix multiplies) and through 70 
iterations of the power method, both starting from the same 
initial estimate.  Fig. 2 shows the size of the per-node 
residual for BiCGStab on these labels (using an L1 norm).  
As with our small-scale simulations, at the end of our second 
iteration, the not-insignificant residuals occurred at the 3% of 
the nodes that were at the “wavefront boundary” of one or 
more of the topic labels.  This level of convergence, with just 
5 matrix multiplies, is not seen in the power-iteration 
solution until the 62th iteration (an additional savings of 
nearly 12.5 times). 
Since the goal of our label propagation is to increase the 
richness and extent of the topic labeling on poorly labeled (or 
unlabeled) domains without over-extending into domains 
that are not related to our commercial subset, it is helpful to 
look at the statistics summarized in Fig. 3 through 5. 
Fig. 3 gives a measure of the richness of our labels on 
commercial domains and how that richness increases as a 
function of iteration.  The plot shows the percentages of 
domains by how many commercial-topic labels are seen on 
that domain. If a domain is commercial, the more 
commercial labels that are associated with the domain, the 
richer the topic description.  As shown by the plots, our 
injection labels (those given by topic analysis) within each 
domain provides sparse topic labels, with the largest 
percentage of commercial domains having only one label.  
 
Figure 3: Node-level coherence of commercial labels. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Since our 71 commercial topics are actually a hierarchical 
set, this sparseness is unlikely to be correct for most 
domains.  By the end of the second iteration, the mode of 
that distribution has moved to around 30 topic labels per 
commercial domain. 
Also, the legend in Fig. 3 gives us the information 
needed to check that we are not just expanding the support of 
our commercial-topic labels indiscriminately across the full 
domain graph.  The first iteration extends the support of the 
commercial labels by a third, from just under 9% of all 
domains to just under 12%, suggesting the addition of a 
subset of the unlabeled domains within the graph.  After the 
first iteration, the support of the commercial-label set is 
effectively unchanged.  This can be traced back to the effect 
of pre-normalizing on the full set of topic labels.  Even 
though the non-commercial topics are not being explicitly 
computed in our iterations, they still have an effect, keeping 
the commercial labels from spreading onto distant (in the 
graph-connection sense) domains, as they otherwise would 
as the commercial wavefront progressed.  This highlights 
both one of the main advantages of the original Adsorption 
as well as the most compelling advantage of the pre-
normalized Adsorption.  With the original Adsorption, each 
node has a limited capacity for supporting labels, thereby 
limiting propagation – but enforcing that limited capacity 
forced computation of all label distributions, not just the 
labels of interest.  With pre-normalized Adsorption, there is 
still the per-node limited capacity for supporting labels, but 
we achieve that capacity limit by pre-normalizing, freeing us 
to compute only at that subset of labels that we are interested 
in, without having those labels spread unchecked. 
Up to now, our analysis of our results has focused on the 
richness and extent of our commercial labels but not on the 
likely quality of the mix of labels that we are introducing 
onto commercial nodes.  Since our topics are structured into 
a hierarchical framework, intuitively what we would like is 
to have each commercial site labeled mostly by closely 
related subsets of the available topics.  We can use dendrite 
distances between the labels to capture this sense of 
closeness among the sets of labels associated with each 
domain node.  As with standard dendrite measures, for each 
pair of labels on a domain, we count the number of 
hierarchical topic links that we have to go across in order to 
travel from one topic label to the other.  We lengthen that 
distance by one for each generation that both labels have to 
travel back through, in order to penalize siblings more than 
grandparent-grandchild relations.  As an example, if we need 
to calculate the distance between women’s jewelry and 
men’s clothing and we have the two tree branches “Jewelry -
> Women’s Accessories -> Apparel” and “Men’s Clothing -
> Apparel”, our dendrite distance measure would be 4: two 
(for “Women’s Jewelry” to “Apparel”) plus one (for “Men’s 
Clothing” to “Apparel”) plus one (for the one generation 
removal from direct descendent connection). 
As a way to evaluate our label distributions on domains 
with 2 to 6 labels, we computed all pairwise dendrite 
distances within each domain and averaged them (again, on 
a per-domain basis).  Due to the use of the topic hierarchy in 
our dendrite-distance measure, smaller distances amongst the 
labels on a single domain correspond to more believable 
topic mixes.  Fig. 4 shows our results, as function of 
iteration.  When the initial topic labeling provides more than 
one label, it includes many dissimilar labels, with the mode 
of the dendrite average distance being up between 6 and 7.  
Our propagation reduces that average distance, filling in 
parent and children nodes, to give a mode that is just above 
one.  While parents could always be filled in by knowing the 
hierarchical structure of our topic labels, the propagation 
graph is doing this without that knowledge – it is finding 
these associations purely through propagation of neighbor 
labels.  (Furthermore, we could not use the tree-structure 
meta-information to fill in the correct children labels – if we 
blindly used the tree structure, we would get numerous 
nearby but irrelevant labels.)  For this set of nodes, we are 
enriching the topic description without introducing unrelated 
labels.  This measure of quality is a stringent one, since at no 
point do we use the dendrite structure to limit our 
propagation.  
Fig. 5 shows a similar measure, for domains with more 
than 6 labels, again averaging the dendrite distances within 
each node. We did this separation between Fig. 4, for 
domains with 2-6 commercial labels, and Fig. 5, for domains 
with more than 6 commercial labels, since the dendrite 
distances across larger sets of labels, taken from the same 
hierarchy will have a larger minimum-average distance than 
will smaller sets of labels.  For small sets, you can often find 
2-6 labels, with all parent-child or sibling relationships with 
one another but, for large sets of labels, this is not possible 
and first and second cousin relationships become a major 
part of even the most compact set of labels.  Same as with 
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 shows that the average dendrite distance 
decreases with each iteration, even on nodes with more than 
6 labels.  Since closely related sets of topic labels are more 
likely to be a full and accurate description of the domain 
topic, our topic labeling seems to be improved by our graph 
 
Figure 4: Dendrite topic-label distance on domains with 2-6 labels     
(by iteration). 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

propagation work. 
All of the measurements conducted on the propagation of 
web labels on this large set of domains indicate an 
improvement in search indexing and content-matched 
advertising.  In the future, we will expand these experiments 
in two directions.  First, we will run live trials, with full user-
facing experiments, to determine the quality improvement in 
the user experience.  Second, we will increase our graph size 
and specificity by including individual urls, for those sites 
that have enough textual information to support that level of 
analysis.   
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper improves the computational efficiency of 
Adsorption, a graph-based labeling approach that has already 
been shown to be highly effective. We do so by replacing 
propagation-interleaved 
normalization 
with 
pre-
normalization, without changing the results provided by 
Adsorption.  Specifically, if the power-method approach to 
finding a solution is used, as it was with Adsorption, the 
answers at every iteration will be exactly the same using 
either the original or the pre-normalized Adsorption.  The 
advantage 
of 
the 
pre-normalized 
Adsorption 
is 
computational 
efficiency 
in 
determining 
the 
label 
distribution.  With the pre-normalized version, we can use 
label slicing, to compute only those labels that are of direct 
interest, without losing the beneficial belief-limiting 
characteristics of the full label set.  Label slicing reduces the 
computational cost linearly with the percentage of dropped 
labels. Similarly, we can use Gaussian elimination, to 
compute the labels only on those nodes that are of direct 
interest, without losing the effects of the connections that 
occur indirectly through currently not-of-interest nodes.  
Finally, we can speed up convergence to the steady-state 
solution by a factor of 12 (in numbers of graph matrix 
multiples), by using stabilized biconjugate gradient descent, 
instead of power iteration.  We also applied pre-normalized 
Adsorption to a new, large-scale application area, topic 
labeling on web domains, with promising results. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Baluja, R. Seth, D. Sivakumar, Y. Jing, J. Yagnik, S. 
Kumar, D. Ravichandran, and M. Aly, “Video suggestion and 
discovery for YouTube: taking random walks through the 
view graph,” Proc. International Conference on World Wide 
Web, ACM, April 2008, pp. 895-904. 
[2] X. Zhu and Z. Ghahramani, “Learning from labeled and 
unlabeled data with label propagation,” CMU tech report, 
CMU-CALD-02-107, 2002. 
[3] P.P. Talukdar, J. Reisinger, M. Pasca, D. Ravichandran, R. 
Bhagat, and F. Pereira, “Weakly-supervised acquisition of 
labeled class instances using graph random walks,” Proc. 
Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 
Assoc. Computational Linguistics, October 2008, pp. 582-
590. 
[4] Y. Jing and S. Baluja, “Visual Rank: applying Page Rank to 
large-scale image search,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, vol. 30, November 2008, pp. 1877-
1890. 
[5] J. Liu, W. Lai, X S. Hua, Y. Huang, and S. Li, “Video search 
re-ranking via multi-graph propagation,” Proc. International 
Conference on Multimedia, ACM, September 2007, pp. 208-
217. 
[6] M. Speriosu, N. Sudan, S. Upadhyay, and J. Baldridge, 
“Twitter polarity classification with label propagation over 
lexical links and the follower graph,” Proc. Workshop on 
Unsupervised Learning in NLP, Assoc. Computational 
Linguistics, July 2011, pp. 53-63.  
[7] H. A. Van der Vorst, “Bi-CGSTAB: A Fast and Smoothly 
Converging 
Variant 
of 
BiCG 
for 
the 
Solution 
of 
Nonsymmetric Linear Systems,” SIAM Journal on Scientive 
and Statistical Computing, vol. 13, March 1992, pp. 631-644.  
[8] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “MapReduce:  Simplified Data 
Processing on Large Clusters,” Symposium on Operating 
System Design and Implementation, December 2004, pp. 137-
150.  
[9] Wikipedia, 
“Biconjugate 
Gradient 
Stablized 
Method,” 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biconjugate_gradient_stabilized_
method [retrieved February, 2013]. 
 
 
Figure 5: Dendrite topic-label distance on domains                        
with more than 6 labels (by iteration). 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-265-3
MMEDIA 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

