A Novel Bidirectional Transmission System Based on Passive Optical Network and
Wavelength Reuse Technique
Chung-Yi Li
Department of Communication Engineering
National Taipei University
New Taipei City, 23741 Taiwan
e-mail:cyli@gm.ntpu.edu.tw
Wen-Shing Tsai*
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ming Chi University of Technology
New Taipei City 24301, Taiwan
e-mail:wst@mail.mcut.edu.tw
Min-Cian Chen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ming Chi University of Technology
New Taipei City 24301, Taiwan
e-mail:r943006@gmail.com
Abstract—In this paper, a bidirectional transmission system
based on Passive Optical Network (PON) and wavelength reuse
technology is proposed and demonstrated. A local oscillator,
with 16 GHz via first Mach-Zehnder Modulator (MZM) and
1.25-Gb/s data via second MZM, generates the transmitting
signal. The signal is separated by Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG)
into two optical signals. One is central carrier and the other is
subcarrier. The subcarrier signal transports data from Optical
Line Terminal (OLT) to Optical Network Unit (ONU) by 25
km Single Mode Fiber (SMF) transmission. The central carrier
is reused as upstream light source to achieve bidirectional
transmission. The power penalty of the system is < 1.7 dB for
downlink with and without enhanced channel, and downlink
and
uplink
transmissions
of
Bit
Error
Rate
(BER)
performances are < 10-9.
Keywords- Fiber Bragg Grating; Mach-Zehnder Modulator;
Passive Optical Network; Radion-on-Fiber; Wavelength Reuse.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A Radio-on-Fiber
(ROF)
system
provides
broad
bandwidth for users to solve transmission congestion. It can
be applied to microwave communication systems, such as
Wavelength
Division
Multiplexing
(WDM),
Optical
Add-Drop Multiplexing (OADM) and Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) [1]-[3]. These techniques
are often accompanied by high bandwidth and high capacity
in order to meet the needs of many users. Hybrid Fiber to
The
Home
(FTTH)
systems
can
achieve
this
goal
[4].Currently, integrated ROF-PON technology [1][2] is the
most common application of hybrid FTTH technology. It
can transmit microwave signals over a long distance with
high fidelity. Such technology can make effective usage of
the
broad
bandwidth
and
low
transmission
loss
characteristics of the fiber, in order to meet needs for
bandwidth and mobility. Optical fiber has lots of advantages
in long distance transmission including high bandwidth, low
power loss, and immunity to electromagnetic interference.
Bidirectional optical fiber transport system has a series of
interferences. This is due to the simultaneous uplink data
and the downlink data transport, which creates the Rayleigh
backscattering (RB) effect [5]. The RB results in power
fading, deteriorating system performance and increasing bit
error rate because the fiber crystal structure is not uniform in
the manufacturing process leading to a shift in the refraction
index. To solve the RB of power fading, many schemes and
demonstrations have been proposed, such as using different
paths or wavelengths between the uplink and the downlink
transmissions.
In this paper, we propose a ROF-PON and wavelength
reuse system that can increase spectral efficiency. Another
advantage is to use only an optical light source that can
reduce the RB interference as well as improve the system
performance.
II.
EXPERIMENT SETUP AND RESULTS
The
experimental
setup
of
the
bidirectional
transmission system based on the passive optical network
and wavelength reuse technique is shown in Figure 1.
Because the
sensitivity of the MZM is affected
by
polarization, we set a Polarization Controller (PC) before
MZM to improve the stability of MZM. The Optical Double
Sideband (ODSB) signal is generated by first MZM. After
the ODSB signal is separated by FBG, the +1 order
sideband signal, the -1 order sideband signal with central
carrier are used as downstream signals for different paths
transmission. The +1 order sideband signal is reflected by
FBG and the -1 order sideband with central carrier signal
pass through FBG. The downstream optical signal combines
the two ways of optical signals and is amplified by Erbium
Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA) to avoid transmission power
loss for 25 km SMF transport. The downstream signal with
1.25-Gb/s data is generated by the MZM. The combined
optical spectrum is shown in Figure 2. Upstream 1.25-Gb/s
data is modulated by using another MZM. To compare the
downstream and upstream transmissions, the transmission
data is in the +1 sideband signal and the -1 sideband with
central carrier signal, respectively.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

Figure 1. Experimental setup of bidirectional transmission system based on passive optical network and wavelength reuse technique
We reuse part of the downstream optical signal as upstream
carrier. The upstream optical signal goes through odd
channel then performs Optical / Electrical (O/E) convert by
Photodetector (PD) and measures BER performance.
Figure 2. Combined downstream optical signal spectrum.
For the even channel, we let the +1 order sideband
signal pass through, even channel enhance the power of the
downstream signal to lead the downstream signal with better
BER performance. The measured BER curves of the
received optical power are presented in Figure 3. The
received optical power levels at the BER of 10−9 are −23.1 
dBm (with even channel enhanced for downlink), −21.4 
dBm (without even channel enhanced for downlink), and
-20.1 dBm (uplink). A power penalty of approximately <1.7
dB (for downlink) of the fiber link is observed during the
BER test for 25 km SMF transmission.
III.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have proposed and demonstrated a bidirectional
ROF-PON system. The system has simple and low cost
features. Due to the RB effect, using FBG and IL achieve
different carrier transmission and enhances the power in
even channel. We reuse part of the downstream signal as
upstream optical carrier in BS to achieve low cost. As
compared with downstream and upstream for transmission,
the transmission data is in the +1 sideband single and the -1
sideband with central carrier signal, respectively. The power
penalty of the system is < 1.7 dB, downlink and uplink
transmission of BER values are < 10-9. The system can be
combined with optical network and radio frequency, such as
FTTH to implement long-haul transmission.
Figure 3. The measure BER curves
REFERENCES
[1] J. Yu, Z. Jia, T. Wang, G. K. Chang, and G. Ellinas
“Demonstration of a Novel WDM-PON Access Network
Compatible with ROF System to Provide 2.5Gb/s per Channel
Symmetric Data Services,” 2007 Optical Fiber Communication
and National Fiber Optic Engineers Conference (OFC/NFOEC
2007), pp. 1-3, March 25-29, 2007.
[2] J. Prat, J. Lazaro, P. Chanclou and S. Cascelli, “Passive OADM
Network Element for Hybrid Ring-Tree WDM/TDM-PON,”
the
35th
European
Conference
on
Optical
Communication(ECOC 2009), pp.1-2, Sept. 20-24, 2009,
Vienna, Austria.
[3]
Y.
Liao
and W.
Pan,
“All-optical
OFDM
Based
on
Arrayed Grating Waveguides in WDM Systems,” International
Conference on
Electronics,
Communications and
Control
(ICECC), pp.707 – 710, Sept. 9-11, 2011.
[4] R. Llorente, M. Morant, M. Beltran, and E. Pellicer, “Fully
Converged
Optical,
Millimetre-Wave
Wireless
and
Cable
Provision
in
OFDM-PON FTTH Networks,”
Transparent
Optical Networks (ICTON), 2013 15th Int. Conf. on, pp.1-4,
Jun. 23-27, 2013
[5] H. H. Lin, C. Y. Lee, S. C. Lin, S. L. Lee and G. Keiser
“WDM-PON Systems Using Cross-Remodulation to Double
Network Capacity with Reduced Rayleigh Scattering Effects,”
2008Optical Fiber communication (OFC) /National Fiber
Optic Engineers Conference (NFOEC), pp.1-3, March 24-28,
2008.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-697-2
MMEDIA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

