Text Driven Recognition of Multiple Faces in Newspapers
Nicola Adami, Sergio Benini, and Riccardo Leonardi
Department of Information Engineering, Signals & Communications Lab
University of Brescia, via Branze 38, 25123, Brescia, Italy
Email: nicola.adami@ing.unibs.it, sergio.benini@ing.unibs.it, riccardo.leonardi@ing.unibs.it
Abstract—Face recognition is still a hard task when per-
formed on newspaper images, since they often show faces
in non-frontal poses, prohibitive lighting conditions, and too
poor quality in terms of resolution. In these cases, combining
textual information derived from the page articles with visual
information proves to be advantageous for improving the
recognition performance. In this work, we extract characters’
names from articles and captions to restrict facial recognition
to a limited set of candidates. To solve the difﬁculties derived
from having multiple faces in the same image, we also propose
a solution that enables a joint assignment of faces to characters’
names. Extensive tests in both ideal and real scenarios conﬁrm
the soundness of the proposed approach.
Keywords-Face recognition; Newspapers; Text analysis; Visual
information; Multimodal.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last decades researchers have been making
attempts to solve the problem of machine recognition of
faces [1]. Algorithms proposed during the years can be
coarsely classiﬁed into two categories: holistic approaches,
such as Principal component analysis (PCA) [2] or Linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) [3], and local feature-based
ones (see e.g., [1] and [4]). Most recent developments of
the holistic approaches include the Marginal Fisher anal-
ysis (MFA) [5], Eigenfeature regularization and extraction
(ERE) [6], the sparse representation [7] and asymmetric
PCA [8] and LDA [9], while Elastic bunch graph matching
(EBGM) [10] and Active appearance model (AAM) [11]
can be considered among the most performing feature-based
algorithms. Despite the advances brought by these recent
methods, there are still challenging problems to be tackled
in face recognition, such as variations in pose, different
facial expressions, make-up, lighting conditions as well as
occlusions and cluttered background.
The recognition task is even harder when targeting news-
paper images, where human faces are usually pictured at low
quality and/or resolution. When visual data are not enough
informative, one possible solution is combining natural
language and visual information for improving semantic
understanding of images. Newspapers in fact provide text
that can be used to help the recognition process: each image
with characters is commonly connected to an article on the
same page, or at least described by a textual caption.
The idea has been relatively unexplored until the work
in [12], which ﬁrst proposes to use captions to locate faces
in the accompanying photographs, thus with no recognition
aims. A few years later, the rule-based PICTION system
[13], trained on a dataset of 50 pictures was able to recognise
human faces with a success rate of 65% by combining
captions and photographs, even without employing a face
recognition system.
In this paper, we target automatic recognition of human
faces appearing in real newspapers by combining visual
and textual information. As an advance with respect to
previous work, we exploit all textual information coming
from the newspaper page, thus not limiting the analysis to
captions only, as done in the recent investigations in [14],
[15], and [16]. Concerning face detection, we ﬁrst apply an
improved version of the Viola-Jones classiﬁer [17] nowadays
considered as a standard baseline for face detection. The
recognition phase is then performed by using the standard
method provided by Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
[2]. These traditional approaches usually guarantee accept-
able performance in not too complex contexts. However,
these speciﬁc editorial products are mined by two major
impediments that make harder the recognition process: one
is related to the often too poor quality of images chosen for
publishing in terms of resolution, contrast, illumination and
pose; the second is due to the dimensions of the characters’
database, which are potentially unlimited. These issues,
which may lead to a difﬁcult recognition, are here also
addressed. Finally, as an additional contribution, recognition
performance in case multiple faces are present in the same
image are improved by a mechanism that jointly assigns
identities to detected human faces.
Figure 1 describes the workﬂow: the textual analysis
module extracts from newspaper pages potential characters’
names to restrict the recognition phase to a few candidates.
Results of recognition are inspectable by a human operator,
who also takes care of the cases when a name (respectively,
a face) found in the page has no associated face (resp. a
name) stored in the databases, so that the system is able to
learn from previous recognition processes.
Helping the automatic understanding of newspaper arti-
cles, such a tool could ﬁnd application in complex tasks
such as news segmentation, or in supporting professional
frameworks for production of new multimedia content, such
as news aggregators or feeds.
The document is organized as follows: in Section II, we
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

update 
DB?
Page 
processing
Text 
analysis
Face 
detection
Identities
DB
Face 
Library
Text driven    
face recognition
images
text, captions
faces
eigenfaces
candidates
Figure 1: Diagram describing the workﬂow for the combined visual
and text-based face recognition process.
explain how a segmented page looks like. Face detection and
text analysis processes are described in Sections III and IV,
respectively. In Section V, we focus on the multiple face
recognition algorithm that employs a weak supervision in
the form of text found in articles and captions. Experiments
are conducted in Section VI, while conclusions are ﬁnally
drawn in Section VII.
II. PAGE PREPROCESSING
Newspaper pages are ﬁrst segmented by a process whose
description is beyond the scope of this paper. As shown in
Figure 2, the output of the segmentation stage consists of two
separate pages (the image-page and the text-page) provided
with two related structure ﬁles describing all page elements
(images, articles, titles, captions, etc.) and their positions in
the original page.
=
+
a)
b)
c)
Figure 2: Example of how a) a newspaper page is segmented into
b) an image-page, and c) a text-page.
III. FACE DETECTION
In order to ensure a correct recognition of characters, a
robust face detection process on the image-page becomes
a fundamental prerequisite. Once segmented from the rest,
the image-page is fed into a classiﬁer to isolate regions
belonging to human faces. This is achieved by relying on
the well-known Viola-Jones method [17] endowed with the
following adjustments to boost the detection performance.
On the one side we increase the robustness to pose change:
despite the fact this classiﬁer is known to work well for
frontal faces only, the last implementation in [18] comes
with several cascade ﬁles for detecting proﬁle faces, even if
with slightly lower performance. On the other hand, before
being processed, images undergo a process of histogram
equalization as in [19] to increase the algorithm invariance
to complex lighting conditions. These adjustments are im-
portant in the speciﬁc domain of newspaper images, where
characters are usually pictured in arbitrary poses, under
different illumination conditions and often at low resolution.
Last but not least, since the whole system aims at recog-
nising characters, each missed face during detection (i.e.,
each true negative) results in a ﬁnal missed recognition. On
the contrary, false positives are not that relevant, since they
will not match with any candidate face in the database,
therefore not producing errors. Thus the ﬁnal tuning of
the cascade face classiﬁers has been carried out in order
to privilege recall rather than precision. Examples of non-
relevant and relevant errors during the detection phase are
given in Figure 3-a and Figure 3-b, respectively.
a)
b)
3.2. Face Detection
questa fase `e quindi la mancata localizzazione della faccia del soggetto che comporta,
inevitabilmente, al mancato riconoscimento. Non `e particolarmente grave il caso in
cui si presentino falsi positivi, in quanto il modulo di riconoscimento dovrebbe com-
pensare l’errore rilevando una grande distanza tra essi e le immagini del database.
Tali errori non compromettono il riconoscimento e possono comunque venire corretti
successivamente (si veda la ﬁg. 3.2).
Figura 3.2: Esempi di errori introdotti dal modulo di face detection. L’immagine di
sinistra rappresenta un errore ”cosmetico”, che non compromette irrimediabilmente
il riconoscimento successivo: il soggetto `e individuato, sebbene sia stato rilevato un
falso positivo. Nell’immagine di destra, invece, la faccia non viene localizzata: il
modulo di riconoscimento non potr`a correggere l’errore in alcun modo.
La fase di taratura `e stata svolta considerando quanto appena detto. Nella va-
lutazione delle prestazioni `e stato attribuito maggior peso agli errori dovuti alla
mancata estrazione di facce, piuttosto che alla estrazione di regioni che in realt`a non
ne contengono. Dopo una serie di test empirici si `e giunti alla taratura ﬁnale.
Sono state, inoltre, valutate alcune migliorie da apportare al ﬁne di incremen-
tare le prestazioni. Come gi`a detto, le tecniche di face detection possono mostrare
vulnerabilit`a in caso di condizioni di illuminazione avverse. Diversi studi hanno pro-
posto metodi di pre-elaborazione mirate a limitare questo problema (si veda [33]).
La tecnica base `e quella dell’equalizzazione dell’istogramma, che permette di rendere
uniforme l’istogramma della scala di grigi di una ﬁgura, in modo da aumentarne il
contrasto. Tale tecnica risulta utile per evidenziare dettagli poco evidenti nel caso
di immagini aventi una distribuzione dei livelli di grigio molto concentrata (ﬁg. 3.3).
Esistono varianti decisamente pi`u elaborate, ma nel nostro caso l’equalizzazione del-
65
Figure 3: Examples of errors in detection: a) non-relevant error:
the false positive on the tie will not ﬁnd any matching face during
recognition; b) relevant error: the missed detection of the face will
determine a missed recognition.
IV. TEXT ANALYSIS
Since in newspapers face recognition is a hard task, it
is necessary to exploit all information we have at hand to
support the identiﬁcation of characters. Luckily, the text-
page usually contains a direct reference to the characters’
names pictured in the image-page. Even if this might not
always happen, from our experiments (see Section VI) the
case where a pictured character is not cited in the text is so
rare that we can assume this hypothesis as reasonable.
To emulate the process of human comprehension while
reading a newspaper is a hard task: a few decades of research
dealing with the problem of natural language processing
(see e.g., [20]) still have not solved the problem. For our
purposes however, it is sufﬁcient that the text module is
able to extract names that might correspond to characters
contained in images. To achieve this goal, the module relies
on two databases: the identity database containing several
characters’ data, and one common names database 1.
1Lists of names and surnames are easily available for each country. In
some languages their extraction is easier since they start with capital letters.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Whenever a name is found in the text, if that identity is
already present in the characters’ database, then that person
is proposed as a candidate for the face recognition process.
Conversely if a name is recognised as such but the related
identity is not in the database, a new identity is proposed
for approval to a human operator for insertion. In this case,
a new database record is created and few images retrieved
on the web (with Google’s images search [21]) are used to
populate the character’s face library.
The identity database also manages name variations re-
ferring to the same person (e.g., “George W. Bush”, “G.
W. Bush”, “George Bush”, etc.), so that when any of
these variants is found in the text, a unique candidate is
selected for the recognition phase. When only the surname
(e.g., “Bush”) appears in the text, all characters with the
same surname (e.g., the singer “Kate Bush”) are chosen as
candidates. Even if one surname is very popular, this will
restrict anyway the candidates to a limited pool of characters.
In the common case when a caption accompanies the
image, the importance of the text module increases, since it
is sufﬁcient to use the caption text as the only input (instead
of the whole related article) to restrict the pool of candidates
to a very short list, as shown in the example of Figure 4.
Figure 4: Caption returns a restricted pool of candidates: “Walter
Veltroni”, “Matteo Renzi”, and “Nicola Zingaretti”.
The module is not error free: for example it fails in case
the text refers to “G. W. Bush” only as “President”, or in
general, in every case when a person is referred to by means
of his/her title, such as “Prime Minister” or similar ones.
V. TEXT DRIVEN FACE RECOGNITION
Due to the fact that the application must be able to
update the database during execution, the training phase
on face recognition should be as automatic as possible. In
fact, in case there is the need to add new faces, it is not
reasonable to involve the human operator in too complex
update operations. As a consequence, all local recognition
approaches that require a manual labelling of points of
interests (such as EBGM [10] or and AAM [11]) are not
applicable in this context.
On the contrary, traditional holistic methods such as PCA
[2] or LDA [3], if provided even with few image examples,
are able to build sufﬁciently accurate models for each iden-
tity in an automatic way. Despite more modern approaches
exist, performance offered by Principal Component Analysis
in its original formulation are sufﬁcient for implementing the
visual part of the proposed supervised recognition approach.
A. Training
The initial face library contains a limited set of famous
characters belonging to politics, sports, economy, science
and culture. As seen in Section IV, each time that a new
name pops up from newspaper pages, related face images re-
trieved on the Internet can be dragged in the face library. To
ensure an acceptable level of automation, inserted pictures
are automatically cropped and resized without forcing the
user to extract faces manually: to do this the face detection
algorithm described in Section III on equalized images
ﬁrst extracts face bounding boxes; after, image dimensions
are normalized to 64 × 64 pixels. If the image quality is
acceptable, faces are rotated and centered by using an eye
detection algorithm, thus obtaining the ﬁnal training image.
Examples of processed images are shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5: 64 × 64 normalized faces are extracted for training.
Obtained images are then used for the training phase,
which is performed by a standard PCA. Eigenfaces are
calculated from the training set by keeping the M-images
that correspond to the highest eigenvalues, so that they
contain at least the 80% of the total energy, as suggested
in [22]. These M eigenfaces deﬁne the M-dimensional
“face space” employed during recognition. As new faces
are added to the face database, eigenfaces can be updated
or recalculated.
B. Recognition
Face recognition is treated as a pattern recognition task:
each detected face Γ is projected onto the “face space” by
transforming it into its eigenface components
Γ = [γ1, γ2, . . . , γM]
which describe the contribution of each eigenface in repre-
senting the input face. The feature vector Γ is then used in
a standard pattern recognition algorithm to ﬁnd which of a
number of predeﬁned face classes best describes the face.
Since face recognition is a particularly difﬁcult task,
especially in case of numerous possible identities as in
newspapers, to improve recognition performance we reduce
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

the number of face candidates only to those N identities
found in the same text-page. Since it is rare that characters
in pictures are not referred in the article body or in the
caption itself, we accept the risk connected to an excessive
candidate reduction.
The advantage of this supervised approach is most appar-
ent when only one face is detected and one name is extracted
from the text-page. As shown later in the experiments, this
event is frequent when captions are associated to images: in
such a situation, there is no need to perform a projection on
the face space, but the image face is directly associated to
the uniquely extracted name.
In case of multiple candidates instead, classiﬁcation is
performed by comparing the feature vector Γ of the test face
with the face classes, which are the average representations
Φ =

φ1, φ2, . . . , φN

of each candidate over a number of face images. Comparison
is based on the Mahalanobis’ distance between Γ and Φ to
ﬁnd which candidate best describes the test face:
k = argmin
i
q
assigned to the best candidate, while the face with lower q is
reassigned to the next closest candidate (Figure 8-b). Please
notice that q(Γ2) > q(Γ3) means that Γ2 is on average
further from other possible candidates than Γ3, so that it
is more likely that the latter was incorrectly assigned.
a)
Gates
Obama
Geithner
a)
b)
Barack Obama
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Robert Gates
Robert Gates
a)
b)
Barack Obama
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Robert Gates
Robert Gates
a)
b)
Barack Obama
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Timothy Geithner
Robert Gates
Robert Gates
b)
Γ3
Γ2
Γ1
q(Γ2)>q(Γ3)
Barack Obama
Timothy Geithner
Robert Gates
Figure 8: a) Obama’s identity is corrected via joint face recognition;
b) the face with higher q, i.e., Γ2 is assigned to its best candidate,
while Γ3 is reassigned to the next candidate.
The algorithm is able to solve an arbitrary number of
conﬂicts and works also when the number of faces is larger
than the database possible identities. In this case, faces with
worst q scores are labelled as unknown. Please notice that the
label unknown does not necessarily imply that the identity is
not in the database, but only that the face was not coupled
with any of the candidates extracted from text.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
The experimental part is subdivided in four progressive
steps, so that to appreciate the beneﬁcial brought by different
modules of the supervised approach.
In the ﬁrst part of the experiments, the performance of
the face recognition algorithm are tested alone on a public
available database “Olivetti-Att-ORL” [23], which contains
400 human faces belonging to 40 unique people, where
each individual is pictured 10 times from a frontal view
or with a slight tilt of the head (see Figure 9). Training
Figure 9: First test: recognition is performed on images from the
Olivetti-Att-ORL dataset.
is performed on 325 randomly chosen images, while the
recognition task is performed on the remaining part of the
dataset. Classiﬁcation results averaged on 5 runs returns 75%
of correct recognition, which is in line with state of the art
PCA performance [1].
In the second part of the experimental phase, we test
the recognition algorithm on real newspaper pictures. For
this aim a face library from newspaper images has been
built as follow: around 200 identities have been extracted
from different copies of the italian newspaper “Corriere della
Sera” and for each identity, an average of four face images
has been retrieved from the web, for a total training set
of approximately 800 images. The test set instead is built
up by using 200 images extracted from 15 different issues
of the same newspaper, which contain faces in arbitrary
conditions of pose, illumination, and quality, as shown in
the examples of Figure 10. In this real application scenario,
recognition performance collapse, as expected, around 50%,
thus conﬁrming that recognition of characters in newspaper
images is far more challenging than on a standard dataset.
Figure 10: Recognition on newspaper images is more challenging
due the variety of image poses, light conditions, or quality.
In the third step of the experiment, the approach combin-
ing face recognition with the supervision of text has been
tested on the newspapers data. For each test image, we
constrain recognition only to those candidates whose names
are found in the same text-page or in the corresponding
image caption. Results obtained yield a percentage of 83%
correctly recognised faces.
Finally, the application to the same dataset of the algo-
rithm for multiple face recognition further improves perfor-
mance up to 86%. Table I summarises all performed tests
and the related performance.
Table I: Performed experiments.
Test
Algorithm
Data
Perf.
1
Face recognition only
Olivetti-Att-ORL
75%
2
Face recognition only
Newspapers
50%
3
Text driven recognition
Newspapers
83%
4
Joint supervised recog
Newspapers
86%
The built system is able to learn from previous classiﬁca-
tions by including the recognised faces in the face library.
Therefore it is commonsensical to believe that performance
are expected to improve as long as the system is in use.
As ﬁnal considerations, we mention three causes of errors
that inﬂuence the system performance. First, errors might be
generated in case of wrong initial segmentation into text- and
image-pages. For example, if one image is associated to a
wrong caption, this likely leads to a missed recognition. Sec-
ond, errors can be due to the face detection: true negatives, as
seen in Section III are estimated to be around 10%. Third and
last, the text module might fail in extracting correct names:
this happened three times during the 200 performed tests
(1.5%) because the mentioned identity was addressed only
by his/her title. All these types of error are not included in
results of Table I, which accounts only for the performance
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

of the supervised algorithm when both the text and the face
detection modules return correct results.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we combine text derived from newspaper
articles and captions with visual information to improve
face recognition performance. Characters’ names are used
to constrain facial recognition to a limited set of candi-
dates, which are jointly assigned to the related faces in
case multiple characters are present in the same picture.
The good performance obtained in the experimental phase
demonstrates that this approach allows for high recognition
rate on newspaper images, notoriously a difﬁcult benchmark
since often showing faces in non-frontal poses, prohibitive
lighting conditions, and poor in quality and/or resolution.
Future work aims at extending the approach to a wider set of
editorial publications (including magazines, satyrical, etc.)
as well as to integrate higher performing recognition method.
REFERENCES
[1] W.-Y. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P. Phillips, and A. Rosenfeld,
“Face recognition: A literature survey,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 399–458, 2003.
[2] M. Turk and A. Pentland, “Face recognition using eigen-
faces,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, vol. 591, 1991.
[3] J. Lu, K. N. Plataniotis, and A. N. Venetsanopoulos, “Face
recognition using LDA-based algorithms,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 195–200, Jan.
2003.
[4] X. Tan, S. Chen, Z.-H. Zhou, and F. Zhang, “Face
recognition from a single image per person: A survey,”
Pattern Recognition, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1725–1745, 2006.
[5] S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, Q. Yang, and S. Lin,
“Graph embedding and extensions: A general framework
for dimensionality reduction,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 40–51,
2007.
[6] X. Jiang, B. Mandal, and A. Kot, “Eigenfeature regularization
and extraction in face recognition,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 383–394, 2008.
[7] J. Wright, A. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. Sastry, and Y. Ma,
“Robust face recognition via sparse representation,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 210–227, 2009.
[8] X. Jiang, “Asymmetric principal component and discriminant
analyses for pattern classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 5,
pp. 931–937, 2009.
[9] ——, “Linear subspace learning-based dimensionality reduc-
tion,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 28, no. 2, pp.
16–26, 2011.
[10] L. Wiskott, J. M. Fellous, N. Kruger, and C. von der
Malsburg, “Face recognition by elastic bunch graph match-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 19, pp. 775–779, 1997.
[11] T. Cootes, G. Edwards, and C. Taylor, “Active appearance
models,” IEEE Transactions On Pattern Analysis And Ma-
chine Intelligence, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 681–685, Jun 2001.
[12] V. Govindaraju, D. Sher, R. Srihari, and S. Srihari, “Locating
human faces in newspaper photographs,” in Proc. of IEEE
Conf. on CVPR, San Diego, CA, Jun 1989, pp. 549–555.
[13] R. K. Srihari, “PICTION: A system that uses captions to
label human faces in newspaper photographs,” in Press, A.
(ed.) Proceedings of the AAAI-91, 1991, pp. 80–95.
[14] M. Guillaumin, T. Mensink, J. Verbeek, and C. Schmid,
“Automatic face naming with caption-based supervision,” in
Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition, Jun
2008, pp. 1–8.
[15] T. Mensink and J. Verbeek, “Improving people search using
query expansions: How friends help to ﬁnd people,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision, ser. LNCS, vol. II.
Springer, oct 2008, pp. 86–99.
[16] D. Ozkan and P. Duygulu, “Interesting faces: A graph-
based approach for ﬁnding people in news,” Pattern Recogn.,
vol. 43, pp. 1717–1735, May 2010.
[17] P. Viola and M. Jones, “Rapid object detection using a
boosted cascade of simple features,” Proceedings of CVPR,
vol. 1, pp. 511–518, 2001.
[18] G. Bradski, “The OpenCV Library,” Dr. Dobb’s Journal of
Software Tools, 2000.
[19] L. Tao, L. M.-J. Seow, and V. K. Asari, “Nonlinear image
enhancement to improve face detection in complex lighting
environment,” International Journal of Computational Intel-
ligence Research, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 327–336, 2006.
[20] C. D. Manning and H. Sch¨utze, Foundations of statistical
natural language processing.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT
Press, 1999.
[21] “Google’s
image
search,”
http://images.google.com/.
[retrieved: April, 2012]. Available: http://images.google.com/
[22] R. Tjahyadi, W. Liu, and S. Venkatesh, “Automatic param-
eter selection for eigenfaces,” in Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Optimization: Techniques and
Applications, 2004.
[23] F. Ferdinando Samaria and A. Harter, “Parameterisation of a
stochastic model for human face identiﬁcation,” in Proceed-
ings of 2nd IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer
Vision, Sarasota, FL, Dec. 1994.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-195-3
MMEDIA 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

