Current Status of Examples of Initiatives Using Open Data in Government 
Participating in the First Governor's Cup Open Data Hackathon in Tokyo 
Yusuke Takamori, Junya Sato, Masahiro Fujimoto 
Electronic Information Course 
Polytechnic University 
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: b19309@uitec.ac.jp, b19308@uitec.ac.jp, 
b19315@uitec.ac.jp 
Masaki Endo, Shigeyoshi Ohno 
Division of Core Manufacturing 
Polytechnic University 
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: endou@uitec.ac.jp, ohno@uitec.ac.jp 
Daiju Kato 
Nihon Knowledge Co. Ltd. 
Taito-ku, Tokyo 
e-mail: d-kato@know-net.co.jp 
Hiroshi Ishikawa 
Graduate School of Systems Design 
Tokyo Metropolitan University 
Hino-shi, Tokyo 
e-mail: ishikawa-hiroshi@tmu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports on services using open data that 
we proposed at the "First Governor's Cup Open Data 
Hackathon" held by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government. The 
use of open data is necessary for the digitization of public 
administration. We participated in a hackathon organized by 
the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, developed an application 
that allows users to search for and participate in event 
information using open data, and proposed it as a solution for 
regional revitalization. This proposal demonstrated the 
usefulness of open data and its potential for solving 
administrative issues. Nevertheless, open data in Tokyo remains 
underdeveloped: it needs improvement. We will also report on 
improvements we made through this hackathon. 
Keywords–big data; civic tech; Hackathon; open data. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Open data are held by the national government, local 
governments, private companies, etc. The data are made 
publicly available on the Internet so that anyone can use the 
data freely and free of charge. Secondary use of open data by 
the public and by companies is permitted. In addition, the 
data must be in a format that is easily read by computers. In 
Japan, the Basic Act on the Promotion of Public-Private Data 
Utilization [1] was enacted in 2016 to promote the use of 
public–private data. 
Approximately 96% of prefectures and municipalities 
responded to the "Questionnaire on Open Data Initiatives for 
Local Governments" [2] administered by the Information and 
Communications Technology (IT) Strategy Office, Cabinet 
Secretariat in 2020. Of the organizations which responded 
(prefectures (47 responses) and municipalities (1,668 
responses)), 56.6% had already released open data. The top 
three open data items released to the public were basic 
statistical information (population, industry, etc.) at 37.7%, 
various information in the disaster prevention field 
(designated emergency evacuation sites) at 41.0%, and 
information related to the location of public facilities and 
services (list of public facilities and list of administrative 
services) at 33.6%. However, the top three challenges and 
problems in working with open data were unclear effects, 
benefits, and needs of open data (50.6%), lack of human 
resources in charge of open data (55.4%), and lack of 
progress in the utilization of open data (29.2%). As indicated 
by survey results, open data are becoming increasingly 
available to the public in government. However, the lack of 
human resources in charge of open data and the lack of 
understanding of how to use open data have not promoted 
initiatives related to open data in Japan. 
In this context, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, led 
by its Digital Services Bureau, strengthened its efforts to use 
open data. As of December 2021, the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government has released more than 49,000 items of open 
data [3], about 70% of which are in computer-readable 
Comma Separated Values (CSV) or other formats. The 
Tokyo Metropolitan Government, the most open data-
oriented government in Japan, still has too few initiatives for 
open data utilization. For this reason, the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government held the first Governor's Cup Open Data 
Hackathon as a five-day event in December 2021. This event 
was an effort to solve Tokyo's administrative issues and to 
use civic technology to implement new social digital services 
that are expected to  improve Tokyo residents’ quality of life. 
The Hackathon received 68 applications for participation 
from 186 people. 
This paper reports on issues related to open data in Tokyo, 
based on services we proposed and prototyped at the first 
Governor's Cup Open Data Hackathon [4] and based on 
findings from the hackathon. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents earlier research related to this topic. In 
Section 3, we present our proposed use of open data for 
public administration. Section 4 describes the open data used 
in the proposed methodology. Section 5 describes the 
prototype created using the proposed method. Section 6 
describes the challenges found in the process of creating the 
prototype. Section 7 describes the future of open data in 
government. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-942-3
MMEDIA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

II. RELATED WORK 
Various applications using open data have been 
developed. Although the number of applications in Tokyo is 
small, there are some published examples [5]. The Fuchu 
Barrier-Free Restroom MAP [6] visualizes barrier-free 
restrooms in Fuchu City using the Tokyo Metropolitan Open 
Data Catalog. In addition, the River Camera Dashboard [7] 
application, a one-stop dashboard, visualizes the locations 
and transmitted images of river-monitoring cameras managed 
by the Bureau of Construction of the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government and sea surface live cameras managed by the 
Bureau of Ports and Harbors of the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government. "LinkedSpending: OpenSpending becomes 
Linked Open Data" [8] presents a platform for using 
government spending as open data in countries around the 
world. Also, "Interactive Navigation of Open Data Linkages" 
[9] shows a web application for utilizing open data. 
Next is an example of a hackathon conducted by 
governments. Few examples exist in Japan, but hackathons 
use civic technology in other countries. The President's Cup 
Hackathon [10] in Taiwan, to which the Tokyo hackathon 
referred, has been held since 2018. The international track in 
that hackathon is open to international participants. Hack the 
Crisis is a hackathon proposed by Accelerate Estonia, an 
Innovation Lab led by the Estonian government, and 
organized by Garage48 [11], a hackathon management 
organization, to fight the new coronavirus. Approximately 
1,300 people from more than 20 countries participated in this 
online hackathon. An operations manual was also published. 
The event became a worldwide event, especially in Europe. 
Consequently, hackathons that use open data and civic 
technology are becoming popular. In Japan, a need exists for 
activities using digital technology to promote available data 
by bringing together those who use data, such as companies 
and citizens, and those who own the data, such as 
governments. 
III. PROPOSED SERVICE 
We developed an application to help revitalize local 
communities in Tokyo using open data. In Tokyo, the 
declining birthrate, aging population, and influx of people 
from rural areas have diluted local communities and have 
become an administrative issue. Furthermore, in recent years, 
the Corona pandemic has reduced the number of 
neighborhoods and has accelerated the weakening of local 
communities. In addition, community ties are an essential 
element of smooth communication during a disaster and are 
necessary for an earthquake or fire. We responded to this 
challenge by creating an application that provides an 
opportunity to develop local communities using open data. 
This proposal will be developed as a smartphone 
application that anyone can use. The smartphone application 
allows users to find and participate in data on events that are 
the first step in building community connections. The 
application is divided by ward, city, town, and village, 
allowing users to browse events in the neighborhoods where 
they live. The application targets elderly people, people who 
are moving to Tokyo for higher education or employment, 
and singles in households. By helping them find new places 
to live, we can create a comfortable living environment for 
Tokyo residents. 
IV. USED OPEN DATA 
Widely diverse open data are available, including data of 
local stores and public facilities. Among them, we chose 
event data as the target for utilization. Event data include 
information related to events held by local communities: the 
data are more relevant to issues of regional revitalization than 
other related data. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government 
publishes open data on events in each ward, city, town, and 
village. Event information is uploaded to the catalog site by 
each ward, city, town, and village; the information is released 
as open data. We confirmed that 17 wards, cities, towns, and 
villages published event information related to the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Government's portal site. 
Information related to events in various municipalities is 
available, but we used open data of Koto-ku as a 
demonstration, mainly for two reasons. The first is the 
abundance of information. Unlike other wards, cities, towns, 
and villages, Koto-ku has large amounts of information 
related to events. We were able to confirm various 
information about the possibilities. We decided to use Koto-
ku data because we judged that this amount of detailed event 
information was sufficient to realize our application. The 
second reason was the data precision. Most open data 
published by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government included 
large amounts of null information. Among them, Koto-ku 
was selected as a demonstration because it has few nulls and  
TABLE I.  
OPEN DATA CONTENT OF THE EVENT 
Category 
Description 
Place 
Prefectures, Municipality, Address, 
Latitude, Longitude, How to access, 
Postcode, Distance 
Event 
Event name, Event details, 
Description 
Date and time 
Start date and time, End date and 
time, Start time, Ending time 
Contact 
Contact name, Phone number 
Organizer 
Organizer name 
Participation 
information 
How to apply for participation, 
Description of the deadline date and 
time information, Participation 
Conditions 
Home page 
Description of homepage Uniform 
Resource Locator (URL), Event 
image 
Capacity 
Description of capacity by age 
Remarks 
Presence or absence of parking lot, 
Presence or absence of a nursery 
center and details 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-942-3
MMEDIA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

large amounts of event information, which we judged to be 
easy to handle for our use. For these reasons, we created an 
application using event information of Koto-ku as the first 
demonstration data among the data of many wards, cities, 
towns, and villages. 
We obtained data for Koto-ku from the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Government's Open Data Portal site. The open 
data for Koto-ku events included 107 event data, and 
included 55 pieces of detailed event information. Table I 
shows typical events, put into nine categories: location, event, 
date and time, contact information, organizer, participation 
information, website, capacity, and remarks. The nulls, 
representing missing data among these open data, were 911 
out of 5564 pieces of total data, or approximately 17% of the 
total. Koto-ku event data had the lowest level of missing data 
among the 17 wards and municipalities in the Tokyo portal. 
V. PROTOTYPE 
To provide services using open data, we created a 
prototype of an application. The prototype implemented the 
functions and User Interface (UI) to search for and participate 
in Tokyo Metropolitan Government event information. We 
developed the prototype as a smartphone application. 
Smartphones are currently gaining popularity rapidly in 
Japan. As of May 2021, the smartphone penetration rate in 
Japan is 92.8%. To enable more people to use them, we chose 
a smartphone application because it is accessible to everyone. 
The prototype of this application targets Koto-ku, Tokyo. 
Its essential functions are to search for event information in 
the area to obtain details and to participate in events. It is also 
necessary to maintain the new community created through 
the event. For this reason, we implemented a chat function 
within the community. The application consists of a screen 
for seeking event information to find a suitable event, a 
screen displaying detailed information about each event, and 
a screen for chatting with other event participants. 
Figure 1 shows the UI of the screen intended for searching 
for event information and finding an event. We divided this  
 
 
 
(a) Display in map format   (b) Display in list format 
Figure 1.  Event information search screen. 
screen into search items and event search results. The event 
information matches the conditions entered in the search 
items displayed immediately in the results. In this prototype, 
to search for necessary information from the vast amounts of 
data, we added a function that allows users to search by any 
of the following items: date, time, address, category, keyword, 
and distance. By narrowing down event information from 
multiple criteria, one can obtain the exact information users 
want from a vast amount of data. Additionally, we 
implemented a function to switch between list (Figure 1a) and 
mapping (Figure 1b) formats to display results of retrieved 
event information. By making it possible to switch the 
display format, the UI design facilitates the comparison of 
items of importance according to user needs. 
The screen displaying detailed information for each event 
is displayed when the event in Figure 1 shown earlier is 
selected. It consists of detailed information for that event. The 
detailed information includes the location, date and time, 
event details, contact information, and other information 
required by event participants. Event participants can chat 
freely with other participants. We generated a chat room for 
each event. The chat room can be accessed from event details. 
Participants are provided a place for participants in the same 
event to communicate. 
This application realized open data by providing the 
information 
desired 
by 
users 
in 
a 
visual, 
easily 
understandable form. We also believe that using open data 
will help revitalize the community. 
VI. RESULTS OF WORKING ON THE HACKATHON 
We used open data of event information published in only 
17 of the 62 wards, towns, and villages in Tokyo. The 
percentage of wards, towns, and villages that publish open 
data was 27%. Of the 17 wards, cities, towns, and villages 
which publish open data on events, 15 publish open data in 
CSV files. The remaining two publish open data in different 
formats. They updated only one within one month of the 15 
wards, towns, and villages which published their open data in 
CSV files. Consequently, the open data released by the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Government are of various formats. The stated 
update frequency is not reliable, making it difficult for users 
to use the data. For future data use, we hope that the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Government will create a unified standard for 
data to be released using the recommended dataset of the 
Government Chief Information Officers (CIO) Portal and 
other data and create mechanisms to increase the update 
frequency. 
The prototype we created was intended to solve the 
problem by providing open data information to users in an 
easily searchable format. However, in terms of using open 
data, it is preferable to process event information into an 
easy-to-read format and to provide it in combination with 
open data of public facilities and generate new data and value 
by making predictions and inferences from the original data 
before providing the data. We regard the true meaning of 
using open data as providing newly created value that has not 
been available until now, only from event information by 
combining event information and information of other types. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-942-3
MMEDIA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

Administrative issues include employment, public safety, 
air pollution, and many others. To resolve administrative 
difficulties, we use open data to leverage the digital skills of 
residents. This goal necessitates enhancement of open data 
that the government makes available free of charge in a form 
that is useful for secondary purposes. This event confirmed 
that open data help resolve administrative issues. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper reports  services using open data proposed by 
the Tokyo Metropolitan Government in the first Governor's 
Cup Open Data Hackathon held by the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government. For this effort, developing an application that 
will become a service through the utilization of open data and 
civic technology is also underway. Consequently, the 
hackathon conducted by the government demonstrated the 
possibility of solving administrative issues. However, results 
also clarified that a need exists for measures to enhance open 
data in public administration and to create a mechanism to 
involve more engineers with digital skills in the digitization 
of public administration. Our future reports will present 
proposals to the administration, including points for 
improving the Tokyo Metropolitan Government's open data, 
which we have learned through our research using open data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 
18K13254. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number 20K12081, Tokyo Metropolitan University 
Grant-in-Aid for Research on Priority Areas, and the Okawa 
Foundation Research Grant. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet. Basic Law for the 
Promotion of Public-Private Data Utilization. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/it2/hei/detakatsuyo_honbho.
html 2016.12.07 [retrieved: April, 2022] 
[2] Government CIOs' Portal, Japan. Results of Questionnaire on 
Open Data Initiatives for Local Governments. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://cio.go.jp/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/r2_surv
ey_results.pdf 2021.06.09 [retrieved:April, 2022] 
[3] Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government Open Data Catalog Site. [Online]. Available 
from: https://catalog.data.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/dataset 2017.03.24 
[retrieved:April, 2022] 
[4] Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Tokyo Governor's Cup Open 
Data 
Hackathon. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://portal.data.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/hackathon/ 
2021.11.05 
[retrieved:April, 2022] 
[5] Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Tokyo Governor's Cup Open 
Data Application examples, etc. [Online]. Available from: 
https://portal.data.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/case/ 
2021.6.28 
[retrieved:April, 2022] 
[6] Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Fuchu Barrier-Free 
Restroom 
MAP. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://portal.data.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/case/case-study-01/ 
2021.6.28 [retrieved:April, 2022] 
[7] Tokyo Metropolitan Government. @KentoIDE: River Camera 
Dashboard. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://portal.data.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/case/case-study-07/ 
2021.11.11 [retrieved:April, 2022] 
[8] H. Konrad, M. Michael and L. Jens, “LinkedSpending: 
OpenSpending becomes Linked Open Data,” Semantic Web, 
vol. 7, pp. 95-104, Jan. 2016, doi: 10.3233/SW-150172. 
[9] Erkang Zhu, Ken Q. Pu, Fatemeh Nargesian and Renee J. 
Miller, “Interactive Navigation of Open Data Linkages,” 
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 10, pp. 1837–1840, 
Aug. 2017, doi: 10.14778/3137765.3137788. 
[10] Taiwan. 2021 Presidential Hackathon. [Online]. Available 
from:
 
https://presidential-hackathon.taiwan.gov.tw/en/ 
2021.6.24 [retrieved:April, 2022] 
[11] Garage48. Hack the Crisis. [Online]. Available from: 
https://garage48.org/hackthecrisis 2020.3.13 [retrieved:April, 
2022] 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-942-3
MMEDIA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

