Embedding Information in 3D Printed Objects with Curved Surfaces Using Near 
Infrared Fluorescent Dye 
*Piyarat Silapasuphakornwong, **Hideyuki Torii, 
**Kazutake Uehira 
Human Media Research Center 
Kanagawa Institute of Technology 
Atsugi, Japan 
*e-mail: silpiyarat@gmail.com,  
**email: {torii, uehira}@nw.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
Siravich Chandenduang 
Department of Mathematic & Computer Science 
Chulalongkorn University 
Bangkok, Thailand 
e-mail: Siravich93@gmail.com
 
Abstract—This paper presents a technique to embed barcodes 
in the curved surfaces of objects fabricated with a 3D printer. 
The objects are fabricated using resin material, and the 
barcodes patterns inside an object are formed using the same 
resin material as other regions but containing a small amount 
of fluorescent dye. When these objects are irradiated with 
near-infrared rays, fluorescent dyes are excited, and they emit 
near-infrared fluorescence. Therefore, the internal barcode 
patterns can be captured as high-contrast images using a near-
infrared camera, and the information expressed by the 
barcodes inside the objects can be nondestructively read out. 
We conducted experiments to demonstrate that this technique 
can also be applied to objects with curved surfaces. A sample 
was prepared using a 3D printer with two-head fused 
deposition modeling. The experimental results show that we 
can hide a barcode inside an object so that no one can see it 
from the outside and that we can decode all barcodes correctly 
with 100% accuracy.  
Keywords-3D printer; information hiding; near infrared 
light; fluorescent dye. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
3D printers have been attracting attention as a new 
method of manufacturing. This is because consumers can 
easily obtain a product that they want just by buying the 
model data through the Internet and print it if they have a 3D 
printer in their own home or office. 3D printers have been 
reduced in price and miniaturized. Notice that we could not 
see the barcodes from outside all of the sample. Thus, the 
barcodes were hidden completely. Thus, 3D printers are 
expected to revolutionize distribution and manufacturing in 
the future [1] – [3]. 
3D printers use a unique process called additive 
manufacturing in which thin layers are formed one by one to 
create an object [4]. This enables forming any structure 
inside the object. We have used this feature in our study on 
the techniques of embedding information inside a 3D printed 
object, and we were able to form fine patterns inside the 
object to express information [5] – [9]. 
The embedding of information inside 3D printed objects 
will enable adding extra value to these objects. For example, 
we can embed information that usually comes with newly 
purchased products into them. Moreover, it will be possible 
to use them as “things” of the Internet of Things (IoT) in 
connecting to the Internet. 
   We have studied some methods of forming fine 
patterns inside a 3D printed object that used a Fused 
Deposition Modeling (FDM) 3D printer with resin as a 
material. One of them is a method that forms internal 
patterns using resin containing a small amount of fluorescent 
dye [10]. Fluorescent dye emits fluorescence when near-
infrared rays are irradiated; therefore, the internal pattern can 
be captured as a high-contrast image using a near-infrared 
camera. This enhances the readability of the embedded 
information. 
So far, we have demonstrated the feasibility of this 
technique and also the possibility of high density information 
embedding by forming inside patterns at double depth [11]. 
This study was conducted using flat surface sample objects 
because they were intended to determine the feasibility and 
because flat surfaces made the experiment easy. However, 
we have to demonstrate that this technique can also be 
applied to many general objects for practical use because 
such objects usually have curved surfaces. This paper 
describes our experiments using objects with curved surfaces 
and the results we obtained.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the 
principle of basic embedding fluorescent dye into a fabricate 
object and its readout method are described in Section II. 
Then, we show the feasibility and method how to embedding 
barcodes under the curve surface and evaluation in Section 
III. Next, Section IV is the results and discussions, followed 
by the conclusion in Section V, respectively.  
II. 
INFORMATION EMBEDDING USING FLUORESCENT DYE 
The technique of using fluorescent dye for internal 
patterns is illustrated by Figure 1. This technique assumes 
that the resin is used as an object material. Pattern regions 
inside the object are formed using the same resin as that of 
other regions, but they contain a small amount of 
fluorescent dye. Because resin has high transmittance for 
near infrared, the rays reach the internal fluorescent dyes 
when the object is irradiated with near-infrared rays from 
the outside. The light source irradiates light with wavelength 
λE, which excites the fluorescent dye. The fluorescent dye is 
then excited and emits fluorescence. Therefore, a bright 
image of the patterns inside the resin object can be captured. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

Because wavelength λF of the dye's fluorescence differs 
from wavelength λE of the irradiated light, only light the 
fluorescent dye emits enters the camera using an optical 
filter that blocks the light from the source. In our previous 
studies where near infrared rays were used, reflective light 
from the object surface also entered the camera as noise. 
This decreased the readability of the embedded information. 
In contrast, because the technique in this study can block 
such reflective light from the surface, a low noise image of 
the pattern should be obtainable, enhancing readability. 
The patterns cannot be seen with the naked eye from the 
outside using the same color of resins for the body and 
internal patterns even if they are formed in a very shallow 
position from the surface. This is because the amount of the 
fluorescent dye contained in the resin is very small, and this 
hardly changes the color. This is important for applications 
requiring embedded information to remain hidden. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
In this paper, we focus on applying this technique to the 
curved objects in order to confirm the feasibility to apply in 
practical general 3D objects. Most general 3D objects have 
curved surfaces. The difference in the incidence and 
reflection of light on the curved surface is irregular. It may 
have some effects on the appearance in captured images, 
such as brightness and contrast. Therefore, it could affect the 
readability of the read-out process in the end. Hence, we set 
up experiments to find the appropriate factors in our 
technique concerning when our technique should be applied 
in practical situations. 
A. Sample preparation 
We prepared samples and evaluated the results using the 
workflow shown in Figure 2. The 3D models were built from 
a CAD program. With this step, barcodes containing 
information on the word “Hi” were embedded and hidden 
inside the 3D models, as shown in Figure 3. We varied the 
depth of embedding the barcodes at 0.5 and 1.0 mm, and we 
placed them in 3D models such as a half sphere and a half 
cylinder to compare the effect of the curved surfaces on the 
samples. The space between each line of the barcodes was at 
least 1 mm, and the size of each line was 1 mm. The design 
of the samples is shown in Table I. Then, a sample file was 
generated in the g-code file for slicing. After that, the 
samples were created using a 3D printer with two nozzles, 
one nozzle being a normal ABS and the other being an ABS-
fluorescent dye mixed filament, as shown in Figure 4 (left). 
After printing, we captured images of samples using a near 
infrared camera with a specific optical filter. The barcodes, 
which were embedded inside the objects, would then appear. 
Finally, we scanned the barcodes of the pictures we took and 
compared the readability of each object. 
B. Capture of near infrared images 
We used a near infrared CCD camera with a specific 
optical filter to capture the images of the hidden barcodes 
inside the samples. The resolution of the images was 2048 x 
1088 pixels. The layout of the samples with instruments is 
shown in Figure 4 (right). To read out the data embedded in 
the objects, we used a QR & barcode scanner application 
available on Android and a QR-scanner application available 
on iOS for decoding the barcodes. However, some images 
could not be read out directly from the capturing process. To 
solve this problem, we enhanced them by adjusting their 
sharpness using the sharpness enhancement mode provided 
by Microsoft PowerPoint. Then, we repeated the scanning 
Near infrared camera 
Near infrared light source 
3D printed object 
Inside pattern region 
containing fluorescent dye 
Near infrared light with 
wavelength λL  
Optical filter 
Near infrared light with wavelength λF 
emitted by fluorescent dye 
Figure 1. Basic concept of proposed technique [10] 
Figure 2. Workflow of experiment 
 
Generate 
a barcode 
 
Embed the barcode into a 3D model 
and generate a g-code of that model 
 
Print 3D samples with 
a 3-nozzle printer 
 
Scan the barcode from the pictures and 
compare the readability of each sample 
Space ≥ 1 mm 
Bar code 
Cross section 
Body 
Diameter: cm 
0.5, 1.0 mm 
Figure 3. Cross section of our sample used in the experiment 
 
 TABLE I. DESIGNED SAMPLES IN EXPERIMENTS 
3D Model 
Diameter (cm) 
Depth of barcode from 
surface (mm) 
Sphere 
8 
0.5 
1.0 
Cylinder 
4.5 
0.5 
1.0 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

step. The enhancement process is shown in Figure 5.  
We tried to read out the barcodes using the automatic 
barcode scanner application ten times and reported the % 
accuracy, both in before and after enhancement images, as 
determined with the following equation. The accuracy 
measures how it is easy to access to readout barcodes—
change to word or some understandable information.  
 
 
(1) 
   
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table II shows the 3D models of the half spheres and 
cylinders after printing them with the bar code depth varied 
at 0.5 and 1.0 mm below the surface and the readout results, 
respectively. Notice that we could not see the barcodes from 
outside all of the samples. Thus, the barcodes were hidden 
completely. 
When the depth of 0.5 mm was used in both the half 
sphere and cylinder surfaces, the barcodes could be read out 
within a second (almost immediately), and no sharpness 
enhancement was needed. We could decode from the 
captured images directly. 
Nevertheless, for an embedding depth of 1.0 mm, both 
the half sphere and cylinder surfaces could be read out using 
the same application, but more time was needed, along with 
an ideal position to read the barcodes. Thus, the sharpness 
needed to be improved. After sharpness was enhanced, they 
could be read out within a second (almost immediately). 
Also, the results of the embedding depth of 0.5 mm were the 
same. 
The samples of the embedding depth barcode of 1.0 mm 
could not be read out directly because of the irregularity of 
incident and reflect lighting on the curved surfaces. The 
curves of the surfaces made the distance different between 
the barcodes to the light and camera in each area. The center 
of the curves was the highest. Hence, we could capture the 
images very clearly because they were near the camera and 
in the point of focus. However, the barcodes at the curved 
rims were the farthest from the camera, making the capture 
images from this area very blurry and unreadable because 
they were out of focus. 
However, after the enhancing process, the barcodes could 
be read out effectively. We tried to enhance the sharpness of 
images in both the 0.5 and 1.0 mm samples. The results were 
that they could be read smoothly. That let us know that the 
sharpness was an important factor for our technique to 
ensure the readability of the hidden barcodes inside 3D 
models. Hence, we will utilize our method to enhance the 
sharpness of captured barcode images for effective readouts 
when our technique will be applied in practical applications 
for embedding information in general 3D models, the main 
target for our study. That will make the information on 
decoding more accurate and make the readability more 
efficient.         
Moreover, we will endeavor to embed QR codes instead 
of barcodes in future work because they can increase the 
amount of embedded information, though they will increase 
the difficulty of readouts. With the principle of reading out 
the barcodes, the patterns just clarify only a tab where the 
length is greater than the width at a propagation of 2:1. This 
will make the barcodes much easier to decode than QR codes. 
For QR codes, all of their positions have to be completely 
clear. The rim of the curved surfaces mainly cause a problem 
with reading because the images are blurry and the codes 
distort (caused by the shape model and printing), as shown in 
Figure 6. Thus, we have to determine feasibility in future 
work for this reason.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We proposed a technique of non-destructively reading 
out information embedded inside curved objects using near-
infrared light. We determined the feasibility of applying our 
technique to general non-flat models by creating 3D curved 
samples, such as spheres and cylinders, by varying the depth 
Infrared 
camera 
Optical 
filter 
Infrared LED 
Sample 
Figure 4. Experiment setup: (left) a two-nozzle printer, (right) 
Layout of instruments for evaluation 
 Figure 5. Enhancement process: (left) before enhancement, 
(right) after enhancement by adjusting sharpness 
 
Figure 6.  Problem of barcode at the rim of the curved surface model 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

below the surface of barcodes between 0.5 and 1.0 mm, and 
by comparing the same model with different barcode depths. 
The results showed the feasibility of hiding the barcodes 
inside the objects so that no one can see even part of them 
from the outside and the feasibility of decoding all the 
barcodes correctly with 100% accuracy. The best barcode 
depth for embedding was found to be 0.5 mm. Although, at 
the depth of 1.0 mm, we could not read out the barcodes 
directly from the captured images, enhancing the process 
helped with reading out the barcodes correctly. We found 
that sharpness was an importance factor of readability in our 
technique, for both 0.5 and 1.0 mm surface embedded 
thickness. We can choose to embed information at a depth of 
0.5 mm from the surface in 3D printed objects. At this depth, 
we do not need any sharpness enhancement to read out 
information, ensuring the best conditions, convenience, and 
efficiency for use in practical applications. The target of our 
study is to apply our proposed method to cover all cases of 
real-world printed objects in the future. Thus, we will also 
try to embed QR codes instead of barcodes in both flat, 
curved, and general surfaces in order to increase the amount 
of information embedding effectively.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank DIC Corporation for providing 
the fluorescent dye contained in the ABS resin in this 
research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Berman, “3-D printing: The new industrial revolution,” Business 
horizons, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 155–162, March–April 2012. 
[2] B. Garrett, “3D printing: New economic paradigms and strategic 
shifts,” Global Policy, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 70–75, February 2014. 
[3] C. Weller, R. Kleer, and F. T. Piller, “Economic implications of 3D 
printing: Market structure models in light of additive manufacturing 
revisited,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 164, 
pp. 43–56, June 2015. 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS 
Model: Embedded 
Depth (mm) 
Real Printed Object 
Captured Infrared Image 
Readability 
After Enhancing Image  
Readability 
Sphere: 0.5 mm 
 
 
√ 
(Fast) 
100% 
 
√ 
(Immediate) 
100% 
Sphere: 1.0 mm 
 
 
X 
(Only from an ideal 
position & with slow 
readout) 
50% 
 
√ 
(Fast) 
100% 
Cylinder: 0.5 mm 
 
 
√ 
(Fast) 
100% 
 
√ 
(Immediate) 
100% 
Cylinder: 1.0 mm 
 
 
X 
(Only from an ideal 
position & with slow 
readout) 
50% 
 
√ 
(Fast) 
100% 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

[4] F. Hartung and M. Kutter, “Multimedia watermarking techniques” 
Proc IEEE, Vol. 87, No. 7, pp. 1079–1107, 1999. 
[5] M. Suzuki, P. Silapasuphakornwong, K. Uehira, H. Unno, and Y. 
Takashima, “Copyright protection for 3D printing by embedding 
information inside real fabricated objects,” International Conference 
on Computer Vision Theory and Applications, pp. 180–185, March 
2015. 
[6] M. Suzuki, et al., “Embedding Information into Objects Fabricated 
With 3-D Printers by Forming Fine Cavities inside Them”, 
Proceedings of IS&T International symposium on Electronic Imaging, 
Vol. 2017, No. 41, pp. 6–9, 2017 . 
[7] P. Silapasuphakornwong, et al., “Nondestructive readout of copyright 
information embedded in objects fabricated with 3-D printers”, The 
14th International Workshop on Digital-forensics and Watermarking, 
Revised Selected Papers, pp. 232–238, 2016. 
[8] K. Uehira, et al., “Copyright Protection for 3D Printing by 
Embedding Information Inside 3D-Printed Objects”, The 15th 
International Workshop on Digital-forensics and Watermarking 
Revised Selected Papers, pp. 370–378, 2017. 
[9] K. D. D. Willis and A. D. Wilson, “Infrastructs: Fabricating 
Information Inside Physical Objects for Imaging in the Terahertz 
Region”, ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 138-1–
138-10, July 2013. 
[10] P. Silapasuphakornwong, M. Suzuki, H. Torii, and K. Uehira, 
“Technique for embedding information in objects produced with 3D 
printer using near infrared fluorescent dye”, Proceedings of 
MMEDIA, pp. 55-58, 2019. 
[11] H. Kasuga, P. Silapasuphakornwong, H. Torii, M. Suzuki, and K. 
Uehira, “Technique to Embed  Information in 3D Printed Objects 
Using Near Infrared Fluorescent Dye”, Proceedings of IECIE, 2019. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-772-6
MMEDIA 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Multimedia

