Secure and Anonymous Multimedia Content Distribution in Peer-to-Peer Networks 
Amna Qureshi, Helena Rifà-Pous, David Megías
Department of IT, Multimedia and Telecommunications, Internet Interdisciplinary Institute, 
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya,  
Barcelona, Spain  
{aqureshi, hrfia, dmegias}@uoc.edu 
 
Abstract—In recent years, the distribution of large scale 
multimedia contents has become easier and more efficient than 
ever before. The unauthorized distribution of copyright-
protected content has emerged as a major concern. A buyer of 
a multimedia content does not want to reveal his/her identity 
whereas the seller or owner of the content does not want the 
buyer to further distribute the content illegally. Accordingly, 
this paper presents a secure and privacy-aware multimedia 
content distribution mechanism based on Tardos Codes for 
Peer-to-Peer networks. Our proposed system offers copyright 
protection by means of a traitor-tracing capability, collusion-
resistance, content owner and buyer’s security with mutual 
anonymity during secure data exchange. 
 
Keywords-privacy; security; anonymity; trust; collusion-
resistant fingerprinting;Peer-to-Peer networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) is often described as a type of 
decentralized computing system in which nodes, referred to 
as peers, use the Internet to communicate with each other 
directly. All the peers in this interconnected network provide 
resources to other peers, including bandwidth, storage space, 
and computing power. It greatly helps to establish 
multimedia communication networks and enables efficient 
distribution of digital content at a large scale. However, in 
the absence of security mechanism, P2P networks lack the 
ability to maintain content protection and access control 
towards copyright material, hence leading to piracy 
commitment and copyright infringement. The enforcement 
of copyright protection mechanisms in P2P content 
distribution systems, however, poses serious privacy threats 
to end users, i.e., monitoring of their activities by keeping 
record of downloaded files, IP address through which files 
are being downloaded, history of files shared or downloaded, 
or a list of the peers with whom a user has interacted in the 
past. Thus, there is an inherent conflict of interest between 
copyright protection supporters and privacy advocates. P2P 
developers need to balance security and privacy needs when 
designing content distribution systems.  
However, security and 
privacy in P2P content 
distribution systems are achieved by various cryptographic 
mechanisms, 
(Homormorphic 
encryption, 
multi-party 
computation, etc) and digital watermarking/fingerprinting 
technology. Most of the research work related to copyright 
protection and privacy in content distribution system incurs 
high computational and communicational burden at the 
buyer’s and/or at the multimedia owner’s/merchant’s end. 
Literature review shows that a few P2P content distribution 
systems [1-2] exist that provides both secure and 
anonymous content distribution with reduced computational 
burden at merchant’s end. The review of some recent P2P 
content distribution systems satisfying either security or 
privacy properties can be found in [3]. Hence, it is of utmost 
importance to build an integrated platform which can enable 
content owners’ to distribute their large-sized digital 
contents without a fear of copyright violation at reduced 
delivery costs and simultaneously enable end users to 
receive legal content without fear of privacy breach.   
 In this paper, we propose a secure and anonymous 
content distribution system for P2P networks that provides 
both copyright protection and privacy. Also, the proposed 
system reduces the computational cost of a merchant.   
A. Contributions 
A newly proposed privacy-aware content distribution 
scheme for P2P networks which would benefit 
multimedia owners (merchants) to share their large-sized 
copyrighted files and end users/peers (buyers) to 
download their content legally. In the proposed system, 
the original multimedia file is partitioned by the 
merchant into a base and supplementary file. The base 
file is much smaller than the original file and contains the 
most important information. Without this information, 
the file reconstructed by the end user would be unusable. 
The base file is dispensed by the merchant on payment 
from the user and a supplementary file is distributed to 
the P2P network. Thus, it reduces the burden of the 
merchants by only sending the small-sized base file and 
making use of the P2P network infrastructure to support 
most of the file transfer process. In this paper, we adopt a 
collusion-resistant Tardos fingerprint code [4] to confirm 
the distribution scheme’s security against collusion 
attacks. A Trusted Third Party (TTP) Monitor is used, 
which is assumed to be an honest entity and is trusted by 
both the merchant and the buyer. Since Tardos codes 
used by a merchant for the generation of collusion-
resistant fingerprint depend on a secret vector which 
cannot be revealed to the buyer, this secret vector is 
committed to a Monitor. Moreover, to provide security to 
a buyer from a malicious merchant who might frame an 
honest user for illegal-redistribution, this secret vector is 
committed to a Monitor along with the pseudo identities 
of a merchant and a buyer. The proposed scheme can 
protect the buyer’s privacy until the illegal re-distribution 
is proven. The illegal re-distributor is identified by the 
merchant using Tardos Code’s piracy tracing algorithm. 
Also, the scheme provides resistance to man-in-middle 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

attacks by employing mutual anonymity and key 
agreement and pseudonym-based trust management. 
B. Outline of the paper 
In this paper, we focus on a new solution to provide 
security, anonymity and privacy to both merchant and end-
users of P2P content distribution system. In Section II, we 
highlight the design requirements for our system. The 
building blocks of our system are introduced in Section III. 
In Section IV, we describe our proposed system and, in 
Section V, we draw a conclusion and discuss future work. 
II. 
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
This section defines the system requirements and certain 
assumptions made during the design process of the system. 
A. Design Requirements 
For secure and privacy-aware P2P content distribution 
scheme, we have the following requirements depending on 
security, 
privacy, 
anonymity, 
trust, 
robustness 
and 
imperceptibility constraints. 
 
The identity of a buyer should remain anonymous 
during transactions until he/she is proven to be guilty 
of copyright violation. 
 
The merchant should be able to trace and identify the 
illegal re-distributor in case of finding a pirated 
copy. 
 
The scheme should be collusion resistant against a 
specific number of colluders’ c as specified by 
Tardos codes. 
 
The buyer accused of re-distributing an unauthorized 
copy should not be able to claim that the copy was 
created by the merchant. 
 
The judge with the help of a Monitor should be able 
to resolve the disputes without the buyer revealing 
his/her identity. 
 
The fingerprinting process should be blind and the 
inserted fingerprint should be imperceptible and 
robust against common signal processing attacks. 
 
None of the other peers in the system should know 
about the source provider peer and requesting peer’s 
identity or an item being exchanged. 
 
The real identity of a user should be protected during 
authentication process thus, enabling each user to 
verify the authenticity of each other anonymously.  
B. Assumptions 
The assumptions for the proposed system are as follows: 
 
There are four major players involved: merchant, 
buyer, Monitor and Judge. 
 
The merchant and the buyer do not trust each other 
but they both trust the Monitor. 
 
Each entity is supposed to have a public key Kp and 
a private key Ks.  
 
SP is selected on the basis of its reputation and 
resources and is thus assumed to be honest. 
 
Each user can have only one pseudonym against its 
secret information. 
 
The base file transfer between the merchant and the 
end user is secure and efficient by using the 
Anonymous two-party Authenticated Key Exchange 
(AKE) protocol.  
 
A P2P system maintains end-to-end data integrity. 
The reconstruction of the original file from the base 
and supplementary files is performed at the user end 
without assistance of a user. The supplementary file 
is only shared within the P2P network whereas the 
base file is not shareable. 
III. 
BUILDING BLOCKS 
Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA), Symmetric key 
cryptography, Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) of identity, 
hash function, fingerprint collusion-resistance algorithm and 
Quantization Indexed Modulation (QIM) scheme are useful 
technologies for the proposed P2P content distribution 
system. In our proposed system, DSA and ZKP of identity 
are used by the users to authenticate each other’s identity 
and generate a one-time session key for secure data 
exchange. An unforgeable and verifiable pseudonym for 
each entity of the system is generated by using standard 
hash function. Symmetric key encryption is used to encrypt 
and decrypt the data exchanged anonymously between the 
two parties. Tardos Codes are used in our system in order to 
provide collusion-resistant against colluders and these 
fingerprints are embedded into the content using a QIM 
based watermarking scheme. 
A. Digital Signature Standard (DSS) 
The DSS [5] is the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) 
which is used to generate digital signature for the 
authentication of an identity of the message sender and data 
integrity. The algorithm works in conjunction with the 
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA). DSA uses the following 
three parameters which are publicly known: 
 
   P:    a large prime number (at least 1024 bits) 
 
   Q:    a sufficiently large prime number (at least 160  
bits) that is also a divisor of (p-1) 
 
   g:    a generator for the multiplicative subgroup of 
order Q of  integers modulo P 
A DSA private key is an integer x taken modulo Q and 
the public key is the integer y = gx mod P.  
B. Symmetric key cryptography 
To prevent illegal copying of digital content, the content 
is generally encrypted using a symmetric key algorithm. 
Symmetric key encryption is a cryptography technique that 
uses a shared secret key to encrypt and decrypt data. 
Symmetric encryption algorithms (AES, DES, etc) are very 
efficient at processing large amounts of information and 
computationally less intensive than asymmetric encryption 
algorithms (RSA, El Gamal, etc). 
C. Zero-knowledge proof of identity 
Zero-knowledge proof of identity [6] system is a 
cryptographic protocol between two parties whereby, the 
first party wants to prove his/her identity to the second party, 
without revealing anything about his/her identity to the 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

second party. Following are the three main properties of zero 
knowledge proof of identity: 
1) Completeness: The honest prover convinces the honest 
verifier that the secret statement is true. 
2) Soundness: Cheating prover can’t convince the honest 
verifier that a statement is true (if the statement is really 
false). 
3) Zero-knowledge: Cheating verifier can not get anything 
other than prover’s public data sent from the honest prover. 
In our proposed scheme, we employ zero-knowledge 
proof of identity scheme of [7] in Section IV. In this 
algorithm, the central authority being used in basic ZKP of 
identity protocol [6] has been eliminated to make it 
adaptable to P2P networks.    
D. SHA-1 
SHA-1 is a secure hashing algorithm which is used to 
output a 160-bit message digest of any input file less than 264 
bits. The SHA-1 hash is called secure because it is 
computationally infeasible to find a message which 
corresponds to a given message digest, or to find two 
different messages which produce the same message digest 
We employ SHA-1 to use it with the DSA as specified in 
the DSS. The initiator and receiver of a message compute 
and verify a digital signature using SHA-1. In the spirit of 
Pseudo-Trust [7], we use a one-way function to generate 
pseudonyms together with a proof. 
E. Tardos Codes 
A variation of Tardos codes, i.e., Nuida's codes [8] are 
used in the proposed system for fingerprint generation. 
These codes are based on the Marking assumption, i.e., set 
of colluders c can only alter those bits of the codeword that 
differ between colluders. The fingerprinting code F and a 
secret vector s are outputs of this algorithm. The details of 
Nuida’s codes construction and traitor tracing algorithm can 
be found in [8]. 
F. Quantization Indexed Modulation (QIM) 
QIM [9] is a relatively recent watermark embedding 
technique. It has become popular because of the high 
watermarking capacity and the ease of implementation. The 
basic QIM scheme embeds a fingerprint bit f by quantizing a 
Discrete Wavelets Transform (DWT) coefficient W by 
choosing between a quantizer with even or odd values, 
depending on the binary value of f. It is important to consider 
an optimal selection of the embedding quantizer step size Δ 
and scaling factor, so that the best tradeoff between 
robustness 
and 
minimum 
quality 
degradation 
can 
automatically be achieved. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The proposed privacy-aware content distribution scheme 
shown in Fig. 1 involves five entities:  
 
A merchant M is an entity that distributes the 
copyrighted content to end users (peers) in the P2P 
system. It is involved in fingerprint generation and 
embedding, base and supplementary file distribution, 
traitor tracing and dispute resolution. 
 
A peer is an entity that can either play a role of a 
content requester or provider. Some of the peers with 
additional facilities act as super-peers. A peer is 
involved in acquisition of a base file from the 
merchant, distribution of a supplementary file in the 
system and a dispute resolution, in case he/she is 
found guilty of copyright violation. 
 
A super peer SP (a.k.a index server) is a peer with 
additional facilities which is assigned a role of 
content server for a small portion of the network. 
Each peer on registration with P2P system may 
upload their files to SP. SP maintains a list of the 
peers connected to the network and act as central 
servers. However, instead of peers’ address, their 
pseudonyms are stored. The peers send their queries 
to the SP for downloading their files of interest. The 
SP receives a supplementary file from M. On 
receiving the file, it divides the content into multiple 
fragments and transmits these fragments to users. 
Initially, SP is booted with a supplementary file by 
M. 
 
A Monitor MO functions as a trusted party to keep 
the encrypted hash of the secret vector used in the 
fingerprint generation with the pseudonyms of the 
merchant and the peer. It also keeps the record of 
transactions between SP and the peer. In case of 
traitor tracing, the MO reveals the encrypted hash of 
the secret vector to M. 
 
A judge J is assumed to be a trusted party which 
resolves the disputes between M and a peer with the 
cooperation of MO. 
Setup: The setup of the system involves two things, (1) A 
Hybrid structured P2P design is opted which provides 
efficient data search and consists of multiple coordinators 
called 
super-peers. 
At 
the 
system 
startup, 
the 
bootstrapping can be done via a well-known booting 
node. (2) To protect real identities of entities in the 
system,   each entity is required to generate a pseudo 
identity P (pseudonym) and a pseudo identity certificate 
(PC) based on [7] before joining the system. A peer with 
PC can verify what it claims to be to the other party. 
Each peer uses its unique secret as an input for a pseudo 
identity generation.  The complete description of the 
generation of P and PC can be found in [7]. On 
registration, each peer transfers its P, PC and public key 
to the connected SP. P and PC are used by peers for an 
anonymous communication in the system. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

Traitor 
Tracing 
Algorithm
Collusion
Attack
Set of 
colluders
Traitor Tracing
Wavelet 
Transform
Fingerprint
Generation
Multimedia
Content
Fingerprinted Base File
Supplementary File
Base and Supplementary File Generation
Judge/Arbiter
Monitor
Dispute
Resolution
Exchange of 
encrypted hash of 
secret vector
Supplementary File 
Transfer to P2P 
Network
Base File Transfer from 
Content Provider
P2P Network
Peer 1
Peer 2
Peer n
Super-Peer
Peer 1
Peer 2
Peer n
Super-Peer
Peer 1
Peer 2
Peer n
Super-Peer
  
 
 
Figure 1. Secure and Privacy-aware P2P Content Distribution System 
The proposed scheme as shown in the Fig. 1 consists of 
the following sub-protocols. 
A. Fingerprint generation process 
The algorithm for fingerprint generation takes a 
parameter ε for error probability and the total number N of 
users as an input, and outputs a collection F = (f1, .., fN) of 
binary codewords fi of length m and a secret vector s. The 
codeword Fi is sent to the user i, while the encrypted vector s 
and a hash of s is sent to a MO to be used later in traitor 
tracing. 
B. Base file and supplementary file generation 
The base file (BF) is designed to have a small size and is 
distributed from M to all the peers on receiving a payment 
for the requested file. The proposed method employs DWT 
to split the content into low-frequency (approximate 
coefficients) 
and 
high-frequency 
(detail 
coefficients) 
components. In case of audio DWT decomposition, we get 
approximate and detail (CA, CD) coefficients whereas in case 
of an image file obtained from a frame of a video, we get one 
approximate component (LL) and three detail (horizontal 
(HL), vertical (LH) and diagonal (HH)) components. An 
approximate coefficient is then itself split into a second-level 
approximation and detail coefficients, and the process is 
repeated. For example, for four-level DWT decomposition of 
an image of size 1024x768, the coefficient set is, 
W=[WA4,WH4,WD4,WV4,...,WA1,WH1,WD1,WV1]. At the fourth 
level, the size of the approximate coefficient WA4 is 
significantly reduced to 64x48. DWT level-4 decomposition 
has been chosen for our design considering the trade-offs 
between robustness, capacity and transparency properties of 
watermarking. WA4 provides more robustness and reduced 
file size with a lesser amount of effect on quality. The 
fingerprint fi of length m is then imperceptibly embedded 
into this WA4 using a blind, robust and secure QIM-based 
watermarking technique [8]. This constitutes a BF which is 
sent to the end user. The remaining detail coefficients 
constitute a supplementary file (SF), which is sent to the SP 
for distribution in P2P system. Eventually, the system at the 
user end can apply the inverse DWT to get a fingerprinted 
copy. 
C. Distribution of the base  file 
On receiving a file request from a peer Pi (Pi is the 
pseudo identity of a peer i), SP directs Pi’s request to the M 
(pseudo identity of a merchant). M first initiates the 
authentication procedure to verify that the peer claiming to 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

be the holder of Pi is not lying. An anonymous two-party 
AKE protocol based on PseudoTrust [7] is established 
between M and Pi. M sends an authentication request to Pi. Pi 
replies to M with its PCi (pseudo identity certificate of peer 
Pi). Having the PCi of Pi, M initiates the authentication 
process. The authentication process includes two main 
phases: (1) Pi acts as a prover to prove its validation to M 
and (2) M proves its authenticity to Pi.  
For generation of a session key for secure BF exchange 
between Pi and M, Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange protocol is 
used in the authentication process. A DSS is adopted to 
simplify the AKE protocol. 
 
 
Figure 2. Two-party anonymous AKE protocol based on PseudoTrust [7] 
 
Fig.2 illustrates the authentication process between M 
and Pi. Similarly, for secure exchange of h(p), M and MO 
undergo a two-party AKE to exchange one time secret 
session key K2 as illustrated in the Fig.2. M encrypts s with 
its public key KPM and further encrypts (EKPM [s], h(s) M, 
Pi) with MO's public key (KPm) and obtains E1= EKPm 
(EKPM [s], h(s), M, Pi). Then it encrypts it again with the 
session-key K2 to get EK2(E1). MO, upon receiving the 
encrypted content, decrypts it with the session key K2 and 
further decrypts it with its private key KSm. MO stores 
EKMP[s] and h(s) along with the pseudonyms of M and Pi. 
After mutual authentication between Pi and M, the 
session key K1 is generated to encrypt BF: EBF =EK1 (BF) 
and send the encrypted content to the requesting Pi. M 
generates h(BF) and saves h(BF), Pi against a transaction 
ID. Pi decrypts it with K1 and gets a decrypted BF. 
D. Distribution of the supplementary file 
SP searches for a particular file requested by a peer 
within its group. If found, it displays the list of peers 
having that particular file and also displays randomly 
selected peer nodes to act as middle nodes between content 
providing peer and the requesting peer. On joining the 
system, peers construct anonymous paths with existing 
peers and find their tail nodes based on the APFS protocol 
[10]. These middle nodes form a covert path for the 
content-providing peer to send the content to the 
requesting peer. The content-providing peer pre-constructs 
an onion-path which points to it and add this path to the 
SP. By doing so, a requesting peer can utilize the onion-
path to contact the content-providing peer while knowing 
nothing about provider’s identity. If SP is unable to find 
the file within its group, it sends a request for the file to 
other connected SPs. The other SP on finding the 
particular content-provider sends the response to the 
requesting SP. The SP then establishes a path between the 
requesting peer and that content-providing peer. 
Let’s assume that a is a requesting peer (P_a), b is the 
providing peer (P_b) and T_p acts as a tail node to relay a 
message for the requesting peer P_a. When a peer P_b 
receives the file request and it holds the requested file and 
decided to be the file provider, it replies to the query 
through its tail-node T_b. The requesting peer P_a initiates 
the authentication process to verify the identity of P_b. 
P_a sends an authentication request to P_b through the 
anonymous path, P_a → T_a→ T_b→ P_b. Using the 
two-party anonymous AKE as illustrated in Fig.2, both 
parties authenticate each other identities and generates a 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

one-time session key K_ab to encrypt the content of the 
file. P_b sends the encrypted file F and hash of the file 
(EK_ab(F,h(F)) to P_a through T_b and T_a.  
In order to transfer P_a, P_b, h (F) along with the ID 
of SP securely to MO, a session key is generated using 
two-party AKE as described in Fig. 2. At the completion 
of SP transfer to P_a, MO concatenates all the h(F)s and 
stores this concatenated hash and P_a against a transaction 
ID. 
E. Traitor-Tracing  
Once a pirate copy Y of content X is found, M extracts 
the fingerprint by decomposing the pirated content Y with 
the same wavelet basis used in the fingerprint insertion 
step. This gives the approximate coefficient matrix in 
which pirated code pc ε {0, 1}* is embedded. After 
extraction of a pirated code from Y, the tracing algorithm 
of Nuida’s codes is employed to identify colluder(s).  
In the tracing algorithm, a colluded fingerprint pc and 
secret vector s are given as an input. The encrypted secret 
vector s is obtained from MO in order to generate the 
fingerprint matrix for identification of the colluder(s). M 
further decrypts s using its private key KSM. The score of 
users are calculated as per algorithm described in [8] and 
the output of this tracing algorithm is the user with the 
highest score. M cannot accuse any user of producing a 
forged copy due to commitment of secret vector s to MO, 
which is being trusted by both merchant and buyer.  
F. Arbitration 
If the user has been identified as a colluder through 
detection algorithm and he/she denies that an unauthorized 
copy has been originated from his/her copy and want to 
prove his/her innocence, a judge J can be requested to 
solve this conflict. J is assumed to be a trusted party, 
which is able to resolve conflicts without the user 
revealing his/her identity. Moreover, J does not require the 
whole fingerprinted content. On receiving request from a 
user to deny accusation of piracy, J gets a pirated copy's 
hash from traitor tracing step. J requests MO to provide the 
hash of the file registered against the user’s pseudonym. If 
both the hashes have high correlation, it means end user is 
guilty else he/she is innocent. If found guilty, the real 
identity of the user can be traced with the help of MO. 
Since MO has kept record of each transaction between a 
peer and SP, it can identify the SP with whom the accused 
peer was connected to and thus through its public key, its 
real identity can be revealed to J.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have proposed a privacy-aware 
content distribution mechanism which provides security 
and anonymity to both the merchant and buyer. The newly 
proposed scheme is specific for P2P networks and can 
benefit multimedia owners to share their big files without 
fear of copyright violation, such as video files, utilizing the 
convenience of P2P networks. This scheme reduces the 
burden of the media owner’s server by only sending a 
small-sized base file and making use of the P2P network to 
support the majority of the file transfer process. The 
wavelet technique makes the base file into necessary 
information for the customer and fingerprint generated 
using Tardos codes, offers collusion-resistance against a 
chosen number of colluders and illegal-redistributors’ 
identification whilst preserving the privacy of honest 
users. 
Future Work: Preliminary results of our proposed system 
show that the base file of both the audio and video files is 
considerably small in size as compared to the original size. 
In our forthcoming paper, we will discuss the security and 
performance analysis of the system. Also, we will compare 
its performance with similar P2P content distribution 
systems in terms of security and privacy properties and 
computational cost.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly funded by the Spanish Government 
through 
projects 
TIN2011-27076-C03-02 
‘‘CO-
PRIVACY’’ 
and 
CONSOLIDER 
INGENIO 
2010 
CSD2007-0004 ‘‘ARES’’. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Megías and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Privacy-aware peer to 
peer content distribution using automatically recombined 
fingerprints”,  Multimedia Systems, (In press) 
[2] J. Domingo-Ferrer and D. Megías, “Distributed multicast of 
fingerprinted cntent based on a rational peer-to-peer 
community”, Computer. Communication, vol. 36, no. 5, 
Elsevier,  2013, pp. 542-550.  
[3] Amna Qureshi, Helena Rifà Pous and David Megías, 
“Security, Privacy and Anonymity in Legal Distribution of 
Copyrighted Multimedia Content over Peer to Peer 
Networks  A Brief Overview”, Proc. Fifth International 
Conference on Multimedia Information Networking and 
Security (MINES), IEEE, 2013. 
[4] G. Tardos, “Optimal probabilistic _fingerprint codes,”  
Proc. Symposium on Theory of Computing ( STOC), 
ACM, 2003,  pp. 116-125. 
[5] Digital Signature Standard, FIPs PUB 186-4, [Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips186-
4/fips186-4 change1.pdf, accessed 14.12.2013. 
[6] U. Fiege, A. Fiat and A. Shamir, "Zero Knowledge Proofs 
of Identity," Journal of Cryptology, vol. 1, no. 2, Springer, 
1988, pp. 77-94. 
[7] L. Lu et al. , “Pseudo Trust: Zero-knowledge authentication 
in anonymous P2Ps,” IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distrib. 
Syst., vol. 19, no. 10, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1325- 1337. 
[8] K. Nuida, “Short collusion-secure fingerprint codes against 
three pirates”, International Journal of Information 
Security, vol. 11, no. 2,  Springer, 2012, pp. 85-102. 
[9] B. 
Chen 
and 
G.W.Wornell, 
“Quantization 
index 
modulation: A class of provably good methods for digital 
watermarking 
and 
information 
embedding,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 4, IEEE, 
2001, pp. 1423–1443. 
[10] V. Scarlata, B. N. Levine and C. Shields, "Responder 
Anonymity and Anonymous Peer-to-Peer File Sharing",  
Proc. Ninth International Conference on Network Protocols 
(ICNP), IEEE, 2001, pp. 272-280. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-320-9
MMEDIA 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia

