3D Objects Watermarking and Tracking of Their
Visual Representations
Mireia Monta˜nola Sales∗, Patrice Rond˜ao Alface† and Benoˆıt Macq∗
∗ICTEAM, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve B-1348 Belgium
mireia.montanola@uclouvain.be, benoit.macq@uclouvain.be
†Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs, Copernicuslaan 50, B-2018, Antwerp, Belgium
patrice.rondao alface@alcatel-lucent.com
Abstract—In the context of 3D watermarking, most of the
state-of-the-art techniques analyze a 3D/3D approach where the
insertion and the extraction of the mark take place over the
object itself, whereas the most common use of 3D objects is
done through its 2D projections or eventually stereovision. In
this paper we present a work in progress in the context of 3D
watermarking that introduces an asymmetrical approach 3D/2D
which will allow the extraction of the mark without access to the
3D object. The extraction will be carried out from one or several
2D views with the aim of protecting the Intellectual Property
Rights associated to the object in its projections.
Index Terms—3D mesh; watermarking; visualization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last years the “digital rights management” (DRM)
issue has been addressed for different types of information in
order to protect the data from piracy [11]. 3D watermarking is
a well known technique that is being introduced and combined
with cryptography in current DRM systems. It consists in
protecting the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) related to
a content by means of insertion of a secret mark in an
imperceptible and also in a robust way.
Watermarking techniques provide rights protection for mul-
tiple contents: audiovisual documents, images, videos and 3D
objects. 3D models are distinguished ﬁrstly by their usually
associated irregular sampling and secondly by the fact that they
deal with arbitrary geometry varieties (manifold) immersed
in a threedimmensional Euclidian space. As a consequence
of this particular nature the usual tools for signal processing
commonly used by regular signals such as audio, image or
video, cannot be directly applied to 3D objects. Accordingly,
3D watermarking techniques do not present the maturity of
their equivalents for other types of contents.
In addition, the current watermarking algorithms generally
insert a secret mark into the 3D model, and need this wa-
termarked object to be able to detect or read the mark [5].
However, the most common use of 3D models is done through
their visualization (2D or eventually stereo). For instance, 3D
models are commonly used in image or video content, for
example in 3D cinema via stereo or home entertainment ap-
plications using 3D meshes. While it is possible to reconstruct
a 3D object from several of its 2D views, to decode the mark
in this context is presently difﬁcult or even impossible (see
Fig. 1).
Fig. 1.
The Teapot model and a set of projections depending on the angle
of visualization. The model can be reconstructed from a certain number of its
2D representations.
This is the problem that we propose to address in this
work. Contrary to the ordinary 3D watermarking techniques,
for which the insertion and the extraction of the mark take
place over the 3D model itself (3D/3D approach), we plan to
develop techniques following an asymmetric approach 3D/2D
in which the extraction of the mark could be done over one or
several 2D projections of the 3D object without having access
to the latter (see Fig. 2).
Fig. 2.
The original Bunny 3D mesh and two of its 2D representations.
The scheme we want to develop should provide the capability of reading the
watermark from one or several representations of the object.
In this particular setting, we can name the pionneer work of
J. Bennour et al. [1], who propose an insertion in the silhouette
of a 3D object in several of its views belonging to image or
video contents using this 3D object. This technique is able to
detect the watermark only for certain views. However, given
the fact that a minimal change in the visualization angle leads
to a different silhouette along with the lack of knowledge of
111
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

the orientation angles of the object in its visualizations, the
object may not be protected. On the other hand, in the work
presented by E. Garcia et al. [2], the 3D model is protected via
its texture. The texture is deﬁned by a set of images projected
onto the object surface. However, this technique requires a
texture rich enough to provide a robust watermark. Hence this
results to a compromise between the texture richness and the
robustness of the 2D hidden mark. These original methods still
present limitations in both theoretical and application levels
which this work intends to study.
This paper is organized as follows. The second section
introduces the industrial applications of the techniques we will
develop. The third section is devoted to present the proposed
work and the way we plan to address it. The last section
presents the conclusions.
II. APPLICATIONS
Digital watermarking ﬁnds already applications related to
image and video content. The most suitable application is
copyright protection, where the watermark identiﬁes the buyer
of the digital content. This mechanism allows to prevent piracy
by discouraging people to make illegal copies of a protected
content.
3D multimedia content has also to be protected. 3D wa-
termarking ﬁnds industrial applications such as 3D cinema,
3D videoconference, video games, home entertainment or
augmented reality applications in smartphones. The idea is to
protect the intellectual property rights of 3D meshes as well
as their visualization.
In this particular work, the proposed watermarking schemes
of 3D content respond to several cases of different applica-
tions. Among them, 3D watermarking based on Quantization
Index Modulation (QIM) is suitable in a blind and semi-fragile
context, and it is useful in data authentication applications.
The 3D watermarking technique making possible a detec-
tion from a certain number of 2D representations of the object
is useful for copyright protection tools in the case of a 3D
object immersed in 2D video or 3D stereo content. This need
suits several domains: digital cinema, video games or home
entertainment, audiovisual content players (for example Blue-
Ray) or screens and stereovision glasses used to visualize 3D
content.
On the other hand, this work will study the projections more
suitable to watermark in order to protect the whole 3D model.
In particular, the analysis of feature points or lines, roughness
properties and local texture on the surface will be performed.
This offers new perspectives in the watermarking of 3D phys-
ical objects either immersed or not in an augmented reality
environment, like 3D videoconference or mobile applications
in smartphones related to the 3D navigation.
III. PROPOSED WORK
Presently there exist several schemes which provide a robust
protection of the intellectual rights of a 3D object by embed-
ding a secret and imperceptible mark [4]. But there is a lack
of protection of the digital rights of visual representations of
3D models.
This work will focus on the extraction of the information
(originally hidden into a 3D model) from one or several views
of the object, with the interest of protecting the intellectual
rights associated to the model in its 2D visual representations.
Figure 3 summarizes the scheme of our work.
Fig. 3.
A secret mark is ﬁrst inserted in the 3D original model, protecting the
content. The watermarking scheme has to be able to resist the visualization
transformation and recover the mark from one or several 2D representations
of the object.
Given the uncertainty related to the angles (2D views) in
which the 3D object will be visualized, the use of silhouettes
as in the work presented by J. Bennour et al. [1] does not seem
as an optimal choice, since a slight variation in the direction
of view would completely modify the silhouette.
We plan to perform an automatic detection of robust feature
points in the 3D object around which robust neighbourhoods
will be deﬁned, performing local watermarks along the sur-
face. Feature points detection together with neighbourhood
deﬁnition could be based on the results presented in the
work by P. Rondao Alface et al. [4]. To insert the mark
we plan ﬁrst to make use of the Spread Transform Dither
Modulation (STDM) technique [3]. STDM is a variant of
QIM technique and present good properties in the frame of
3D blind watermarking. Other variants of QIM will be tested
for performing the insertion, as well as other state-of-the-
art techniques, either in the spatial or the spectral domain,
evaluating their pertinence in the frame we are dealing with.
Since there are many parameters for visualizing a 3D mesh
(rendering, angle, texture, resolution, etc), we will address
the problem step by step, deﬁning a scenario with the sim-
plest conditions in the ﬁrst instance, and building increasing
complexity models afterwards. The impact of the rendering
process can be seen in Figure 4, which shows the rendering
when using different shading techniques. As a matter of
fact, different parameters in the rendering (shading, lighting
models, etc) will have different impacts over the watermark
which will be evaluated. We plan to develop a model of the
visualization attack that the 3D object undergoes in the 2D
to 3D transformation. We will study the distortion the model
undergoes and the impact on the watermark. This model will
extend the works discussed in [1, 2] and will be based on the
analysis of the whole transformation chain that a 3D object
112
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

undergoes from the watermarking process until the complete
or partial reconstruction from its visualization in 2D.
Fig. 4. From left to right: the same scene rendered with ﬂat shading, Gouraud
shading, Phong shading and Ray Tracing respectively (data courtesy of [9]).
One of the important steps is based on the use of depth
maps, which can be for example obtained from stereovision.
Depth maps give information of the depth of every pixel of
the 2D view. Hence these depth maps provide part of the
3D mesh structure and should help in recovering the mark.
The issue can then be brought to the case of ”cropping” of
the 3D object as well as a regular remeshing (resampling
of positions of 3D points), depending on the resolution and
accuracy of the depth estimation (see Figure 5). However,
whereas the state-of-the-art blind and robust 3D watermarking
schemes already withstand combinations of a wide variety
of attacks (noise addition, simpliﬁcation, smoothing, etc),
there is a lack of blind schemes which can withstand the
cropping attack and the subsequent de-synchronization. We
will study in particular the state-of-the-art methods for depth
map reconstruction from several projections as well as the
impact of the resolution (image) of the captured views, and
possibly the impact of their compression [6, 7, 8]. As a matter
of fact, topological errors may appear due to obstructions when
there is not enough number of used views, such as the presence
of holes or disconnected parts of the mesh. Few watermarking
schemes provide resistance to this kind of errors in the mesh
reconstruction [5].
Fig. 5.
A simulation of the Bunny model after the visualization process. The
depth component for every pixel of the image resulting from the projection
transformation is represented by blocks. The problem can be brought to the
case of ”cropping” of the 3D Bunny model together with a regular re-sampling
attack (data courtesy of [10]).
Other factors likely to inﬂuence the reconstruction accuracy,
the selection of the views or the watermarking robutness,
such as the presence of textures, the surface curvature and
roughness and the presence of edges, feature points and feature
lines, will be as well examined in detail subsequently in order
to reﬁne the watermarking algorithms.
The goal is thus to determine if the mark can be detected
from a number of views lower than what is required to
reconstruct the 3D object (without watermark) with good
quality.
Subsequently this technique could be extended to animated
3D objects as well as the study of the impact of the 2D views
resolution and their compression (for example via JPEG) over
the robustness of the watermark. Another possible extension
consists in the evaluation of the watermarking of solid objects
which are later numerized (from one or several 2D represen-
tations) with the intention of their use into augmented reality
applications.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a work in progress based on the
protection of the intellectual rights of 3D objects through their
2D projections. Since the most common use of 3D models is
done through their visual projections in 2D or stereovision, we
plan to develop 3D watermarking schemes able to resist the
visualization process undergone by the object during the 3D
to 2D transformation. This will help to protect the 3D models
in its 2D representations.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Bennour and J.-L. Dugelay. Protection of 3D object visual represen-
tations.
ICME 2006, IEEE International Conference on Multimedia &
Expo, July 9-12, 2006, Toronto, Canada, pp. 1113-1116
[2] E. Garcia and J.-L. Dugelay. Texture-based watermarking of 3D video
objects.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 853-866, Aug. 2003.
[3] R. Darazi, R. Hu, and B. Macq. Applying spread transform dither
modulation for 3D mesh watermarking by using perceptual models.
In
International Conference on Accoustic Speech and Signal Processing
2010. ICASSP 2010. IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1-5 Mar.
2010.
[4] P. Rondao Alface, B. Macq, and F. Cayre. Blind and robust watermarking
of 3D models: How to withstand the cropping attack?.
In Image
Processing, 2007. ICIP 2007. IEEE International Conference on, 5, pp.
V-465 - V-468, Sept. 2007.
[5] P. Rondao Alface and B. Macq. From 3D Mesh Data Hiding to 3D Shape
Blind and Robust Watermarking: A Survey.
T. LNCS Transactions on
Data Hiding and Multimedia Security 2:91-115, 2007.
[6] C.H. Esteban and F. Schmitt. 2004. Silhouette and stereo fusion for 3D
object modeling.
Computer Vision Image Understanding, vol. 96, no.
3 (Dec. 2004), pp. 367-392, 2004.
[7] N.D.F. Campbell, G. Vogiatzis, C. Hernandez, and R. Cipolla. Automatic
3D object segmentation in multiple views using volumetric graph-cuts.
In 18th British Machine Vision Conference, vol. 1, 2007.
[8] Y. Yemez and C.J. Wetherilt. A volumetric fusion technique for surface
reconstruction from silhouettes and range data.
Computer Vision and
Image Understanding, vol. 105, pp. 30-41, 2007.
[9] A. Oebbeke. http://www.glossar.de.
[10] V. Lu. https://netﬁles.uiuc.edu/victorlu/www.
[11] S. Haber, B. Horne, J. Pato, T. Sander, and R. E. Tarjan. If Piracy is the
Problem, Is DRM the Answer?.
in E. Becker, W. Buhse, D. Gnnewig and
N. Rump (Ed.): Digital Rights Management - Technological, Economic,
Legal and Political Aspects. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 224-233,
2003.
113
MMEDIA 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advances in Multimedia
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-129-8

