Communication Needs of Japan and the United States: 
A Comparative Analysis of the Use of Mobile Information Services 
 
Qazi Mahdia Ghyas, Fumiyo N. Kondo, Takayuki Kawamoto 
Dept. of Social Systems & Management 
University of Tsukuba 
Ibaraki, Japan 
E-mail: s1030160@u.tsukuba.ac.jp, kondo@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp, takaroom1118@yahoo.co.jp
 
 
Abstract—Mobile marketers are anxious to gain knowledge 
about the use of mobile services in different cultures and 
countries. The aim of this research is to construct a method for 
comparing consumer demand for mobile information services 
in different countries. We attempted to gain a understanding of 
the cross-national needs structure through a comparison of use 
intentions between the United States (at the University of 
California at Los Angeles) and Japan. Toward this end, we 
extracted use intention factors from both the locations. The 
results confirmed the following four factors: the information-
intensive factor, the entertainment factor, the low penetration 
service factor, and the communication tool factor. This study 
also found that the two countries have different needs 
characteristics for a certain mobile communication service, i. e., 
mobile e-mail, and roughly the same needs characteristics for 
mobile entertainment services and for mobile information 
services except "radio". 
Keywords- Cross-national study; Information intensive; Low 
penetration service; Entertainment; Communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
By the end of 2010, there were 5.3 billion mobile 
subscriptions worldwide. That equates to 77% of the 
world’s population [1]. This represents a large increase from 
the 4.6 billion mobile subscriptions in existence at the end 
of 2009. The increase in mobile service usage around the 
world has been driven by both advanced technologies and 
the growing number of service options available to 
consumers. For the most part, these services include mobile 
searches, news and sports information, music and video 
downloads, e-mail, and instant messages [1]. The explosive 
growth in the use of mobile devices is frequently noted in 
research studies [2], [3]. 
Despite the growing importance of mobile devices, few 
studies have been conducted using a cross-national approach. 
The usages of mobile devices vary considerably among 
different countries [4]. The adoption of mobile services and 
technology does not appear to follow any single universal 
logic or pattern for different countries [2]. Harries et al. [5] 
investigated the role that culture plays in explaining 
differences in adoption, usage, and attitudes with regard to 
mobile services by comparing the United Kingdom and 
Hong Kong. Cho [6] explored how mobile phone users in 
the United States and Korea adopt both existing and 
potential mobile services. Lee et al. [7] investigated the 
different usage patterns among mobile users in Korea and 
Japan and interpreted these patterns within the framework of 
a value structure. Vrechopoulos et al. [8] conducted 
sociological research and found Finland to be the most 
mature mobile market when compared with Germany and 
Greece. They identified critical success factors and noted 
that these factors vary among the countries. Bohlin [9], on 
the other hand, identified new policy implications for the 
future European mobile market through an analysis of the 
success factors in the Japanese mobile Internet market. 
As mobile carriers and content providers perform on a 
global scale [10], empirical cross-national research on 
mobile services has become increasingly relevant. A clear 
understanding of the mobile service needs of consumers can 
be achieved by investigating the structure of mobile services 
across different countries. In order to learn about consumer 
needs with respect to mobile information services, and 
whether consumers in different countries perceive these 
needs differently, we performed a comparison between the 
mobile information services needs structure of young people 
in Japan and the United States. These locations were 
selected for this international comparison because they are 
the two leading countries in the mobile market and because 
they use mobile services differently. Mobile users in Japan 
are the ―most connected,‖ with more than 75% using 
connected 
media 
(browsed 
the 
Internet, 
accessed 
applications, or downloaded content) compared to 43.7% in 
the United States and 38.5% in Europe [13]. At the end of 
June 2010, there were 111 million mobile subscribers in 
Japan [11], and there were 302.95 million subscribers in the 
United States at the end of December 2010 [12]. There is a 
need to identify a practical systematic framework of 
different structures in mobile information service needs in 
the United States and Japan by way of a cross-national 
comparison. If there are differences in service needs 
structures between two countries, mobile companies need to 
vary their international marketing strategies and tactics 
between the countries by adjusting for the differences. The 
following strategies can be used: introduce very high-spec 
devices, offer multiple technologies (picture messaging, 
mobile Flash, GPS, etc.), provide better network quality and 
coverage, etc. By understanding the differences in consumer 
needs with respect to mobile information services, mobile 
127
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

companies will have a better chance of success. Therefore, 
the following hypotheses are presented: 
H1. There is no change in the mobile phone service 
structure over a two-year period in Japan. 
H2. The mobile service structure for information is same 
in both the United States and Japan. 
H3. The mobile service structure for entertainment is 
same in both the United States and Japan. 
H4. The mobile service structure for communication 
needs is same in both the United States and Japan. 
This paper is composed as follows: In the following 
section, we cite relevant literature surveys to introduce 
various mobile services, and then in Section III, we identify 
the behaviors of mobile service users in the United States 
and Japan. In Section IV–VI, we describe how we measured 
information services in terms of the use intention data via an 
online survey. Section VII presents a factor analysis that is 
based on Japanese data and was carried out over a two-year 
period, and Section VIII presents a comparative factor 
analysis using data from Japan and the United States. The 
paper ends with a discussion of the results in terms of 
information, entertainment, and communication service 
factors, as well as the limitations of the study. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The use of mobile communication devices is increasing 
rapidly, and devices based on mobile technology are 
commonplace in everyday life [14]. A mobile information 
service is defined as use of the Internet via a handheld 
device [15]. The consumer pays for the desired mobile 
content or services [16]. Existing and potential services vary 
depending on the developments in mobile technology [9]. 
M-businesses offer more efficient markets and value system 
services, customized offering services, building community 
services, disrupting pricing services, and a radically 
extended reach in values services [17]. There are three main 
types of mobile services: 
Information services: As a source of information, a 
mobile phone can have a significant impact on user behavior. 
Therefore, the quality of information provided by the device 
(e.g., maps or driving directions, restaurant guides, and 
promotional ads) often serves to expedite search efforts and 
stimulate the intention to use the mobile phone further. 
Users often log on to the Web to check e-mail, get news, 
obtain maps or driving directions, consult restaurant guides, 
etc. [9]. 
Entertainment services: Millions of people use their 
mobile devices for play [18]. Mobile phone usage in this 
context is an enjoyable activity that allows for an escape 
from reality. Users of these services may perceive mobile 
phone usage as more entertaining than informative [19]. 
Communication services: Short message service (SMS), 
multimedia message service (MMS), voice mail, and e-mail 
all fall under the category of communication services. These 
services may be classified as either utilitarian or hedonic, 
depending on the way they are used and the motivation 
behind their use [9]. 
III. 
MOBILE INFORMATION SERVICES IN THE UNITED 
STATES AND JAPAN 
Most people today have a mobile phone, and many use 
them for mobile services beyond just calling and messaging. 
The mobile service market is growing rapidly. However, 
there are also many new service providers competing for 
customers, so it is very important to understand consumer 
usage behavior. This can be achieved easily by comparing 
user behavior on the basis of regions. The needs and uses of 
these services differ from country to country. 
The United States is in its early stages of M-commerce 
development and adoption as compared to many European 
and Asian countries (e.g., Sweden, Japan, and Korea) [20]. 
This is true despite the fact that mobile application usage is 
slightly higher in the United States than that in Japan, as 
indicated in Table 1. In the United States, 19% fewer 
application users utilize their browser than in Japan, while 
19% fewer browser users utilize applications. Messaging 
methods also vary. The United States displays the highest 
rate of text messaging, with 68.0% of users sending text 
messages compared with just 41.60% in Japan. Japanese 
users exhibit the highest reach in the e-mail category at 
TABLE 1.  
MOBILE SERVICE USER BEHAVIOR IN JAPAN 
AND THE UNITED STATES IN OCTOBER–DECEMBER 2010: 
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL MOBILE AUDIENCE (AGE: 13+ YEARS) 
 
128
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

57.10%, while consumers in the United States are most 
likely to use text messaging services on their mobile devices 
(68.00%). Social networking/blogs reached the greatest 
percentage of mobile users in the United States at 24.70%, 
followed by Japan at 19.30%. Japanese users were most 
likely to capture photos (62.90%) and watch TV/video 
(22.80%) on their mobile devices, while users in the United 
States were most likely to listen to music (15.70%) and play 
games (23.20%) [10]. Table 1 displays mobile service user 
behavior in Japan and the United States [16]. 
Mobile phone users in certain countries, such as Japan, 
use integrated services, such as receiving messages regarding 
credit card usage, enjoying windows live messenger and 
other instant messenger systems, receiving messages from 
online community services, receiving promotional price 
discounts for family restaurants, and receiving coupons. 
Pioneers of location-based services—such as Korea and 
Japan—have created precise combinations of infrastructure 
and applications needed to ensure success [6]. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
We conducted two consecutive studies on Japanese 
customers in 2008 and 2009. In 2008, we conducted in-depth 
interviews with 30 mobile phone users who had adequate 
experience using mobile information services to explore their 
information needs and to identify the crucial factors that 
influence their mobile phone usage. On the basis of this 
qualitative study, we developed an instrument for survey 
research. We employed a professional market research firm 
in Japan to collect data under a random sampling framework 
from a panel of mobile information service users between the 
ages of 16 and 79. Data were collected online in the period 
between September 18 and September 24, 2008. A 
questionnaire focusing on the ―use of information services 
via mobile phone‖ was distributed to a randomly selected 
Internet research panel with a sample size of 20000. From 
this sample, 5567 effective responses (27.8% of the total 
sample) were obtained. Out of these 5567 effective responses, 
the number of people who had mobile phones was 5222, 
which amounted to 93.8% of the effective responses. The 
following 21 services were examined: mobile e-mail, SMS, 
MMS, TV phone, radio, Internet, 1-seg TV (mobile 
terrestrial digital audio/video and data broadcasting service), 
music, ring tones, video streaming, games, learning 
(dictionary, translation services, and encyclopedia), health, 
infotainment content (movies, nightclubs, and celebrity 
gossip), mobile chat (push to talk), stock trading, shopping 
services, coupon and advertising information services, online 
storage services (Internet data storage services), reservation 
or booking (hotel rooms or airline seats), and location-based 
services (GPS or maps). 
V. 
DATA COLLECTION 
In 2009, an Internet research panel with a sample size 
of 3500 was randomly selected from the original 5222 
respondents. Data were collected online during the period 
between July 10 and July 14. We obtained 1854 effective 
responses (53.0% of the sample). 
 For a two-year comparative study, a sample of 1854 
effective responses from Japanese users was compiled. 
This sample consisted of the same people who responded 
in both 2008 and 2009; these respondents were designated 
as our analysis subjects. 
In 2009, an Internet study was conducted with a sample 
size of 499 students at the University of California at Los 
Angeles (UCLA) in the United States. Out of the 499 
respondents, 389 were in their 20’s. 
For a comparative study of young people in their 20’s 
between Japan and the United States, we had an effective 
sample of 169 out of 1854 respondents from Japan and a 
sample of 389 students from UCLA. These respondents 
comprised our final set of sample data. 
VI. 
FACTOR ANALYSIS BASED ON USE INTENTION DATA 
A. Measurement 
Aaker and Alvarez Del Blanco [21] have indicated that 
brand awareness indirectly affects purchase behavior. 
Likewise, an awareness of newly emerging services will 
affect purchase behavior and the intention to use these 
services. Therefore, this was a good place to begin 
extracting factors based on use intention. We conducted a 
factor analysis on 5222 respondents from the 2008 data and 
1854 respondents from the 2009 data to extract common 
factors that exist among similar services in terms of the ―use 
intention‖ of the 21 mobile information services. The 
following is a summary of the measurement: 
The phrase, ―Please rate your intention to use the 
following mobile information service‖ was used to 
operationalize use intention. A five-point Likert-type scale 
was anchored by low/high use intention for the 21 services. 
VII. FACTOR ANALYSIS BASED ON JAPANESE USE 
INTENTION DATA OVER A TWO-YEAR PERIOD 
In order to focus on the needs of the present and 
potential customers, we analyzed only ―use intention.‖ For 
this comparative two-year period, 1854 effective responses 
were designated as the analytical subjects. We conducted a 
factor analysis to extract common factors that existed 
among similar information services in terms of the ―use 
intention‖ of the 21 mobile information services. 
The factor analysis was conducted on the basis of the 
use intention by the principal factor method using varimax 
rotation. Kondo et al. [22] identified three dimensions of 
mobile services—information intensiveness, amusement, 
and service penetration rate—on the basis of the data of 
―awareness,‖ ―past use behavior,‖ and ―use intention.‖ Here, 
we extracted four factors from the 21 information services, 
leading to the addition of one factor from the previous 
analysis. There was no change between 2008 and 2009 in 
the services affected by these factors except for ―radio‖ 
(because of a missing value), which confirmed hypothesis 
H1. 
Table 2 summarizes the factor loadings for each service  
129
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

TABLE 2.  
FACTOR LOADINGS AND USER RATIO FOR EACH SERVICE IN 2008 AND 2009 
 
(A) Year 2008: 1707 respondents; age group: 16~79 
(B) Year 2009: 1686 respondents; age group: 16~79 
 
in the case of each factor. The differences between the two 
years were due to a number of missing values. The results 
showed that in both 2008 and 2009, four factors were 
confirmed to be the primary factors affecting the mobile 
information service needs in Japan. These four factors were 
as follows: 
Factor 1: information intensiveness; 
Factor 2: entertainment; 
Factor 3: low penetration service; and 
Factor 4: communication service. 
Factor 1 refers to services that require a high degree of 
information, such as making a reservation or stock trading. 
Factor 
2 
represents 
services 
with 
entertainment 
characteristics, such as ring tones. Factor 3 represents 
services with low penetration characteristics where the use 
ratio is low, such as a TV phone. Factor 4 represents services 
having communication tool characteristics, such as SMS, e-
mail, and MMS, i.e., e-mail with pictures. Services within 
the factor are listed as follows:  
Factor 1: radio, the Internet, learning, health, infotainment 
content, stock trading, shopping services, coupon and 
advertising information services, online storage services, 
reservation or booking, and location-based services; 
Factor 2: 1-seg TV, music, ring tones, video streaming, and 
games; 
Factor 3: TV phone and mobile chat;  
Factor 4:  mobile e-mail, SMS, and  MMS. 
VIII. COMPARATIVE FACTOR ANALYSIS BASED ON USE 
INTENTION DATA FROM JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES 
In order to focus on the needs of both present and 
potential customers, we analyzed only the ―use intention.‖ 
For this comparative research of young people in Japan 
(169) and the United States (389), effective responses were 
designated as the analytical subjects. We conducted a factor 
analysis to extract common factors that exist among similar 
information services in terms of the ―use intention‖ of the 
20 mobile information services, excluding 1-seg TV, which 
does not exist in the United States. 
We used factor analysis as the statistical technique to 
analyze the data. We examined the data to check for 
inconsistencies due to random error by running a reliability 
test, ensuring that the integrity of the data was at a 
manageable level. Table 3 shows that the overall factor 
analysis was significant for Japan as the Kaiser-Meyer-
Olkin statistics were greater than 0.50 and the chi square 
statistics were significant with a probability of less than 0.05 
[23]. In the case of UCLA (Table 6), the overall factor 
analysis was not significant because there was a 
considerable amount of missing data from the Internet 
questionnaire, and hence, we ran the factor analysis without 
including the Internet data. Without the Internet data, the chi 
square statistics became significant, as shown in Table 8. 
We conducted a factor analysis on the 20 mobile 
information services by further excluding Internet data and 
extracted four factors that explained the 68.23% cumulative 
variance for Japan and three factors that explained the 
57.6% cumulative variance for UCLA (eigenvalues greater 
than 1 are shown in Tables 4 and 9). The Cronbach α 
coefficient, the reliability coefficient of the measured value 
of questionnaire items for each construct from the point of 
view of internal consistency, is used for verifying whether 
each item had common parts for the same factor. If the 
130
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

value of this coefficient was 0.7 or more, the internal 
consistency of the measurement scale was considered to be 
high and the reliabilities were adequate. The coefficients for 
each factor are shown in Tables 5 and 10. Since all values 
exceeded 0.7, it was concluded that the items of each 
information service of these factors had common parts. 
We extracted four factors from 20 information services. 
There was no change in the first two factors between UCLA 
and Japan, except for some services belonging to the 
communication factor. In Table 10, the factor structure is 
presented on the basis of the identification of items that 
have loadings on the same factor, with a factor loading 
greater than 0.4. The service item Internet (for the United 
States) did not satisfy the abovementioned requirement and 
hence was omitted. For UCLA and Japan, the same items 
that significantly loaded on the first factor were reservations 
and booking, coupon advertisements, Internet storage 
services, shopping services, stock trading, learning, and 
location-based services. These six items represented the 
information services that customers could access by using a 
mobile device. Therefore, this factor was referred to as a 
mobile information-intensive service. Reservations and 
booking and coupon advertisements were very significant in 
the information-intensive service for both countries. The 
most information-intensive service items were loaded on the 
same factor; this implied that the service structure for an 
information-intensive service was same between the United 
States and Japan. This supported hypothesis H2. 
The common items for the United States and Japan that 
were loaded as the second factor were music, games, ring 
tones, and video streaming. All of these items had an 
entertainment factor. These items indicated that customers 
prefer to be entertained by their mobile devices. Therefore, 
this factor could be named ―entertainment.‖ Users in both 
countries were always satisfied by mobile entertainment 
services that enabled them to listen to music and download 
ring tones on their mobile phones. There existed an 
entertainment factor for both counties, and the entertainment 
service items were loaded on the same factor except for 
some items. This resulted in the rejection of hypothesis H3. 
We could interpret this as the existence of a same structure 
of the entertainment factor with slight differences in its 
members. 
In Table 11, the order of the third and fourth factors was 
different for the United States and Japan. The identified 
items (for the United States and Japan) of the last two 
factors were fewer than those of the first two factors. 
Therefore, they were relatively old services and did not 
explain data variability well as compared to the first two 
factors. For the United States, the third factor consisted of 
two items, SMS and MMS, which facilitate basic 
communication; 
hence, 
this 
factor 
was 
named 
―communication services.‖ For Japan, factor 3 represented 
services with low penetration characteristics where the 
loading value was low. The third factor consisted of mobile 
chat and TV phones. These were classified as the ―low 
penetration 
factor,” 
which 
specified 
advanced 
communication tools. The fourth factor was composed of 
MMS, mobile e-mail, and SMS, all of which facilitated 
basic communication. We found that the service structure 
for communication was different between the United States 
and Japan, which resulted in the rejection of hypothesis H4. 
TABLE 3.  
KMO AND BARTLETT’S TEST FOR JAPAN 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy 
0.912 
Bartlett's test of sphericity 
Approx. Chi-square 
2085.6 
  
Df 
  
190 
 
Sig. 
  0.00 
TABLE 4.  
KMO AND BARTLETT’S TEST FOR JAPAN 
factor 
Rotation sum of squared loadings 
Total 
% variance 
Cumulative % 
1 
9.379 
46.896 
46.896 
2 
1.936 
9.682 
56.578 
3 
1.255 
6.276 
62.854 
4 
1.076 
5.380 
68.234 
TABLE 5.  
RELIABILITY STATISTICS FOR INFORMATION SERVICE IN 
JAPAN 
For Japan 
Cronbach's α 
No. of 
items 
Information-intensive service 
0.898 
8 
Entertainment 
0.913 
7 
Low penetration service 
0.774 
2 
Communication tools 
0.654 
3 
TABLE 6.  
KMO AND BARTLETT’S TEST FOR UCLA (WITH 
INTERNET) 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy 
0.905 
Bartlett's test of sphericity 
Approx. Chi-square 
60.443 
  
Df 
  
190 
Sig. 
  
1.0 
TABLE 7.  
TOTAL VARIANCE EXPLAINED FOR UCLA (WITH 
INTERNET) 
Factor 
Rotation sum of squared loadings 
Total 
% variance 
Cumulative % 
1 
7.123 
35.616 
35.616 
2 
2.529 
12.645 
48.261 
3 
1.330 
6.650 
54.911 
4 
1.034 
5.168 
60.079 
131
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

TABLE 8.  
KMO AND BARTLETT’S TEST FOR UCLA (WITHOUT 
INTERNET) 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy 
0.906 
Bartlett's test of sphericity 
Approx. Chi-square 
1246.164 
  
Df 
  
171 
Sig. 
  
0.00 
TABLE 9.  
TOTAL VARIANCE EXPLAINED FOR UCLA (WITHOUT 
INTERNET) 
Factor 
Rotation sum of squared loadings 
Total 
% variance 
Cumulative % 
1 
7.108 
37.409 
37.409 
2 
2.505 
13.183 
50.592 
3 
1.330 
6.998 
57.590 
TABLE 10.  
RELIABILITY STATISTICS FOR UCLA INFORMATION 
SERVICE (WITHOUT INTERNET) 
For UCLA 
Cronbach's α 
No. of 
items 
Information-intensive service 
0.930 
10 
Entertainment 
0.883 
7 
Communication tools 
0.642 
2 
TABLE 11.  
FACTOR LOADINGS OF EACH MOBILE SERVICE: 
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND JAPAN 
 
A) USA (UCLA): 19 items; 389 respondents  
B) Japan (National): 20 items; 169 respondents 
For the large sample size of 1854 for 2008 and 2009 in 
Japan and the medium sample size of 389 for UCLA, health 
and learning were loaded in the first factor, which was an 
information-intensive factor. Because of the small sample 
size of 169 for Japan, the first factor and the second factor 
for the services of learning and health could not be easily 
differentiated. They were very close and had little influence 
on the entertainment factor. In Table 11, we concluded that a 
factor in TV phones was less assertive in Japan. Infotainment 
content was loaded in the entertainment factor for Japan and 
in the information-intensive factor for the United States. 
IX. 
CULTURAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES IN 
MOBILE INFORMATION SERVICES BETWEEN JAPAN AND THE 
UNITED STATES 
Differences in service needs between Japan and the 
United States were found in our research. From the 
previous section, we concluded that the intention to use 
mobile services for chat, mobile e-mail, and Internet access 
was considerably higher in Japan than in the United States. 
The reasons may be summarized as follows: 
In the United States, a mobile phone is often viewed as a 
necessary tool rather than a luxury [24]. People in the 
United States are just as enthusiastic about mobilizing 
technology, but they often think in terms of shrinking and 
mobilizing the PC and the Internet, rather than expanding 
the mobile phone. Young people in the United States are 
much more likely to use SMS than e-mail. Sending an SMS 
was often considerably cheaper than sending an e-mail. The 
U.S. market has traditionally favored smart devices, such as 
the BlackBerry, which target business users as a path for 
potential growth. 
On the other hand, mobile service sales in Japan have 
been consumer driven: people use their phones for e-mail, 
music downloads, games, and mobile-wallet services, in 
which financial transactions are carried out via the mobile 
phone [25]. Thus, Japan has developed a sophisticated 
mobile phone market earlier than the United States. Many 
Japanese people look to their mobile device as a central 
source of information gathering. This leads to a ―Keitai 
(mobile phone) Culture‖ that is more obvious in Japan than 
in other countries, partially because of the Japanese people’s 
affection for technology in general. The citizens of Japan are 
very technologically savvy, with considerable technological 
research, development, and manufacturing occurring in their 
country. Similarly, Japanese adults and teenagers rely on 
their mobile phones for communication and for the types of 
functions that a laptop or desktop computer would normally 
provide. With so many types of services and phones 
available, they may have one phone solely for the purpose of 
talking and another phone just for e-mail and accessing the 
Internet, or for other capabilities. The increase in texting via 
e-mail is the natural extension of the mobile phone culture 
and etiquette, which dictates the correct and appropriate 
usage of phones because Japanese people do not want to 
listen to other passengers chatting incessantly on their 
phones while they are riding a train home from work. As 
technology grows and develops, the mobile phone appears to 
132
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

be at the forefront of both exponential growth and the 
evolution of culture. In this sense, the Japanese mobile 
market is years ahead of the U.S. market and is leading the 
way with respect to the mobile phone culture. The smart 
phone market in Japan expanded in 2010 with innovative and 
diverse formats such as personal/governmental/corporate 
communications. Our data dealt with mobile information 
service needs in 2009 instead of the actual usage. When we 
look at the rapid growth of smart phones in 2010, our 
analysis based on the 2009 needs data successfully predicted 
the potentiality of the mobile information service needs. 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
We identified four dimensions of need determinants for 
Japan and the United States: the information-intensive 
dimension, the entertainment dimension, the communication 
dimension, and the service penetration rate (advanced 
communication) dimension. Each factor was very closely 
related to the device generation, 1G or 2G (communication), 
3G (entertainment), and 3G or 4G (information intensive). 
Therefore, we could conclude that our measurements were 
generally appropriate for extracting factors with respect to 
the need for mobile information services in technologically 
advanced countries. These results might be considered 
reliable largely because of the consistency of the sample 
questions. 
The dimension of the service penetration rate was 
related to services with advanced technology, and there 
would not be many people who experienced using certain 
services. The dimension of information-intensive services 
had the largest variability. This might be due to the fact that 
this dimension was specific to customers who were 
interested in the specific services and would require 
appropriate segmentation identifying the relationship 
between the interests in the service and the characteristics of 
the customers.  
From the comparative study, we found that the service 
structure for the information service was same and the 
service structure for the entertainment service was roughly 
same in the case of both the United States and Japan.  
However, the scenario for service with communication 
factors appeared to be due to the cultural differences 
between the United States and Japan. Japan is more 
advanced than the United States 
in the use of 
communication tools. Daily life in Japan is not conceivable 
without an Internet connection. Mobile users in Japan were 
the ―most connected,‖ with more than 75% using connected 
media (browsed the Internet, accessed applications, or 
downloaded content) in June 2010 as compared to 43.7% in 
the United States. Japanese mobile users also displayed the 
highest usage of both applications and browsers, with 59.3% 
of the entire mobile population accessing their browsers in 
June 
2010, 
and 
42.3% 
accessing 
applications. 
Comparatively, 34.0% of the mobile users in the United 
States used their mobile browsers, and 31.1% accessed 
applications. The use of messaging methods also varied. 
The United States had the highest use of text messaging, 
with 66.8% sending a text message in June 2010 compared 
with just 40.1% in Japan. Japanese users exhibited the 
highest reach in the e-mail category at 54%, while 
consumers in the United States were most likely to use 
instant messaging services on their mobile phones (17.2%). 
Mobile operators in developed countries could begin to lose 
money in the next two to four years if they do not change 
their business models [26]. In this competitive mobile 
market, companies need to come up with innovative ideas 
and implement them around the world. 
This study confirmed that mobile information services 
could be categorized into three types: information, 
entertainment, and communication. In our comparison of 
these services in Japan and the United States, communication 
displayed the largest difference. 
XI. 
LIMITATION 
Our research has some limitations with respect to the 
generalized ability of its findings. In 2009, an Internet study 
with a sample size of 499 was administrated to UCLA 
students, while the sample for Japan was randomly drawn. 
We could not exclude the impact of country-specific factors 
such as governmental legislation and other regulations. 
Controls on these effects could lead to cross-cultural studies. 
However, this might prove difficult because regulations 
were not enforced simultaneously in the considered 
countries, and the rate of development was not equal. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] <http://www.idc.com/about/viewpressrelease.jsp?containerId
=prUS22110509&sectionId=null&elementId=null&pageType
=SYNOPSIS>12.03.2011. 
[2] Barnes S. J. and Scornavacca E.: ―Mobile marketing—The 
role of permission and acceptance,‖ International Journal of 
Mobile Communication, vol. 2, no. 2: pp. 128-139, 2004. 
[3] Massoud S. and Gupta O. K.: "Consumer Perception and 
Attitude toward Mobile Communication", International 
Journal of Mobile Communication, vol. 1, no. 1: pp. 89-118, 
2003. 
[4] Pedersen P. E.: ―An adoption framework for mobile 
commerce,‖ 1st IFIP conference of E-commerce, Minitrack 
on mobile commerce, Switzerland, 2001, available at 
<http://ikt.hia.no/perep/publications.htm>. 
[5] Patricia H., Ruth R., and Cheung C. K.: ―Adoption and usage 
of M-commerce: A cross-cultural comparison of Hong Kong 
and the United Kingdom,‖ Journal of Electronic Research, vol. 
6, no. 3: pp. 210-214, 2005. 
[6] Yoon C. C.: ―Assessing user attitudes toward mobile 
commerce in the US vs. Korea: Implications for M-commerce 
CRM,‖ Journal of Business & Economic Research, vol. 6, no. 
2: pp. 91-100, 2008. 
[7] Yeonosoo L. and Inseong L.: ―A cross cultural study on the 
value structure of mobile Internet usage: Comparison between 
Korea and Japan,‖ Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 
vol. 3, no. 4: pp. 227-235, 2002. 
[8] Vrechopoulos A., Constantiou I., Sideris L., and Doukidis G.: 
―The critical role of consumer behaviour research in mobile 
commerce,‖ International Journal of Mobile Communications, 
vol. 1, no. 3: pp. 329-340, 2003. 
133
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

[9] Bohlin E., Björkdahl J., and Lindmark S.: ―Strategies for 
making 
mobile 
communications 
work 
for 
Europe,‖ 
Proceedings of the European Policy Research Conference 
(EuroCPR), 
Barcelona, 
Spain, 
2003, 
available 
at 
<http://www.chalmers.se/tme/SV/organisation/personliga-
sidor/bohlin-erik>. 
[10] Haghirian P. and Madlberger M.: ―Consumer attitude toward 
advertising via mobile devices—an empirical investigation 
among Austrian users,‖ European Conference of Information 
Systems, 2005, Regensburg, Germany, pp. 1-2. 
[11] <http://www.tca.or.jp/english/database/2010/02/index.html> 
10.02.2011. 
[12] <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_number_
of_mobile_phones_in_use> 08.02.2011. 
[13] <http://mobithinking.com/mobile-marketing-tools/latest-
mobile-stats> 18.07.2011. 
[14] Sridhar Balasubraman, Robert A. Peterson, and Sirkka 
L. Jarvenpaa: ―Exploring the implications of M-commerce for 
markets and marketing," Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, vol. 30, no. 4: pp. 348-361, 2002. 
[15] Cho C. H. and Cheon H. J.: ―A cross cultural comparison of 
interactivity on corporate websites: US, UK, Japan & Korea,‖ 
Journal of Advertising, vol. 34, pp. 99-115, 2005. 
[16] Consumer Behavior Statistics of Mobile Telephone Services, 
F R I D A Å H S L U N D Master of Science Thesis, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 2006. 
[17] Mohammed R. A., Fisher R. J., Jaworski B. J., and Cahill A. 
M.: ―Internet marketing: Building advantage in a networked 
economy,‖ McGraw-Hill Irwin, Marketspace U, 2002. 
[18] Danet B., Wachenhauser T., Bechar-Israeli H., Cividalli A., 
and Rosenbaum-Tamari Y.: ―Curtain time 20:00 GMT: 
Experiments with virtual theater on Internet relay chat,‖ 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication (JCMC), vol. 
2, no. 3, December 1996, http://jcmc.huji.ac.il/vol2/issue3/. 
[19] Zhou Zheng: ―Users’ attitudes toward web advertising: 
Effects of Internet motivation and Internet ability,‖ Advances 
in Consumer Research, vol. 29: pp. 71-78, 2002. 
[20] Chew A. A.: ―The adoption of M-commerce in the United 
States,‖ Honors thesis, California State University, Long 
Beach, CA, pp. 2-22, 2006. 
[21] Aaker and Alvarez Del Blanco: ―Brand Leadership,‖ London: 
Free Press, 2009. 
[22] Kondo F., Hirata J., and Akter S.: ―Exploring loyalty in 
mobile information services: The role of sound amusements,‖ 
International Journal of Mobile Marketing, vol. 5, no. 1: pp. 
125-140, 2010. 
[23] Naresh K. Malhotra: Marketing Research, 4th edition, 
Pearson Education, 2004. 
[24] <http://mobileopportunity.blogspot.com/2006/09/european-
vs-american-mobile-phone-use.html> 17.07.2011. 
[25] <https://wiki.smu.edu.sg/digitalmediaasia/Digital_Media_in_J
apan>19.07.2011. 
[26] <http://www.tellabs.com/news/2011/index.cfm/nr/142.cfm> 
04.02.2011. 
134
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

