Data Center Workload Analysis in Multi-Source RSMAD’s Test Environment 
 
Leszek Staszkiewicz, Michał Brewka, Małgorzata Gajewska, Sławomir Gajewski, Marcin Sokół 
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics 
Gdansk University of Technology 
11/12 G. Narutowicza St., Gdansk, Poland 
e-mail: {leszek.staszkiewicz, michal.brewka, malgorzata.gajewska, slawomir.gajewski, marcin.sokol}@eti.pg.gda.pl 
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents the system model of Radio 
System for Monitoring and Acquisition of Data from Traffic 
Enforcement Cameras, noting the used network connections 
and their effective throughput. The article presents the results 
of test verifying the performance of selected elements of 
designed system, in terms of image data transmission from 
multiple sources. Threats that could be caused by large 
amounts of data transmitted from multiple sources to the 
database server have been identified. 
Keywords-RSMAD; data center; workload; performance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Radio System for Monitoring and Acquisition of Data 
from Traffic Enforcement Cameras (RSMAD) provides 
innovative, integrated and extensive computerized system 
primarily used for transmission, archiving and exploration of 
data concerning traffic offenses. The RSMAD system is 
designed for the police and it is to cover the whole country 
with its range [1][2]. 
 The research has been aimed at verifying the 
performance and capabilities of the one of the most 
important elements of the system – the Data Center (on the 
basis of the database server). It was very important to test 
workload of the database server in the multisource 
RSMAD’s environment (presented in Section III). 
There are many articles referring to database servers’ 
workload. But it is difficult to find example related with 
testing database server workload, using many mobile sources 
of image data.  
The paper contains system model and multi-source 
RSMAD’s environment description, database server’s 
performance measurments methods, and interpretation of 
results. The model of the system, detailing the tested 
elements and their parameters, will be discussed. The multi-
source RSMAD’s environment will be presented, including 
summarized possible throughput. The tests were conducted 
in variants presenting the actual conditions of the system 
performance and in variants allowing identification of the 
risks resulting from the larger amount of incoming data than 
the predicted one. Therefore, proposals to avoid such threat 
will be presented. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
The basic element of the RSMAD system is Traffic 
Enforcement Camera (TEC) enriched by Transmission 
Module (TM). The module’s role is performed by a 
computer with parameters not worse than presented in Table 
I. The UMTS/GSM/TETRA modem (router) and dedicated 
application are also integral elements of the module. The 
application collects and processes image data from TEC and 
forms the transport block (compressed and cryptographically 
protected packet containing image data and included 
information (in XML format)). So, prepared data is sent by 
the application to the database server using FTP (File 
Transfer Protocol [3]). Transport block is transmitted using 
the secure VPN (Virtual Private Network) tunnel. The entire 
image data processing is also to partially relieve the Data 
Acquisition Center. 
Database server performs several key functions in the 
system:  
• 
Operates the FTP server software allowing 
recording the transport blocks by TM included in 
the RSMAD system,  
• 
Processes the received transport blocks, providing 
decryption, 
decompression, 
verification 
and 
recording of image data, as well as adding the 
information included in transport block to database, 
• 
Stores the image data for the application used to 
generate documentation of traffic tickets for traffic 
offenses. 
The exact technical parameters of the database server are 
presented in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
HARDWARE PARAMETERS OF SELECTED RSMAD’S 
ELEMENTS 
 
Transmission 
Module 
Database Server 
Processor 
Intel Celeron M 1.00 
GHz 
Intel E7400 2.80 GHz 
HDD 
160 GB 
250 GB 
RAM 
1024 MB 
2048 MB 
Operating system 
Windows XP Home 
Edition x86 
Windows Server 
2008 Enterprise x86 
Network Interface 
Card 
Ethernet 10/100 
Ethernet 10/100/1000 
 
112
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Database server is just one of many elements included in 
the Data Acquisition Center which description exceeds the 
theme of this article. The detailed architecture of the 
RSMAD system is presented in [1][2][4]. 
To create the earlier mentioned VPN tunnels, the 
Security Gateways (ZyXEL ZyWALL 2 Plus) were used. 
This solution fundamentally improves the level of security of 
data transmitted over Internet. [5] 
The transmission module, sending transport blocks from 
TEC, uses the selected subsystems of UMTS/GSM/TETRA 
for transmission of data. Selection of particular solution, as 
well as transmission rate offered, depends on specification of 
particular modem used in the system, configuration of used 
network and its instantaneous load. RSMAD does not limit 
technology of transmission which can be chosen by the 
operator of the system. 
The target implementation of the RSMAD system should 
be characterized by a throughput of the database server link 
much greater than the throughput rate of transmission 
module of TEC. Such solution would significantly improve 
the capacity of the system and would make its work faster 
and more efficient [6]. 
III. 
THE MULTI-SOURCE RSMAD’S ENVIRONMENT 
Traffic enforcement camera (mobile or stationary) can 
take 2 new photos and TM can generate 2 new transport 
blocks every 5 seconds. Maximum size of one transport 
block is 2 MB. According to these assumptions, maximum 
throughputs generated by 100 TMs has been presented in 
Table II. 
TABLE II.  
MAXIMUM THROUGHPUT GENERATED BY 1 AND 100 
TRANSMISSION MODULES 
Transmission type used 
Maximum 
throughput 
(1 TM) 
Maximum 
throughput 
(100 TMs) 
n.a. (maximum value) 
6.4 Mbps 
640 Mbps 
HSUPA (release 6) 
5.76 Mbps 
576 Mbps 
UMTS 
384 kbps 
37.5 Mbps 
Maximum values (in the 1st row in Table II) were 
calculated on the basis of assumptions presented in the 
previous paragraph. Other maximum throughputs are 
dependent on transmission type used. 
It is necessary to mention that average transport block 
size is  much lower than 2 MB, real throughputs are lower 
than theoretical. In addition, mostly TECs do not take 
maximum number of photos, and not every localization 
allows for the best transmission type support. Generally, real 
throughputs are much lower that maximum value. 
PC
VPN tunnel
PC
PC
VPN tunnel
VPN tunnel
Security Gateway 
ZyXEL ZyWALL 2 
Plus
Security Gateway 
ZyXEL ZyWALL 2 
Plus
Database Server
 
 
Figure 2. The test environment – the first variant. 
F2
F1
F3
F4
F6
F5
F7
F8
F14
F13
F15
F16
F18
F17
F19
F20
F22
F21
F23
F24
F10
F9
F11
F12
G2
G1
G3
G4
Fast Ethernet
Gigabit Ethernet
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
Database Server
Second variant
(Gigabit Ethernet)
First variant
(Fast Ethernet)
 
 
Figure 1. The test environment (2nd and 3rd variant) 
 
113
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

IV. 
DATABASE SERVER’S PREFORMANCE MEASUREMENTS 
Due to the expected large number of supported devices, 
as well as a large amount of incoming image data, the 
database server was subjected to various performance tests. 
These tests checked the efficiency of the database server 
under the various load of its Network Interface Card (NIC), 
and under load of the database itself. Following the 
preformed tests, it was decided to further investigate the 
performance of the hard drive used in the test server. All 
tests were carried out independently to each other. Analysis 
of tests’ results is presented in Section V. 
A. Test of database server performance under Network 
Interface Card load – the first variant 
Tests have been conducted to verify the impact of the 
amounts of incoming image data on the database server 
performance. Methods for loading of the NIC were used. 
Tests were carried out using the FTP server software, 
running on the database server, and FTP clients, running on 
other computers (elements of the test environment). Each 
FTP client was able to establish up to ten simultaneous 
connections. 
During testing the following options backgrounds, a load 
on the NIC was increased – files were sent from single 
computer, and then gradually the number of computers 
sending files was successively increased. Computers and 
servers were equipped with Gigabit Ethernet. Server 
performance was measured by registering on Database 
Server's NIC download rate. Also the percentage usage of 
CPU was recorded. 
In the first variant of the test environment, it was taken 
into account a combination of 3 FTP clients (10 connections 
per client) with the server using a secure VPN tunnel (the set 
up by Security Gateways). The first variant of the test 
environment is presented in Figure 2.  
The maximum rate was limited to only about 20 Mbps 
(as presented in Table III). This was due to a high degree of 
transmission security, low productivity and applied Security 
Gateways. Such a low rate has had a negligible impact on 
server load – CPU usage has increased by no more than 2 - 
3% in comparison to CPU load without using NIC.  
TABLE III.  
DOWNLOAD RATES IN TUNNEL MODE – THE FIRST VARIANT 
OF THE TEST ENVIRONMENT 
Type of 
IPsec 
Type of 
hash 
algorithm 
Type of 
cipher 
Average data transfer rate 
in [Mbps] 
Test I 
Test II 
ESP 
SHA-1 
3DES 
17,12 
19,36 
AES-128 
18,48 
20,64 
AES-256 
18,00 
20,32 
 
B. Test of database server performance under Network 
Interface Card load – the second variant 
In subsequent versions of the test environment (presented 
in Figure 1), the use of Security Gateways and VPN tunnel 
was abandoned (for tests only) to check the server 
performance in a much larger influx of imaging data. In 
target implementation of RSMAD, security gateways’ 
performance will not influence significantly on efficiency of  
system work. 
The only network device that mediated the transfer was a 
switch equipped with Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet 
interfaces (such solution provided the least possible impact 
of other devices on the effective transmission rate). 
Computers – clients’ NICs were connected to the Fast 
Ethernet interfaces, and server’s NIC was connected to Fast 
Ethernet interface of the switch. 
The Database Server's NIC transmission rate at the limit 
standard Fast Ethernet was recorded – aggregate file transfer 
rate reached 96 Mbps (Figure 3). The CPU load of Database 
Server was in this case was about 15 – 20 %. 
C. Test of database server performance under Network 
Interface Card load – the third variant 
 
In the third scenario of the test environment, similar 
measurement methods as in the second variant were used. 
Computers – clients’ NICs were also connected to the Fast 
Ethernet interfaces but server’s NIC was connected to 
Gigabit Ethernet interface of the switch. The third variant of 
the test environment is presented in Figure 1. 
A significant load of the CPU, reaching up to 80% was 
observed (as presented in Figure 4). With the achievement 
 
 
Figure 3. CPU load and NIC load (download rate) of Database 
Server – the second variant of the test environment. 
 
 
Figure 4. CPU load and NIC load (download rate) of Database 
Server – the third variant of the test environment. 
114
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

rate exceeding the level of 500 Mbps, the FTP server 
application has stopped responding and the performance of 
the operating system has also been disrupted. 
D. Testing of the efficiency of the database server in 
conditions of database load and testing of the database 
server’s hard drive performance 
During testing, the local connection to the database took 
place. Also, neither of the available physical NICs was used. 
Database environment Microsoft SQL Server 2008 was used 
with AES-128 database encryption.  To check the 
performance of the database server, toughest test conditions 
were prepared. Each query to the database began with the 
forging of a new connection.  
The procedure was 8 times repeated, beginning with the 
1st query, each time increasing the number of requests 
tenfold. Additionally, all tests were 3 times repeated, and the 
results averaged [7].  
Data saving in the database took place in a continuous 
manner, taking 50% of the CPU power (continuous operation 
of one core). Average number of queries per second (with 
50% CPU load) is presented in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF TESTING OF THE EFFICIENCYOF THE 
DATABASE SERVER IN CONDITIONS OF TABABASE LOAD 
Number of 
queries 
Processing time [s] 
Average number of 
queries per second 
1 
0.0170 
58.82 
10 
0.0180 
555.56 
100 
0.0230 
4347.83 
1000 
0.0727 
13755.16 
10000 
0.4773 
20951.18 
100000 
3.9303 
25443.35 
1000000 
35.1163 
28476.80 
10000000 
353.4117 
28295.61 
 
In real conditions of the system operations, a database 
query will not be done continuously. Between queries there 
will be made a decryption and a decompression of the 
transport block. Therefore database server’s load caused 
database work will be much lower.  
Hard drive performance was tested using a dedicated 
application. Testing software checked maximum possible 
speed of data saving to hard drive. With the greatest load 
write speeds on the hard drive have achieved 85 MBps (680 
Mbps). It should be noted that the total load of hard disk with 
recording generated by one application or one process may 
prevent the stable operation of the operating system. 
 
V. 
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 
Tests conducted in the first scenario of the test 
environment shows that the transmission and processing of 
data sent with the maximum allowed rate (for this variant) do 
not interfere with the work of the database server. 
Second, an intermediate variant of the test environment 
also allows the stable operation of the database server. 
However, it should be noted that throughput disrupting the 
work rate of the device (Environmental Test - variant 3), are 
also feasible to achieve. This is possible by using a 
sufficiently large number of sources of image data (TECs) 
using a high-speed links (eg. HSUPA or later subsystems). 
After a thorough research of the third variant of the test 
environment, it was found that the recorded throughput, 
distorting the FTP server application performance and 
system application, can be close to the maximum possible 
data read / write speed to the hard disk of the database server. 
A disk performance test, has confirmed the hypothesis that 
the system stability problems really arise when achieving a 
comparable throughput with a maximum speed of read / 
write data to the hard drive. 
The work of the database server is not only limited to 
receiving files from multiple image data sources and its 
processing (e.g., image data information adding to the 
database). The image data or information about a specific 
traffic offenses stored in the data base will be used by 
applications for conduct the process issuing the ticket. All of 
these processes will load the CPU, RAM, hard drive and the 
Database Server's NIC. 
There is a possibility of increasing the efficiency of 
application server through:  
• 
The use of a hard drive with higher read/write rate, 
• 
The use of multiple hard drives connected in the 
matrix increasing read/write speed in comparison to 
a single hard drive, 
• 
Replacement or installation of new CPUs, 
• 
Installation of larger amount of memory. 
In case of absence of a sufficient capacity to process 
incoming transport blocks this task can also be differentiated 
between the database server and an FTP server on two 
physically separate servers. This solution due to the design 
and architecture of the RSMAD system should not create 
problems other than a more complex configuration of the 
software currently drafted. 
In order to become independent on hardware, the stability 
of their servers should be taken care of, through its 
appropriate configuration on the application layer. The 
maximum rate allowed on the FTP server should be also 
limited to the level which does not cause destabilization of 
the server operating system’s work. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper identified the risks resulting from the provision 
of large amounts of data from multiple sources to the 
database server. Modifications to hardware in order to 
prevent overloading of RSMAD system’s servers were also 
proposed. 
Moreover, 
the 
need 
to 
control 
system's 
performance, not only carried out on the hardware level but 
primarily at the application layer, was pointed.  
With the current state of implementation of subsystems 
for data transmission in mobile networks, the occurrence of 
described risks is not expected. But they should not be 
115
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

ignored as in view of the rapid development of the 4G 
cellular networks, the risk of overloading the equipment with 
too large number of incoming data is becoming more real. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work is carried out under research and 
development grant No. N R02 0034 06 in 2009-2012, in the 
Department of Radiocommunication Systems and Networks, 
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics 
in Gdansk University of Technology. The work is financed by 
the National Centre for Research and Development. 
REFERENCES 
[1] KSSR DT 01.100 v 1.0.1: General concept of RSMAD 
(in Polish), Gdansk University of Technology, Poland 2009. 
[2] S. Gajewski, M. Gajewska, R. Katulski, A. Marczak, M. 
Sokół and J. Staniszewski, “Radio system for monitoring and 
acquisition of data from traffic enforcement cameras – 
features and assumptions of the system,” International 
Conference 
Transport 
of 
21st 
Century, 
Białowieża,  
September 2010. 
[3] Network Working Group J. Postel, RFC959: File Transfer 
Protocol (FTP). 
[4] KSSR DT 07.100 v. 1.0.1: General concept of RSMAD’s 
DAC (in Polish), Gdansk University of Technology, Poland 
2009. 
[5] M. Sokół, M. Gajewska, S. Gajewski and A. Marczak, 
“Secure 
access 
control 
and 
information 
protection 
mechanisms in radio system for monitoring and acquisition of 
data from traffic enforcement cameras,” International 
Conference 
Transport 
of 
21st 
Century, 
Białowieża,  
September 2010. 
[6] M. Brewka and L. Staszkiewicz, Computer Model for Image 
Data Registration (in Polish), Gdansk University of 
Technology, Poland 2010. 
[7] KSSR RT 04.900 v. 1.0.0: IMOFOT-F and IMOFOT-C 
interfaces’ performance analysis (in Polish), 
Gdansk 
University of Technology, Poland 2011. 
116
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

