Obesity Management in Children on an iOS Device 
Alexiei Dingli and Gary Hili 
University of Malta 
Msida, Malta 
emails:{alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt, gary.hili.10@um.edu.mt} 
 
Abstract- The main objective of this paper is to create an 
application that makes use of gamification principles in order 
to teach and guide children and teens towards a healthier life 
and encourage them to lead it. The application also allows 
users to track their overall progress and it instructs them on 
how to proceed. While doing so it gives them tips and facts 
about improving their lifestyle. The application also tries to 
apply gamification techniques like having a sense of 
competition and providing feedback so that tasks like exercise 
are more engaging. To evaluate the application, a group of 
people made use of the application as they saw fit, for a period 
of time. The gamification techniques used were successful in 
giving them the desired experience. With the competitive 
element between friends encouraging them to make more use 
of the application and the tips and facts helping them towards 
a healthier lifestyle. The biggest concern was that the 
application did not encourage the users to keep using it as 
much as we’d liked. 
Keywords-obesity; healthy; iOS; gamification; lifestyle 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The problem of obesity is a growing concern that has 
reached epidemic scales in most developed countries within 
Europe and the United States of America [16], [18]. Recent 
studies show Malta as having the most obese adult and child 
males in Europe [1], [2]. 
The biggest concern is that obesity puts children and 
teens at risk of developing more serious health issues, which 
are normally seen at an older age [17]. It is also a strong 
indication that the child or teen will be obese once 
adulthood sets in. 
This helped motivate us into trying to find our own 
solution to the problem; so we set out to develop an iOS 
application that would help the users tackle obesity. With 
current smartphone devices, the application’s potential is 
endless, even more so since current generations spend so 
much time playing some kind of game on some type of 
device or console [19]. 
After reviewing various publications and current 
technologies, we came up with the My Lifestyle App for the 
iOS. It makes use of gamification concepts like using a 
points and a leader board system in order to engage users 
and help them maintain healthier lifestyles. The application 
also attempts to challenge and teach users so that they can 
lead a healthier lifestyle. 
Once we developed the application, we also had a group 
of people trying out the application for a period of time 
before evaluating it. After they evaluated it, we analysed all 
the results and came to a conclusion. 
In this paper, we give a short analysis of different papers 
that we reviewed with regards to current technology used 
for nutritional purposes and different gamification concepts. 
We then move on to stating our aims and objectives and 
how we plan on designing our proposed application in order 
to reach these objectives. From there, we move on to the 
Implementation stage. There we give a detailed outlook on 
how the application was developed. Finally, we give a 
report of our findings before coming to our conclusion. In 
the conclusion, we try to summarise our findings and state 
different ways of how we plan on improving the application 
for future reference. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
The literature review was split into two main sections. 
The first section revolved around papers, publications, and 
applications regarding technology that is being or will be 
used in helping to improve ones nutritional values and help 
to combat obesity. The second section was with regards to 
gamification and the different techniques that can be used in 
order to make mundane and tiring tasks more fun, engaging 
and meaningful. 
A. Technology and Nutrition 
The basis of how we plan on tackling obesity, as said by 
Tsai et al. [3] is to modify the two main modifiable aspects 
of an obese or overweight person’s life. These aspects are 
their diets and their physical inactivity. So, we sought out to 
examine the different technologies that were able to help in 
improving these aspects of someone’s life in some way or 
another. 
With the advancements in smartphones, monitoring food 
intake has become much easier, where various systems 
allow you to scan barcodes and retrieve the item’s 
nutritional values very easily. Yet, for this to function 
properly, we need to have large amounts of data stored in 
large online databases, with food items for all kinds of 
societies since different societies will have different brands 
and different food items. This would also make the 
application more dependent on an Internet connection, 
which might not always be available. It might also have 
efficiency issues in order to retrieve certain information 
from the database, so it will need to be optimized to enable 
quick searches. 
Although such a system would allow an application to 
tell you what kind of food you would need during the day, 
and what’s good and what’s not, simply allowing them to 
monitor themselves still would not be enough. This is 
mostly due to the fact that even if you simply scan an item 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

to input it’s nutritional values, some users will still either 
forget or not bother to input the items, which would result in 
the application giving them bad instructions. Therefore, we 
will also need to teach the user about why and how they 
should eat healthier, so that they would not necessarily need 
to monitor their food intake. Instead they will know what is 
good for them and what’s not.  
One way of teaching nowadays is through games, and 
this is becoming especially common in younger generations. 
One simple example can be seen in [4], where Piziak et al. 
make use of a Pictorial Bingo Game, which would help 
teach children about healthy foods, either through riddles 
instead of calling up numbers like in a normal bingo game 
or by simply showing them the image of a healthy food item 
for them to cross out on their bingo card. Piziak et al. also 
conducted a study about how effective such a method was. 
Parents of the children were asked to state if they saw a 
change in their child’s eating habit after using the game, and 
they reported some good results. Parents stated that they 
saw an increase in vegetable consumption, also showing that 
children were actually learning about their food in a fun and 
enjoyable way. In a different publication (Yien et al. [5]) 
they developed a course that made use of different games to 
teach children about different ways of living a healthier life. 
The course was split into 4 sections, with each section 
making use of a different computer game. It included 
sections like learning about food for psychological and 
physical needs, where they learnt about the different food 
groups within the food pyramid. An illustration of the food 
pyramid can be seen in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Food pyramid indicating the six main food groups 
Source: [6] 
They also learnt about how certain environmental factors 
that came into play when eating healthy foods. They learnt 
about eating less fast food and about eating alternative, 
healthier foods. Their last lessons involved a one-day diet 
where they monitored what they consumed for a whole day, 
so that for a single day they were more aware of what they 
were actually eating. After this one-day diet, each subject 
compared their personal lifestyle to that of a healthy 
lifestyle in order to see how they were doing. They also 
learnt about how they can improve their lifestyle, by making 
use of certain rules to develop a healthier example of living. 
So, by making use of simple games to teach children, it 
can have very positive effects. Yet, as mentioned earlier, we 
not only want to teach our users about healthy eating, we 
also need to find ways of how to help increase our users’ 
physical activity during the day. Different means were 
researched, like use of active video games and use of 
smartphones and other technologies, which can hopefully 
have some effect on a child or teen’s level of activity.  
With regards to active video games, there were two 
publications that generated the most interest in order to help 
us design our application. Both these papers conducted 
studies on the use of active video games and on how 
effective they really are. The first publication is by 
Maddison et al. [7] and they conducted a controlled study 
with regards to active video games used by children, where 
they had advised their intervention group to perform a 
minimum of 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise 
every day. The children involved (both control and 
intervention groups) would also be monitored three times 
during the entire study. At the start, half way through and at 
the end of the study period, a series of tests were conducted 
to see if there was any improvement in the children’s Body 
Mass Index (BMI) and other aspects. The study resulted 
significant difference in the BMI percentile of the 
intervention group against that of the control group. With 
the intervention group losing an average of 0.33% of their 
BMI, whereas the control group averaged a loss of 0.08%. 
Yet in our second paper by Baranowski et al. [8], they 
conducted a more naturalistic study, meaning that there was 
less intervention within the subject’s life. They simply gave 
their subjects a Wii console together with some active 
games and let the children use them in any way they 
wanted, without any kind of instructions being given to 
them other than what the video game itself instructs them to 
do. This study gave conflicting results when compared to 
the paper by Maddison et al. [7]. They came to a conclusion 
that when the children were given a more natural setting, 
they either did not play the games that they were given or 
they compensated by being less active during other times of 
the day. 
Here, we can see the conflicting result where when 
given the more natural setting, children were not making 
much use of the active video games. This resulted in no 
significant improvement on the overall health of the subjects 
[8], unlike what we saw in the more controlled setting, 
which is more unrealistic [7]. 
As for smartphone devices, we can make use of the 
device’s in-built sensors like an accelerometer, a gyroscope, 
and Global Positioning System (GPS) to help track the 
device and the user’s movement. So, with such a device 
there is great potential to create great applications that can 
help increase the user’s physical activity. Such an 
application can be seen in [9], where Arteaga et al. 
developed an application that recommends third party health 
and fitness apps that it deems suitable for that particular 
user. Such an application works by first making use of the 
Big 5 Personality Theory to help get an idea of what kind of 
applications and tasks the user would mostly like to 
perform. Then, when the application recommends a certain 
application for the user, the user can accept or decline the 
recommendation, thus helping the app to continue learning 
about the user in order to better tailor the apps for him/her. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

From all the publications, it was very evident that by 
making use of smartphone technology, we are able to give 
the user a better interactive experience, and we are able to 
track their daily activity without having to be too intrusive 
in their daily routine, yet still manage to be part of this 
routine. The device is also a great medium to help teach our 
users about healthy living. 
B. Gamification 
Gamification is the art of adding game mechanics to a 
system in order to make it less tedious and more enjoyable 
to use. Such a technique is ideal for making exercise seem 
less tedious and more like a game where you can compete 
against your friends. With our gamification techniques, we 
aim to achieve a Rate of Flow [10], a theoretical state 
developed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, where the user is 
balanced between a state of anxiety and boredom. It is at 
this particular state that we are the most concentrated on 
performing a certain act, making the task feel easy and 
effortless to perform. 
In order to achieve this rate of flow and have a 
successfully gamified application, we tried to find what 
makes a successfully gamified system and what we should 
avoid from doing. We saw various frameworks and theories 
about how and what needs to be done in order to reach our 
goal. With all the different theories we analysed, they all 
came down to the Mechanics, Dynamics, and Aesthetics of 
the system, also known as the MDA Framework [11]. The 
Mechanics of the system or the application are the 
individual aspects and background workings of the 
application. It includes the rules, conditions, game states, 
and user representation of the game or the system. The 
Dynamics of the game take into consideration the game’s 
interaction with the user through the different mechanics 
during run-time. It does so in order to react to the user’s 
inputs, enabling the user to make use of the mechanics. The 
dynamics also considers how intuitive the application is for 
the user and it also enables consistency within the 
application, which is important in order to give the user a 
good experience. The final aspect is the Aesthetics, which 
helps to evoke the desired emotions that we try to create 
with the mechanics and the dynamics of the system. These 
are the means by which the user will give his/her input and 
how he/she will receive feedback from the application. 
By making use of this framework when gamifying our 
system, we will be able to give our user a more engaging 
experience. It will also help to give the application more 
meaning, which is essential if we want our users to keep on 
using the application. 
From the publications that we reviewed we were also 
able to come up with the kind of gamification concepts that 
we can use within our application. One aspect is social 
integration within the application. This means that we make 
use of social networks like Facebook, so that users can share 
their progress and all their achievement on the social 
network for all their online friends or other app users to see, 
like and comment so that they could help encourage the 
users in reaching their goal [12]. Another aspect is the 
feedback system. Here, we would make use of a points 
system so that for every achievement or completion of a 
task we give the user an amount of points, thus giving the 
user an indication of how well or poorly they are doing. 
Also, by making use of the user’s total points we can create 
a global leader board that would introduce a more 
competitive aspect. This would help to motivate our users 
by making them compete against their friends, thus resulting 
in them making more use of the application. 
What we would not want to happen is to have the 
application be meaningless for the user. Such a thing 
happened to the Foursquare system that would allow the 
user to claim mayorship of certain destinations, which they 
would often visit. The concept of being a virtual mayor of a 
real destination did not really give the user much meaning. 
This is why, back in 2012, they completely redesigned the 
system and went from a game oriented application to a 
recommendation application, which it was intended for in 
the first place. 
After reviewing some publications on successful and 
unsuccessful gamified systems, we came to a conclusion 
that whenever we need to gamify any system, our aim has to 
be that we try to fully immerse the user in the system. For 
this to happen we need to give meaning to the system, so 
that the user is actually doing something with purpose. 
Without having some form of meaning, users will get bored 
and stop using the system or the application. 
III. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
The main objective behind the development of this 
application is to help users engage in a healthier lifestyle by 
making use of a mobile app on an iOS device. The 
application will specifically target children and teenagers 
between the ages of 12 to 19 years. Since not a lot of time is 
available in order to have a full trial where we can see 
whether or not the application makes any significant 
difference, we will only be aiming to get our users on the 
right track towards leading a healthier lifestyle. 
To make the application more fun and engaging for our 
users we will be making use of gamification in order to help 
teach and guide them in maintaining a healthier lifestyle. 
Other than simply teaching them about healthier choices, the 
application will also try to challenge the user to perform 
certain tasks that will increase their physical activity, tasks 
include walking instead of taking the bus, going out for a 
quick run, taking the stairs instead of an elevator and so on. 
Therefore, we will be using the iOS device to challenge our 
users in real life instead of in a virtual environment. 
In order to achieve our goals, we try to apply 
gamification techniques like using a points feedback system 
to help encourage the user and a leader board system to 
create a sense of competition. We also incorporated a social 
aspect to the game by giving users the ability to share their 
current progress on their Facebook accounts. 
Hopefully, by making use of these concepts we are able 
to engage the users and have them feel a great sense of 
achievement by having completed the challenges set out for 
them. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

IV. DESIGN 
While designing the application, we kept in mind that 
we wanted to be able to give the user the necessary 
functionality, but this shouldn’t mean that its aesthetic 
qualities should suffer. First of all, the application will be 
designed using XCode (https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) 
and it will be optimized for use with the iPhone/iPod Touch 
running iOS 6.1 or later, allowing us to make use of the 
accelerometer and Global Positioning System (GPS) sensors 
found on the devices. 
To start making use of the app, we will need certain 
information from the user in order to give him/her the 
appropriate instructions. The information needed will allow 
us to calculate the user’s BMI, their ideal weight and 
Resting Metabolic Rate. The application will also request 
Facebook permissions so that the application is allowed to 
post on behalf of the user. 
 
 
 
The application design is split into five sections, fitting 
the iOS’s tabbed navigation controller as seen in Figure 2, 
so that we can display all of our content in the different 
sections for the user to easily navigate through. These 
sections are the following: 
• Home Section – This is the first view seen by the user. It 
contains a progress bar together with a summary of how 
the user is doing.  It also has an area with some tips and 
facts about eating and living healthier. An important 
aspect of our gamification techniques can also be found 
here, since we included the overall leader board, which 
displays the top ten users. 
• Recipe Section – This section includes a list of healthy, 
easy to make, tasty recipes for every time of the day that 
the user can enjoy. It also gives the user the possibility 
of sharing an image of what they prepared on the social 
network, by doing so they will also be earning points. 
• Weight Readings – Used to track the user’s progress in 
terms of their weight and height in order to get an idea of 
the user’s current Body Mass Index. Here, users will be 
able to get a more visual representation of how they are 
doing by having a scatter graph instead of a list of 
numbers with their past weight. 
• Calorie Counting – It allows the user to track the calorie 
content of the food they consume and calculate the 
caloric burn of the exercise or physical activity that they 
perform. By inputting such information, the application 
will be able to instruct the user on how to proceed by 
first calculating their current caloric balance.  
• Challenges Section – This is a very important section 
within the application. Here the application will be 
tracking the user while he/she is performing certain 
exercises that the app can track. These exercises include 
push-ups, stair climbing, walking or running. In this 
section, the application recommends certain exercises 
depending on the time of day and the amount of exercise 
performed so far in the day. Users will then be given 
certain amount of points depending on how well they 
perform during each challenge. 
By having the user make use of these different sections 
we will be able to help them achieve their goal of leading a 
healthier life. 
V. IMPLEMENTATION 
When we implemented the application, we made use of 
the Model-View-Controller design pattern, which has the 
advantage of separating the data and the information from 
the user, resulting in cleaner, reusable code and a more 
efficient application. 
A. Controller Layer 
The 
Controller 
layer 
is 
where 
the 
application 
communicates from the front end to the back end of the 
application. Classes in this layer don’t have much logical 
computation performed in them. In our implementation, 
some of the controllers do perform some of the more 
complex operations within the Challenges section of the 
application. 
• In the Push-Up challenge, the controller will receive 
accelerometer data every time the push up button is 
touched. 
 
Figure 3. Use of accelerometer to detect the device's orientation 
Source: Gary Hili - 2013 
The purpose of this is to detect the device’s 
orientation, as seen in Figure 3, so that it can help detect 
if the user is cheating by not having the device lying face 
up but instead he/she is holding it in their hands. 
• The Stair Climber challenge also makes use of the 
accelerometer sensor. In this challenge, the controller is 
constantly receiving information from the accelerometer. 
Figure 2. Application screenshot showing the Challenges and Home 
Sections, together with the other three sections shown in the tabbed 
navigation bar 
Source: Gary Hili - 2013 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The controller then calculates the magnitude of the three 
axes of the accelerometer and if a certain threshold is 
reached that will be counted as a step. It continues to do 
this until the user either chooses to stop or the challenge 
has been completed. 
• In the final challenge, the Walk/Run Challenge, the 
application makes use of the devices GPS tracking 
capabilities in order to track the user’s route, speed and 
distance. The Walk/Run Challenge also consists of one 
of the biggest disadvantages within the application. This 
is the fact that the current version isn’t capable of 
tracking the user once the device’s screen has been 
locked. 
Other than the above-mentioned algorithms, the 
Controller will mostly handle any data being sent by the 
model layer and any user interactions that are made with the 
view layer and require some kind of processing. 
B. View Layer 
The View layer contains all the aesthetic properties of 
the application. It is this layer of the application that the user 
will interact with and be given feedback. Implementation of 
this layer was relatively easy since we made use of the 
XCode storyboard feature, so designing and connecting the 
different views was quick. Designing the look of the 
application still took some time in order to achieve the best 
possible aesthetic appeal. While designing this layer we 
tried to make use of a simplistic approach, using a 
monochrome design with contrasting colours throughout the 
application. This simple approach was used in order not to 
overwhelm the user and so that the emphasis can remain on 
the content of the application yet still be appealing to the 
user. One of the more complex views was the Weight 
Readings Section since here we had to include the CorePlot 
Library [13] in order to design the view. 
Most of the maintenance of the view layer is done by the 
iOS itself, so the main job of the views is to simply fire 
actions each time a user interacts with that view so that any 
listening methods can perform the necessary action. 
C. Model Layer 
As for the Model layer, this is the backbone of the 
application, where all the logical and mathematical 
calculations are being made. At this layer we have all the 
data controller classes together with the classes that 
manipulate this data before being sent to the controller layer 
in order to be sent to the view layer. The data controllers are 
used to load and save data in XML format. They are able to 
either load the necessary data from the application bundle or 
the devices document directory and they also have basic 
array manipulation methods that allow other classes to make 
use of the loaded data. We use the data controllers at various 
points within the application. They control the challenge 
difficulty levels, the list of recipes and the handling of 
weight and calorie count entries amongst other tasks. This 
layer also makes use of algorithms that help determine what 
tasks should be recommended or what instruction should be 
given to help the user. In order to give the necessary 
instructions to the user, we have certain classes that take the 
available data and calculate the BMI, Resting Metabolic 
Rate (RMR), the caloric balance and so on, storing these 
values for other classes to use. So, these values are then 
called by another class, which uses them to determine what 
kind of instruction to give the user. By using BMI and the 
caloric balance, the application will tell the user how they 
are doing during that day, instructing them to eat or exercise 
more, or whether they are overdoing it and eating or 
exercising too much. The model layer also instructs users on 
what kind of exercise they should perform. The algorithm 
used to tell the user what challenges to perform makes use 
of the time of day together with how much exercise they’ve 
performed so far during that day. The main reason why we 
used this approach is because our main age focus is 12 to 19 
years of age, and at these ages they are spending 9 months 
out of 12 in school, so they are more likely to be home at 
certain hours, and at school at others. Hence, in the 
mornings and the evenings the application will be 
suggesting the Stair Climb challenge since it might be too 
early or too late to actually go out for a walk. As for the 
Walk/Run Challenge, it’s mostly encouraged after school, 
maybe walking back home or to some after school activity. 
As for the push-ups they are mostly being used as a way to 
working your body and not be sitting down all day, so we 
create this easy challenge where they don’t really need to go 
out. Being such a low calorie burning exercise, the 
application would not be recommending it as much as the 
other challenges. Figure 4 shows what kind of challenge is 
being recommended during a certain period of time. Taking 
into account the amount of time spent exercising during the 
day, the algorithm will no longer recommend the Walk/Run 
Challenge. Instead it recommends the Stair Climb 
Challenge, which is easier to perform indoors in a shorter 
period of time. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Gantt chart of the times each exercise is suggested  
Source: Gary Hili – 2013 
The instruction being provided also makes use of 
positively reinforced statements because certain studies 
(Woolfard et al. [14]) had shown that making use of such 
messages makes the users feel better about themselves, 
boosting their self-esteem. 
The last thing the model layer is handling is the social 
integration of the application and any network related 
functions. This includes retrieving and setting data on the 
leader board being used in the home section. 
Implementation of the artefact took longer than expected 
since we were new to technology. However, the resulting 
application was very satisfactory and once testing of the 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

application’s features were performed, the beta evaluation 
of the artefact could commence. 
VI. RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
In order to evaluate the application, we first conducted a 
20-day trial period, where a group of 25 users were asked to 
use the application as they saw fit and then evaluate it by 
filling in a questionnaire. Each user’s points throughout this 
period were also being tracked so that we were able to 
evaluate how much they actually made use of it. 
The aim of the application was to help our users in order 
to start leading a healthier life, so we tried to improve the 
users’ eating habits by teaching them about healthier 
alternatives and giving them the possibility of tracking their 
food consumption for them to be more aware of what they 
eat. We also tried to increase their physical activity by 
making use of the different challenges and encouraging 
them to exercise more during the day. To make it all the 
more enjoyable we implemented gamification concepts that 
motivated our users to compete against one another and 
encourage one another. 
The users that evaluated the application did not have any 
severe problems of obesity. 52% were female and the rest 
male, with 76% between the ages of 19-21, 16% were 
between the ages of 16-18 and the rest were over 25 years of 
age. Although most of the users were not within the age 
group the application was targeting, their input was still 
valuable. The reason being that they are able to express 
themselves better about how the application is helping them 
and how it can be improved. 
In order to evaluate the application they were given a 
questionnaire, which regarded the use of the gamification 
concepts within the application. It also regarded how well 
the application helped the user with regards to their diet and 
exercise, and finally they were asked to report any bugs or 
future work they’d like to see. 
With regards to the use of gamification, users found the 
points and leader board techniques to be very helpful and it 
made them want to use the application. The biggest reason 
was because of the competition it evoked, which was 
motivational for them. The social integration factor wasn’t 
as successful as we’d hoped it would be. We had included 
this feature since in recent years we have seen an increase in 
how people are constantly posting and sharing statements 
about their lives on such online networks. With our 
application, users did not really make much use of this 
feature, resulting in the majority (68%) not even realizing 
that using it would earn them more points, yet 70% of those 
that did not realize this said that they would’ve made more 
use of it if they had realized it gave them extra points. 
Another important aspect of a gamified system is the 
application’s intuitiveness and ease of use, which is highly 
dependent on the aesthetics of the application. We had 96% 
of the users finding it very easy to use, while the other 4% 
gave a neutral opinion on the matter. 
Next, the users were asked about how the application 
helped them increase their physical activity. Most of the 
users liked all the three challenges that we provided but they 
were not used as much as they were liked. This meant that 
the challenges were not effective in helping our users lose 
weight, but were helping in keeping the users engaged with 
the application. For example, 80% of the users liked the 
Stair Climber Challenge, 92% of the users even said that 
having an application that tracks their exercise is great, yet 
only 40% of the users said that they made use of Stair 
Climber challenge on a daily or almost daily basis. The 
same scenario can be seen throughout the three different 
challenges (as seen in Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. Bar charts showing usage of challenges  
Source: Gary Hili – 2013 
Then the users were asked about how the tips and facts 
given to them about living healthier managed to help or in 
any way affect them. The tips were found to be very helpful 
and easy to remember as well, with most of the users having 
recited a tip or a fact that they had read while using the 
application. As for the calorie counting aspect of our 
application, we saw that tracking the user’s food 
consumption wasn’t very effective. A small percentage said 
that it was easy to use, yet the majority said that they either 
did not use it or they couldn’t bother to search the web to 
see how much calorie an item contains. Some users also 
suggested that we try to make this easier by adding a way 
that the users can actually search their food’s nutritional 
values and add it to their list. 
In the final part of our evaluation, we analyzed the data 
recorded by keeping track of the users’ points throughout 
the 20-day period. As one would expect, some users made 
more use of the application than others. Our biggest concern 
was that even for a small period of time, users were not 
making use of it daily, with some users even showing long 
periods of not making any use of the application. By the last 
6 days of the trial period, about 90% of the users had 
stopped making use of the application entirely. Around half 
way through our trial period, we introduced an update to the 
application, which handled some bugs that we had found. 
After making this update available for the users we could 
see a slight overall increase in the usage of the application 
even though no new visible content was released. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

What we were able to conclude from this was that we 
were not able to retain the users as much as we’d liked. 
When we asked some of the more active users why they 
think this happened various responses were given. Yet most 
of them stated that they had moved on to another application 
that was capable of giving them more detailed reports with 
regards to their current performance and is capable of giving 
them detailed reports on their personal computer as well. 
By making use of gamification, we were able to 
successfully motivate our users so that they’d make more 
use of the application by competing against their friends. 
We also managed to help them learn about ways to lead a 
healthier life. However, we still were not able to retain the 
user’s interest for a long enough period to make a 
significant difference in their lifestyle. Other pitfalls with 
our application included our food tracking implementation, 
which, although easy to use, isn’t able to tell the user the 
nutritional values of a food item. The application also 
lacked in the social aspects, since users did not really make 
much use of the social networking features. 
Even if we had some negative results from the 
evaluation of the application, we still managed to get some 
results that have helped us get a better understanding of how 
we can fix and improve the application in order to benefit 
our users and make a significant difference in the lives. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our aim when we started this project was to develop an 
application that would help obese children and teenagers 
start leading a healthier lifestyle. 
Although we managed to make a small difference in the 
lives of our users, room for improvement can be evidently 
seen, most of all we would need to introduce a better way to 
track the users’ caloric consumption. This can be done using 
various ways depending on how technology will move 
forward. One way is to use large databases with different 
choices that the user can search for. Another way would be 
to introduce edible RFIDs [15], which could contain such 
information directly on the RFID or via an online database. 
The application also needs to introduce background 
processing in order to improve the application’s exercise 
tracking capabilities. 
Some other possible ideas were also mentioned in the 
user evaluation of the application. This included the 
introduction of more challenges, which would give a better 
variety. The users also said that one kind of additional 
feature could be the ability to upload images of their 
workouts.  
We were able to successfully design and implement our 
application, using gamification concepts throughout in order 
to help teach the user about healthier foods and motivating 
them to increase their physical activity. After having 
analyzed all our findings, we were able to come up with a 
possible way forward that would improve the application in 
general. Most of all, it will improve the user retention and 
hopefully have the users make more use of the application, 
maybe even on a daily basis. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Ameen, Times of Malta [Online], 
http://www.timesofmalta.com/articles/view/20120708/local/Study-
confirms-children-s-obesity-problem.427583, July, 2012 [retrieved: 
October, 2013] 
[2] 
B. deNorre, Eurostat Commission [Online], 
http://www.ec.europa.eu/malta/news/28.11.22_eu_obesity_ranking
s_en.htm, November, 2011 [retrieved: October 2013] 
[3] 
C. C. Tsai et al., “Usability and feasibility of PMEB: A mobile 
phone application for monitoring real time caloric balance”, Mobile 
Networks and Applications, vol. 12, June 2007, pp. 173-184. 
[4] 
V. Piziak, “A pilot study of a pictorial bingo bilingual nutrition 
education game to improve the consumption of healthful foods in a 
head start population,” International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, vol. 9(4), April 2012, pp. 1319-1325. 
[5] 
J.-M. Yien, C.-M. Hung, G.-J. Hwang, and Y.-C. Lin, “A game-
based learning approach to improving students’ learning 
achievements in a nutrition dourt,” The Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 10(2), April 2011, pp. 1-10. 
[6] 
The Felt Source [Online], http://www.thefeltsource.com/New-
Food-Pyramid-Large.jpg, [retrieved: April, 2013] 
[7] 
R. Maddison et al., “Effects of active video games on body 
composition: a randomized controlled trial,” The American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 94, July 2011, pp. 156-163 
[8] 
T. Baranowski et al., “Impact of an Active Video Game on Healthy 
Children’s Physical Activity,” Official Journal of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, vol. 129(3), March, 2012, pp. 636-642 
[9] 
S. Arteaga, M. Kudeki, and A. Woodworth, “Combating obesity 
trends in teenagers through persuasive mobile technology,” 
Sigaccess Newsletter, vol. 94, June 2009, pp. 17-25. 
[10] 
M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal 
Experience, 1st ed., Harper Perennial Modern Classics, 2008. 
[11] 
D. R. Flatla, C. Gutwin, L. E. Nacke, S. Bateman, and R. L. 
Mandryk, “Calibration Games: Making Calibration Tasks 
Enjoyable by Adding Motivating Game Elements,” Proc. ACM 
Symp. User interface software and technology (UIST 11), Santa 
Barbara, California, October 2011, pp. 403-412, doi: 
10.1145/2047196.2047248. 
[12] 
K. Kiili, A. Perttula, P. Tuomi, M. Suominen, and A. Lindstedt, 
“Designing mobile multiplayer exergames for physical education,” 
Proc. IADIS, International Conference Mobile Learning, 
Iadisportal.org, 2010, pp. 141-148. 
[13] 
D. McCormack, and B. Wark, Cocoa plotting framework for OS X 
and iOS [Online], http://code.google.com/p/core-plot/, [retrieved: 
October, 2013]. 
[14] 
S. J. Woolfard, S. J. Clark, V. J. Stretcher, and K. Resnicow, 
“Tailored Mobile phone text messages as an adjunct to obesity 
treatment for adoloscents,” Telemed Telecare, vol. 16(8), Oct. 
2010, pp. 458-461, doi: 10.1258/jtt.2010.100207. 
[15] 
A. Kooser, CNet [Online], http://news.cnet.com/8301-17938_105-
20070913-1/chew-on-this-nutrismart-edible-rfid-tags/, June, 2011 
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[16] 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [Online], 
http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html, August, 2013 
[retrieved: October, 2013]. 
[17] 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [Online], 
http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/obesity/facts.htm, July, 2013 
[retrieved: October, 2013]. 
[18] 
World Health Organization Europe [Online], 
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-
diseases/obesity/obesity, 2009 [retrieved: October 2013]. 
[19] 
V. Vahlberg, “Fitting into their lives: A Survey of Three Studies 
about Youth Media Usage,” NAA Foundation, March, 2010. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

