Bridging Location-based Data with Mobile Practices 
Introducing a Framework for Mobile User-Studies 
Johanna Meurer*, Julian Dax*, Martin Stein*, Thomas Ludwig**, Volker Wulf* 
Information Systems and New Media*, CSCW and Social Media** 
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
{johanna.meurer, julian.dax, martin.stein, thomas.ludwig, volker.wulf}@uni-siegen.de 
 
Abstract—Increasingly, mobile services are using location-
based information provided by GPS sensors. Especially HCI 
research deals with a growing interest in how people make 
sense of location-based information while on the move. Mobile 
user-studies can help to address this black box and provide the 
opportunity to combine location-based data with context 
related content of the mobile practices being performed. In 
this study, we address this relationship and ask how spatial 
information should be visualized in order to explore mobile 
contexts. We conducted a qualitative study to learn about the 
usage and interpretation forms of spatial information and 
further translated these findings into a basic framework for 
mobile user-studies, concluding with an evaluation. 
 
Keywords-mobile 
user-studies; 
location-based 
services; 
mobility; user studies; framework. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, mobile phones accompany most of us every 
day and everywhere we go. They have opened up new 
possibilities for the investigation of human behavior [31]. 
In particular, mobile, intelligent, and GPS-enabled 
smartphones allow for and demand an integrated view of 
location-based information and the mobile contexts in 
which the particular mobile practices are performed [14] 
[21]. HCI research has is greatly interested in how people 
make sense of location-based information while on the 
move. Currently, more and more mobile user-studies are 
being conducted to answer this question e.g., [11][26]. 
However, the relationship between spatial information and 
mobile practices is still underexplored. 
In order to shed light on this question, we ask in this 
paper how spatial information and mobile practices (and 
their relationship) should be addressed in order to support 
mobile user-studies in an appropriate manner. The 
challenge herein is to map the geo-location data (referring 
to time, longitude and latitude) with the cultural and 
meaningful dimension of space to inform a framework for 
mobile user-studies. To do so, we conducted a context 
study with 19 users who allowed us to track their 
movements over three weeks. At a later date, we provided 
them with GPS-based paths of their own movements, which 
enable them to follow their movements on a map over the 
time. This alienated mobility data triggered narrations about 
mobility, i.e.  the users were encouraged to report freely 
about the mobile contexts they identified. These mobility 
narrations allowed insights into how spatial information 
was used, referenced and interpreted when reporting on 
mobile practices. In particular, we discovered three main 
requirements from the interviews to inform mobile user-
studies: (1) the visualization of movements, (2) the 
visualization of paths and places and (3) the integration of 
interpretation spaces. We continued by building a 
framework for mobile user-studies around these identified 
findings. We then evaluated the framework and concluded 
with a discussion regarding future enhancements.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
In the following, we introduce current tools for mobile 
user-studies that can be clustered into three groups: (1) 
experience-based studies, (2) location-based studies, and 
(3) integrated studies. We will discuss the current 
approaches with regard to their ability to explore how 
people use location-based information, and state the 
necessity for a framework that allows this question to be 
addressed. 
A. User-Studies in the mobile contexts   
Fostered by the rapid dissemination of mobile devices 
and their ever-increasing role in our everyday lives, the 
field of HCI has yielded new approaches to capture 
peoples’ behavior and actions with regard to location-based 
data by observing the use of mobile devices.  
1) Experience-based studies 
Early on (mobile) diary studies [1], as well as the 
experience 
sampling 
method 
[8] 
were 
viewed 
as 
appropriate methods for capturing users’ behavior directly 
in a specific situation [17]. Both facilitate user-driven 
reporting of one's own behavior in mobile contexts. In diary 
studies, users– based on previous instructions by the 
researchers – decide when and which information is worth 
reporting. Forms of voice-based diaries or photo-based 
diaries [4] as well as combined methods have been 
designed for specific mobile contexts [9]. In all these 
studies, the diary entries have to be reported manually [6]. 
Brandt et al. [2] present variations called snippets, which 
are short diary notes recorded in specific situations and 
which allow the users to complete the entry later. These 
traditional paper-based diary studies include fields for 
writing down the location of an activity and are comparable 
to the experience sampling method, the main difference 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

being that in experience sampling, participants are given a 
signal at a specific time to report details about his/her 
current situation. One Shortcoming of both diary studies 
and experience sampling is the effort needed to document 
the relevant data. Further location-data is not systematically 
addressed as a basis for interpretation, and as a result users 
lack proper support to reflect on locations [21][23].  
2) Location-based studies 
Beside these more qualitative approaches, quantitative 
logging approaches are being used increasingly to gather 
detailed information on mobile behavior. Life-logging is 
one such approach which aims to record user behavior 
automatically via “the continuous capturing of personal 
data, such as photos from one's field-of-view, location, 
audio, biometric signals and others, with the aim of 
supporting the later recall and reflection on one's life events 
and experiences” [12]. Data logging in general means that 
usage data, which would otherwise be very hard and time-
consuming to capture, is automatically collected by a 
device with no user interaction whatsoever [11]. Due to the 
fact that mobile devices have become highly personalized 
tools for virtually everyone, they are more or less present 
and on hand at any time and place [10]. Mobile-data 
logging therefore represents a significant part of life-
logging, allowing users' spatial footprints to be traced. 
Hence these services do not offer the integration of the 
user's-perspective. 
3) Integrated studies 
Further, approaches that combine experience-based 
studies with automatic data logging are coming increasingly 
into existence. The current stance of literature is dominated 
by a space-related understanding of mobility [15]. One 
characteristic of this research stream is strong sensor 
orientation which allows mobility patterns, like routines and 
mobility modes [19] to be discovered, thus enabling 
mobility systems to be improved [28], or sustainable 
mobility behavior to be fostered [3][22]. One example is 
given by driver logbooks that allow drivers to report 
information about certain journeys [21][24], or Froehlich et 
al’s [11] system that combines the logging of phone data 
with mobile experience sampling by triggering surveys at 
specific moments of interest. They show that the acceptance 
of such a mobile system in everyday life requires both 
robust performance and non-intrusive data collection. Liu et 
al. [23] argue that such mixed methods are required to 
gather appropriate information about users’ behavior. A 
major challenge of this research line is identifying 
encounters for temporal and spatial mobility patterns [20], 
and interpreting this data as forms of mobility activities. 
This can be addressed by using location-based data 
collected from social media applications (e.g. Foursquare or 
Twitter) 
[14], 
or 
mixed-method 
research 
using 
questionnaires, surveys or interviews that aim to describe 
the purpose of the activities, the means of transportation 
and personal details [5][16]. However, these complex 
frameworks do not look in detail at how location-based data 
is actually interpreted by users in particular mobility 
contexts. 
B. Motivating a framework for mobile user-studies 
We showed that researchers can benefit from the new 
options to capture, track, simulate, mimic and shadow the 
many interdependent forms of people's intermittent 
movement [30]. Hence, we do not move in an empty space 
but through streets and places. We go home, to work, to a 
restaurant, visit a friend or the sports club. Often we have a 
special preference within the selected transport mode, the 
company we choose for our journeys, types of coordination, 
or the selected route. In order to focus on such issues, we 
cannot refer to locations as being stated only objectively. 
Moreover, we have to ask how users can be supported in 
interpreting spatial data to re-construct the specific 
meanings of places that influence our movements and daily 
mobility [26]. Hence, mobile user-studies should not only 
take the objective spatial dimension into account but should 
also support the user in an appropriate manner to reflect on 
the actual mobility [7][13]. Yet there is very little going on 
in terms of trying to understand the role of real world 
context in relation to understanding, building or evaluating 
interactive mobile user-systems [18][26]. This leads us to 
the challenge of finding new ways to support people with 
their mobile phones to not only track spaces, but to allow 
the users to remember and interpret concrete mobility 
situations.  
III. 
CONTEXT STUDY 
In the following, we introduce the study conducted in 
order to discover how users make use of and interpret 
spatial data.  
A. Method 
We conducted an empirical study with 19 users. The 
user group was selected from a wider project, aimed at 
assisting elderly people with modern mobility support 
systems. The initial contact with participants was made 
through various local organizations for senior citizens. We 
selected a heterogeneous group of socially active seniors 
(N=19, 14 female and 5 male), in relation to age (between 
57 and 80 years old, and an average of 69 years), local 
infrastructure (10 in high density areas and 9 in more low 
density areas), and also in relation to the transport systems 
typically used. The idea behind this selection was to obtain 
a wide spectrum of mobility experiences. We worked with 
the seniors in a participatory design-orientated Living Lab 
setting [25]. We provided all users with a modern 
smartphone and guided them in its usage. In regular 
schooling sessions that took place weekly over a period of 
about two years, the users improved their technological 
skills and increased their knowledge of mobile mobility 
services. Hence, although we were dealing with older 
adults, at the time of investigation all interviewees were 
skilled in handling mobility-related application services.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Mobility narrations were conducted in an interview-like 
manner with each of the 19 users. We asked them to 
interpret the prepared maps with the outlined GPS tracking 
data of their movements over the last two weeks. We 
provided all users with a Google account, which allows us 
to obtain GPS data produced by the participant’s mobile 
phones in order to track their movements. Mobile behavior 
was recorded automatically by the Google service Location 
History [32]. During the trial, the participants led their daily 
lives routinely while the GPS mobile sensor was constantly 
tracking their outdoor movements. After two weeks of 
tracking we re-visited each participant and prepared the 
collected data for presentation. We used both paper-based 
as well as computer-based representations of the tracked 
mobility behavior as shown in figure 1. The picture shows 
the data of one day, as provided by the Google service. The 
digital version enables users to check the detailed travel 
times on demand and to zoom the map in and out. These 
forms of presentation provided information about the 
spatial movements in units of space and time gained from 
the mobile GPS sensors. With these representations, we 
triggered mobility narrations that led us back to elementary 
travel stories. These stories provided insights into how 
people read and make sense of their personal location-based 
data. 
              
 
Figure 1. Shows the material provided to the users 
Our study was conducted in a region in western 
Germany which has about 100,000 inhabitants and includes 
both urban and rural areas. All the workshops took place in 
participants' homes and lasted between 56 and 153 minutes. 
Pseudonyms have been used to ensure participants’ 
anonymity and confidentiality. 
B. Identified Elements of locating practices 
In the following we outline the empirical findings from 
our study. The mobility narrations provide insights into 
how users align their mobile practices along the presented 
spatial information of past journeys. Three key elements 
which especially supported the users were (1) visualization 
of movements, (2) visualization of paths, and (3) 
interpretation spaces.  
 
 
1) Visualization of movements 
We started by asking users what they could see on the 
personalized maps lying in front of them. We made sure to 
ask open questions that leave participants space to explain 
using their own reference system. We obtained answers like 
the following example sequence #1:  
Sequence #1: [locating mobile contexts] 
 I: So let’s take a look at the details on the map. 
A: Yes, okay. It (the internet page) is just setting 
up. Goodness, that’s amazing! What’s this? 
Whereabouts was I then? Right here! I was in the 
internet café yesterday. As clear as day! Wow! 
[…]And here. er. here I can see my way to my 
brother over there. 
In this sequence the maps are addressed as an important 
tool to help participants remember and identify their own 
past mobility practices as it is emphasized with expressions 
of joy: #1: It (the internet page) is just setting up. 
Goodness, that’s amazing! […] As clear as day! Wow! 
Further, the geographic visualizations of their own GPS 
data was often used for orientation, to identify where the 
participants had actually been. However, although the users 
only see spatial references as red-lined GPS marks of their 
movements, 
they 
do 
not 
state 
purely 
geospatial 
descriptions. Instead, people refer to their mobile practices 
as if one could actually see them on the map (“I can see 
what I have been doing”, or in “I can see my way to my 
brother over there” (#1)). Hence, people literally bridge the 
geographic data lying before them with their mobile 
practices. Coincidentally, both dimensions are connected 
through the narrative elements of  “here” or “there” as their 
locutionary seat. The map with the referenced GPS 
coordinates was disengaged by the users in an interpretative 
process that turns geographic space into a meaningful area. 
Although the spatial character still exists within the 
indexical reference of the particles “here” and “there”, the 
emphasis lies not on the geography but rather on the mobile 
practices performed. In other words, mobile contexts are 
easily identified by the users with the help of the maps and 
the referenced GPS locations, as the two examples (along 
with many others) show.  
2) Visualization of paths  
Additionally, it turned out that the visualization 
especially of paths supports the identification and 
interpretation of mobile contexts, as illustrated by the 
following sequences #2- 3:  
Sequence #2: [categorizing located contexts] 
I: Perhaps you could describe what you can see on 
the map? 
D: Well, for example, that’s where I took the bill to 
Alfons. In the garden centre. It is only a short 
walk,  I went on foot, because it is right here in the 
neighborhood.  
Sequence #3: [categorizing located contexts] 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

E: when I’m mobile I go to the gym, I go shopping, 
or go swimming with my neighbor, as you can see 
here below.” 
In these sequences not only the indexical character of the 
elements like “here” and “there” are addressed, but rather 
its deontic character that refers to a particular mobile 
practice. In sequence #2 it is paying a bill in a shop in the 
neighborhood, or in sequence #3 it is going home. 
Ascribing content to locations in this way is different from 
simply naming streets or areas of the city as it connects 
familiar meanings to the paths shown. In the excerpts, users 
refer explicit to these paths as “making sense”. Within these 
ensembles, users are able to inscribe particular knowledge 
to the “geometrical” or the “geographical” space which 
makes it meaningful and socially readable. Thus, the paths 
drawn on the map work as preconditions to transform users' 
mobility practices into a legible form along the path that 
can be identified and described easily.  
3) Integration of interpretation spaces  
Further, in the course of the interviews it transpired that 
users locate their mobile practices within particular paths 
and places, as illustrated in the following sequence #6: 
Sequence #4: [reading located contexts] 
C: So I’m only here. From my place, I drove into 
Ludwig Street first.. This is Ludwig Street here. 
Then I went back and forth a bit, picked a friend 
up then went up [name of a village] to Berleburger 
Street and picked up another friend. And then we 
went to  Giersberg (= area) to play cards here. 
The user point out a “tour” of paths as a series of units 
(Ludwig Street first, to. […]to Berleburger Street and 
[…]to Giersberg (= area)”. Although the drawings on the 
map outline not the “route” (there isn’t one) but the “log” of 
peoples’ journeys – users interpret the outlined marks as 
footprints of the successive events that took place in the 
course of the journey. In sequence #4 the speaker refers to 
an event which happened at a particular place. Within the 
stated mobility context of playing cards the related mobility 
practices are expressed within certain preferences. Hence, 
although we are dealing with an objective tool – the map - 
the reference to this tool is quite selective and subjectively 
motivated according to the stated mobility practice of 
playing cards. Therefore, the conducted mobility is stated in 
a particular manner, namely as a regular activity that is 
shared with friends. If the user had talked about the 
workplace or the home, these descriptions would probably 
have been different. We can imagine for example that the 
way-finding would be much more straightforward without 
picking up friends, or would rely on using public transport. 
Hence, the map is not used in order to reconstruct the prior 
paths and visited places but to reconstruct particular 
activities and events from mobile practices that can be 
located or related to paths and places. We could further 
observe that users start to annotate the maps, what identifies 
paths and places as useful units providing users with spaces 
in which to describe and exaggerate their journeys.  
IV. 
CONCEPTIONAL FRAMING 
The three identified elements of (1) visualization of 
movements, (2) visualization of paths and places, and (3) 
integration of interpretation spaces turned out to be basic 
needs, necessary to make use of and interpret spatial 
information. The study especially reveals that designers 
should provide users' starting points to empower them to 
make sense of geo-location data. We found out that 
designers need to understand how users refer to their 
performed mobility and provide an appropriate basis for the 
interpretation of mobile contexts.  
This motivates the creation of a framework for mobile 
user-studies that empowers users to actively make sense of 
the mobile practices they performed. Hence, we identified 
the following issues that go along with the three findings: 
(1)  “Visualization of movements” refers to the need to 
collect spatial movements in situ. 
(2) “Visualization of paths and places” can be translated 
as the users’ need to be supported in identifying journeys 
places within performed trips.  
(3) “Integration of interpretation spaces” refers to the 
need to allow users' annotations on the performed trips.  
TABLE I.  
IDENTIFIED ISSUES, DESIGN CHALLENGE AND TECHNICAL 
IMPLICATIONS 
 
V. 
A FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE USER-STUDIES 
In the following, we introduce in more detail how the 
identified requirements are translated into a framework for 
mobile user-studies. This framework allows studying in rich 
detail how users make use of and identify mobile contexts 
while on the move.  
No. 
Identified 
Issue 
Design 
Challenge 
Technical 
Implications 
1 
Visualizing  
GPS/ 
time 
data 
on 
a 
map   
Collecting 
spatial 
movements in 
situ  
Users' 
mobile 
phones 
need 
to 
continuously 
log 
position and time 
2 
Visualizing 
the 
 
GPS/ 
time data as 
paths  
Identifying 
trips 
and 
destinations  
as the points 
of 
beginning 
and ending a 
performed 
activity  
Based on available 
sensorial data the 
system needs to be 
able to determine 
the start and end of 
trips 
3 
Integration 
of 
interpretation 
spaces  
Collecting 
information  
within 
the 
performed 
journeys and 
places 
Based 
on 
the 
recorded trips the 
system 
needs 
to 
provide features to 
annotate trips and to 
select 
context 
information 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

A. Addressing the challenge to locate mobile contexts 
Collecting spatial movements in situ requires location 
data from the phones' sensors to be acquired. GPS 
immediately comes to mind as the most important sensor, 
but other sensors like wifi or Bluetooth signals can also be 
used to determine a users’ location. In order to identify trips 
and destinations, it is necessary to analyze this data. In 
long-term studies, large amounts of location data are 
gathered which leads to high demands of computational 
power to process this data. E.g. we tested processing 1000 
locations on a modern smartphone with clustering 
algorithms like DBSCAN. The computation of clusters took 
about 10 seconds. Yet for in-situ recognition of places and 
routes, such approaches are not suitable for processing a 
complete data set.  
Thus these calculations need to be repeated at very short 
intervals to ensure in-situ recognition of trips. Further, the 
intensive workload on the devices would make them 
unusable due to battery drainage. Moreover, combining the 
GPS data with other sensor inputs like wifi or Bluetooth 
signals is problematic when using this approach. Thus we 
decided to gather location data and process the incoming 
stream according to predefined rules. This approach allows 
the researcher to define under which circumstances data 
should be stored and/or can be shown to users to ask for 
qualitative input like collecting information about a trip or 
destination.  
We used a complex event processing approach (CEP) to 
implement a rule system on the client side. This has several 
advantages compared to performing statistical analysis of 
the collected location data. Firstly, using a CEP Engine 
(CEPE) allows the data to be processed stream-based. Thus 
only relevant, incoming location data is processed. The 
CEPE automatically filters relevant data (e.g. locations that 
were received within a given timeframe) based on the rules 
that were defined previously using a special event pattern 
language (EPL). Secondly, these rules can be (de-) 
activated or swapped easily without modifying the code of 
the application itself. Using CEPE on the mobile client 
allows on-the-fly modifications of data collection (e.g. 
triggering a questionnaire when a user leaves a spot that has 
been identified as relevant during the running study). 
In our case, we used the Esper complex event-
processing engine. Esper is an open source CEPE that has 
been ported to Android and is only about 6MB in size. 
Further we used the Funf framework to capture sensor data 
from more than 15 sources including location, wifi and 
running apps. This data is then sent to Esper. The patterns, 
which have been defined on the server, are downloaded via 
a REST API as soon as they are available. This API 
provides a JSON file, containing the EPL and the id 
numbers of the actions it should trigger, which in our case 
are surveys initially linked to particular places. To create 
such EPL patterns, knowledge of EPL syntax is required. 
To eliminate this necessity and to enable researchers 
without technical training to define EPL rules that allow for 
categorization locations, we created a graphical editor that 
is described in the following section. 
B. Graphic rule definition to support categorization 
As pointed out earlier, one of the main challenges is the 
collection of spatial information, and to react to this data 
e.g. by running questionnaires based on the user's mobility. 
Thus we developed a web-based editor that is based on the 
EPL and allows researchers to define events using a 
graphical user interface (GUI). The editor (Fig. 2) ensures 
that researchers formally define the situations which are 
relevant for the study in order to make them unambiguously 
recognizable by mobile devices equipped with the 
appropriate sensors.  
 
         
 
Figure 2. Web Based Editor for Event-Definition 
This example shows how researchers can create event 
patterns that support the categorization of the participants’ 
devices. Firstly (1) researchers name the patterns they are 
going to create. From the list of sensors (2) they can drag 
and drop different location-related sensor events to the 
canvas (3). The available sensor events are: 
Location: Probably the most basic sensor event for 
location detection. This event will be triggered every time 
the device receives a location. This can also be specified in 
more detail by providing bounding areas of relevant 
locations (e.g. specifying that a questionnaire should be 
triggered when users are at a specific location, e.g. at 
university). 
Time of Day: Basic sensor event to define a time. This 
event can be used to define rules that should only be 
matched at a given time of day (e.g. specifying that a 
questionnaire should be triggered at 3 PM on a 
Wednesday). 
Location Change: This event detects a change of the 
geographic location without the need to specify a concrete 
GPS position. The researcher needs only to provide a time 
span and a distance. If there are location measurements in 
this time span that are further apart than the provided 
distance, the event is triggered. 
Wifi: This can be used to determine if a user is 
connected to specified (or indeed any) wifi. This sensor can 
be helpful to detect if users are in a specific building (e.g. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

triggering a questionnaire when users connect to their home 
wifi). 
Further, the framework allows these sensor events to be 
connected through “AND”, “OR” or “Followed-by” 
connections. Per default, events are connected by “OR”; 
“Followed-by” and “`AND” connections are established by 
dragging lines between the events. 
 
  
 
Figure 3. Left: Connecting two events - Right: Setting location attributes 
using “quick setup” 
 “AND”-connections imply that the criteria for the event is 
fulfilled simultaneously, e.g. the participant is at the 
specified location and connected to the specified wifi. 
“OR”-connections imply that one of the specified events 
has happened, e.g. the participant is connected to the 
specified wifi but is not at the specified location (or vice 
versa). “Followed-By”-connections refer to a sequential 
order, e.g. the participant happened to be at the specified 
location but left and connected to the specified wifi 
afterwards. For “AND” and “Followed-By” connections 
researchers can specify a timeframe for the occurrence of 
the involved sensor events (see (4) in fig. 3). For each of the 
sensor events, attributes can be determined (5) to further 
specify events. E.g., using the attribute SSID for wifi-events 
implies that events will only be triggered when the 
participants connect to a specific wifi network. It also 
demonstrates the “quick setup” of the location sensor to 
define attributes based on a selected geo region (7). The 
output of the event orchestration is shown below the canvas 
in fig. 3 (6). Here the generated EPL-snippet is shown. The 
snippet and the canvas are synchronized, thus any changes 
in one will be reflected in the other representation. These 
event pattern can be connected to actions (in our case 
triggering questionaires) that are executed when the event 
occurs. These EPL-snippets are pushed to the mobile 
devices along with their corresponding action. Principally 
this enables the researcher to specifiy or adapt his definition 
easily and to push it to the participants' devices immediately 
without changing any source code or adjusting settings. 
C. Interface design to support the analysis of location data 
After a survey has been started and data has been 
received from the users, researchers have to be able to view 
and analyze the collected qualitative and quantitative data. 
To enable this, we built a web-based route viewer (see Fig. 
4), which allows researchers to inspect the routes, the 
participants’ names for those routes, and the respective 
surveys. This enables researchers to comprehend the 
participant’s thoughts on those routes, as participants name 
locations according to what they mean to them personally. 
The locations are managed in the route viewer. The route 
viewer provides a list of participants as shown on the lower 
left. If a participant is selected, all routes for this participant 
are listed to the right with the name designated by the 
participant. If a participant gives the same name to several 
routes, these routes are grouped together, thus facilitating 
the categorization of locations.  
 
    
 
Figure 4. Web based route viewer 
VI. 
EVALUATION 
In order to evaluate the framework, we first conducted a 
test to check the its functionality by defining different 
events and testing whether the respective action is triggered. 
Secondly, we tested the web frontend with researchers to 
find out whether the identified issues were included 
properly.  
A. Technical evaluation 
Within the technical evaluation we equipped four 
students with mobile devices and pre-installed our 
framework. After this we defined several event patterns in 
the backend system. The first pattern was expected to 
trigger when the students were on campus. At first, we did 
not take into consideration that this event would be 
triggered each time a new location measurement is added to 
the CEPE. This resulted in two cases of students being 
prompted to fill out the same survey several times while 
they were present at the university. This was fixed by 
changing the event pattern definition slightly, so that it only 
triggers once a day. Next we defined a more complex event, 
intended to trigger when the student's phone detects a 
certain wi-fi network and switches on the screen of his 
phone. This was used as a way to detect precise in-door 
locations.  This enabled us to define a survey which was 
triggered when the student was in the proximity of our 
offices and using the mobile phone. The problem with this 
approach was that the survey notification was triggered 
directly after the screen was turned on - a time when users 
usually want to accomplish a certain task. It would be 
possible to add a pause time after the event triggers in the 
CEPE, but our visual editor has not supported this feature 
yet. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

B. Content evaluation 
We 
further 
conducted 
a 
first 
content-orientated 
evaluation with five researchers from the field of 
information science and mobile media studies. Having 
introduced them to the framework, we let them use the 
described functions and conducted an interview afterwards 
that lasted about 30 minutes on average. 
The participants confirmed that: (1) the implemented 
framework collects spatial movements in situ and visualizes 
them on a map; (2) Visualization of paths and places helps 
to identify journeys and important places; Further, (3) the 
participants used the annotation feature within the journeys 
performed in order to provide more detailed information 
about the trips conducted.  
The five participants did however also name some 
critical issues: (1) Three of the users stated they would 
appreciate the option to annotate routes later, without the 
need to do it while being on the move. Participants pointed 
out that situations could potentially arise when one is 
pressed for time and therefore it would be more convenient 
to categorize trips later; (2) Further, we gathered initial 
insights into preferences concerning how to visualize trips 
on the map in order to support users in remembering and 
interpreting their mobile practices. Most of the participants 
strongly recommended visualizing single trips instead of 
cumulated routes. The clustering of trips where are 
annotated with the same categories was recommended; (3) 
Finally, participants stated that a time line is important for 
them, to help remember particular trips better. Two of the 
researchers stated their wish to view trips in a chronological 
order and to view trips of selective categories on the same 
timeline. 
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 
In this paper, we argued in favor of mobile user-studies 
as a great approach to foster our understanding of mobile 
behavior. However, current services mostly address spatial 
information as fixed and restricted to longitude and latitude. 
We showed that location-based information is highly 
interwoven into sense-making processes and mobile 
routines. Therefore, mobile user-studies are needed to 
provide answers to how people actually use and interpret 
their performed mobility while actually being on the move.  
In order to inform the design for a framework of mobile 
user-studies, we started with a context study to discover 
ways in which users make sense of spatial information in 
daily mobility. We especially gained insight about three 
requirements that were translated for building the 
framework: 
(1) 
visualization 
of 
movements, 
(2) 
visualization of paths and places, and  (3) integration of 
interpretation spaces. 
The evaluation showed major research issues for the 
future. The organization of trips was particularly stated to 
be a major issue. A future version should therefore be 
designed so as to assign collected content information 
within performed trips on maps that can be seen by both 
researchers and users. Moreover, the route viewer and the 
questionnaire editor are implemented as two separate 
applications. Currently, questionnaire data cannot be shown 
in the route viewer although it has the same access to the 
API. Hence in future we plan to integrate those two 
applications seamlessly.  
The framework is openly and flexibly designed to allow 
researchers manifold options of collecting data on the 
move. Our challenge in the future is to find appropriate 
ways of integrating and making use of empirical data like 
questionnaires, open questions, photos etc. that can be 
selected in connection with a particular trip. Hence we have 
laid the basic groundwork that allows how people actually 
interpret their performed mobility to be studied, as well as 
making use of location-based information while on the 
move. But to answer this question in more detail, our 
second step has to be to build a graphic editor that 
visualizes what the framework can already achieve (by 
using the event pattern language): the integration of routes 
with user-interaction mechanisms.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We like to thank all participants who contributed to the 
study and Rachel Schneider for her suggestions and 
improvements. 
REFERENCES 
 [1] Bolger, N., Davis, A., and Rafaeli, E. Diary Methods: 
Capturing Life as it is Lived. Annual Review of 
Psychology 54, 1 (2003), 579–616. 
[2] Brandt, J., Weiss, N., and Klemmer, S.R. txt 4 l8r  : 
Lowering the Burden for Diary Studies Under Mobile 
Conditions. Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems ’07, ACM New York (2007), 
2303–2308. 
[3] Broll, G., Cao, H., Ebben, P., et al. Tripzoom: an app 
to improve your mobility behavior. Proceedings of the 
11th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Mobile 
and 
Ubiquitous Multimedia, ACM (2012), 57. 
[4] Brown, B.A.T., Sellen, A.J., and O’Hara, K.P. A diary 
study of information capture in working life. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems CHI  ’00, ACM (2000), 438–445. 
[5] Christensen, P., Mikkelsen, M.R., Nielsen, T.A.S., and 
Harder, H. Children, mobility, and space: using GPS 
and mobile phone technologies in ethnographic 
research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, (2011). 
[6] Church, K. and Smyth, B. Understanding mobile 
information 
needs. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, ACM 
(2008), 493–494. 
[7] Cici, B., Markopoulou, A., Frias-Martinez, E., and 
Laoutaris, N. Assessing the Potential of Ride-Sharing 
Using Mobile and Social Data: A Tale of Four Cities. 
(2014). 
[8] Consolvo, S. and Walker, M. Using the experience 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

sampling method to evaluate ubicomp applications. 
IEEE Pervasive Computing 2, 2 (2003), 24–31. 
[9] Dörner, C., Heß, J., and Pipek, V. Fostering user-
developer collaboration with infrastructure probes. 
Information Systems Journal, (2008), 45–48. 
[10] Fortunati, L. The Mobile Phone: Local and Global 
Dimensions. In A Sense of Place. The Global and the 
Local in Mobile Communication. Kristóf Nyíri, Wien, 
2005, 61–70. 
[11] Froehlich, J., Chen, M.Y., Consolvo, S., Harrison, B., 
and Landay, J.A. MyExperience: a system for in situ 
tracing and capturing of user feedback on mobile 
phones. Design, ACM (2007), 57–70. 
[12] Gouveia, R. and Karapanos, E. Footprint Tracker: 
Supporting 
Diary 
Studies 
with 
Lifelogging. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems CHI  ’13, ACM (2013), 2921–
2930. 
[13] Harrison, S. and Dourish, P. Re-place-ing space: the 
roles of place and space in collaborative systems. 
Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, ACM (1996), 
67–76. 
[14] Hasan, S., Zhan, X., and Ukkusuri, S.V. Understanding 
urban human activity and mobility patterns using 
large-scale location-based data from online social 
media. Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGKDD 
International Workshop on Urban Computing, ACM 
(2013), 6. 
[15] Hjorth, L. The place of the emplaced mobile: A case 
study into gendered locative media practices. Mobile 
Media & Communication 1, 1 (2013), 110–115. 
[16] Jones, P., Drury, R., and McBeath, J. Using GPS-
enabled mobile computing to augment qualitative 
interviewing: two case studies. Field methods 23, 2 
(2011), 173–187. 
[17] Kahneman, D., Krueger, A.B., Schkade, D.A., 
Schwarz, N., and Stone, A.A. A survey method for 
characterizing 
daily 
life 
experience: 
the 
day 
reconstruction method. Science 306, 5702 (2004), 
1776–80. 
[18] Kjeldskov, J. and Paay, J. A longitudinal review of 
Mobile HCI research Methods. Proceedings of the 
14th international conference on Human-computer 
interaction with mobile devices and services, ACM 
(2012), 69–78. 
[19] Kose, M., Incel, O.D., and Ersoy, C. Online human 
activity recognition on smart phones. Workshop on 
Mobile Sensing: From Smartphones and Wearables to 
Big Data, (2012), 11–15. 
[20] Kostakos, V., O’Neill, E., Penn, A., Roussos, G., and 
Papadongonas, D. Brief encounters: Sensing, modeling 
and visualizing urban mobility and copresence 
networks. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI) 17, 1 (2010), 2. 
[21] Kracheel, M., McCall, R., Koenig, V., and Engel, T. 
Driver diaries: a multimodal mobility behaviour 
logging 
methodology. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
5th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Automotive 
User 
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 
ACM (2013), 254–257. 
[22] Lathia, N. and Capra, L. How smart is your 
smartcard?: measuring travel behaviours, perceptions, 
and incentives. Proceedings of the 13th international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing, ACM (2011), 
291–300. 
[23] Liu, N., Liu, Y., and Wang, X. Data logging plus e-
diary: towards an online evaluation approach of mobile 
service 
field 
trial. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
12th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, ACM 
(2010), 287–290. 
[24] Meschtscherjakov, A., Wilfinger, D., Osswald, S., 
Perterer, N., and Tscheligi, M. Trip experience 
sampling: assessing driver experience in the field. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular 
Applications, ACM (2012), 225–232. 
[25] Meurer, J., Stein, M., Randall, D., Rohde, M., and 
Wulf, V. Social dependency and mobile autonomy – 
Supporting older adults’ mobility with ridesharing 
ICT. Proceedings of the 2014 ACM annual conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI, ACM, 
(2014). 1923-132.  
[26] Meurer, J., Stein, M., and Wulf, V. Designing 
Cooperation for Sustainable Mobility: Mobile Methods 
in Ridesharing Contexts. COOP 2014-Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on the Design of 
Cooperative Systems, Springer (2014), 345–359. 
[27] Möller, A., Kranz, M., Schmid, B., Roalter, L., and 
Diewald, S. Investigating self-reporting behavior in 
long-term studies. Proceedings of the Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI  ’13, ACM 
(2013), 2931-2940. 
[28] Raubal, M., Winter, S., Teβmann, S., and Gaisbauer, 
C. Time geography for ad-hoc shared-ride trip 
planning in mobile geosensor networks. ISPRS Journal 
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 62, 5 (2007), 
366–381. 
[29] Robinson, M.D. and Clore, G.L. Belief and feeling: 
Evidence for an accessibility model of emotional self-
report. Psychological Bulletin 128, 6 (2002), 934–960. 
[30] Sheller, M. and Urry, J. Mobile Transformations of 
`Public’ and `Private’ Life. Theory, Culture & Society 
20, 3 (2003), 107–125. 
[31] Vergunst, J. Technology and technique in a useful 
ethnography of movement. Mobilities 6, 2 (2011), 
203–219. 
[32] Google 
Location 
History. 
https://maps.google.com/locationhistory. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-417-6
MOBILITY 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

