Design and Implementation of Co-Presence
Transportation for Physical Objects
Lars Fischer
Research Group IT-Security
Business and Information Systems Engineering
University of Siegen. Germany
Email: ﬁscher@wiwi.uni-siegen.de
Julia Dauwe
Operating Systems and Distributed Systems
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Siegen, Germany
Email: julia.dauwe@uni-siegen.de
Abstract—This work introduces a prototype for negotiation-based
routing in co-presence networks. The Physical Object Sneaker
Transport (P.O.S.T.) is aimed at forwarding physical objects
towards their destination using local wireless communication
devices (i. e.,
smartphones) for opportunistic route negotiation.
The combination of existing data communication technology with
the physical world provides not only interesting challenges, but
may also provide novel methods for distributed authentication,
payment systems and social networking. The prototype provides
the basic functionality for further research and development of
protocols and concepts related to spatial, distributed networking
of physical and digital objects.
Keywords–Co-Presence; Opportunistic Routing; Emergence.
I.
INTRODUCTION
We have developed an early prototype to support trans-
portation of physical objects in a purely distributed man-
ner using techniques from co-presence networking [1]. The
general idea of co-presence networking is to exploit spatial
movement of individuals and the occasional contacts between
them to transport objects. A co-presence network is inherently
a distributed network of contact events and unidirectional,
ephemeral links between all participants. The scenario moti-
vates research on a wide array of challenges and opportunities
that emerge from the combination of distributed networking
and corporeal co-presence.
This paper describes the ongoing work on protocol and
prototype development for co-presence based transportation of
physical objects. At this state of the project, the main objective
is to show that routing and communication methods can be
practically developed to enable peer-to-peer transportation of
physical objects. The underlying objective is to provide a ﬁrst
platform that is based on spatial closeness relations and can
prospectively be used to research authentication and payment
in distributed, co-presence networks.
Network infrastructure has reduced the effects of and the
requirements for spatial closeness in many forms of social
interaction. There is, nonetheless, a tight relation between
humans and their spatial and temporal location. Corporeal co-
location generally is still the fundamental mode of interaction
and the key source of social relations. One of the main
objectives is to create an application which utilises spatial
closeness in the digital domain.
The current version of the prototype is a very fundamental
solution for peer discovery, co-presence opportunistic routing
and integration of spatial attributes into the digital domain.
The prototype is able to connect to instances of the prototype
on other devices and negotiate an estimation of the best
carrier, based on manually conﬁgured data about destinations
of participants and objects. It already implements a basic
model to protect location privacy by reducing the amount of
disclosed information on destinations to a necessary minimum.
This paper is organised as follows: Section II introduces
the scenario in the context of related work. In Section III,
the protocol scheme is introduced. Section IV describes the
architecture of our. prototype. A brief test of the functionality
is summarised in Section V. Future work is discussed in
Section VI. The paper is concluded in Section VII.
II.
SCENARIO AND RELATED WORK
The objective of P.O.S.T. is to transport physical — as
opposed to digital — objects on a network of contact events
and movements of physical entities, i. e.,
transport books,
letters and other small goods by passing it to the next person
moving in the right direction. The idea is that mobile devices
establish a co-presence network, discover peers, negotiate
routes and handle security protocols. The concept is compara-
ble to Software Deﬁned Networking, with the distinction that
[2] human participants have to be involved to handle objects
similar to the forwarding layer.
The idea has ﬁrst been published in [3], where we un-
dertook a ﬁrst simulation to show general feasibility of the
idea. But, co-presence networks are well known in the domain
of transportation of digital objects. Transportation of physical
objects otherwise is only found in centralised systems, e. g.,
ride-sharing agencies. Also, analysis shows that the network
formed by encounters is scale-free, and thus can provide
comparatively short paths for transportation [4].
Distributed transportation of physical objects is related to
Delay-Tolerant Networks (DTN) [5]. Research on DTN is
striving to engineer data mules. The objective of P.O.S.T. is
aiming at mules, i. e., the transportation of physical — not only
digital — objects. Known addressing and routing schemes,
for example opportunistic routing [6], can be used to forward
objects towards spatial locations. But also, direct addressing
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Carrier
Candidate
beacon
Discovery
transport offer
packet params
Handshake
Negotiation
Handover
Fig. 1. Protocol Overview
of individual recipients, using probabilistic routing [7] can
be imagined. While research on DTN for digital data is very
well established, transportation of physical objects is, albeit
comparable, rarely considered [8].
Routing decisions in this network are based on predictions
of future location and contacts. This means that personal
information — especially regarding location — has to be
disclosed to peers. Formal models of location privacy pro-
vide techniques to establish a balance between privacy and
efﬁciency [9]. Recent application concepts for contact-based
communication, e. g., MoP-2-MoP [10], already address the
topics of effectiveness and privacy for digital communication.
III.
PROTOCOL SCHEME
This section brieﬂy introduces the four parts of com-
munication of the P.O.S.T.-prototype: Discovery, Handshake,
Negotiation and Handover. Participants then either take the
role of carrier if the considered physical object is in their
custody, or of candidate if not. This section describes the
primary intentions and attributes of the protocol. The ﬁnal
communication standard is still under development.
The Discovery of devices that are P.O.S.T.-enabled is im-
plemented by beacon messages. During the initial Handshake
the candidate decides whether the attributes of an object,
e. g.,
weight, dimensions, safety and security requirements,
are agreeable by the user. The Routing Negotiation generates a
decision about the optimal next carrier based on commitments
to itineraries or destinations of participants and objects. The
ﬁnal Handover signiﬁes the transfer of custody of physical
objects. (See Figure 1).
A. Discovery
The main obstacle for device discovery is to synchronise
remote devices within a brief physical link duration [11].
Discovery of P.O.S.T.-enabled devices — in its current imple-
mentation — makes use of the Bluetooth Service Discovery
Protocol (SDP). Bluetooth has been chosen, because it is wide
available in smartphones. Every device subsequently alternates
between actively scanning for devices or waiting for incoming
connections. Waiting time is randomized by a parametrized
amount. A P.O.S.T.-service is recognised if a connection on a
common Universally Unique IDentiﬁer (UUID) is established.
An established connection is then handed over to the
Handshake protocol below.
B. Handshake
An existing connection, i. e., the communication socket, is
used for the handshake protocol. Both communication partners
take on the role of carrier for all carried objects and the role
of candidate for the objects carried by the partner. Starting
with the client of the connection at ﬁrst taking the role of
carrier, a carrier sends descriptive data about carried object
to the candidate. The data currently includes dimensions and
weight of objects. This data explicitly excludes information
on the objects or carriers destination which is exchanged only
during negotiation.
The candidate then decides whether it is generally accept-
able to carry this object. A negative decision ends the protocol
for the current object. A positive decision lets both partners
enter the route negotiation, described below, for this object.
C. Route Negotiation
Route Negotiation describes the part of the protocol where
the decision which of two partners will carry a given physical
object onwards from the contact event. The protocol adheres
to three principles to thwart attacks. The ﬁrst principle is that
the partner not holding the object must disclose his destination
before the destination of the object is revealed. This order of
disclosure makes sinkhole attacks more difﬁcult. The second
principle states that the ﬁnal decision is made by the current
carrier of an object. The current carrier is entrusted with
custody of the object and already in the position to misuse this
trust. The third principle demands that no partner will reveal
movement predictions and destinations with a higher precision
than the partner.
In the ﬁrst message of the negotiation, the candidate
discloses a current prediction of future movement to the
current carrier. The precision of this spatial information is
reduced to a deﬁned degree to protect the user’s privacy. The
current prototype implements a prediction of the direction of
movement which is cloaked by calculating a cone with a user-
deﬁned opening angle. The orientation of the cone is selected
uniformly at random from all orientations that contain the
original direction within the cone.
The current carrier of an object then decides whether the
partner is moving closer to the destination than himself, not
moving closer to the destination, or whether he cannot decide
deﬁnitely. The ﬁrst two outcomes lead to the termination of
the routing negotiation with either a handover of the object
following, or not. The third outcome of the decision leads to
a request for higher precision sent to the partner not holding
the object. The partner may now decide whether he accepts
lower location privacy by calculating a new cone, contained
within the previous cone which has a smaller opening angle. If
a partner is not willing to increase precision of his movement
prediction, the negotiation is terminated with a negative result.
D. Handover
In the event of a positive routing decision, the object
is handed over to the candidate. Handover is the only part
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

of the protocol where participants have to be involved. The
current handover consist of the transfer of data describing the
physical object to the new carrier, i. e.,
dimensions, weight
and precise destination. The transfer has to be acknowledged
by both involved users. Only if the acknowledgements are
communicated, the respective database entries are updated,
meaning the former carrier deletes his entry on the object while
the new carrier adds an entry to his database.
E. Location Privacy Protection Mechanism
One objective in the route negotiation protocol is to reduce
the amount of disclosed information of future destinations of
participants to a necessary minimum. The Location Privacy
Protection Mechanism (LPPM) [9] utilised here is obfuscation
by reducing the precision of destination predictions exchanged
with the communication partner. The current prototype im-
plements destination as geodetic location, which is used to
calculate the direction of predicted movement from the location
of the current contact event.
To reduce the amount of disclosed information the protocol
does not exchange the precise direction but a cone opening
towards the direction of predicted movement. The opening
angle of the cone is used as a measure of the precision of
the disclosed information, i. e., the LPPM privacy parameter.
The direction of the cone is chosen uniformly at random in
a way that guarantees that the precise direction is included
within the cone. It is further speciﬁed, that both participants
disclose information with the same precision, emphasising the
equality of both partners in the exchange.
Negotiation is initiated with a user-determined wide open-
ing angle and successively reduced if, based on the disclosed
cone, no decision can be reached. The prototype ensures that
the opening angle is never reduced below a minimum privacy
level as deﬁned by the user. The result of a routing decision,
based on a disclosed cone thus has a ternary result. If, ﬁnally,
the minimum privacy level of either of the participants is
reached with no deﬁnite result who the best carrier for a given
object is, the object is left with the current carrier.
As the chosen privacy level is controlled by the user, the
project is not yet able to determine to what degree the LPPM
is reduces the quality of routing decisions. This topic is an
interesting part of future analysis of the whole socio-technical
system.
IV.
PROTOTYPE
The project has implemented a prototype for the an-
droid operating system that provides the core functionality of
P.O.S.T., namely peer discovery, routing negotiation, handover,
as well as a related database and a user interface.
The architecture is an extension of the model-view-
controller (MVC) primitives [12], introducing a separate user
service. The common primitives are represented by database,
main service (dæmon) and User Interface (UI). Figure 2pro-
vides a structured view on the main components of the
prototype.
User Service and Database are combined into the model-
component and provide the complete state of the local system,
Main Service
Main Activity
Database
User
Service
Worker
Thread
Routing
Service
Geometry
Protocol
Accept
Connect
Device
List
Package
List
Fig. 2. Prototype Architecture
which contain the user’s intentions, including privacy conﬁgu-
rations. Within the database currently carried objects and data
on the communication status of known devices are stored. In
the future, the database will be extended to contain data to
authenticate users and handle handover receipts. The idea is
to utilise semantic vocabularies and methods to improve the
integration into the physical world.
Main Service and Main Activity are structured following
android implementation recommendations. A Worker Thread
within the Main Service handles discovery of devices and runs
through necessary handshakes alternately using Accept and
Connect subroutines to establish communication. The routing
process is then handled by an additional Routing Service
in order to allow for concurrency, supported by necessary
Geometry and Protocol instances. The Main Activity provides
views on known devices and carried objects to the user, as well
as providing the conﬁguration interface to the User Service.
V.
TEST RESULTS
The project executed some primary tests that veriﬁed that
the prototype provides the intended functionality. Tests where
executed as a small ﬁeld test with ﬁve individuals carry-
ing P.O.S.T.-enabled smartphones simulating multiple contact-
events at a crossing. We tested that communication between
devices takes place and that routing negotiation produces the
expected results. It could not yet be tested whether objects are
indeed propagated over multiple hops.
For the current state of the prototype, the main problem
seems to be peer discovery. During the tests with multiple
devices, only a fraction of the present devices were positively
identiﬁed as P.O.S.T.-enabled. Repeated laboratory tests iden-
tiﬁed mismatched accept- and connect-phases of the discovery
protocol. Results from Nayebi and Karlson [11] suggest that
the accept-time must adhere to the physical link duration in
pedestrian situations.
The tests further identiﬁed usability of the prototype as one
of the main obstacles for its success. The participants were
dissatisﬁed with manual enrolment of objects. The sugges-
tions hinted towards better automated support for selection of
participant destination, object destination and identiﬁcation of
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

objects during handover. It was further deemed unsatisfactory,
that the objects where handed over to “strangers” without any
receipt.
VI.
FUTURE WORK
The main contribution of the prototype is to provide the
context to a rich selection of challenges. Distributed net-
working in a co-presence world may be natural for human
interaction, but it poses very fundamental problems for digital
devices. On the other hand, the research community does not
seem to have used the advantages and attributes of spatial
closeness for security related operations, e. g.,
validation of
identities for authentication.
Among the base communication problems, the peer-
discovery is the most urgent problem to solve. The Bluetooth-
solution seems to be a dead-end in this respect, but common
mobile devices lack a dedicated channel usable for peer
discovery. There seem to be two different approaches to be
followed here: improving multi-channel communications, i. e.,
protocols to manage hand-overs from discovery to communi-
cation mediums and the exploration of unusual communication
mediums, e. g.,
utilisation of ultrasound or light, depending
on circumstances.
The routing scheme must be extended to realistic routing
based on road maps. In the next iteration, routing on combined
address-spaces, e. g., symbolic, personal and geodetic, will be
incorporated. Symbolic representations, i. e., names of places,
are better known to users, but the actual destination of an object
usually is an individual person or organisation. Distributed
transportation may provide a way to reach even mobile desti-
nations of physical objects, the so-called probabilistic-routing
might be utilised within P.O.S.T..
To enable the routing in this context, a precise prediction
of future movements of an individual are fundamental. The
main hindrance probably is the computational cost attached to
predictive heuristics. It is nowadays common for individuals
to provide precise predictions while using navigation soft-
ware, but a person rarely uses navigation under every day
circumstances on known territory. The project intends to use
or develop algorithms that detect and exploit regularly visited
locations for predictions.
The remaining area of research where the prototype pro-
vides a motivating and enabling platform is the wide ﬁeld of
physical security. We identify a need to physically secure the
objects against damage and theft. We further require secure
proof-of-work schemes to allow for payment or reputation
systems. Further, without authenticity, there can be no account-
ability for lost objects and no penalty for stolen goods.
The project intends to use the prototype to research ways
to exploit spatial closeness for authentication and the estab-
lishment of reputation. It has been shown by others, that
spatial closeness and social relation are in correlation to each
other [13]–[16].
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper introduced a protocol and prototype for trans-
portation of physical objects on co-presence networks that
are still under development. The P.O.S.T. prototype provides
the basic functionality for minimum-angle routing on geodetic
coordinates. This paper discussed a list of areas for research
that are opened up by the scenario and whose development is
supported by the prototype.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the student team that did
most of the implementation work, in alphabetical order: Patrick
Brooks, Johannes Hees, Heinz K. Hiekman, Julian Huperts,
Marius M¨uller, and Niels Stahlhut.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Zhao, “Toward a taxonomy of copresence,” Presence: Teleoper.
Virtual Environ., vol. 12, no. 5, October 2003, pp. 445–455.
[2]
H. Kim and N. Feamster, “Improving network management with soft-
ware deﬁned networking,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 51,
no. 2, February 2013, pp. 114–119.
[3]
L. Fischer, M. Heupel, and D. Kesdogan, “Evolving logistics: Physical-
objects sneaker transport (post),” in 8. GI/KuVS-Fachgespr¨ach Ortsbe-
zogene Anwendungen und Dienste, M. Werner and J. Roth, Eds., 2011,
pp. pp. 192ff.
[4]
V. Kostakos, E. O’Neill, A. Penn, G. Roussos, and D. Papadogkonas,
“Brief encounters: Sensing, modeling and visualizing urban mobil-
ity and copresence networks,” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.,
vol. 17, no. 1, 2010.
[5]
Y. Zhu, B. Xu, X. Shi, and Y. Wang, “A survey of social-based
routing in delay tolerant networks: Positive and negative social effects,”
Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 1, First 2013, pp.
387–401.
[6]
L. Song and D. F. Kotz, “Evaluating opportunistic routing protocols
with large realistic contact traces,” in In Proc. ACM 2nd Workshop on
Challenged Networks (CHANTS ’07), pp 35–42, 2007.
[7]
A. Lindgren, A. Doria, and O. Schel´en, “Probabilistic routing in inter-
mittently connected networks,” LNCS Service Assurance with Partial
and Intermittent Resources, vol. 3126, 2004, pp. pp. 239–254.
[8]
A. Voyiatzis, “A survey of delay-and disruption-tolerant networking
applications,” Journal of Internet engineering, vol. 5, no. 1, 2012.
[9]
R. Shokri, G. Theodorakopoulos, J.-Y. Le Boudec, and J.-P. Hubaux,
“Quantifying location privacy,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, Oakland, CA, USA, 2011.
[10]
M. Senftleben, M. Bucicoiu, E. Tews, F. Armknecht, S. Katzenbeisser,
and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Mop-2-mop – mobile private microblogging,” in
Proceedings of Financial Cryptography and Data Security 2014, 2014.
[11]
A. Nayebi and G. Karlsson, “Beaconing in wireless mobile networks,”
in proceeding of: Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence, 2009, ser. IEEE Xplore, 05 2009.
[12]
T. Reenskaug, “The model-view-controller (mvc) its past and present,”
University of Oslo Draft, 2003.
[13]
J. Cranshaw, E. Toch, J. Hong, A. Kittur, and N. Sadeh, “Bridging
the gap between physical location and online social networks,” in
Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference on Ubiquitous
computing, ser. Ubicomp ’10.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp.
pp. 119–128.
[14]
S. Pan, D. Boston, and C. Borcea, “Analysis of fusing online and
co-presence social networks,” in Pervasive Computing and Commu-
nications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on, March 2011, pp. pp. 496–501.
[15]
L. Backstrom, E. Sun, and C. Marlow, “Find me if you can: Im-
proving geographical prediction with social and spatial proximity,” in
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web,
ser. WWW ’10.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, April 26–30 2010, pp.
pp. 61–70.
[16]
D. Liben-Nowell, J. Novak, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, and A. Tomkins,
“Geographic routing in social networks,” PNAS, vol. 102, no. 33,
August 2005, pp. pp. 11 623–11 628.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

