New Scheduler with Call Admission Control (CAC) for IEEE 802.16 Fixed with
Delay Bound Guarantee
Eden Ricardo Dosciatti
GETIC-NATEC-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Pato Branco - Parana - Brazil
Email: edenrd@utfpr.edu.br
Walter Godoy Jr.
NATEC-CPGEI-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Curitiba - Parana - Brazil
Email: godoy@utfpr.edu.br
Augusto Foronda
DAELN-NATEC-UTFPR
Federal University of Technology
Curitiba - Parana - Brazil
Email: foronda@utfpr.edu.br
Abstract—The IEEE 802.16 Working Group is developing a
standard for broadband wireless access in Metropolitan Area
Networks (MAN) known as WiMAX. One of the features of
the MAC layer, in this standard, is that it is designed to
provide differentiated servicing for trafﬁc with multimedia
requirements. Based on these assumptions, and considering
that the standard does not specify a scheduling algorithm,
a new scheduler with call admission control was proposed
based on Latency-Rate (LR) server theory and with system
characteristics as speciﬁed by the system standard using
the WirelessMAN-OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing) air interface. The proposed scheduling algorithm
calculates the time frame (TF) in order to maximize the
number of stations allocated in the system while managing
the delay required for each user. Properties of this proposal
have been investigated theoretically and through simulations.
A set of simulations is presented with both Constant Bit Rate
(CBR) and Variable Bit Rate (VBR) trafﬁc, and performance
comparisons are made between cases with different delays and
different TFs. The results show that an upper bound on the
delay can be achieved for a large range of network loads, with
bandwidth optimization.
Keywords-IEEE 802.16; scheduling algorithm; delay bound;
optimization; Call Admission Control (CAC).
I. INTRODUCTION
The deployment of high-speed Internet access is often
cited as a challenge for the second decade of this century.
Known as broadband Internet, it is effective in reducing
physical barriers to the transmission of knowledge, as
well as transaction costs, and is fundamental in fostering
competitiveness.
However,
wired
access
to
broadband
Internet has a very high cost and is sometimes unfeasible,
since the investment needed to deploy cabling throughout
a region often outweigh the service provider’s ﬁnancial
gains. One of the possible solutions in reducing the
costs of deploying broadband access in areas where such
infrastructure is not present is to use wireless technologies,
which require no cabling and reduce both implementation
time and cost [1].
This was one of the motivations behind the development
by
the
IEEE
(Institute
of
Electrical
and
Electronics
Engineers) of a new standard for wireless access, called
802.16 [2], also known as Worldwide Interoperability for
Microwave Access (WiMAX). It is an emerging technology
for next generation wireless networks which supports a
large number of users, both mobile and nomadic (ﬁxed),
distributed across a wide geographic area.
Motivated by the growing need for ubiquitous high-speed
access, wireless technology is an option to provide a
cost-effective solution that may be deployed quickly and
easily, providing high bandwidth connectivity in the last
mile. However, despite the many advantages of wireless
access networks, such as low deployment and maintenance
costs, ease of conﬁguration and device mobility, there are
challenges that must be overcome in order to further advance
the widespread use of this type of network.
To achieve this purpose, the IEEE 802.16 standard
introduces of a set of mechanisms, such as service classes
and several coding and modulation schemes that adapt
themselves according to channel conditions. However, the
standard leaves open certain issues related to network
resource management and scheduling algorithms.
This paper presents a new scheduler with admission
control of connections to a WiMAX Base Station (BS). We
developed an analytical model based on Latency-Rate (LR)
server theory [3], from which an ideal frame size, called
Time Frame (TF), was estimated, with guaranteed delays
for each user. At the same time, the number of stations
allocated in the system is maximized. In this procedure,
framing overhead generated by the MAC (Medium Access
Control) and PHY (Physical) layers was considered when
calculating the duration of each time slot. After developing
this model, a set of simulations is presented for constant
bit rate (CBR) and variable bit rate (VBR) streams, with
performance comparisons between situations with different
delays and different TFs. The results show that an upper
limit on the delay may be achieved for a wide range of
network loads, thus optimizing bandwidth.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, a brief description of the IEEE 802.16 standard
is presented. Our analytical model of packet scheduling is
proposed and explained in Section III. Evaluation of the
139
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

capacity of the new scheduler with Call Admission Control
(CAC) is shown in Section IV. Conclusions are in Section
V.
II. THE IEEE 802.16 STANDARD
A. Overview of Fixed WiMAX
The basic topology of a IEEE 802.16 network includes
two entities that participate in the wireless link: Base
Stations (BS) and Subscriber Stations (SS), as shown in
Figure 1.
Figure 1.
IEEE 802.16 Network Architecture
The BS is the central node, responsible for coordinating
communication and providing connectivity to SSs. BSs are
kept in towers distributed so as to optimize network coverage
area, and are connected to each other by a backhaul network,
which allows SSs to access external networks or exchange
information between themselves.
Networks based on the IEEE 802.16 standard can be
structured in two schemes. In PMP (Point-to-MultiPoint)
networks, all communication between SSs and other SSs
or external networks takes place through a central BS node.
Thus, trafﬁc ﬂows only between SSs and the BS (see Figure
1). In Mesh mode, SSs communicate with each other without
the need for intermediary nodes; that is, trafﬁc can be routed
directly through SSs. Thus, all stations are peers which can
act as routers and forward packets to neighboring nodes.
This article only considers the PMP topology.
The communication between a BS and SSs occurs in two
different channels: uplink (UL) channel, which is directed
from SSs to the BS, and downlink (DL) channel, which
is directed from the BS to SSs. DL data is transmitted
by broadcasting, while in UL access to the medium is
multiplexed. UL and DL transmissions can be operated in
different frequencies using Frequency Division Duplexing
(FDD) mode or at different times using Time Division
Duplexing (TDD) mode.
In TDD, the channel is segmented in ﬁxed-size time slots.
Each frame is divided into two subframes: a DL subframe
and an UL subframe. The duration of each subframe is
dynamically controlled by the BS; that is, although a frame
has a ﬁxed size, the fraction of it assigned to DL and
UL is variable, which means that the bandwidth allocated
for each of them is adaptive. Each subframe consists of a
number of time slots, and thus both the SSs and the BS
must be synchronized and transmit the data at predetermined
intervals. The division of TDD frames between DL and UL
is a system feature controlled by the MAC layer. Figure
2 shows the structure of a TDD frame. In this paper,
the system was operated in TDD mode with the OFDM
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) air interface,
as determined by the standard.
Figure 2.
IEEE 802.16 Frame Structure
Figure 3 shows an example OFDM frame structure in
TDD mode. As seen earlier, each frame has a DL subframe
followed by a UL subframe. In this structure, the system
supports frame-based transmission, in which variable frame
lengths can be adopted. These subframes consists of a ﬁxed
number of OFDM symbols. Details of the OFDM symbol
structure may be found in [1].
Figure 3.
OFDM Frame Structure with TDD
The DL subframe starts with a long preamble (two
OFDM symbols) through it the SSs can synchronize with
the network and check the duration of the current frame.
Instantly after DL long preamble, the BS transmits the Frame
Control Header (FCH), which consists of an OFDM symbol
and is used by SSs to decode the MAC control messages
transmitted by BS.
140
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

The UL subframe consists in contention intervals for
initial ranging and bandwidth request purposes and one or
several UL transmission bursts, each from a different SSs.
The initial ranging slots allow an SS to enter the system,
by adjusting its power level and frequency offsets and by
correcting its timing offset. Bandwidth request slots are used
by SSs to transmit bandwidth request headers.
Two
gaps
separate
the
DL
and
UL
subframes:
the
Transmit/Receive
Transition
Gap
(TTG)
and
Receive/Transmit
Transition
Gap
(RTG).
These
gaps
allow the BS to switch from the transmit to receive mode,
and vice versa.
B. Related Research
Since the standard only provides signaling mechanisms
and no speciﬁc scheduling and admission control algorithms,
some scheduling algorithms have been proposed to provide
QoS (Quality of Service) for WiMAX. However, many of
these solutions only address the implementation or addition
of a new QoS architecture to the IEEE 802.16 standard. A
scheduling algorithm decides the next packet to be served
on the waiting list and is one of the mechanisms responsible
for distributing bandwidth among several streams.
In [5], a packet scheduler for IEEE 802.16 uplink
channels based on an hierarchical queue structure was
proposed. A simulation model was developed to evaluate the
performance of the proposed scheduler. However, despite
presenting simulation results, the authors overlooked the
fact that the complexity of implementing this solution is
not hierarchical, and did not deﬁne clearly how requests
for bandwidth are made. In [7], authors proposed a QoS
architecture to be built into the IEEE 802.16 MAC sublayer,
which signiﬁcantly impacts system performance, but did
not present an algorithm that makes efﬁcient use of
bandwidth. In [8], authors presented a simulation study of
the IEEE 802.16 MAC protocol operating with an OFDM
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) air interface
and full-duplex stations. They evaluated system performance
under different trafﬁc scenarios, varying the values of a
set of relevant system parameters. Regarding data trafﬁc,
it was observed that the overhead due to the physical
transmission of preambles increases with the number of
stations. In [9], a polling-based MAC protocol is presented
along with an analytical model to evaluate its performance.
They developed closed-form analytical expressions for cases
in which stations are polled at the beginning or at the end
of uplink subframes. It is not possible to know how the
model may be developed for delay guarantees. Finally, in
[10], the author presents a well-established architecture for
QoS in the IEEE 802.16 MAC layer. The subject of this
work is the component responsible for allocating uplink
bandwidth to each SS, although the decision is taken based
on the following aspects: bandwidth required by each SS for
uplink data transmission, periodic bandwidth needs for UGS
ﬂows in SSs and bandwidth required for making requests for
additional bandwidth.
Considering the limitations exposed above, these works
form the basis of a generic architecture, which can be
extended and specialized. However, in these studies, the
focus is in achieving QoS guarantees, with no concerns for
maximizing the number of allocated users in the network.
This paper presents a scheduler with admission control
of connections to the WiMAX BS. We developed an
analytical model based on Latency-Rate (LR) server theory
[3], from which an ideal frame size called Time Frame
(TF) was estimated, with guaranteed delays for each user
and maximization of the number of allocated stations in the
system. A set of simulations is presented with CBR and
VBR streams and performance comparisons are made for
different delays and different TFs. The results show that an
upper bound on the delay may be achieved for a large range
of network loads with bandwidth optimization.
III. ANALYSIS OF THE ANALYTICAL MODEL
A. System Description
Figure 4 illustrates a wireless network operating the newly
proposed scheduler with call admission control, which is
based on a modiﬁed LR scheduler [3] and uses the token
bucket algorithm. The basic approach consists on the token
bucket limiting input trafﬁc and the LR scheduler providing
rate allocation for each user. Then, if the rate allocated by
the LR scheduler is larger than the token bucket rate, the
maximum delay may be calculated.
Figure 4.
Wireless Network with New Scheduler
The behavior of an LR scheduler is determined by two
parameters for each session i: latency θi and allocated rate
ri. The latency θi of the scheduler may be seen as the
worst-case delay and depends on network resource allocation
parameters. In the new scheduler with call admission control,
the latency θi is a TF period, which is the time needed to
transmit a maximum-size packet and separation gaps (TTG
and RTG) of DL and UL subframes. In the new scheduler,
considering the delay for transmitting the ﬁrst packet, the
latency θi of is given by
141
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

θi = TT T G + TRT G + TDL + TUL + Lmax,i
R
(1)
where TT T G and TRT G are DL and UL subframes gaps
durations, TDL and TUL are the DL and UL subframes
duration, Lmax,i is the maximum packet size and R is the
outgoing link capacity.
Now, we show how the allocated rate ri for each session
i may be determined, and how to optimize TF in order to
increase the number of connections accommodated with Call
Admission Control (CAC).
B. CAC Description
An LR scheduler can provide a bounded delay if the
input trafﬁc is shaped by a token bucket. A token bucket
[1] is a non-negative counter which accumulates tokens at
a constant rate ρi until the counter reaches its capacity σi.
Packets from session i can be released into the queue only
after removing the required number of tokens from the token
bucket. In an LR scheduler, if the token bucket is empty,
arriving packets are dropped; however, our model ensures
that there will always be tokens in the bucket and that no
packets are dropped, as described in Section IV. If the token
bucket is full, a maximum burst of σi packets can be sent to
the queue. When the ﬂow is idle or running at a lower rate
as the token size reaches the upper bound σi, accumulation
of the tokens will be suspended until the arrival of the next
packet. We assume that the session starts out with a full
bucket of tokens. In our model, we consider IEEE 802.16
standard overhead for each packet. Then, as we will show
below, the token bucket size will decreased by both packet
size and overhead.
The application using session i declares the maximum
packet size Lmax,i and required maximum allowable delay
Dmax,i, which are used by the WiMAX scheduler to
calculate the service rate for each session so as to guarantee
required delay and optimize the number of stations in the
network. Incoming trafﬁc passes through a token bucket
inside the user terminal during an interval, as shown in
Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Input Trafﬁc with Token Bucket
This passage of data trafﬁc by the token bucket is bounded
by
Ai(t) ≤ σi + ρit
(2)
where σi is the bucket size and ρi is the bucket rate.
Then, the packet is queued in the station until it is
transmitted via the wireless. Queue delay is measured as
the time interval between the receipt of the last bit of a
packet and its transmission. In the new scheduler with call
admission control, queuing delay depends on token bucket
parameters, network latency and allocated rate. In [3], it is
shown that if input trafﬁc is shaped by a token bucket and the
scheduler allocates a service rate ri , then an LR scheduler
can provide a bounded maximum delay Di:
Di ≤ σi
ri
+ θi − Lmax,i
ri
(3)
where ri is the service rate, σi is the token bucket size, θi
is the scheduler latency, Lmax,i is the maximum size of a
package. σi
ri +θi − Lmax,i
ri
is the bound on the delay Dbound.
Equation (3) is an improved bound delay for LR
schedulers. Thus, the token bucket rate plus the overhead
transmission rate must be smaller than the service rate to
provide a bound on the delay. The upper bound delay Dbound
should be smaller or equal to the maximum allowable delay:
σi
ri
+ θi − Lmax,i
ri
≤ Dmax,i
(4)
Therefore, three different delays are deﬁned. The ﬁrst is
the maximum delay Di, the second is the upper bound on
the delay Dbound and the third is the required maximum
allowable delay Dmax,i. The relation between them is Di ≤
Dbound ≤ Dmax,i.
So, the delay constraint condition of the new scheduler is
(σ′
i−L′
max,i)T F
r′
iT F −∆R+L′
max,i
+T F +
L′
max,i
R
+TT T G+TRT G≤Dmax,i
(5)
where
σ′
i
is
the
token
bucket
size
with
overhead,
L′
max,i is the maximum size of a packet with overhead
(preamble+pad), TF is the time frame, r′
i is the rate
allocated by the server with overhead, R is the outgoing
link capacity, TT T G is the gap between downlink and uplink
subframes, TRT G is the gap to between uplink and downlink
subframes, Dmax,i is the maximum allowable delay and ∆
is the sum of initial ranging and BW request, which is the
uplink subframe overhead. Physical rate, maximum packet
size and token bucket size are parameters declared by the
application. However, TF and total allocated service rate
must satisfy Equation (5).
Figure 6 shows a frame structure with TDD allocation
formulas as described by Equation (5). Physical rate,
maximum packet size and token bucket size are parameters
142
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Figure 6.
Frame structure with TDD allocation formulas of Equation (5)
declared by the application. However, TF and total allocated
service rate must satisfy Equation (5).
Equation (6) is the second constraint condition to TF and
service rate. Token bucket rate plus the rate to transmit
overhead and a maximum-size packet must be smaller than
the service rate to place a bound on delay. Thus, the second
constraint condition is
ρi + ∆R + L′
max,i
TF
≤ r′
i
(6)
where ρi is the bucket rate, ∆ is the uplink subframe
overhead, R is the outgoing link capacity, L′
max,i is the
maximum packet size with overhead, TF is the time frame
and r′
i is the rate allocated by the service with overhead.
Previous schedulers do not provide any mechanism to
estimate the TF needed to place a bound on delay or to
maximize the number of stations, because each application
requires a TF without the use of criteria to calculate the
time assigned to each user. TF estimation is important
because a small TF reduces maximum delay, but increases
overhead at the same time. On the other hand, a large TF
decreases overhead, but increases delay. Therefore, we must
calculate the optimal TF to allocate the maximum number
of users under these both constraint. The maximum number
of users is achieved when the service rate for each user is
the minimum needed to guarantee the bound on the delay
Dbound. Different optimization techniques may be used to
solve this problem. In this study, we have used a step-by-step
approach, which does not change the scheduler’s essential
operation. We start with a small TF, for example, 2.5ms,
calculate r′
i and repeat this process every 0.5ms until we
ﬁnd the minimum r′
i that satisﬁes both equations.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
To analyze the IEEE 802.16 MAC protocol behavior with
respect to the new scheduler with call admission control,
this section presents numerical results obtained with the
analytical model proposed in the previous section. Then,
with a simulation tool, the proposed analytical model is
validated by showing that the bound on the maximum
delay is guaranteed. In this section, two types of delays
are treated: required delay, in which the user requires the
maximum delay, and the guaranteed maximum delay, which
is calculated with the analytical model.
A. Calculation of Optimal Time Frame
All PHY and MAC layer parameters used in simulation
are summarized in Table I.
Table I
PHY and MAC parameters
PARAMETER
VALUE
Bandwidth
20MHz
OFDM Symbol Duration
13,89 µs
Delay
5 / 10 / 15 and 20 ms
∆ (Initial Ranging and BW Request) →
125,10 µs
9 OFDM Symbols
TTG + RTG → 1 OFDM Symbol
13,89 µs
UL Subframe (preamble + pad) →
1,39 µs
10% OFDM Symbol
Physical Rate
70 Mbps
DL Subframe
1% TF
Performance of the new scheduler with call admission
control is evaluated as the delay requested by the user and
assigned stations. Station allocation results, in the system
with an optimal TF, limited by the delay requested by the
user, are described in sequence. The ﬁrst step is deﬁne token
bucket parameters, which are estimated in accordance with
the characteristics of incoming trafﬁc and are listed on Table
II.
Table II
Token bucket parameters
Audio
VBR video
MPEG4 video
Token Size (bits)
3000
18000
10000
Token Rate (kb/s)
64
500
4100
Thus, the optimal TF value is estimated according to the
PHY and MAC layer’s parameters (see Table I), token bucket
parameters (see Table II), required maximum allowable
delay, physical rate and maximum package size.
The graph in Figure 7 shows the optimal TF value, for
four delay values required by users (5, 10, 15 and 20 ms).
Figure 7.
Optimal TF
143
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Next, we show the number of SSs assigned to each
trafﬁc type. As an example, Figure 8 show that when the
user-requested delay is of 20 ms, an optimal TF of 15 ms
is calculated and 50 users can be allocated for audio trafﬁc,
or 30 users for VBR video trafﬁc, or 13 users for the MPEG4
video trafﬁc.
Figure 8.
Number of subscriber stations for 20 ms of delay
Two important observations from Figure 8 should be
highlighted:
1) With a requested delay of 20 ms, we cannot choose
a TF of less than 15 ms, since the restrictions placed
by Equation (5) (which regards delay) and Equation
(6) (which regards the token bucket) are not respected
and thus no bandwidth allocation guarantees exist.
2) We also cannot choose a TF greater than 15 ms, even
though it complies with Equations (5) and (6) with
respect to guaranteed bandwidth, because there will
be a decrease in the number of users allocated to each
trafﬁc ﬂow due to increase of the delay.
The same philosophy holds true for other delay values of
5, 10 and 15 ms.
B. Guaranteed Maximum Delay
In this article, only UL trafﬁc is considered. To test
the new scheduler’s performance, we have carried out
simulations of an IEEE 802.16 network consisting of a BS
that communicates with eighteen SSs, with one trafﬁc ﬂow
type by SS and the destination of all ﬂows being the BS.
In this topology, six SSs transmit on-off CBR audio trafﬁc
(64 kb/s), six transmit CBR MPEG4 video trafﬁc (3.2 Mb/s)
and six transmit VBR video trafﬁc. Table III summarizes the
different types of trafﬁc.
On Figure 9, with an optimal TF of 3 ms and an
user-requested delay of 5 ms, the average guaranteed
maximum delay for audio trafﬁc is 1.50 ms. For VBR video
Table III
Description of the different trafﬁcs
Node
Application
Arrival Period
Packet size
Sending rate
(ms)
(max) (bytes)
(kb/s) (mean)
1 → 6
Audio
4.7
160
64
7 → 12
VBR video
26
1024
≈ 200
13 → 18
MPEG4 video
2
800
3200
trafﬁc, whose packet rate is variable, the average maximum
delay is 1.97 ms. For MPEG4 video trafﬁc, the average
maximum delay is 2.00 ms.
Figure 9.
Maximum Guaranteed Delay
C. Comparison with other Schedulers
The new scheduler with call admission control, here
called New Scheduler, was compared to those of [9], here
called Scheduler_1, and [5], here called Scheduler_2. The
comparison was accomplished through the ability to allocate
users in a particular time frame (TF). Table IV shows the
parameters used for comparisons.
Table IV
Parameters used for comparisons
PARAMETER
Scheduler_1
Scheduler_2
Bandwidth
20 MHz
20 MHz
OFDM symbol duration
13.89 µs
13.89 µs
Time Frame (TF)
5 ms
10 ms
Delay Requested by the user
0.12 ms
20 ms
Maximum Data Rate
70 Mbps
70 Mbps
Trafﬁc type
Audio
Audio
In the graph of Figure 10, we compare the New Scheduler
with the Scheduler_1. A maximum delay of 0.12 ms was
requested by the user, and the duration of each frame (TF)
was set at 5 ms. Other parameters are listed in Table IV. In
comparison, the New Scheduler allocates 28 users in each
frame, while the Scheduler_1, allocates 20 users. Thus, the
New Scheduler presents a gain in performance of 40% when
compared with the Scheduler_1.
In the graph of Figure 11, we compare the New Scheduler
with the Scheduler_2. A maximum delay of 20 ms was
requested by the user, and the duration of each frame (TF)
was set at 10 ms. Other parameters are listed in Table IV.
144
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

Figure 10.
Comparison of allocation of users with Scheduler_1
The comparison was extended by also considering frame
duration values of 7.00 ms, 8.00 ms and 9.00 ms to
demonstrate the efﬁciency of the New Scheduler. For a
TF of 10 ms, the New Scheduler allocates 41 users in
each frame, while the Scheduler_2 allocates only 33 users.
This represents 24.24% better performance for the New
Scheduler. Similarly, the New Scheduler also allocates more
users per frame in comparison with the Scheduler_2 for all
other frame duration values.
Figure 11.
Comparison of allocation of users with Scheduler_2
V. CONCLUSION
This work has presented the design and evaluation of a
new scheduler with call admission control for IEEE 802.16
ﬁxed networks, that guarantees different maximum delays
for trafﬁc types with different QoS requisites and optimizes
bandwidth usage. Firstly, we developed an analytical model
to calculate an optimal TF, which allows an optimal number
of SSs to be allocated and guarantees the maximum delay
required by the user. Then, a simulator was developed to
analyze the behavior of the proposed system.
To validate the model, we have presented the main
results obtained from the analysis of different scenarios.
Simulations were performed to evaluate the performance of
this model, demonstrating that an optimal TF was obtained
along with a guaranteed maximum delay, according to
the delay requested by the user. Thus, the results have
shown that the new scheduler with call admission control
successfully limits the maximum delay and maximizes the
number of SSs in a simulated environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank all the researchers at the Advanced Nucleous
of Communication Technology at UTFPR.
REFERENCES
[1] A.
Gosh,
D.
Wolter,
J.
Andrews,
and
R.
Chen,
“Broadband wireless access with WiMAX/802.16: current
performance benchmarks and future potential,” In IEEE
Communications,
v.
43(2),
Feb.
2005,
pp.
129-136,
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2005.1391513.
[2] IEEE
802.16-2004,
“IEEE
Standard
for
Local
and
Metropolitan
Area
Networks
-
Part
16:
Air
Interface
for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE Std.,
Rev. IEEE Std802.16-2004, Oct. 2004.
[3] D. Stiliadis, and A. Varma, “Latency-Rate Servers: A General
Model for Analysis of Trafﬁc Scheduling Algorithms,” In
IEEE-ACM Transactions on Networkink, v. 6, Oct. 1998, pp.
611-624, doi:10.1109/90.731196.
[4] E. R. Dosciatti, W. Godoy Jr., and A. Foronda, “A New
Scheduler for IEEE 802.16 with Delay Bound Guarantee,”
The Sixth International Conference on Networking and
Services (ICNS 2010), Cancun, Mexico, v. 1, Mar. 2010, pp.
150-155, doi:10.1109/ICNS.2010.27.
[5] K. Wongthavarawant, and A. Ganz, “Packet Scheduling for
QoS Support in IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access
Systems,”
In
Internacional
Journal
of
Communications
Systems, v. 16, Feb. 2003, pp. 81-96, doi:10.1002/dac.581.
[6] C. Hoymann, “Analysis and performance evaluation of
the OFDM-based metropolitan area network IEEE 802.16,”
In Computer Networks, v. 49, Oct. 2005, pp. 341-363,
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2005.05.008.
[7] G. Chu, D. Wang, and S. Mei, “A QoS architecture
for the MAC protocol of IEEE 802.16 BWA system,”
In
IEEE
Conference
on
Communications,
Circuits,
and
Systems,
v.
1,
Jun./Jul.
2002,
pp.
435–439,
doi:10.1109/ICCCAS.2002.1180654.
[8] C. Cicconetti, A. Erta, L. Lenzini, and E. Mingozzi,
“Performance Evaluation of the IEEE 802.16 MAC for QoS
Support,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing - TMC07,
v. 6, Jan. 2007, pp. 26–38, doi:10.1109/TMC.2007.250669.
[9] R.
Iyengar,
P.
Iyer,
and
B.
Sikdar,
“Delay
Analysis
of
802.16
Based
Last
Mile
Wireless
Networks,”
Global
Telecommunications
Conference
- GLOBECOM’05 - IEEE, v. 5, Dec. 2005, pp 1-5,
doi:10.1109/GLOCOM.2005.1578332.
[10] S. Maheshwari, “An Efﬁcient QoS Scheduling Architecture
for IEEE 802.16 Wireless MANs,” Master Degree, K R
School of Information Technology, Bombay, India, Jan. 2005.
145
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

