VVID: A Delay Tolerant Data Dissemination Architecture for VANETs Using
V2V and V2I Communication
Koosha Paridel, Yolande Berbers
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium
Email: {koosha.paridel, yolande.berbers}@cs.kuleuven.be
Josip Balen, Goran Martinovic
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
J. J. Strossmayer University of Osijek
Osijek, Croatia
Email: {josip.balen, goran.martinovic}@etfos.hr
Abstract—Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) have
a highly dynamic network topology due to the constant
and rapid movement of vehicles. Therefore, communica-
tion in VANETs is mostly affected with disruptions and
delays as a result of network disconnections and partitions.
Moreover, increasing the geographical coverage area for
data dissemination while keeping the data-delivery delay
low is a challenge. This paper ﬁrst surveys the routing
techniques in Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs), and also
the usage of DTN communication in VANETs. Then, the
paper proposes a combined architecture of Vehicle-to-Vehicle
(V2V) communication, DTN communication, and Vehicle-
to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication as a large-scale data
dissemination system for vehicular networks. We argue that
the combined architecture enables data dissemination in a
larger geographical area compared to a V2V communication
model, and efﬁciently deals with disconnectivity and network
partitions that mostly occurs in sparse networks.
Keywords-VANET; DTN; V2V Communication; V2I Com-
munication.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless communication in Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks
(VANETs) enables information exchange between vehicles
(V2V communication) and between vehicles and road-
side infrastructure (V2I communication). Since vehicles
are moving, network topology is constantly changing.
Therefore, VANETs are highly dynamic and have most
characteristics of Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks (MANETs)
[1]. However, VANETs behave in different ways than
conventional MANETs, since vehicle movements are con-
strained by roads and mobility patterns can be predicted
to some extent. Furthermore, vehicles have different char-
acteristics than conventional nodes in MANETs. There are
numerous applications in the domain of VANETs and they
can be used for different purposes like improving safety
(accident avoidance, incident notiﬁcation), improving driv-
ing (congestion monitoring, parking space allocation) and
commercial services (business, entertainment).
Our current work, described in [2], optimizes commu-
nication in VANETs with context-based grouping mech-
anism based on common spatio-temporal characteristics
(location, direction, speed and time) and shared interests.
Each group is represented by vehicles with special re-
sponsibilities that specify which context information can
be distributed inside the group and between the groups.
The large-scale simulated experiments show that our
context-based grouping mechanism signiﬁcantly reduces
the overall network trafﬁc usage, irrelevant and redundant
information ﬂow and the processing overhead.
Our experiment on very large-scale realistic trafﬁc data
shows that despite the beneﬁts of group-based commu-
nication, there is still a considerable number of vehicles
that are far away from the crowded areas and are not in
contact with other vehicles. These vehicles form single-
vehicle groups and while they are disconnected from the
rest of the trafﬁc, they cannot participate in the propagation
of information. These vehicles can come in contact with
other vehicles later on, but they lose all the information
propagated during their disconnection.
Taking advantage of temporary connections to propa-
gate information is the focus of delay-tolerant communica-
tion. A delay-tolerant network is composed of nodes with
bidirectional links together. These links may disconnect
and connect as a result of mobility or failure. When
two nodes are connected, they have the opportunity to
exchange data. In a delay-tolerant communication system,
nodes, instead of only receiving and forwarding the infor-
mation, also save the information in a buffer to exchange it
later on, when they come in contact with other nodes. This
model is usually referred to as the store-carry-forward
model. This characteristic of the delay-tolerant communi-
cation matches with what our group-based communication
is lacking. Adding delay-tolerant communication capabil-
ity helps our current system to increase its information
propagation coverage to less crowded areas where there is
very limited connection.
The contribution of the paper is a hybrid architecture
called VVID that combines V2V, V2I, and Delay Tol-
erant Network (DTN) communication models in order
to address the current issues in vehicular communication
such as geographical scalability, information coverage in
sparse networks, and smart and timely dissemination of
information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes the routing techniques in DTNs. In Section III,
we survey recent work in the area of DTN communication
in VANETs. In Section IV, we propose and describe a
hybrid architecture for the efﬁcient data dissemination in
VANETs that combines V2V, V2I and DTN communica-
tion models. Section V concludes the paper.
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

II. ROUTING TECHNIQUES IN DTNS
As mentioned in [3], DTNs are often described with
various phrases, such as eventual, partially, intermittently
or transient connected networks, opportunistic networking,
and space-time routing. All aforementioned terminologies
are used to describe a network where end-to-end con-
nectivity is not assumed and communication is affected
with disruptions and delays as a result of network dis-
connections and partitions. The best example of DTNs
are MANETs since nodes in such networks are usually
moving and network structure is constantly changing. To
overcome all mentioned shortcomings, efﬁcient routing
protocols are required. As described in [3], based on
network time-evolving topology they can be categorized
as routing protocols for deterministic or stochastic time-
evolving networks. If all future topologies of the net-
work are completely known or predictable then deter-
ministic routing can be applied. There are three different
approaches: (i) Space time routing; (ii) Tree approach;
and (iii) Modiﬁed shortest path approach. They are all
based on modeling the dynamics of the network as a
space-time graph or tree and then selecting the ﬁnal path
depending on requirements (shortest time or minimum
number of hops). In dynamic networks, where network
behavior is random, future network topology is unknown
and cannot be predictable. Therefore, to deliver packets
from source to destination routing protocols for stochastic
time-evolving networks should be applied. There are ﬁve
different approaches:
• Epidemic routing-based approach [4], [5], [6], [7]:
The classic example is to ﬂood the message through
the network. However, this approach is very costly
and can cause network congestion. Another example
is to deliver message only when source and des-
tination are within communication range. Although
this approach has minimal overhead, the delay is
often very long. The best results are obtained with
approaches that are trade-off between these two ex-
treme examples. Another example is spray routing.
The idea is to ﬁrst unicast sprayed packet to a node
close to destination and afterwards multicast trafﬁc
within the vicinity of the last-known location of
the destination. Furthermore, by adding relay nodes
between source and destination routing performances
can be signiﬁcantly improved.
• History or predication-based approach [8], [9]: In this
approach the link forwarding probability is estimated
based on the one-hop or end-to-end information.
Nodes can interrogate each other to learn more about
network topology and nodal capacity to make intelli-
gent routing decisions. One-hop information is usu-
ally obtained by exchanging the information between
two nodes when they meet. The selection of the next
hop can be based on the various metrics, such as:
spatial location, bandwidth, relative velocity/mobility
between two nodes, vicinity of the candidate, capa-
bility of the candidate and data transmission time.
• Model based approach [10]: It is based on modeling
motion patterns of mobile nodes for a better selection
of relaying nodes and a determination of receiver’s
location without ﬂooding the network. For example,
in VANETs, the two mostly used vehicle trafﬁc
models are: highways and city trafﬁc models.
• Node movement control-based approach [11] [12]:
Controlling node mobility can improve overall system
performance. There are different ways to control
node mobility such as modifying nodes trajectories,
using virtual mobile nodes that travel through the
network and collect and deliver messages, controlling
the mobility of autonomous agents, using Message
Ferries (single or multiple) to provide communication
services for nodes in the network, using snake and
runners protocols and using DataMules.
• Coding based approach [13], [14]: Erasure coding
and network coding techniques are used in this
approach. In erasure coding technique an original
message is encoded into a large number of coding
blocks but can be decoded if smaller number of
blocks is received. With this technique worst case
delay can be signiﬁcantly improved. In network cod-
ing, intermediate nodes, instead of simply forwarding
the packets they receive, can combine some received
packets and send them out as a new packet. By using
this technique, packet delivery ratio could be much
higher.
III. DTN COMMUNICATION IN VANET
There are several works that apply DTN routing tech-
niques in VANETs. Yang and Chuah [15] presented Ferry
Based Interdomain Multicast Routing Scheme (FBIMR) in
DTNs where ferries are used to deliver multicast messages
across groups that are partitioned. They are investigating
how different buffer sizes, numbers of ferries and ferry
speeds impact on the delivery performance in VANETs.
They concluded that by increasing the buffer size (from
1000 to 2500 packets) the delivery ratio is improved
but the average delay is increased and data efﬁciency is
decreased. Furthermore, when the packet rate is higher
than 1 pkt/s delivery ratio is signiﬁcantly increased and
delay is decreased. With increasing the ferry speed from
15 m/s to 30 m/s delivery ratio is much higher and delay
is lower.
Zhao et al. propose an infrastructure-to-vehicles data
dissemination system with a buffering mechanism to
increase the data dissemination coverage [16]. In their
system, there are several data centers installed along a
road. These data centers periodically broadcast data to
the vehicles along the road. This procedure is called Data
Pouring (DP). The vehicles that receive a broadcast, buffer
the data and re-broadcast it in the intersections. Therefore,
the system covers not only the road covered with data
centers, but also the intersecting roads. The authors call
this mechanism as DP with Intersection Buffering (DP-
IB).
VADD
(Vehicle-Assisted
Data
Delivery
in
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

VANET) [17] adopts the idea of store-carry-forward
communication model to deal with the intermittent
connectivity in VANETs. Moreover, VADD tries to
predict the mobility of the vehicles in order to forward
packets to the best route with the lowest data delivery
delay. In VADD, vehicles store and carry the information,
and forward them in the intersections. Based on the
technique used for road selection at the intersections,
the authors propose three different VADD protocols,
and evaluate them in terms of packet-delivery ratio, data
packet delay and trafﬁc overhead.
DV-CAST [18] is a vehicular broadcast protocol that
aims to address both the broadcast storm problem [19] and
the disconnected network problem, in order to build a sys-
tem that works efﬁciently in dense and sparse network ar-
eas. DV-CAST consists of three main components, namely
neighbor detection, broadcast suppression, and store-carry-
forward mechanisms. Neighbor detection mechanism pro-
vides the local connectivity information, and on the basis
of this information, broadcast suppression mechanism or
store-carry-forward mechanism is used to deal with the
dense or the sparse network situations respectively. DV-
CAST is evaluated only in highway scenarios and the
authors are planning to extend their solution to urban
environments as well.
SRD [20] is a dissemination protocol for VANETs,
which employs different strategies for dense and sparse
networks. SRD uses broadcast suppression techniques
in dense networks, in order to avoid the broadcast
storm problem. In sparse networks, SRD uses store-carry-
forward communication model, in order to take advantage
of the mobility of the nodes, and disseminate information
in parts of the network that are geographically sepa-
rated. The authors show through simulations that SRD
outperforms DV-CAST [18] in terms of delivery ratio and
network trafﬁc overhead.
GeoDTN+Nav [21] is another hybrid routing protocol,
which combines geographic routing and DTN forwarding.
In dense or connected VANETs it uses geographic routing
and routes packets in two modes: greedy and perimeter
mode. It is able to estimate network partition and then
improves packet delivery by switching to the DTN mode.
Furthermore, authors propose Virtual Navigation Interface
(VNI) that provides generalized route information in order
to choose forwarders in partitioned networks. Performance
evaluation shows that GeoDTN+Nav outperforms con-
ventional geographic protocols in packet delivery ratio.
However, the tradeoff is an increased delivery delay.
Bitaghsir and Hendessi [22] proposed an intelligent
routing protocol for DTNs, which is similar to the
GeoDTN+Nav protocol presented in [21]. For the dense
or connected VANETs they both use the same geographic
routing. However, for the delay tolerant forwarding the
intelligent routing protocol considers other useful param-
eters in order to choose the best node for storing and
carrying the packets. Furthermore, the genetic algorithm
is used to train the DNT node evaluation system and
to determine how important each parameter is in the
simulation environment. Performance evaluation results
show that each new generation of parameters obtained by
the genetic algorithm decreases the average delivery delays
and increases average delivery ratio.
GeoSpray [23] is a hybrid geographic routing protocol
that takes advantages of multiple-copy and single-copy
routing schemes. First it performs ”control spraying” by
distributing a limited number of bundle copies to the
network nodes that go closer (and/or arrive sooner) to the
bundle destination. Afterwards, it switches to a forwarding
scheme where it combines several control data sources to
perform routing decisions. In the end, in order to improve
resource utilization, it clears delivered bundles across the
network nodes. Performance measurement results show
that it improves the delivery probability and reduces
delivery delay, comparing with the other multiple-copy
and single-copy routing schemes.
While the mentioned systems use DTN communication
to cover the sparse areas of network, none of these systems
provide a solution for communication in geographically
large vehicular networks. The simulations are done in
areas with dimensions of a few kilometers, and the number
of vehicles is limited to a few hundred. In order to
cover geographical areas with dimensions of hundreds
of kilometers, one cannot only rely on multihop V2V
communication, as it increases the propagation delay,
decreases the delivery ratio, and imposes heavy overhead,
since the vehicles must buffer many messages, keep them
for a log period and carry them for large distances.
IV. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND PROPOSED SOLUTION
In our previous work [2], we took advantage of the
network of vehicles, and used this ad hoc network in order
to disseminate important information among vehicles. We
evaluated our mechanism using simulations. We measured
parameters such as network trafﬁc, message delivery effort
and relevancy of the delivered information. However,
we encountered several limitations while evaluating our
mechanism using simulations. For example, it was not
possible to simulate large datasets because it requires
considerable amount of time, resources and computational
power. Furthermore, due to the lack of a global view over
the ad hoc networks, it is difﬁcult to analyze the structure
of the groups and their connectivity in the network using
simulation.
Therefore, we developed a tool using Prolog for analysis
of vehicular ad hoc networks. This tool receives the traces
of movements of the vehicles for a certain time period as
an input. On the basis of the logic of a routing protocol,
our tool measures the desired network parameters. By
using our tool, we can now measure the number of
groups at each snapshot of the time. We also measure
parameters such as the average number of vehicles in each
group, the number of connections between the groups,
the shortest paths between groups and the graph diameter
of the network. An important contribution of this work
is the ability to analyze a potentially large network with
a massive number of vehicles such as a VANET. In our
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

experiment, we use a real-life vehicular dataset [24] with
260,000 vehicles recorded over a period of 24 hours.
An important observation during the analysis of a large-
scale vehicular network was the existence of many single
vehicles at each snapshot. These single vehicles are the
ones that are moving in sparse parts of the network, and
do not have any connection to the rest of the vehicles
in the network. These vehicles can later on move into
the denser areas and come in contact with other vehicles.
However, these vehicles lose the opportunity of obtaining
some important information while they are not connected
to the rest of network.
The intermittently connected nature of vehicular net-
works requires a communication mechanism that can
tolerate disconnectivities and delays more than the con-
ventional IP delays. This is the main motivation behind
delay tolerant communication. We believe that adding
delay tolerant communication capability to our system can
improve the coverage of information dissemination, and
prevents losing important information caused by tempo-
rary disconnectivities.
We deﬁne a set of requirement for a data dissemination
system in vehicular networks:
• Coverage of Information: We want to disseminate
information to as many vehicles as possible, in a
large geographical area of hundreds of kilometers,
including areas with low density of vehicles.
• Timeliness: Fast dissemination of urgent information
in a matter of seconds. Certain types of information
such as reports of an accident or a hazard must be
disseminated quickly in the few-kilometer vicinity of
the incident.
• Smart
Dissemination:
Disseminate
information
based on the interest of vehicles. Prevent the dissem-
ination of irrelevant information.
• Minimal infrastructure: The system must use as
less infrastructure as possible. Infrastructure costs
money, and is a point of failure, in contrast with
infrastructure-less systems that are mostly cheap and
more fault tolerant.
We propose an architecture for data dissemination in
vehicular networks to address the above requirements. The
architecture uses V2V communication, DTN communica-
tion, and V2I communication, combined together to build
!"#$%&'$(&)*+,#$
-.*.$/#0*#,$
-.*.$/#0*#,$
/#0*,.1$
-.*.2.3#$
45).1$
%+6#,$
45).1$
%+6#,$
7.&0$85.9$
Figure 1. Main elements of the proposed architecture for data
dissemination in vehicular networks.
a system that can cover a big geographical area, handle
disconnections and communication disruptions, and dis-
seminate urgent information with a small delay. Figure 1
shows a simpliﬁed overview of our proposed architecture.
We summarize the tasks of the three communication
models used in our architecture as follows:
• V2V Group-based communication
– Share urgent information: In case of emer-
gency, such as reporting an accident, the vehicles
use V2V communication to propagate the infor-
mation in their vicinity, up to a certain hop limit
(e.g., 10 hops). Therefore, the urgent messages
are propagated with the lowest delay in a limited
geographical area (see Figure 2a).
– Relay other information towards data centers:
Vehicles use V2V communication to relay non-
urgent information towards data centers, so that
the data centers can store them in the central
database (see Figure 2b).
• DTN communication
– Buffer received data: Vehicles store the re-
ceived information in their buffers (see Fig-
ure 2c), and keep the buffer up-to-date by re-
moving the old information.
– Exchange in case of contact with other ve-
hicles: When vehicles come in contact with
each other, they compare each others buffer, and
exchange the information that each vehicle is
missing. Thus, the vehicles that are disconnected
from the network of vehicle have the chance
to receive the disseminated information with a
delay (see Figure 2d).
• V2I communication
– Store the data collected by vehicles: Data
centers receive the propagated information in the
network of vehicles and store them in the central
database (see Figure 2e).
– Rebroadcast in other data centers based on
the area of relevance: Depending on the con-
text, the stored information in the database can
be rebroadcasted by the other centers, in other
geographical areas (see Figure 2f).
In the VVID architecture, there are several data centers
installed along the main highways that are all connected to
a central database. These data centers do not have to cover
the whole highway. They are only placed at speciﬁc parts
of the highways with major trafﬁc ﬂow. When the vehicles
move into the covered area of a data center, they can
communicate with the data center and share information.
The vehicles can also communicate together and share
information without using the data center, according to our
multi-hop group-based data dissemination protocol [2].
Moreover, the vehicles can buffer data to form a history of
the recent information they have received. In sparse parts
of the network, there are not enough vehicles to form
a connected network of vehicles, and therefore, multi-
hop communication is not effective without a store-carry-
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

!"#$%&'$(%)*&+),-$.#/-)&01213&
(a) Urgent information dissemination.
!"#$%&'()*+,$-*(&.*&/$.$&0"(."+1&
(b) Relay messages towards data centers.
!"#$%&'$($)*$+&,-.-&
(c) Buffering newly received messages.
!"#$%&'()*%+%),-.&)/.&+%#+))
(d) History exchange upon contact with
other vehicles.
!"#$%&'#((%)"%*&+,",&-./01&
(e) Sending messages from vehicles to
data centers.
!"#$%&'(&)*+,-+%*."$+/&*&+0"-*"$)+
(f) Broadcasting the collected data in
other data centers.
Figure 2. The combination of V2V, V2I and DTN communication model used in VVID architecture.
forward technique. In the sparse areas, vehicles exchange
their received information history with other vehicles upon
contact, in order to disseminate information to the vehicles
that are disconnected from the rest of the network.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Efﬁcient data dissemination in vehicular networks is a
challenge. A desired dissemination system must propagate
urgent information in a timely manner, cover a large
geographical area, cover the sparse part of the network,
and prevent the propagation of irrelevant information. We
propose a hybrid architecture for efﬁcient data dissemi-
nation in vehicular networks called VVID that combines
V2V, V2I and DTN communication models, in which
pure V2V communication is used to propagate urgent
information, a combination of V2V and V2I is used to
propagate information in a large geographical area, and
DTN communication to cover the sparse parts of network.
As future work, we will evaluate the proposed system
in terms of network trafﬁc, delivery delay, and relevance
of information using simulation with realistic vehicular
traces.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Toor, P. Muhlethaler, and A. Laouiti, “Vehicle ad hoc
networks: applications and related technical issues,” Com-
munications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 74
–88, quarter 2008.
[2] K. Paridel, T. Mantadelis, A.-U.-H. Yasar, D. Preuveneers,
G. Janssens, Y. Vanrompay, and Y. Berbers, “Analyzing
the efﬁciency of context-based grouping on collaboration
in vanets with large-scale simulation,” Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, vol. 3, pp. 1–16,
May 2012.
[3] Z. Zhang, “Routing in intermittently connected mobile
ad hoc networks and delay tolerant networks: overview
and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 24–37, 2006.
[4] A. Vahdat and D. Becker, “Epidemic routing for partially-
connected ad hoc networks,” Duke University, Tech. Rep.
CS-200006, Apr. 2000.
[5] M. Grossglauser and D. N. C. Tse, “Mobility increases the
capacity of ad hoc wireless networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 477–486, Aug. 2002. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2002.801403
[6] D. Nain, N. Petigara, and H. Balakrishnan, “Integrated
routing
and
storage
for
messaging
applications
in
mobile ad hoc networks,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 9,
no. 6, pp. 595–604, Dec. 2004. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1035715.1035720
[7] F. Tchakountio and R. Ramanathan, “Tracking highly
mobile
endpoints,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
4th
ACM
international
workshop
on
Wireless
mobile
multimedia,
ser.
WOWMOM
’01.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2001,
pp.
83–94.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/605991.606003
[8] M. Musolesi, S. Hailes, and C. Mascolo, “Adaptive routing
for intermittently connected mobile ad hoc networks,” in
Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Symposium
on World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks,
ser. WOWMOM ’05.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2005, pp. 183–189. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WOWMOM.2005.17
[9] C.-C. Shen, G. Borkar, S. Rajagopalan, and C. Jaikaeo,
“Interrogation-based relay routing for ad hoc satellite net-
works,” in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2002.
GLOBECOM ’02. IEEE, vol. 3, nov. 2002, pp. 2920 – 2924
vol.3.
[10] Z. D. Chen, H. Kung, and D. Vlah, “Ad hoc relay
wireless networks over moving vehicles on highways,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM international symposium on
Mobile ad hoc networking & computing, ser. MobiHoc ’01.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2001, pp. 247–250. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/501449.501451
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[11] S. Dolev, S. Gilbert, N. A. Lynch, E. Schiller, A. A.
Shvartsman, and J. L. Welch, “Virtual mobile nodes for
mobile ad hoc networks,” in in DISC04, 2004, pp. 230–
244.
[12] R. C. Shah, S. Roy, S. Jain, and W. Brunette, “Data
mules: Modeling a three-tier architecture for sparse sensor
networks,” in In IEEE SNPA Workshop, 2003, pp. 30–41.
[13] S. Jain, M. Demmer, R. Patra, and K. Fall, “Using
redundancy to cope with failures in a delay tolerant
network,” in Proceedings of the 2005 conference on
Applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for
computer communications, ser. SIGCOMM ’05.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 109–120. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1080091.1080106
[14] Y. Wang, S. Jain, M. Martonosi, and K. Fall, “Erasure-
coding based routing for opportunistic networks,” in
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM workshop on
Delay-tolerant networking, ser. WDTN ’05.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 229–236. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1080139.1080140
[15] P. Yang and M. Chuah, “Efﬁcient interdomain multicast
delivery in disruption tolerant networks,” in Mobile Ad-
hoc and Sensor Networks, 2008. MSN 2008. The 4th
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 81–88.
[16] J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and G. Cao, “Data pouring and buffer-
ing on the road: A new data dissemination paradigm for
vehicular ad hoc networks,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 3266–3277, 2007.
[17] J. Zhao and G. Cao, “Vadd: Vehicle-assisted data delivery
in vehicular ad hoc networks,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1910–1922, 2008.
[18] O. Tonguz, N. Wisitpongphan, and F. Bai, “Dv-cast: A
distributed vehicular broadcast protocol for vehicular ad
hoc networks,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 47–57, 2010.
[19] Y. Tseng, S. Ni, Y. Chen, and J. Sheu, “The broadcast storm
problem in a mobile ad hoc network,” Wireless networks,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 153–167, 2002.
[20] R. S. Schwartz, R. R. R. Barbosa, N. Meratnia, G. Heijenk,
and H. Scholten, “A directional data dissemination protocol
for vehicular environments,” Comput. Commun., vol. 34,
no. 17, pp. 2057–2071, Nov. 2011.
[21] P.-C.
Cheng,
K.
C.
Lee,
M.
Gerla,
and
J.
H¨arri,
“Geodtn+nav: Geographic dtn routing with navigator pre-
diction for urban vehicular environments,” Mobile Networks
and Applications, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 61–82, 2010.
[22] S. A. Bitaghsir and F. Hendessi, “An intelligent routing pro-
tocol for delay tolerant networks using genetic algorithm,”
in Smart Spaces and Next Generation Wired/Wireless Net-
working, 11th International Conference, NEW2AN 2011,
and 4th Conference on Smart Spaces, Proceedings, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6869.
Springer,
2011, pp. 335–347.
[23] V. Soares, J. Rodrigues, and F. Farahmand, “Geospray:
A geographic routing protocol for vehicular delay-tolerant
networks,” Information Fusion (to appear), 2012.
[24] V. Naumov, R. Baumann, and T. Gross, “An evaluation
of inter-vehicle ad hoc networks based on realistic vehic-
ular traces,” in Proceedings of the 7th ACM international
symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing.
ACM, 2006, pp. 108–119.
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

