Situation-based Energy Management System 
Seung-Won Lee 
Future IT Convergence Lab 
LG Electronics Advanced Research Institute 
Seoul, Korea 
seung.lee@lge.com 
Minkyung Cho 
Future IT Convergence Lab 
LG Electronics Advanced Research Institute 
Seoul, Korea 
minkyung.cho@lge.com 
Se Heon Choi 
Future IT Convergence Lab 
LG Electronics Advanced Research Institute 
Seoul, Korea 
ruben.choi@lge.com 
Jungsu Lee 
Future IT Convergence Lab 
LG Electronics Advanced Research Institute 
Seoul, Korea 
jungsu.lee@lge.com
Abstract—Energy related technology such as Smart Grid has 
become one of the main interests in modern industry. Deciding 
whether to supply or store energy by predicting the amount of 
energy consumption rate is the core technology in Smart Gird. 
In this paper, we present a situation-based prediction (SBP) 
system that not only utilizes user’s usage history data but also 
makes use of the user’s situation that is derived from various 
sensor data. According to our experiment, situation-based 
prediction system has about four times better performance 
compared to the time-based prediction system which solely 
relies on user’s usage history.  
 Keywords-situation; context; energy; Bayesian Networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A large number of researches have been done on energy 
management system. At the initial stage, most of the systems 
were based on simple rule-based system and have evolved to 
use some contexts (e.g., location) to predict whether more 
power will be required or not [1][2].  
However, most of these context-aware prediction systems 
are based on simple sensor data and past usage history. Past 
usage history is not sufficient to detect unordinary conditions 
and sensor data can only distinguish simple circumstance 
unless we draw a meaningful significance from those sensor 
data. 
We anticipate that the next stage of energy management 
system is to understand the gathered contexts and derives 
meanings from them. In our system, we call it a situation. 
One possible way to analyze and derive situation from 
contexts is to use probabilistic network such as Bayesian 
networks (BNs), also called belief networks, Bayesian belief 
networks, which are widely used to model uncertain and 
complex domains [3]. Our situation-based prediction (SBP) 
system is based on this Bayesian Network, where a cell 
phone acting as a main device loaded with BN. Cell phone 
gathers contexts from itself along with other electronic 
devices at home or office (e.g., TV, light, PC) and uses these 
contexts as evidence for running Bayesian Network [4]. The 
main idea of situation based prediction system is to keep 
track of user’s energy consumption rate based on user’s 
situation. We believe recording and analyzing situation can 
eventually tell user’s life pattern and adjust the energy 
management system to specific user or group of users.  
This paper is about our research and development of 
situation-based prediction algorithm for energy management 
system and its potential benefit compared to other energy 
prediction systems.  
The organization is as follows: Section 2 starts with the 
definition of the term “Situation”. Section 3 explains the 
process of gathering and utilizing the usage history data 
associated with situation. Section 4 covers retrieval and 
application of feedback data. Section 5 gives a short 
description of the experiment, and Section 6 presents the 
advantage of situation-based prediction system. Lastly, we 
present our conclusion along with possible future works. 
II. 
DEFINITION OF SITUATION 
We define situation as interpretation of various sensor 
data. Sensor can be any device that can give information 
(context). For example, heater and air conditioner can tell us 
the temperature of that area. Motion detector, light sensor 
can present the location of the users in that area. Situation is 
derived by analyzing these raw sensor data.  
One sample situation can be “Sleeping at room”. This 
situation can be derived by using time, light sensor, and other 
electronic equipments in room. If light sensor and other 
electronic equipments are off and the time is late at night, we 
can assume that the user is sleeping or about to get to sleep. 
In our system, we classified 5 different situations; Sleeping, 
Watching TV, Eating, Working, and Resting. In addition, the 
system detects user movement to decide whether to derive 
the situation or not, since all 5 situations we classified occur 
while user staying in one position. The sensors we have used 
to derive situation were personal cell phones, TVs, lights, 
and personal computers. 
III. 
RECORDING AND PREDICTING ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
RATE 
SBP records user’s energy consumption rate every two 
hours. However, if the system detects that user is moving, it 
36
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

does not react until the user’s movement is finished. We 
defined moving as a movement from one isolated place to 
another isolated place. For instance, moving from a living 
room to a dining room would be considered as moving, 
whereas a movement within the living room is not. When 
recording user’s energy consumption rate, SBP first derive 
the current situation in probabilistic matter by running the 
Bayesian network. A sample result of running the network 
can be: Sleeping (87%), Watching TV (50%), Eating (10%), 
Working (15%), and Resting (60%). We only record the 
highest probable situation which would be “Sleeping” in this 
case and the amount of consumed energy at that point. In 
order to derive reliable data, we only record the situation and 
the consumed energy amount only if the probability is higher 
than 75%. Once a pair of situation and amount of consumed 
energy data is collected, we store these data to the database 
which is composed of time slot, average amount of 
consumed energy and the number of occurrence. Each 
situation has its own database table. (Fig. 1)  
The number of occurrence data is used to update the 
average amount of consumed energy and to apply feedback 
data which will be discussed in Section 5. When an update 
occurs, we increase the number occurrence by one, and 
update the average amount of consumed energy. (Fig. 2)  
 
Figure 1.  Database table for each situation 
 
Figure 2.  Calculating average amount for each situation  
One subtle issue in the system is to decide when to derive 
a situation. As we mentioned above, the SBP detection 
occurs every two hours, when no user movement is found. 
We believe energy consumption rate varies if user moves 
from place to place. For example, move to dining room to 
watch TV, move to kitchen to cook, etc. Therefore, if user 
movement is detected, the system waits until user settles at 
certain place. However, if the system urgently needs the 
energy prediction rate, it forecasts the next possible situation 
by comparing the “Occurrence” field of each situation 
database. For example, if current time is 2:00 AM, the 
system retrieves the occurrence field of “2~4 AM” from each 
database and selects the one that has the highest number. 
Since the main object of our experiment was to compare 
situation-based prediction to time-based prediction, the 
system tries to detect the movement of the user every two 
hours. We are also considering deriving a situation whenever 
a user movement is detected regardless of time. In this way, 
the size of the situation database will decrease by one twelfth 
but may require more updates if user frequently moves from 
place to place.  
Once the database is filled with enough data, the system 
utilizes these data to predict user’s energy consumption rate. 
We believe the prediction accuracy increases as the size of 
the database grows and converges at certain point. 
Discovering the convergence point would require an 
experiment in real world. As for now, we gathered a month 
period data before prediction. 
Following are the two steps that SBP uses to predict the 
amount of energy consumption rate. 
1) SBP first runs the Bayesian network and derives the 
current situation by picking the highest probable situation. 
Since the probability threshold is set to 75%, SBP does not 
give its prediction value if the probability is less than 75%. 
37
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

When a tie occurs on situations, although it rarely happens, 
we randomly pick one situation. 
2) Once a situation is selected, the system retrieves the 
database of the selected situation, and gets the average 
amount of consumed energy of the current time slot. For 
example, if current time is 12:30AM and selected situation 
is “Sleeping”, the system retrieves energy consumption data 
of “0-2 AM” from “Sleeping” database for its final 
prediction rate. 
IV. 
APPLYING FEEDBACK DATA 
As we mentioned before, SBP is based on probabilistic 
network such as Bayesian Network and is used to discover 
user’s current situation. In addition to discovering situation, 
we built a separate database that keeps track of energy 
consumption rate. Once the system gives its prediction, it 
observes the actual amount of consumed energy. The 
difference between the actual amount of consumed energy 
and the predicted amount is used as the feedback data, and 
affects future prediction.  
In our system, there are two kinds of feedback data, 
positive feedback and negative feedback. We call it a 
positive feedback when the predicted consumption rate is 
higher than actual consumption rate and negative feedback is 
the opposite where predicted amount is less than the actual 
one. 
 
Figure 3.  Applying Feedback Data 
After receiving the feedback data, we reflect this data to 
our future prediction by dividing the difference between the 
predicted amount and the actual amount by the number of 
data we have used to draw our prediction (# of occurrence). 
For example, let’s say the current situation is “Watching TV” 
and the received feedback is +110 KW (predicted amount = 
550 KW, actual amount = 440 KW, number of occurrence = 
10). We divide 110 KW by 10 which give us 11 KW and 
then subtract this number from our prediction amount. In 
other words, our next prediction amount of that situation at 
that time slot will be 539 KW instead of 550 KW while the 
number of occurrence remains as 10. (Fig 3)  
The feedback data we have mentioned above are only 
used to modify the prediction amount of consumed energy. 
In addition to that, we also allow user to give feedback to the 
derived situation. The Situation-Based Prediction system 
makes it prediction assuming the derived situation is accurate. 
However, the accuracy of the Bayesian Network is not 
always 100% and needs to adjust its network to a specific 
user or a group of users. Since cell phone is working as a 
main device by actually running the Bayesian Network. 
Whenever a situation is derived (once every two hour), the 
cell phone outputs the resulting situation and asks whether 
the situation is correct or not. This feedback data is only used 
to reinforce the Bayesian Network. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 
At this point, our experiment is being done in a 
simulation environment. The simulator consists of a dining 
room, four living rooms, and two bath room where each 
room equipped with TV, light, and personal computer. The 
experiment is targeted to verify two main issues. First is to 
check the competitiveness of our Bayesian Network by 
analyzing the accuracy of the derived situation. The other 
issue is to see whether SBP indeed gives better performance 
compared to other energy prediction systems. Unfortunately, 
it is hard to present the results without experimenting in real 
environment; however, according to our simulation SBP 
does have high accuracy when the derived situation is 
accurate. The details of our simulation are following. We 
built a simulator that simulates user’s daily home life. User 
randomly acts one of 6 situations; Sleeping, Watching TV, 
Eating, Working, Resting, and Moving. As we mentioned 
before, when “Moving” occurs, the system waits until user 
enters a certain space and detects one of the situations. We 
recorded 2 hour based energy consumption rate for 30 days 
in simulator environment. Fig. 4 shows the results of the 
experiment. 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison between Time-based prediction and Situation-
based prediction. 
For comparison, each graph presents average prediction 
value of time-based system, situation based system, and the 
38
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

actual usage rate of the user. Situation-based prediction 
system gave much better performance when multiple 
situations occur in certain time slot. For instance, if user 
either watches TV or sleeps in certain time slot, there is a big 
difference in consumption rate between these two situations 
and time-based prediction cannot reflect this circumstance.  
In average, time-based system had 54% average error 
rate when multiple situations occur in certain time slot 
whereas, situation-based system had only 12% average error 
rate. We need to acknowledge that simulation was run upon 
assumption that situation was accurately derived at all time. 
The accuracy of our Bayesian Network needs to be measured 
in real environment, and for now we leave it as our future 
work. 
VI. 
ADVANTAGE OF SITUATION-BASED PREDICTION 
A. Accuracy 
While most of the modern energy management systems 
rely on past energy consumption history, SBP tracks history 
by analyzing user’s situation. Energy consumption happens 
when activity occurs and situation is one of the best ways to 
predict user’s activity. We are certain that SBP’s accuracy is 
at least higher than the system that solely relies on past usage 
history, since SBP is also based on history data. The biggest 
difference is that, SBP segments these usage data and 
retrieves the most relevant history. 
B. Specialization 
As we mentioned earlier, SBP is based on probabilistic 
network such as Bayesian Network. One of the biggest 
strength of Bayesian Network is that it evolves as it receives 
feedback data from users. There are plenty of ways to 
receive feedback data from users directly or indirectly. 
However, we will not get into details of receiving and 
analyzing feedback data of Bayesian Network since it is 
beyond the scope of this paper. The essential point is that 
SBP keeps evolve as the size of the usage history data grow, 
and as it receives more feedback data from users. In other 
words, SBP evolves to get customized for a specific user or a 
specific group of people. 
VII. CONCLUSTION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we presented a Situation-Based Prediction 
system for energy management. The system is based on 
Bayesian Network, and derives user’s situation in order to 
associate it with energy consumption rate. We are certain 
that SBP is more efficient than other energy managing 
system that solely relies on users’ past usage history and is 
capable of adjusting the system to a specific user or group of 
users.  
SBP is currently targeted for a single user. Our future 
work will be focused on expanding our SBP to support 
multiple users in a distributed environment [5]. Each user 
will use his/her cell phone acting as a main sensor, and share 
information with one another. The biggest challenge of our 
future work will be detecting correlation among users. For 
example, when SBP detects that multiple users are watching 
TV, it needs to find out whether all of the users are watching 
the same TV or not. In addition, creating a database that 
holds individuals’ past situation and associating one another 
to draw a reliable prediction will be the key challenge.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Harris and V. Cahill, “An Empirical study of the potential 
for context-aware power management,” UbiComp 2007: 
Ubiquitous Computing (2007), pp. 235-252, doi:10.1007/978-3-
540-74583-3_14. 
[2]  R. K. Harle and A. Hopper, “The Potential for Location-
Aware Power Management”, UbiComp 2008: Ubiquitous 
Computing (2008), pp. 302-311, doi:10.1145/1409635.1409676.  
[3] L. Uusitalo, “Advantages and challenges of Bayesian 
networks in environmental modelling”, Ecological Modelling, 
vol. 203, No.3-4 (10 May 2007), pp. 312–318. 
[4] P. Korpipää, J. Mäntyjärvi, J. Kela, H. Kernen, and E.-J. 
Malm, “Managing context information in mobile devices”, 
Pervasive Computing, IEEE In Pervasive Computing, IEEE,  
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 42–51, doi:10.1109/MPRV.2003.1228526. 
[5] G. Pavlin, P. de Oude, M. Maris, J. Nunnink, and T. Hood, “A 
multi agent systems approach to distributed Bayesian 
information fusion”, INFFUS, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 267-282, 
doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2009.09.007.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

