Mobile Services through Tagging Context and Touching Interaction 
Gabriel Chavira, Elvira Rolón, Eduardo Alvarez, Salvador W. Nava, Jorge Orozco 
Graduate Division, Faculty of Engineering “Arturo Narro Siller” 
Autonomous University of Tamaulipas  
Tampico, México 
 {gchavira, erolon, ccalvar, snava, jorozco} @uat.edu.mx 
 
 
Abstract— One of main objectives of Ambient Intelligence is 
the reduction to a minimum of the user’s interactive effort, the 
diversity and quantity of devices with which people are 
surrounded with, in existing environments, increase the level of 
difficulty to achieve this goal. The mobile phones and their 
amazing global penetration, makes it an excellent device for 
delivering new services to the user, without requiring a 
learning effort. An NFC-enabled mobile phone will allow the 
user to demand and obtain services, by touching its different 
elements in the environment. In this paper we present a 
proposal where we analyze the scope associated with touch 
interaction, and where a model to perceive touch interaction 
through the tagging context is designed. 
Keywords-tagging context; touching interaction; mobile 
services;context aware. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the first definitions of smart environment [1] [2] 
[3] arises from Ubiquitous Computing, which “created a new 
field of computer science, one that speculated on a physical 
world richly and invisibly interwoven with sensors, 
actuators, displays and computational elements, embedded 
seamlessly in the everyday objects of our lives and 
connected through a continuous network” [4], although Mark 
Weiser does not define it explicitly. 
The vision of Ambient Intelligence [5], which is an 
evolution of Ubiquitous Computing, proposes a new way of 
thinking about computers, which will disappear in the 
environment, meaning that this perceiving and responding 
automatically to the presence of people is creating a smart 
environment. 
The Ambient Intelligence (AmI) paradigm visualizes 
environmental management by applications, which will 
perceive in a continuous way the characteristics of the 
entities that comprise it and the natural interaction between 
them, thereby enabling applications to offer services either 
proactively or with the smallest possible interactive effort. 
Another characteristic of this type of environment is that, 
even with a strong technology, it is “invisible” to people; this 
disappearance can be obtained by embedding it in daily 
objects in the environment. 
The final objective of a smart environment is to satisfy 
users’ needs by providing services that require minimum 
interactive effort from them (the ideal service is one which 
the user receives without explicitly demanding it). 
A smart environment must be able to perceive all the 
interaction techniques that people can develop. From these 
methods, the interaction of contact (or touch interaction) 
represents an opportunity area, justifying the design of a 
system that perceives. This interaction technique is simple, 
requires minimal effort and it is part of the natural reactions 
of people when they want to use an element of the 
environment, if it is within reach (if the device we want to 
use is near, we say we touched it).  
Touch interaction can replace complex techniques and 
even intricate learning processes, for example: sending a 
photo to a new device, printing a document on a printer that 
has never been used, just as an older person will be able to 
request a meal from a company merely by touching a picture 
of it, etc. This feature and its ease of use by older people will 
play an excellent role in certain current issues, such as 
dependency.   
Touch interaction is a simple technique; when it is 
developed between persons or between a person and an 
environmental element, it may involve a large amount and 
flow of information, which would represent a significant 
contribution to a smart environment. 
A 
system 
that 
perceives 
and 
administers 
an 
environment’s touch interaction would be able to offer 
services to users they could not have imagined and will be 
fundamental to the construction of the ideal smart 
environment.  
Our work proposes perception of the touch interaction, 
which will be used to demand services at the moment of 
interacting with the environmental elements or entities.  In 
order to obtain this perception, the “tagging” of the 
environment’s entities will be necessary.  The intention is 
that, when perceiving this interaction, the application that 
manages this environment will obtain information on the 
entities involved that, properly combined with the 
information in the application’s databases, will enable 
services to be delivered.  
II. 
USER SCENARIO 
In the following scenario, we describe some activities at a 
research group; in these the users obtain services through 
"touching interaction". This scenario is the support for the 
application we are developing and testing.  
John arrives at the building door, where his office and 
other workspaces (laboratory, other members’ offices, and 
meeting room) of his research group are located. With his 
NFC-enabled mobile phone he touches the tag at the side of 
the main door of the building and the NFC-enabled mobile 
phone reminds him that he has an important comment for 
51
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

George who is already working at his desk. For this reason 
John decides to go to the laboratory (where George is). At 
the moment John touched the tag, all the members of the re-
search group, who are working in a computer, receive a 
message indicating that John has entered the building. 
In a corridor, John can observe (on a public display) a 
summary of the research group’s current work, such as 
deadlines of the congresses in which they will participate, the 
last versions of the papers being written, the identity and 
location of each person working in the building, etc.  
When John arrives at the door of the laboratory he can 
observe who is in inside by looking at a little display. He can 
also see the degree of progress of the different activities 
(along with notes on projects, programs, articles, etc.) that 
the members of the group are developing. Before entering he 
touches the tag of the next door. Inside the laboratory he can 
observe a reminder of all “notes to comment on”, on a public 
display at the laboratory, which has been stored in his mobile 
phone. Meanwhile, all users who have “notes to comment 
on” to John, can see a reminder indicating that John entered 
the laboratory on their computers. 
While John talks to George, John places his mobile 
phone near the tag on the display of George´s computer to 
show a file. After commenting on it, they decide to show it to 
everyone in the laboratory. To this end, John touches the 
public display with his mobile phone. 
Before John leaves the laboratory, George decides to 
send him a paper for checking, but, due to its large size, it 
does not fit in the mobile phone’s memory. He therefore, 
decides to send the file to John so that it can be checked from 
any computer in the AmI environment. 
 When John leaves the laboratory, he runs the exit service 
in his mobile phone to aware the AmI environment that he is 
coming out of the laboratory. When John arrives at his office 
and touches the tag in the door, his mobile phone shows the 
list of people who came to see him while he was out, as well 
as the messages left for him. 
III. 
ENVIRONMENT ENTITIES 
The model we are proposing would endow an 
environment with the capability of perceiving the touch 
interaction between environment entities, which we define 
as: The intentional approach of two entities in order to obtain 
a service. This implies that when an entity approaches 
another one, the touch interaction arises. The objective of 
this model is limited to the touch interaction, which involves 
only two elements, of which one is a person.  This is the 
reason why the touch interaction of interest to us is defined 
as: A person’s deliberate touching of an environmental entity 
(the latter can be another person) for the purpose of obtaining 
services.  
One of the most popular and referenced context and 
entities definition is given by Anind K. Dey, who states that 
“any information that can be used to characterize the 
situation of an entity. An entity is a person, place or object 
that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user 
and an application, including the user and application 
themselves” [6]. 
Owing to the fact that we are interested only in a specific 
interaction technique between a person and an environment 
element or another person, we have adapted Dey’s definition 
so as to define the context limited to touch interaction as: any 
information on the involved entities that is required to 
deliver the services offered by the touch interaction. 
A. Entities 
The PICTAC (it perceives touch interaction through 
tagging context, in Spanish) objective is to develop a system 
that manages the touch interactions of an environment in 
which at least one person takes part.  This is the reason why 
the entity "application" will not be considered by us. 
Since the capacity to participate in a touch interaction 
that is perceived by the environment is not a person’s natural 
ability and so that a system can take into account a person, 
their data must have been captured previously. If we add 
these capabilities to the “person” entity, we create the “user” 
entity (which would be a subset of the entity proposed by 
Dey), as used in our model. 
Dey’s “object” entity has proved to be too general for the 
purpose of the model, since from the standpoint of the 
service it can provide, we can distinguish two categories of 
objects: Devices, those whose service can be demanded 
through a touch interaction (basically electronic or computer 
equipment), and Objects, those whose service is not 
"suitable" or cannot be demanded through a "touch" (e.g., a 
desk, furniture). However, in the case of the latter, through 
their location and continued use, we can take advantage of 
them to integrate some in the model we are proposing and 
offer services. This is the reason why we have broken down 
the object category into two types of entities: "object" and 
"device".  It must be remembered that an object does not 
even have the capacity to process and communicate which is 
the reason why the capacities that it could have will depend 
on the available computer device that allows it to participate 
in a touch interaction and on the user’s capacities.   
TABLE I.  
COMPARISION BETWEEN  DEY ENTITIES AND OURS 
Dey entities  
Adaptation 
PICTAC Model 
Entities 
Description 
Person 
Only the 
person or 
equipment are 
considered 
User 
Person 
with 
the 
capacity 
to 
participate 
in 
a 
touch interaction 
Object 
They are 
divided into 
two, depending 
on the form 
given to the 
services 
Object 
Those 
whose 
service 
is 
not 
"suitable" or cannot 
be 
requested 
through "touch" 
Device 
The service can be 
demanded through a 
touch interaction 
Place 
Idem 
Place 
Represents a part of 
a smart environment 
or even the entire 
environment 
Application 
Not relevant  
Not used 
52
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF TAGGING CONTEXT PROPERTIES 
 
"Place" is an entity that will remain and will allow us to 
represent a part of a smart environment or even the entire 
environment, since it will have the capacity for self-
inclusion, in which the place may contain entities (or even 
another place). Although, in the first instance, a user has the 
capacity not to associate the service offered by a place, this 
could be considered because, on touching the place it will 
provide the service, entering the smart environment and the 
user could even obtain the opening of the door. A summary 
and comparison of PICTAC and Dey entities is shown in 
Table 1. 
Whenever a user touches any of the four entities 
described above, it will generate one of the four classes of 
touch interaction managed by PICTAC: user-place, user-
device, user-object and user-user, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The four types of the PICTAC Model Touch Interaction. 
IV. 
THE MODEL TO PERCEIVE TOUCH INTERACTION 
THROUGH THE TAGGING CONTEXT 
The objective of the model that we are proposing is to be 
able to develop a system that endows the environment with 
the capacity to perceive the touch interaction using the 
tagging context. 
The model consists of three parts: the properties that the 
environment must have, the tagging context and the services 
that can be offered. 
A. Environmental Requirements 
The PICTAC Model is designed in such a way that the 
system developed can easily integrate with other applications 
in a smart environment or it can be the only one of its type 
operating in the environment. To develop the system that 
manages the touch interaction and maximize the use of the 
information flow generated for the delivery of services, the 
environment must have two properties or infrastructures: 
1. Processing and storage (considered together so that 
they can be offered by one technology)  
2. Communication 
Although 
these 
properties 
are 
essential 
to 
the 
development of the vision of an environment that manages 
the touch interaction, we believe that they will almost 
certainly exist in any environment in which an application of 
this type will need to be developed. This is partly due to the 
fact that the majority of workplaces have them and because 
the touch interaction is ideal for operating the electronic and 
computer devices in today’s workplaces. 
Both infrastructures are the common “technology level”, 
which is shared by all the applications that will make up the 
ideal smart environment. 
B. Tagging Context 
If tagging is to put a tag on something and context is any 
information about entities, tagging context could sound 
incongruous but the intention of creating this paradox is to 
give emphasis to the idea. 
Tagging will be necessary for two reasons: we will have 
to indicate the place where the entity must be touched and 
we must augment the entity with the capacity to perceive 
another entity’s “touch”. 
The word context is used because we will augment the 
entities with the data needed to deliver the services 
originated by the touch interaction. 
The tagging context requires generic properties to be 
developed: perception of touch, containment of information, 
processing and communication. These capabilities will be 
provided by different properties, of which all or some of 
them will be put in the entities. We define the tagging 
context as: 
“Augmentation of the environment’s entities with the 
necessary properties to participate in the touch interaction 
perceived by a system” 
Two properties are necessary for the touch interaction’s 
perception: contact and identification. As it is the user who 
makes the touch, it must have the contact capability.  This is 
just a way of distinguishing the roles performed by each one 
Tagging Context Properties 
Contact 
As it is the user which makes the touch, it 
must have contact property to carry out the 
touch interaction. 
Identification 
This will be given to other non-user entities, 
which will be responsible for responding to 
the touch made by the user 
Context 
This can be one of two types: the context 
limited to the touch interaction, which is the 
information about the entities involved in the 
interaction, or the environmental context.  
Services 
references 
So as not to keep all the information in the 
touched entities, only these are placed. 
Memory 
Although our model will focus primarily on 
data, the memory property is implicit and 
necessary. 
Processing 
It processes the services references. 
Communication 
Linking the entities involved with the 
environmental infrastructure. 
53
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

of the entities that touch. The identification capability will be 
given to other entities (non-user) which will be responsible 
for responding to the touch made by the user.  In other 
words, the entity that is touched is the one which identifies 
(responds to the touch). 
For an entity to contain information, it will require 
memory capability.  Although our model will focus primarily 
on data, the memory capability is implicit and necessary.  
The data involve two properties: context and services 
references. 
Context is the information needed to deliver the service 
and can be of two types: the context limited to the touch 
interaction, which is the information about the entities 
involved in the interaction, and the environmental context. 
The first is saved in the same entities as those involved in 
interaction 
and 
the 
second 
in 
the 
environmental 
infrastructure. 
In order to deliver a service, some processing of 
information must be carried out and, because we are not 
certain where such processing is carried out (in the user, in 
the environment infrastructure or in a device with processing 
capability), it was decided that, instead of the entity that is 
touched containing all the necessary instructions for 
processing the data, it will contain the necessary services 
references. The services references are all the necessary 
information to process and deliver the service to the user. 
C. Services 
The reason for any device or object in the environment is 
to offer users, as a minimum, an intrinsic service and in order 
to obtain it the user must interact with the object. The object 
of PICTAC is to offer services from the environmental 
elements by means of the touch interaction and, together 
with these services, to deliver others in an implicit way.    
The classification established for the services is based on 
the manner in which their execution is originated or who has 
put them. The intrinsic services of the elements in the 
environment (which can be natural to the item or established 
by the system) are the default services, which are received by 
the user who touches. The implicit services are those that 
accompany the above and can be received either by the user 
who touches or other related users.  The optional services are 
those created by the PICTAC system that can be received by 
any user and put in any entity. Table 3 gives a summary with 
the characteristics of each one of the service categories. 
1) Default Services 
All the environmental elements with which people are 
surrounded have at least one function or main use for which 
they were designed.  The model that we propose is designed 
so that such use or service will be delivered to the user at the 
touch of the entity. These services are called default services 
and will be delivered to the user automatically whenever it 
touches an element. 
In a device, the default service is intrinsic to it and is 
easily identifiable (e.g., the printing of the printer, the 
display of the monitor, etc.). 
In an object, default services do not exist because they 
are not inherently associated with any services that can be 
obtained through touch interaction (e.g., the desk). The 
object will only contain optional services. 
In a place entity, the ideal default service, which the 
user would expect to receive, is to open the door, but its 
implementation will depend on the available technology; 
however, touching the place is essential for the user to 
"enter" or "exit" the application that manages the touch 
interaction and, should it fail to do so, it will not receive the 
service. 
2) Implicit Services 
These services are one of the benefits of implementing a 
PICTAC system.  Sometimes and when the system has just 
been installed, they may not be easily associated by the user 
who carries out the touch.  In other words, they are services 
under or attached to the default services.   
Implicit services are developed to take advantage of the 
information flow that is generated when a default service is 
demanded and, like this one, can be delivered automatically. 
All the services that are received either directly or 
indirectly by the related entities and the entities that 
participate in the touch interaction and/or are in the place 
where touch interaction is carried out will be implicit 
services. 
3) Optional Services 
These services will be put on entities by the users, 
depending on their requirements; they were originated to 
take advantage of the foreseeable and daily use of some 
environmental entities. 
These services allow those elements that do not have an 
intrinsic service (the objects) to be regarded as part of the 
PICTAC system and offer services to the touch. 
They can also be placed in any type of entity, the use of 
which can be considered structured. For example, when a 
user reaches its workplace, it will first touch the door of the 
building before entering its office; any user that pays a visit 
to the office must touch the door, etc.  Thus, optional 
services can be placed in the entities that take advantage of 
such use.   
Another example of an optional service is to leave a 
message to any or a specific user on the door of a building, 
on its desktop or any entity in respect of which we can be 
certain that it will be touched by the user to whom we wish 
to communicate something, or a note for a specific user 
when visiting the office in our absence, etc.   
 
 
TABLE III.  
DESCRUIPTION OF SERVICES 
PICTAC Services 
Default 
The entities’ intrinsic services  
Implicit 
These services accompany the default 
services 
Optional 
These will be put on entities by users in 
the case of elements that do not have 
intrinsic services  
 
 
54
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

 
TABLE IV.  
PROPERTY-TECHNOLOGY CORRELATION 
 
 
V. 
MODEL TECHNOLOGY CORRELATION 
The first method of validating the PICTAC model is to 
establish a correlation between its properties and the existing 
technologies with which they could be implemented. As 
some of these properties are matching, in this section we 
decided to consider them jointly in two cases: contact-
identification and memory-context-services references. The 
four categories of model-technology correlation are 
explained below. 
A. Information Flow 
The automatic identification technologies make it 
possible to provide the environmental elements with contact 
and identification capabilities.  Some of these technologies 
(voice, OCR, biometrics, etc.) do not have a relationship 
with this model, that is the reason why we decided to analyze 
three: Barcode, RFID and NFC. 
Barcode technology has contact and identification 
properties, meaning that it can be used to add these 
properties to an entity that could be used in the contact 
interaction. 
Near Field Communication (NFC) technology can 
establish a link when an initiator-reader is within two inches 
or less of a tag. This short distance gives the impression that 
the user is touching the tag (some would touch without 
problems). So the NFC is appropriate for providing these 
capabilities to entities in the environment. 
B. Memory-Context-Services References 
The memory property is essential for storing information 
whose significance is essential for our model because it will 
contain two properties: context and services references. 
It is important to mention that although technologies 
exist, that by themselves do not provide these properties, 
they could be embedded in a device that has them. This is the 
reason why a technology cannot be discarded only on the 
basis of not having them and why devices in which it is 
possible for them to be embedded must be examined. 
Another important feature is that the memory must be re-
writeable since the context is constantly changing. 
The barcode is not an appropriate technology for this 
because of two reasons: saving information in a barcode is 
unworkable and it would not be possible to modify it. 
The RFID and NFC technologies have the memory 
property by default in the tag, while in the reader the 
memory can be obtained from the device that controls it. 
C. Processing 
This property must be obtained from the device (or 
computational device that controls it) where the technologies 
that provide the other properties are embedded. 
The power of this ability will be what determines the 
complexity of the services that can be offered, without 
depending on the environmental structure’s processing 
power. 
D. Communication 
As in the case of the processing property, communication 
must be provided by technologies that are embedded in 
gadgets that provide other properties. To meet this 
requirement, we considered: Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. The major 
drawback of Bluetooth is that each connection requires the 
user’s participation, whereas Wi-Fi technology only requires 
configuration of the first time that the gadgets are linked. 
A summary (Table IV) of the analysis made in the three 
previous sections allows us to observe that none of the 
technologies considered has processing properties, which 
turns this into a requirement of the gadget that we use. 
The bar code-contact only provides identification, so this 
can be ruled out. 
NFC technology is the solution to the Bluetooth 
drawback, as it enables the automatic link via Bluetooth. 
RFID technology is a good option for implementing the 
PICTAC system; unfortunately, although the costs of RFID 
and NFC tags are equal, prices of the antennas and the 
complete set of RFID make this unaffordable, although 
trends indicates that these will fall and once this is the case it 
will be possible to reconsider this option.   
E. Technological Suitability Model 
In order to adapt the PICTAC model to a proposal that 
combines different technologies for its implementation, we 
divided it into two main areas: the “tagging context” and the 
infrastructure environment. The latter is divided into two 
parts: storage-processing and communication.  These and the 
tagging context are the three sections of the technological 
model, which can be summarized as shown in Figure 2 and 
is explained as follows: 
• The gadget technology to implement the tagging 
context will endow the entities with the properties to 
participate in the touch interaction perceived by the 
PICTAC system: contact, identification, memory 
(which contains the context and services references), 
processing and communication.  
• The communication section, which will allow entities 
to link with the processing and storage infrastructure in 
the environment. 
• Processing and storage, defined as the distribution and 
operation of the computer equipment that will execute 
 
Properties 
 
Technology 
I 
M 
Cc 
P 
C 
Interaction 
technique 
Barcode 
  
 
 
 
Touch 
Passive 
RIFD  
  
 
 
 
Not necessary 
Active 
RFID 
  
 
 
 
Not necessary 
NFC 
  
 
 
 
Touch 
Bluetooth ≈ 
ZigBee 
  
 
 
 
Not necessary 
Wi-Fi 
  
 
 
 
Not necessary 
Infrared 
  
 
 
 
Movement 
I=Identification  
M=Memory/Context/Services References Cc=Contact 
P=Processing  C=Communication 
55
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

the services, similar to the way in which they store the 
information from the environment (context) and 
process some services. 
The “tagging context” properties can be satisfied by an 
NFC-enabled mobile phone and NFC-tag; the NFC-enabled 
phone also offers different communication alternatives (some 
models have Bluetooth, GSM, SMS, MMS, XHTML, 
SMTP, POP3, IMAP4 EGPRS and/or GPRS) and a large 
memory (up to 2 Gb). 
The PICTAC model will use computer technology (with 
the communication, processing and storage properties) that 
can be found in most of the workplaces where people 
operate. This is established as a requirement for the 
environmental infrastructure because we consider it 
unattractive for the PICTAC system to be developed in an 
environment that does not have them. 
VI. 
PICTAC VISUALIZATION 
To formalize the relationships and elements that have 
been explained in previous sections that comprise the 
PICTAC model, we use UML class diagrams. 
In the conceptual PICTAC model shown in Figure 3, the 
largest element is the smart environment that contains the 
PICTAC 
system, 
the 
normal 
environment, 
the 
communications infrastructure, processing, data storage, 
context and intelligent interfaces. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Technological Sections of the PICTAC Model. 
The intelligent interfaces are those involved in user 
interaction with environmental elements. The environmental 
elements include objects, places and devices, which together 
with the user compose the PICTAC model entities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  UML Description of the PICTAC Model. 
 
56
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

A system that perceives touch interaction through tagging 
context consists of tagging entities in which a user touches 
the tagging entity for the purpose of obtaining services. This 
contact is perceived through properties that obtain and 
process the necessary data to deliver the service. This 
information and processing property may be contained in 
gadgets that can deliver services without needing the 
environmental infrastructure. However, the quality and 
quantity of these services depend on the technical 
characteristics of the technologies used to provide the 
properties. 
Within 
a 
communications 
infrastructure, 
processing and data storage are essential if the goal for the 
PICTAC system is to be part of an intelligent environment. 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The investigation was possible due to the technological 
innovations that are currently available; however, technology 
itself does not include the innovative uses that are involved 
in our research. 
With the PICTAC model, when implementing a managed 
system, the touch interaction does not only benefit the user 
involved in the touch interaction but the benefits extend to all 
users of the smart environment.   
NFC technology is an excellent tool to provide services 
through touch contact, with the real prospect of easier 
integration with the environmental infrastructure (owing to 
the fact that an NFC mobile with WiFi is being developed). 
The incorporation of contextual information in the tag 
and the offer of various services is the main difference 
between our research and from others working with NFC 
technology.  
We have developed the first phase of PICTAC system at 
the MAmI research group; the TIS (Touch Interaction 
Services). In the daily use of the system we have observed 
that putting several services in tags provides advantages but 
cannot be used in all situations. 
Users gladly accept all the services if they save efforts 
but there are those who are obstinate in accepting the tags 
where there is no perception of savings. In TIS, when we put 
a tag in the door so that users may get into or leave the 
system; for users this represents an over-exertion and 
sometimes they forgot to do it. This perception of over-effort 
disappears when we install an NFC-enabled electronic door 
lock. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been financed by Programa para el 
Mejoramiento del Profesorado (PROMEP) from the 
Secretaría de Educación Pública, México, and Fondo Mixto 
de Fomento a la Investigación Científica y Tecnológica 
CONACYT – Gobierno del Estado de Tamaulipas, México. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cook, D. and S. Das, Smart Environments : Technology, 
Protocols and Applications. Wiley Series on Parallel and 
Distribued Computing, ed. A.Y. Zomaya. 2004. Hoboken, 
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated. 
[2] Song, C.-H., J. Wu, D.-H. Seo, and W.D. Lee. Solving multi-
sensor problem with a new approach. in First International 
Conference on the Applications of Digital Information and 
Web Technologies, ICADIWT 2008. pp. 348-353. Ostrava, 
Czech Republic. 
[3] Klima, M., L. Lhotska, V. Chudacek, M. Huptych , and M. 
Husak. Assistive Technologies: New Challenges for Education 
in 4th European Conference of the International Federation 
for Medical and Biological Engineering. pp. 2730-2733. 2008. 
Antwerp, Belgium. 
[4] Weiser, M., R. Gold, and J.S. Brown, The origins of ubiquitous 
computing research at PARC in the late 1980s. IBM Systems 
Journal, 1999. 38(4): pp. 693-696. 
[5] Aarts, 
E. 
and 
L. 
Appelo, 
Ambient 
intelligence: 
thuisomgevingen van de toekomst. IT Monitor, 1999(9): pp. 7-
11. 
[6] Dey, A.K.: Providing Architectural Support for Building 
Context-Aware Applications. Phd Thesis, Georgia Institute of 
Technology  (2000). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

