Mobile Value Chain and Services 
The Case of Mobile Donations for Charities 
 
Seyed Mohammad Adeli, Silvia Elaluf Calderwood, Claus Oskar Heintzeler, Javier Huerta, Caroline Legler 
Department of Management 
London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) 
London, United Kingdom 
E-mail: heintzeler@locaid.org.uk 
 
Placeholder 
Abstract—This case study shows how the use of mobile digital 
services through smartphones can enhance known value chains 
of services by increasing the lateral margin value. The 
particular case discussed relates to a mobile application for 
charity organizations, i.e., non-profit organizations with the 
intention of providing help and raising money for those in 
need. The paper is of relevance for researchers and 
practitioners, as it demonstrates how computer and business 
science can be linked to analyze human computer interactions, 
which may help to solve problems in existing business 
processes through the use of mobile technology. Based on 
empirical data gathered from research and interviews during 
the case study, the paper identifies the most prevalent 
problems of charity organizations, such as lack of awareness 
and information, trust, transparency and convenience, and 
demonstrates how mobile technology can support these deficits 
in business processes and service value chains. 
Keywords-mobile technology; charity; value chain; value 
added; location services; mobile design 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile technologies have been widely studied by both 
academics and specialists in terms of how their use has 
changed everyday life in today’s society, and also the 
enterprise relationships between companies and their 
employees [25]. In recent days, the increase in the 
availability and popularity of smartphones, like the iPhone 
(2007) and Android devices (2008), has raised the need to 
direct attention to re-evaluating the role which mobile 
devices can play in the delivery of digital services. In this 
context, mobile devices have changed established value 
chains and are able to co-create or add value to them. 
This paper focuses on analyzing the use of mobile 
technology associated with smartphones and its ability to 
add value to the known value chain of charity services. The 
paper will, firstly, review some of the fundamental 
theoretical and practical aspects of general value chains for 
organizations, the value chain for service industries and the 
value-added possibilities of mobile devices. Next, these 
established concepts will be customized for the charity 
service industry on the basis of research and an empirical 
project, and the development of a smartphone application 
called “LocAid”, which exploits the corners of the charity 
value chain and creates added value to charities’ services. 
Finally, the paper will analyze such enhancements in 
terms of design and provide a set of recommendations which 
can be used for both defining what value is added to a known 
value chain when releasing smartphone applications and for 
the design principles which are required for such 
development. The paper will finish with the limitations and 
research directions for further investigation. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND: VALUE CHAIN AND 
MOBILE TECHNOLOGY 
The general concept of the value chain serves as the 
theoretical model of this paper. In the following, the basic 
concept will be introduced, its adaptions in the service sector 
described and the effects of mobile technology identified. 
A. The Value Chain 
The theoretical model of the “value chain” is first 
mentioned by Michael Porter [20] in the discipline of 
strategic management, linking innovation to corporate 
strategy [17]. It describes how internal activities are 
developed inside a firm through different steps, which form 
an economic process, from manufacturing and raw materials 
to the distribution of the built product. 
Porter [20] proposes that a firm can create a cost 
advantage by reducing the cost of individual value chain 
activities or by reconfiguring the value chain itself. The 
concept distinguishes between primary activities and 
support activities. Primary activities refer to the physical 
creation of the product, through design, construction, sale 
and post-sales services such as inbound logistics, 
operations, outbound logistics, marketing and sales and 
service. The secondary or support activities help to improve 
the effectiveness of the primary activities and Porter 
identifies four main types: procurement, technology 
development, 
human 
resource 
management 
and 
infrastructure [2]. 
Porter’s concept of a value chain is used to model the 
full range of activities which are required to bring a product 
or service from conception, through the different phases of 
production, delivery to final consumers and final disposal 
after use [12]. The importance of the concept derives from 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

the fact that it draws attention toward activities which “add 
value” to the final product or service [12]. It is considered 
relevant for seeking competitive advantage, reducing costs 
and identifying ways for differentiation.  
Some authors, such as Altenburg [1], argue that the 
strongest advantage of Porter’s model is that it takes into 
account differences across organizations, suits multifaceted, 
multidivisional firms and provides information on a firm’s 
strengths and weaknesses. On the other hand, its main 
limitation is that Porter focuses mainly on products, thereby 
neglecting services, and only takes into account the internal 
strategic analysis of an organization, not the external one 
(industry, customers, etc.), leading to an incomplete analysis 
of competitive advantage. 
B. Value Chain for Services 
One limitation of Porter’s value chain, as mentioned 
earlier, is that it does not highlight the importance of 
exploring new dimensions of the concept, focusing on 
services, in particular digital services, rather than products. 
A service approach would give an insight into the flows and 
transformations by which value is added and might be of 
great relevance when analyzing service organizations. 
One of the main characteristics of services is that their 
production and consumption happen at the same time. 
Hence, the service production process itself is the product 
and, due to the contribution of consumer value, it is more or 
less co-created. A further characteristic of most services is 
that, unlike products, services are activities, which are 
abstract rather than physical and, therefore, are often 
intangible and impossible to stock. In addition, they are 
perceived subjectively, making them difficult to evaluate, 
and factors such as experience, trust, feeling and security 
play an important role [18]. Based on these characteristics, 
Gabriel [8] proposes a value chain framework customized 
for services, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
 
Primary attributes  
 
Service design: 
The value of the service needs to be incorporated into 
the service design. Service designers need to conduct market 
research and try to be as innovative as possible.  
 
Knowledge management: 
Knowledge management refers to the service provider’s 
knowledge about the needs and dynamics of the decision-
making process of customers as well as the customers’ 
knowledge about the service.  
 
Figure 1. Service value chain, Source: Gabriel [8] 
Delivery systems management: 
Services cannot be stored for future use or separated 
from the provider; this means that services are perishable 
and inseparable from delivery. Good management of 
delivery systems increases the convenience for customers 
and thus improves their perceived value. 
 
Moment of truth management: 
The encounter between service provider and customer in 
the actual moment of delivery of the service can leave a 
positive or negative impression in the customer’s mind. It 
can build or destroy trust and confidence and can dictate 
buying decisions for the future. 
 
Service competition management: 
Customers have a choice between different competitors. 
Therefore, providers need to stimulate their clients even 
after the service delivery. Efficient after-sales management 
and a high quality of service can increase the perceived 
value of the service. 
 
Supporting attributes 
 
People: 
People are important in the co-creation of value due to 
the simultaneous use and production of services. Customer 
expectations need to be matched with offered service to 
prevent a perception gap. 
 
Process information: 
The service provider and their employees need to be 
aware of their service processes and the generation and 
delivery of the service value. Transparency and the 
availability of information, through, e.g., IT, are of great 
importance in this step. 
 
Physical aspects: 
The physical aspects refer mainly to customer services 
and also include tangible aspects like the office’s 
appearance. Accompanying the customer in his preferred 
way throughout all primary activities and signaling the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

value of the service throughout this process is, therefore, 
crucial. 
 
Punctuality and reliability: 
The time aspect is significant in the service industry and 
relates directly to the service quality. Reliability implies a 
level of consistency and assurance for the customer. 
In a similar framework, Nooteboom [18] attempts to 
develop 
a 
generalization 
of 
Porter’s 
framework, 
corresponding to different types of service industry. This 
industry differentiation, based on the central features of the 
value adding process, is believed to enable easier 
identification of sources of inefficiency, to detect 
opportunities for value added and to be crucial for 
increasing transparency. 
The research question this paper seeks to answer is: how 
can mobile applications, through carefully crafted feature 
design, enhance different steps within the service value 
chain? The model described above is used as a theoretical 
framework for the purpose of this study, since it offers a 
more viable perspective than Porter’s original framework. 
C. Value-Added through Mobile Technology 
Mobile technologies and, more specifically, mobile 
applications have unique attributes which can add 
significant value to a company’s service value chain. The 
literature identifies, in particular, three features as 
fundamental supporters in today’s business: 
 
Connectivity 
Connectivity or mobility refers to the interdependence of 
time and place. A wireless infrastructure offers “anytime, 
anywhere” communication and information exchange [4]. It 
is especially valuable for time-critical or spontaneous needs 
[14] and it is useful to employees and customers alike in 
that mobile services provide both user groups with easy 
access to the most up-to-date information [3, 13]. 
 
Personalization 
Mobile devices are typically assigned to single users, 
who can then personalize the interface and application 
settings of the devices [4]. Especially for interactive and 
dynamic mobile services, personalization or customization 
is fundamental for supporting user satisfaction and the 
efficiency of a system, according to Barnes [3] and 
Coursaris et al. [4]. Moreover, mobile technologies support 
an easy modification of content, the repetitive and 
simultaneous consumption of information by different users 
and fast and cheap reproduction [3]. 
 
Localization 
The Internet has the ability to localize specific places 
(e.g., IP address). Mobile technologies can extend this 
localization feature by also localizing users (e.g., a mobile 
worker) and items (e.g., tracking a shipment) [4]. This 
feature is strongly demanded, especially with respect to 
today’s development of mobile applications. 
The identified attributes can be very valuable throughout 
different stages of the service value chain. They can play a 
significant role in service design, knowledge management 
and delivery system management. Moreover, mobile 
technologies are able to assist all supporting attributes 
(people, process information, physical aspects, punctuality 
and reliability) of the value chain. 
However, while improving the connection between the 
customer and the company, some problem areas may arise. 
As Gabriel [8] argues “the more convenient the system, the 
better the perceived value by customers”. This points toward 
the need to give crucial attention to ease of use and the 
perceived usefulness of the mobile device in order to ensure 
that customers do actually use the device, that is that they 
engage in the “cognitive effort” [4, 13]. Moreover, privacy 
and safety in information exchange [4] are often perceived as 
risks in mobile services. In particular, customers can lack 
trust in monetary transactions in mobile commerce and, 
therefore, these should be given special focus in the service 
value chain. 
III. 
MOBILE VALUE SERVICE FOR CHARITIES: “LOCAID” 
In order to illustrate and understand how innovative 
mobile services might add value to established value chains, 
this section studies the case of the mobile application 
“LocAid” in the context of the charity industry. It shows how 
LocAid’s specific design features, identified in market 
research and in interviews with charities and the charitable 
society, can add value to the value chain of charity services. 
Firstly, the general process and work of charities will be 
described and a framework for a charity value chain 
proposed. Following this, the LocAid project itself will be 
introduced and its effects on the value chain illustrated. 
A. Charities and their Value Chain 
A charity organization can be defined as a non-profit 
organization with the intention of providing help and raising 
money for those in need. According to the Charities Act of 
2006 [26], charitable activities include, among others, 
support for health care, poverty prevention, community 
development and environmental issues. These activities 
range from a local to an international level. To finance their 
work, charities rely mainly on external funding. Individual 
donors constitute the main source of income, followed by 
charitable 
trust 
grants, 
fundraising 
initiatives, 
asset 
investments, trading subsidiaries and charity shops [26]. 
The general relationship between charities and the 
beneficent public, and the basic charity operations required 
to pass public resources to those in need, is illustrated in 
Fig. 2. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 2. Charity process, Source: own illustration 
This shows that charities may receive financial, human 
or physical resources from charitable citizens through a 
range of activities. These activities can be broadly 
categorized into donating, fundraising and giving to/buying 
from charity shops. The overall supply of resources is then 
used to support the external and internal demands of 
charities, such as the funding of specific campaigns and the 
management of the organization, in order eventually to help 
people in need. 
The activities of donation, fundraising and charity shop 
use, with which people can engage, are rather diverse. Fig. 3 
depicts the different ways of contributing within each 
category. 
The first activity, donating, is the process of giving 
money to a specific need. While charitable people can 
donate on a one-time or regular basis (single/regular 
donation), they can also make donations on behalf of 
somebody else (gift donation) or based on their own will 
(legacy). 
 
 
Donating 
• Single donation 
• Gift donation 
• Regular 
donation 
• Legacy 
 
• Community 
and children 
• Health and 
medical 
• Culture and 
education 
• Nature and 
animals 
• Disability 
and elderly 
 
Fundraising 
• Gather 
information 
• Register 
• Pay fee 
• Get sponsorship 
• Turn up 
• Buy 
• Donate 
• Participate 
Charity Shop 
Give & buy: 
• Textiles 
• Furnishing 
• Equipment 
• Accessories 
 
Figure 3. Activities with which charitable people can engage, Source: own 
illustration 
The research for the LocAid project revealed that most 
charities do not specifically state to whom/which 
organization their donations will be given. Many charity 
websites did not show which particular projects they 
operated and remained relatively inexplicit about the general 
work they do. This lack in transparency might discourage 
donors from becoming involved in charitable giving and 
reduce the trust in charity organizations. 
The second activity, fundraising, can be defined as the 
process of giving time and effort to a specific need. 
Potential participants may need to gather information on 
event details, register for an event, pay a participation fee 
and collect sponsorships from other people. Moreover, the 
nature of the event and the degree of involvement influence 
the fundraiser’s activity. Fundraisers may just turn up to 
support others mentally (e.g., cheering at a marathon), buy 
an event ticket or items at the event (e.g., registering for a 
party or buying a cake), donate at an event (e.g., donating at 
a gala dinner) or actively take part in the event (e.g., running 
a marathon). 
Internet research for fundraising events showed that 
charities do list their own events on their websites. 
However, there are only a few websites which list 
collectively the events of various charities in a specific area. 
Hence, a higher level of participation might be achieved 
with a clear overview of such events. 
Finally, people can donate their resources or money to 
charity shops by bringing their own goods or purchasing 
second-hand items. The traded items can be textiles (e.g., 
clothes, shoes), furniture (e.g., mirrors, photo frames), 
equipment (e.g., sport equipment, books, CDs) or 
accessories (e.g., bags, jewelry). 
The project’s research revealed that the number of 
charity shops is growing, especially in Western countries. 
This might be due to the throwaway culture which has 
emerged over the last few decades, but also to the current 
recession, which makes people feel less able to give money 
yet perhaps still able to donate unused items. Moreover, a 
social trend was observed, whereby people would like to do 
something “good” while buying something. Campaigns 
such as Fair Trade might confirm this trend. 
 
Charity Value Chain 
In contrast to services in commercial sectors, the charity 
sector is strongly driven by the beliefs of people who want 
to support a specific cause [15, 23]. It is crucial that 
charities understand why people give to causes and 
communicate their services accordingly to achieve a long-
term commitment [9]. Based on LocAid’s market research 
and interviews, the most prevalent challenges for charities 
are the lack of information made available, and their trust 
and transparency, both of which are instrumental in 
deterring people from giving more to charities. In addition, 
some charity services, especially through the Internet, are 
inconvenient to use. Hence, this paper will draw attention to 
the information, linked to general charity awareness, trust, 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

transparency and convenience, and how these issues could 
be mitigated through any kind of value added within the 
value chain. 
According to Saxton [23], people can be motivated to 
give charitably on different levels, from a shared identity (“I 
share their vision”) to the effects on their local environment 
(“It makes a difference to me”). Other scholars identify, 
therefore, the distinct importance of brand management for 
charities in order to communicate and symbolize the 
specific beliefs of charitable people, motivate them and 
facilitate the process [10, 11]. Hakinson [10] divides a brand 
into functional attributes (the cause) and symbolic values 
(brand values) like humanity, impartiality, neutrality or 
independence. Her research shows that charity managers use 
brands to fulfill a range of organizational objectives such as 
raising awareness, building trust, fundraising, educating or 
lobbying. The small amount of existing research on charity 
organizations and their processes shows that, in order to 
create value, a distinct focus on the cause and its symbolic 
values is required. 
The framework in Fig. 4 is an attempt to identify 
potential aspects of a charity value chain as a service. It is 
based upon the service framework of Gabriel [8] with some 
adjustments taken from market research and interviews with 
respect to the LocAid project.  
 
Primary attributes  
 
Service design: 
The design of a charity service will be oriented towards 
beneficent people and their specific motivations for a cause. 
Marketing might play an important role in incorporating the 
cause, the charity value and the resource provision into the 
service design or even in building a specific charity brand. 
Customer 
segments, 
and 
specifically 
their 
intrinsic 
motivations, might be identified through market research to 
enable an effective service design. 
 
Knowledge management:  
The knowledge management phase could be a potential 
step in enabling effective information provision about 
donors and their profiles. Customer data would need to be 
stored intelligently in order to match the specific needs of 
customers with identified relevant causes and projects. The 
organization would also need to ensure that beneficent 
people are aware and sufficiently informed about the charity 
and its service value. 
 
 
Figure 4. The charity value chain, Source: own illustration 
Communication and feedback processes through customer 
service might strongly support the effectiveness of the 
knowledge management phase. 
 
Delivery systems management:  
The delivery phase of a charity service would aim to 
ensure that the most prevalent challenges of trust, 
transparency and convenience are addressed. Specific focus 
might be given to the convenience of the search, selection, 
payment and registration processes for a cause. This might 
be equally important for all service channels, whether on the 
web, via a mobile, via a call-center or by personal 
interaction. Trust and transparency might be enhanced 
within this step through, e.g., successful fundraising events, 
a strong focus on payment security, trust seals or an 
immediate donation confirmation. 
 
Service competition management:  
Strong competition for donations has been observed 
during LocAid’s market research. The service competition 
management phase would be a potential value chain step to 
signal the positive difference of the charity in comparison to 
its rivals in the market. As charities try to incentivize 
customers to donate on a regular basis, long-term 
satisfaction will be crucial for charities. A focus on trust, 
individual needs and the visible effects of donations might 
be supportive in building strong customer relationships. 
Communication after donations might be targeted, e.g., 
through regular updates on a cause. 
 
Supporting attributes 
 
People:  
The project’s research also revealed that the value of 
charity services was extremely dependent on value co-
creation with customers since, without the support of 
charitable people through help, money or resources, a 
charity itself would be meaningless. Hence, donors should 
feel their own importance throughout the whole value chain. 
People might also refer to the employees of the charity, who 
should represent and believe in the underlying causes. They 
should signal seriousness, generosity, sensitivity and 
customer-friendliness and try to build trust in order to match 
the offered service with the donor’s expectations. 
 
Process information:  
Throughout the value chain, the charity process would 
need to be as transparent as possible. Charitable people 
should be able to know the destination of their contribution 
and its effects on a specific cause. It is proposed that 
employees should be able to access this information and 
provide it, if appropriate, to customers. Optimized 
information technology might help in this step to ensure 
data quality, tracking and provision. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Physical aspects:  
The physical aspects of charities would signal the 
service value with an emphasis on trustworthiness and the 
charitable behavior of giving people. These aspects might be 
divided into “Marketing” - online (e.g., website, application) 
or offline (e.g., catalogue, flyer) - and “Facilities” (e.g., 
office, furnishings, charity shop). 
 
Punctuality and reliability:  
Reliability, and punctuality which is closely related, 
would be crucial for charities to build trust. Customers would 
need to be assured that the charity service is serious and 
reliable, for instance in providing the donated money to the 
corresponding cause efficiently. Immediate payment transfer 
and confirmations, real-time data, regular data check-ups and 
security check-ups on causes before and after donations 
might be able to support this value chain step. 
B. The Local Aid Project 
The mobile application LocAid (i.e., “Local Aid”) was 
developed in the context of a university project at the 
London School of Economics and Political Science. It was 
designed according to the findings of market research, 
interviews with charities and charitable people and the value 
chain identified above. In the following, the application 
itself and a brief overview of the project are presented. 
The application LocAid is a mobile application that 
allows users to find, support and connect to local charity 
organizations. The application offers the three main 
functionalities of donating to local charity projects, 
registering for local fundraising events and finding local 
charity shops. The innovations put forth through LocAid are 
driven primarily by the three distinct characteristics of high 
transparency, local applicability and mobility. The idea is 
based on the concept of offering value added for users and 
charities through enhanced information provision and local 
charity awareness to increase local charitable giving.  
The project of the application development was 
organized into two interrelated, parallel work streams, one 
focusing on the foundation, justification and evaluation, and 
the other on the development of the application.  
In the first stream, a market analysis, surveys and 
interviews with charitable people and charity organizations 
were performed to obtain an understanding of the charity 
market and its processes and needs and to identify the 
concrete definition of the application and its required 
functionalities and design. The surveys were also used to 
justify different aspects of the initial requirements. The 
participants were selected as a potential user audience, in 
order to evaluate the importance of different features of the 
application from their perspective. The survey feedback was 
found to be relatively positive, with 96 percent of people 
considering the application to be useful and more than 60 
percent strongly agreeing that it would encourage them to 
engage more in charitable activities. Users also indicated 
great interest in additional functionalities such as a map, 
calendar and news features. The most prevalent issue for 
participants (more than 70 percent) was the security of the 
payment method, which was viewed as critical in building 
trust before using the application. Two focus groups were 
employed to evaluate the innovation, its usefulness, and 
potential, additional functional requirements. To evaluate 
LocAid from a business perspective, a business model was 
created with a specific focus on user development, the 
revenue model and the cost structure.  
The second stream, the development process, consisted 
of four main steps. It was based on the waterfall 
development model [22], allowing iterations between all 
process steps and using unified modeling language (UML) 
to complement the design process. The implementation was 
carried out in two steps: firstly, a functioning GUI prototype 
was created and feedback was received through the focus 
groups 
for 
further 
improvements; 
secondly, 
the 
development of a rudimentary real prototype was started in 
XCode. Issues during implementation were related mostly 
to the availability of data on charity projects. Most of the 
available data were only for the charity itself as a whole, but 
not for specific projects, as the application requires. Future 
steps, 
therefore, 
would 
include 
considering 
direct 
cooperation with a larger charity with strong local 
involvement and highly accessible project data. This paper 
focuses mainly on the computer–human interaction, rather 
than the implementation issues. 
C. Value Added Mobile Application 
As described in Section III A, the literature has 
identified brand and belief creation as two ways to support 
charities and their value creation. Mobile technology might 
be another recent way to add value to the charity value 
chain. Through its distinct characteristics, localization, 
personalization and connectivity, it might be able to tackle 
the most prevalent problems of charities which deter people 
from engaging more with them, in particular the lack of 
awareness 
and 
information, 
trust, 
transparency 
and 
convenience. The mobile application LocAid was designed 
to address these problems and is an exemple of an 
innovative mobile technology with great potential to add 
value to the value chain of charity services. 
 
Awareness and Information: 
 
During 
the 
“service 
design” 
and 
“knowledge 
management” phases, sufficient awareness and information 
were regarded as being fundamental to market charities’ 
projects, events and general work. Commonly, charities 
send street volunteers to inform people, start campaigns to 
increase awareness of specific projects and have a website 
presence to keep users up-to-date about events and their 
work. However, these activities reveal difficulties in 
explicitly targeting the charitable people and in addressing 
their individual information needs. 
Mobile technologies might be able to address these 
difficulties through their localization, personalization and 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

connectivity characteristics. In the case of LocAid, 
functionalities were incorporated to locate charitable 
individuals and to show specific donation projects, 
fundraising events and charity shops “around” them, thus 
customizing the application to individual needs. Moreover, 
the application was designed in such a way that personal 
accounts were offered in order to tailor the content to the 
specific user (e.g., users get an overview of their past 
donations or events and receive updates on ongoing 
projects). Finally, LocAid was provided with a feature to 
give users information when and where needed, making 
charitable giving a real-time activity and keeping the 
individual user informed at any time about the current status 
of their beneficial actions. 
 
Trust: 
 
Trust was identified as a critical concern throughout the 
whole charity value chain and generally as a complex, 
prevalent factor in every financial transaction. Charities 
should build relationships with a charitable society and 
increase their involvement to gain and sustain the public’s 
trust. Traditional advertising channels, such as physically 
approaching people, attempt to develop trust and customer 
relationships through personal contact. However, many 
people feel pressured and hence refuse to become involved 
in this direct approach.  
Mobile technologies might create a two-way connection 
between the charity organizations and the users without 
pressurizing them. Moreover, customer relationships might 
be built through personalization. LocAid, for example, 
includes features to display updates of projects to which 
users have donated and the most popular projects of other 
users. In addition, the local focus of the application was 
chosen to address the trust issue, as local charities might 
often be better known and their projects can be visited in 
person. Finally, during the development of LocAid, a 
networking functionality was considered, connecting 
charitable people through the application, creating a 
community and thus eventually developing a lock-in effect. 
 
Transparency: 
 
Transparency was found strongly to influence trust and 
was seen as crucial for supporting activities in the value 
chain, such as “process information” and “systems delivery 
management”. The surveys and interviews showed that not 
only the process of money transactions, but also the 
money’s destination and effect should be transparent. 
Charitable people were critical of the fact that they do not 
know where their money goes and their perception of 
charities’ transparency was very often low. Almost all 
reported that their most important concern was to see the 
actual result of their charitable actions, leaving them with 
the desired satisfactory feeling of having done something 
good. 
Mobile 
technologies 
might 
increase 
transparency 
through local applicability and customized content. LocAid 
was designed to give attention to local projects and events in 
order to increase the perceived visibility of donated money 
and its effect on local causes. Accordingly, beneficent 
people can help causes where they see the actual results, in 
contrast to foreign aid support, where users often feel wary 
about the destination and use of their money. In addition, 
personalized features, such as receiving feedback and 
updates on projects to which a user has donated money, 
were chosen to foster customer relations management and, 
thereby, to increase transparency. 
 
Convenience: 
 
Convenience is a factor which has received more 
attention in recent years due to the time constraints in 
today’s society. As market research and surveys show, it has 
developed into a core focus in the charity value chain 
process, especially during the “service delivery” phase. 
Users engage with a service if it is simple, convenient and 
efficient. Conventional efforts to offer convenience to 
charitable people, such as actively approaching people on 
the street rather than asking them to go onto websites and 
visit charity offices, or sending forms for event registration 
via email, cannot meet individual needs to engage in 
charitable activities at the right time and in the right place. 
In constrast, mobile technology can offer service 
“around the clock”, giving the advantage of serving 
customers whenever and wherever it is convenient for them. 
Furthermore, 
as 
previously 
indicated, 
LocAid’s 
functionality design was focused on personalization and 
localization (e.g., giving reminders of upcoming events for 
which users have registered or simple directions to charity 
shops near the user), linking charitable giving with a 
comfortable service provision. Related to this, simplicity in 
design was seen as fundamental to providing convenience, 
leading to strict guidelines during the development (e.g., the 
steps required to carry out a donation or fundraising 
registration should not exceed 3-4 clicks). 
The above customer-focused discussion demonstrates 
the potential ability of LocAid to add value to the existing 
value chain of charities. Aside from acquiring, serving and 
satisfying charitable people in a more efficient and effective 
way, the application may also support charities in their 
information management and operational efficiency. For 
example, donations and fundraising registrations can be 
tracked in real time, new information can be communicated 
instantaneously and marketing can be conducted through a 
more targeted approach – all offering the potential for 
competitive 
advantages 
in 
services 
and 
processes. 
Accordingly, LocAid might not only help charities to 
deliver a better service, but simultaneously offer benefits to 
charities, the benevolent society and the people in need, 
hence acting as an intermediary co-creating value between 
the three interrelated parties. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Overall, the case of the development of LocAid 
demonstrates 
how 
the 
effective 
design 
of 
mobile 
technologies might be able to address prevalent problems 
and 
add 
value 
in 
established 
value 
chains. 
The 
characteristics of localization, customization and mobility 
were systematically applied to the design of the application 
in order to fulfill its value added need. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The LocAid case shows how the characteristics of 
mobile technology can add value within an established 
industry, more specifically within the charity value chain. 
However, some limitations of the framework and the mobile 
technology effects need to be considered. Firstly, the 
relationship of the charity value framework with the 
literature will be discussed and, secondly, the issues of the 
mobile technology effects will be described. 
The framework is strongly related to Gabriel´s [8] 
proposed service chain framework but, unlike in the original 
model, the activities of “moment of truth” and “delivery 
system management” are combined. For charities, these two 
activities cannot be differentiated as the actual “service 
moment” of a charity often cannot be defined due to its 
subjective nature. People will define their service moment 
differently: for some, the payment to a cause will be the 
main service moment, while for others it will be the actual 
resource provision or positive effect in the future. The main 
relation to Porter´s original model is the differentiation 
between primary and supporting activities and the 
fundamental idea of how value is created within a “chain”. 
The charity value chain is, in contrast to Porter’s original 
model, a service value chain, which emphasizes not the 
creation of a product but the co-creation of value with its 
customer.  
The charity value described in this paper is formed 
mainly from market research work (interviews). The 
academic literature was not found to be sufficiently detailed 
and was too generic in some cases to be logically 
conclusive. This is a shortcoming of this work, as the model 
might require further testing. In addition, the model 
framework proposed for the charity value chain is only 
validated for the case of London, or at most the UK; hence, 
attempts to extend the results to other contexts would 
require a reassessment of the assumptions for calibration. 
The positive effects of the mobile technology on the 
charity value chain have certain problematic characteristics, 
which will be critically discussed for each attribute. An 
issue for all attributes is that the value added can usually 
only be leveraged if the charity fulfills certain prerequisites 
(e.g., transparency can hardly be enhanced if the charity 
does not provide sufficient data on its processes). This issue 
is strongly related to the key implementation issue regarding 
available data. 
Considering the supporting attributes of the value 
chain framework, people and physical attributes are unlikely 
to 
be 
influenced 
by 
mobile 
technology. 
Process 
transparency and increasing trust through punctuality and 
reliability attributes can be improved, but only if the 
mentioned complementary attributes are present (e.g., the 
charity needs to be reliable before a mobile technology can 
add 
value). 
Regarding 
primary 
attributes, 
mobile 
applications add value to the service design and specifically 
to general charity awareness. Charities need to be aware 
that, in the case of LocAid, these positive effects can occur 
similarly for all cooperating partners of the mobile 
application service provider. Consequently, the service 
could be used more out of a necessity to compete rather than 
as an idea to gain any value added. The knowledge 
management, delivery systems management and service 
competition can be affected very positively through the 
distinct characteristics of personalization, localization and 
connectivity of a mobile application. Similarly to the 
supporting attributes, significant value added can only be 
fostered if the required conditions are fulfilled.  
Further limitations of value added through mobile 
technology arise from the effects on trust and transparency, 
in combination with taking payments through a mobile 
application. Trust is a complex concept and a prevalent and 
important factor for every financial transaction. The ability 
to measure trust is limited by the fact that it is a 
multidimensional socio-technical factor which may be 
differently interpreted by every individual and which has 
received numerous different definitions [5, 7, 19]. Most 
scholars agree that trust is a belief in “favorable 
expectations” [5] based on previous interactions. The 
problem is that a mobile intermediary increases the number 
of parties which need to be trusted, in this case not only the 
charity itself but also the mobile service, leading very often 
to an as yet unaddressed problem of perceived security. 
Trust and security, if not perceived by a user, have been 
identified as major inhibiting factors in user acceptance of 
payments through a mobile application [5, 16]. Security can 
generally be divided into objective and subjective security. 
Objective security denotes the concrete technical details 
which are unlikely to be perceived by the consumer. 
Subjective security is the perception of a user that the 
mobile payment procedure is secure and can be seen to 
combat the perceived risk [5, 6, 21, 24]. Consumers often 
perceive payment solutions as insecure, thus do not trust 
them and are therefore unwilling to use them. 
The positive effects of mobile technology could be 
further mitigated by personal characteristics of charitable 
people, such as their age, beliefs or values. Mobile 
technology and especially payments through mobile 
applications are used mostly by younger generations. 
Because the most charitable group of people is aged 
between 45 and 64 years [26], their adoption, or even 
knowledge, of mobile technology can often be limited. 
Furthermore, the local aspect of LocAid, based mainly upon 
the localization feature, could go against the beliefs of many 
charitable people, who generally come from developed 
countries and often see no reason to donate or support local 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

charities but want to help foreign poorer developing 
countries. Ultimately, the idea of an extra service fee due to 
an additional intermediary could put many people off 
because, firstly, the donated money could be reduced and, 
secondly, some believe a charitable intermediary should not 
aim to gain any benefit at all. This concern should be taken 
into account in any business-model development for a 
mobile value service within a charity value chain, for 
instance by not charging donors at all and charging charities 
only to the extent that the value added exceeds the 
additional service charge. 
Finally, the effects of the LocAid case need to be 
critically debated from the perspective of the overall charity 
industry. Firstly, even though the localization feature can 
indeed add great value if a charity supports local projects, 
charities with non-local projects or no possibility to provide 
local individual information have only limited or no use for 
the mobile value service. The distinct localization feature, 
therefore, only applies to charities with local projects. 
Secondly, the application itself is limited within the charity 
industry because it does not consider volunteering services, 
which are of great importance to many charities. The 
volunteering process often involves a higher level of 
commitment, 
and 
specific 
skills 
and 
training 
and 
differentiates itself from donations, fundraising and shop 
functionalities for any application development. 
The LocAid case shows how design specifications can 
be derived by analyzing the specific value added of the 
application in relation to the industry into which it is 
introduced. Alongside innovation, the application was 
designed in order to signal quality and generosity to 
overcome trust constraints, but also to incentivize users 
(e.g., the color green was chosen as the main color due to its 
signaling of generosity, support and money). Developers 
and graphic designers should work hand in hand to produce 
a coherent design which suits the specific requirements of 
an industry.  
The discussion shows that the proposed charity value 
chain and the effects of the mobile technology and its value 
service can generally lead to value added, but both the 
framework and the value added are limited due to the 
framework’s uncertainty, the intermediary character of the 
mobile technology and the general trust issue within the 
charity industry. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The approach to understanding the role that mobile 
applications such as LocAid can have in value chains is an 
area which has not been researched in depth and companies 
have been slow to understand and plan for future 
implementations. The waterfall model for the design of 
mobile applications, when used with sufficient care and 
vision, is still adequate for providing solutions when 
required. 
The proposed charity value chain framework shows how 
value is co-created with the customer and which specific 
attributes can add value to this service. The specific issues 
of trust, transparency and convenience in the charity sector 
offer a basis for analyzing the positive effects of mobile 
technology. The distinct mobile technology features of 
localization, connectivity and personalization can be related 
to each value chain attribute and offer strong value added 
overall.  
In terms of design, the carefully crafted attention to 
detail, in terms of application design, services, trust, etc., 
allows the provision of an integral solution for the delivery 
of this type of service, which has been positively embraced 
by practitioners in interviews with charities in London, and 
there is interest in releasing the application and its future 
enhancements in the real life market. 
This research paper contributes to the field by presenting 
a new, business-oriented direction for research in computer 
science. By focusing on human-computer interactions in 
relation to specific value chains, it encourages academics 
and practitioners to work together in order to achieve mutual 
benefits. In addition, the very practical findings of this paper 
can help established services to understand the value which 
new technologies, in particular mobile technology, can give 
to their businesses and to create an interest in innovations 
and new developments in the future. 
Future research should further assess the proposed value 
chain framework but also try to identify more specific 
features of mobile technology which can create value added, 
and show how practitioners in related industries and 
developers can use these opportunities to devise practical 
guidelines such as design specifications. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Altenburg, “Donor approaches to supporting pro-poor value 
chains,” Report prepared for the Donor Committee for Enterprise 
Development Working Group on Linkages and Valu Chains, Bonn, 
Germany, July 2006. 
[2] P. Ballon, “Control and value in mobile communications: a 
political economy of the reconfiguration of business models in the 
European mobile industry,” unpublished. 
[3] S. Barnes, “The Mobile Commerce Value Chain: Analysis and 
Future Developments,” International Journal of Information 
Management, vol. 22(2), 2002, pp. 91–108, doi:10.1016/S0268-
4012(01)00047-0. 
[4] C. Coursaris, K. Hassanein and M. Head, “Mobile Technology 
and the Value Chain: Participants, Activities and Value Creation,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Business 
Science 
and 
Applied 
Management, vol. 3(3), 2008, pp. 14–30. 
[5] U. Cyril, G. Gan, J. Ademu and S. Tealla, “Modelling User 
Trust and Mobile Payment Adoption: A Conceptual Framework,” 
Communications of the IBIMA, vol. 3(29), 2008, pp. 224–231. 
[6] T. Dahlberg, N. Mallat, J. Ondrus and A. Zmijewska, “Past, 
Present and Future of Mobile Payments Research: A Literature 
Review,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 
7(2), 2007, pp. 65–181, doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2007.02.001. 
[7] T. Dahlberg, N. Mallat and A. Öörni, “Trust Enhanced 
Technology Acceptance Model – Consumer Acceptance of Mobile 
Payment Solutions,” Proc. 2nd Mobility Roundtable, Stockholm, 
Sweden, May 2003. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

[8] E. Gabriel, “Value Chain for Services: A New Dimension of 
‘Porter’s Value Chain’,” IMS International Journal, vol. 34, 2006.  
[9] B. S. Guy and W. E. Patton, “The Marketing of Altruistic 
Causes: Understanding Why People Help,” The Journal of 
Consumer 
Marketing, 
vol. 
6(1), 
1989, 
pp. 
19–30, 
doi:10.1108/EUM0000000002536. 
[10] P. Hankinson, “Brand Orientation in Charity Organizations: 
Qualitative Research into Key Charity Sectors,” International 
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, vol. 5(3), 
2000, pp. 207–219, doi:10.1002/nvsm.114. 
[11] S. Hibbert and S. Horne, “Giving to Charity: Questioning the 
Donor Decision Process,” Journal of Consumer Marketing, vol. 13, 
1996, pp. 4–13, doi: 10.1108/07363769610115366. 
[12] R. Kaplinsky and M. Morris, A Handbook for Value Chain 
Research. Report prepared for IDRC, University of Sussex 
Institute of Development Studies, 2001. 
[13] M. Kleijnen, K. De Ruyter, M. Wetzels, “An Assessment of 
Value Creation in Mobile Service Delivery and the Moderating 
Role of Time Consciousness,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 83(1), 
2007, pp. 33–46, doi: 10.1016/j.jretai.2006.10.004. 
[14] Y. Kuo, C. Wu and W. Deng, “The Relationships among 
Service Quality, Perceived Value, Customer Satisfaction, and Post-
Purchase Intention in Mobile Value-Added Services,” Computers 
in Human Behavior, vol. 25(4), 2009, pp. 887–896, doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2009.03.003. 
[15] S. Lee, “Marketing charities in the 1990s,” in The Henderson 
Top 1000 Charities: A Guide to UK Charities, R. Henderson, Eds. 
London, UK: Hemmington Scott, 1993.  
[16] N. Mallat, “Exploring Consumer Adoption of Mobile 
Payments – A Qualitative Study,” Proc. Helsinki Mobility 
Roundtable, Helsinki, Finland, June 2006. 
[17] B. Martin and P. Nightingale, “Introduction,” in The Political 
Economy of Science, Technology and Innovation, B. Martin and P. 
Nightingale, Eds. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2000, pp. 13–
42. 
[18] B. Nooteboom, “Service Value Chains and Effects of Scale,” 
Service 
Business, 
vol. 
1(2), 
2007, 
pp. 
119–139, 
doi: 
10.1007/s11628-006-0009-4. 
[19] P. A. Pavlou, “Consumer Acceptance of Electronic 
Commerce. Integrating Trust and Risk with the Technology 
Acceptance 
Model,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Electronic 
Commerce, vol. 7(3), 2003, pp. 101–134. 
[20] M. Porter, Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining 
Superior Performance. New York, NY: Free Press, 1985. 
[21] K. Pousttchi and D. G. Wiedemann, What Influences 
Consumers’ Intention to Use Mobile Payments? New York, NY: 
Free Press, 2007. 
[22] W. W. Royce, “Managing the Development of Large Software 
Systems: Concepts and Techniques,” Proc. 9th International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 87), IEEE Computer 
Society Press, 1987, pp. 328–338. 
[23] J. Saxton, “A Strong Charity Brand Comes from Strong 
Beliefs and Values,” Journal of Brand Management, vol. 2(4), 
1994, pp. 211–220. 
[24] P. G. Schierz, O. Schilke and B. W. Wirtz, “Understanding 
Consumer Acceptance of Mobile Payment Services: An Empirical 
Analysis,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 
9(3), 2010, pp. 209–216, doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2009.07.005. 
[25] C. Sørensen, Enterprise Mobility: Tiny Technology with 
Global Impact on Work. Technology, Work and Globalization 
Series, Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.  
 [26] UK Charity Commission, Charities Act 2006. [online] 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/50/contents> 
[accessed 29 February 2012]. 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

