Design and Evaluation of a Mobile Payment System for Public Transport: the
MobiPag STCP Prototype
Marta Campos Ferreira, Teresa Galvão Dias, João Falcão e Cunha
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Universidade do Porto, Faculdade de Engenharia
Porto, Portugal
Emails: {mferreira, tgalvão, jfcunha}@fe.up.pt
Abstract— The general adoption of mobile devices and their
increasing functionality allow their use to make payments. This
wide-spreading reality is being applied to several sectors,
including
public
transport.
In
fact,
there
are
several
advantages of mobile payment and ticketing over traditional
systems, such as queue avoidance, ubiquitous and remote
access to payment, and the lack of need to carry physical
money. This paper presents a prototype of a mobile payment
system for public transport using customers’ smartphones with
Internet connection. The purchase and validation of tickets is
made Over-The-Air (OTA), and location providers are used to
locate the traveller and reduce the number of options when it
comes to purchasing or validating a ticket. This system was
tested in the city of Porto, by real travellers of Sociedade de
Transportes Colectivos do Porto
(STCP),
the
main
bus
transport company, during their normal use of public transport
services. The users considered the system extremely useful,
since it is more convenient than traditional systems, improving
the travelling process and experience. They also felt secure to
pay with their mobile phones, and valued the fact they could
access information about their journeys, tickets, and account.
The ticket validation process revealed to be one of the main
challenges that any payment system for public transport
should address, as compared to the simplicity of traditional
systems.
Keywords–mobile
payments;
public
transport;
mobile
ticketing; user experience; field trial.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile payment can be defined as the use of a mobile
device (mobile phone, Personal Digital Assistant (PDA),
wireless tablet) “to initiate, authorize and confirm an
exchange of financial value in return for goods and
services.” [1]. For more than a decade now, several attempts
have been done to use mobile phones for payment
transactions. In fact, there are several advantages of mobile
payments over traditional systems, such as queue avoidance,
ubiquitous and remote access to payment, and lack of need
to carry coins and cash [2]. For instance, the users can pay
for transport tickets without the need to visit an Automated
Teller Machine (ATM) or a ticketing machine [3].
In this paper, we present a mobile payment system for
public transport based on customers’ mobile devices that
only need to have Internet connection. The purchase and
validation of tickets is made OTA, and location providers
are used to locate the traveller and reduce the number of
options when it comes to purchasing or validating a ticket,
making the system easier to use. Since the system is totally
based on customers’ mobile devices, Public Transport
Operators (PTOs) do not need to adapt or buy new
infrastructures, such as gates, ticket vending machines or
ticket readers.
The system was tested in real environment in the city of
Porto, by real travellers, during their normal use of public
transport services. Twenty-six users tested the system during
2 weeks and were accompanied by a Facebook group created
for this purpose. This evaluation method was a success, since
it allowed users to report in real time their difficulties,
opinions
and
improvement
suggestions.
After
the
experiments, individual interviews were carried out, being
useful to explore additional questions related with travelling
habits, security perception and mobile payment business
models.
The outline of the current paper is as follows: the next
section
characterizes
mobile
payment
systems
and
traditional ticketing systems in public transport sector.
Section 3 describes the proposed mobile payment system
and Section 4 details the evaluation procedure and the main
results. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and
future research
II.
RELATED WORK
PTOs already used basic mobile phone features, like
making phone calls and sending text messages, to allow
travel tickets purchase. For instance, Paybox in Austria
allows the Austrian railway OBB customers to purchase
travel tickets via Short Message Service (SMS) or through
the Vodafone live! Portal [4], and enable the customers to
pay through their monthly phone bills. Proximus SMS-Pay in
Belgium, Mobipay in Spain and AvantixMetro in UK are
other examples of implemented mobile ticketing systems
based on SMS.
While SMS can be considered a simple and easy to use
technology, it has limitations when used to make payments.
SMS uses store and forward technology, does not use any
encryption method and there is no proof of delivery within
the SMS protocol [5]. Most SMS-based mobile payment
models do provide a proof of delivery, requiring a second
separate message to be sent, which increases the costs of a
transaction. This problem is particularly pertinent when
small payments are at stake.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The evolution of mobile phones to smartphones has
broadened the range of payment possibilities [6]. Also, when
contactless technologies like Near Field Communication
(NFC) were added to smart phones, more functionality
became possible. Tickets can be purchased, downloaded, and
accessed on the phone, and when in contact with NFC-
enabled readers, the tickets are redeemed and a receipt is sent
[7]. Several pilots of NFC-enabled phones have been
launched in the public transport area. For instance, the
Touch&Travel service in Germany allows passengers to
make payments with their mobile phones. Travellers have to
tap their NFC-enabled mobile phone to the Touchpoint
device at the departing station and at the destination. The
length of the journey and the ticket price are calculated at the
end of the journey, and the customer receives, each month, a
statement with all travel data and an attached invoice [8].
A NFC pilot was also launched in London [7], where 500
customers
were
given
Nokia
handsets
with
Oyster
functionality.
Passengers could top up their Oyster by
touching their handset on Oyster ticket machines in tube
stations or at Oyster tickets shops. Key findings of the
research were that customers maintained high levels of
interest and satisfaction throughout the trial and that the main
customer benefits were convenience, ease of use, and status.
NFC was considered a good choice for mobile payments
in terms of speed, security and usability when compared with
traditional
mobile
payment
service
concepts,
such
as
Interactive Voice Response, SMS, Wireless Application
Protocol and One Time Password Generator [9][10]. In fact,
NFC allows two-way contactless communication, offers
faster
connection
between
devices,
less
chance
of
interference, and has a shorter range, making it more secure
for use in crowded places. However, NFC is failing in get
critical mass, since it requires service providers to invest in
new POS and NFC-reading systems and enough number of
customers with NFC-enabled phones and wanting to use
them to use them for payment purposes.
Bohm et al. [11] and Ferreira et al. [12] propose further
mobile ticketing models for public transport based on Global
Positioning System (GPS). According to these models, apart
from having a smartphone with Wi-Fi and GPS technologies,
the user only needs to check-in when starting a trip and
check-out at the end. The customer is also located by the
service provider during his trip at defined intervals. At the
end of the journey, the system determines the route within
the public transport network and calculates the price, which
is then debited from the customers’ account. This kind of
system is really convenient and easy to use for customers, as
they are not required to have any particular knowledge about
tariffs or ticketing machines [12].
Mobile phones’ features make them unique and suitable
to be used to make payments and to offer additional
services. Mobile phones are network-connected, have easy-
to-use sound and text interfaces and provide anytime-
anywhere access to information. When applied to the public
transport sector, mobile ticketing systems allow PTOs to
reduce operational and maintenance costs, acquire better
knowledge about customers’ travel behaviour, and shorten
the interaction with the customers.
III.
PROPOSED MOBILE PAYMENT SYSTEM
The proposed mobile payment system is the result of a
project involving the main bus transport company in Porto –
STCP – and potential customers. The mobile payment
system was designed taking into consideration this specific
service provider and its characteristics. Nevertheless, the
concept and design of the system are scalable and adaptable
to other realities. In the next subsection we describe the
background and the challenges beyond this development. In
Subsection B, we present the architecture of the system and
finally, in Subsection C, we present the system itself.
A.
Background and challenges
The Metropolitan Area of Porto (AMP) is served by an
extensive public transport network which includes buses
(from STCP), light rail (Metro do Porto) and trains (CP –
Portuguese Railways). The electronic ticketing system in
AMP is an open (ungated) system that required a significant
technological investment, such as card readers along the
platforms at each metro station and at each bus vehicle, and
handheld devices for conductors.
The pricing policy implemented in the AMP is based on
two
types
of
price
discrimination:
journey-based
and
passenger-based price discrimination. The price for the
journey-based perspective was settled based on a zone
concept. The AMP network is divided into zones, with a flat
rate within each zone, and the price is determined according
to the number of zones crossed by the passenger. Once the
ticket is validated, the passenger can travel, within a certain
period of time, in the zone he chose. After that period of
time, the traveller must validate the ticket again. The price of
the tickets also depends on the characteristics of the
passenger (child, student, senior or pensioner).
Tickets are available in several types: zonal single ticket,
season ticket and multi-journey ticket. The ticketing system
adopted in AMP is the contactless card, Andante, based on
RFID technology [13]. Travellers can buy the contactless
cards or recharge them at ticket vending machines, Service
Provider Stores and spots, Third Party Agents and inside the
vehicle (bus). Each Andante card can only contain one type
of ticket at the same time (e.g., it cannot have a Zone2 ticket
and also a Zone3 ticket), but it can contain several tickets of
the same type (for instance, 10 Zone2 tickets).
In order to travel along the AMP network, passengers
must buy the Andante contactless card and charge it with
zone tickets. Then, they must validate the travel card in the
reader at the beginning of the journey, and the ticket is
redeemed. There is no need to validate the Andante at the
end of the journey, but travellers must validate the travel
card every time they change vehicle.
One of the main challenges of this work was to propose a
ticketing solution for public transport services requiring the
minimum
investment
cost
from
PTOs
point-of-view,
achieving
at
the
same
time
the
maximum
consumer
acceptance. The proposed system is based on customers’
mobile devices, which are widely available and offer
numerous
functionalities,
and
is
based
on
wireless
communication technologies (3G and/or Wi-Fi) and on
location providers, such as GPS and network triangulation.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

SMS and NFC technologies were not considered a viable
option, due to different reasons. SMS has several limitations
(already referred) and have a premium price associated. NFC
technology would require huge investments to convert
existing infrastructures into NFC readers and would not
represent a ubiquitous solution.
Another challenge we had to face was to guarantee the
supervision of valid tickets by conductors. Since AMP is an
ungated system, Porto PTO must have a way to confirm that
a certain ticket is still valid for a specific journey. This
confirmation is visual and uses security symbols and
sequence numbers. This process is described in detail in the
Subsection C. Such information can also be confirmed by
assessing the backend system, in case of mobile phone’s
dead battery.
Another concern has to do with customers’ information
and data gathering. It is true that PTOs have heavy
infrastructures installed and incur in maintenance costs every
month, but these infrastructures are powerful data collectors
that helps PTOs to know customers’ travel patterns and to
adjust service offerings. With the proposed system we do not
lose this precious information, rather we enhance it. PTOs
have access to individual customers’ travel behaviour and
preferences. This may represent a shift in public transport
service delivery, since SP may direct recommendations,
services
and
institutional
and
operational
information
particularly suited to a specific customer. We move from
mass communication to one-to-one communication.
B.
System Architecture
The
system
architecture
comprises
three
main
components: server, client and conductor (see Fig. 1). The
client component allows customers to interact directly with
the services. This interaction is achieved through the use of a
mobile phone, tablet, or any other mobile device running the
Android operating system. This component allows buying,
store and validating travel tickets, as well as checking tickets
balance, account movements, validation history, check prices
and maps, and find near stations.
The conductor component allows conductors to verify if
a traveller has a valid ticket for the journey or not. The client
and conductor components are integrated in the same
application, in the customers’ mobile phone, which removes
the need of an additional device to be carried by the
conductors.
The server may be considered the heart of the system,
since it provides the services to the other components of the
architecture. It comprises three subcomponents:
a)
Database: all information is stored in a database,
only accessible by server-side business logic.
b)
Webpage: acts as a control panel through which the
platform manager can manage all aspects of the system and
access to the customers’ travelling information.
c)
Web service: most of the logic of the system will be
processed
by
this
component,
which
function
as
an
intermediary between the customer/conductor component
and the central database.
C.
MobiPag STCP Application
According to the proposed mobile payment system, the
purchase and validation of tickets is made OTA and location
providers are used to locate the traveller and reduce the
number of options when it comes to purchase or validate a
ticket, making the system easier to use. Before choosing
which ticket the user wants to buy, a list with the tickets
already stored in his wallet is presented to him, preventing
the user to buy tickets he already has. The user can buy the
travel tickets in two ways: he chooses the zone ticket he
wants to buy and selects the number of tickets for each zone
(see Fig. 2 (a)), or alternatively, he chooses the departure and
the arrival station and the system automatically converts this
information into zones.
To validate a ticket, location providers (GPS and network
triangulation) are used to identify customers’ location. From
the given list of near stops the user chooses which stop he is
going to enter and then he selects the ticket he wants to
redeem from those stored in his virtual wallet. In order
gather valuable information, users must also select the bus
line they are entering (see Fig. 2 (b)). This requirement
allows the Porto PTO to know exactly which vehicle the user
is entering, by crossing this information with time and
vehicles on the road. Once the ticket is validated, the
Figure 1. MobiPag STCP architecture.
Figure 2. Mobile payment system screens: (a) buy ticket by choosing the
type (zone); (b) validate ticket; (c) active ticket (interfaces in Portuguese).
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

passenger can travel in the zone he chose for a certain time,
and check the remaining time on the display. The user is also
warned when the journey time expires.
If a conductor wants to verify if a traveller as a valid
ticket for that journey, the user only needs to show the active
ticket screen on his mobile phone (see Fig. 2 (c)). This
screen has information about the ticket (stop, date and type
of ticket), a security symbol, and a sequence number. The
security symbol, represented by the watermark image, will
act as a secure element to prevent users from creating false
tickets images. This symbol changes every day, and the
conductor has access to it in order to know what he expects
to see on customers’ mobile devices. The sequence number
acts also as a secure element. Each validation corresponds to
a different sequence number. So, the conductor will be able
to verify a pattern (sequence numbers very close) inside a
bus. If he identifies a sequence number very different from
others, this acts as a warning sign for the conductor to check
carefully the other information to see if the title is valid. In
Fig. 2 (c), this number is represented by the number 746321.
The proposed mobile payment system also comprises
several additional services beyond payments in order to
attract potential consumers. For instance, the user can check
tickets balance, account movements, validation history,
check prices and maps, and find near stations.
IV.
EVALUATION
In this section, we explain how we evaluated the
MobiPag STCP system. Our goals were to understand users’
perception about the concept of buying and validating travel
tickets with the mobile phone, and to analyse the usability of
the application, identify major problems and potential
improvements. The next subsection explains the evaluation
procedure that was used. Subsection B details the sample
characteristics. The test phase is described in Subsection C,
and finally, Subsection D presents the major results.
A.
Procedure
The experiments were conducted in real environment, by
real travellers, during their normal use of public transport
services in the city of Porto. The recruitment and selection of
the participants was carried out by STCP, who solicited
participation through their website and information inside the
buses. In order to get as much heterogeneity in terms of
various demographic factors (gender, age, occupation), 37
travellers were selected, from which 26 participated in the
tests. The users tested the application for two weeks.
There were some prerequisites that the participants had to
meet in order to participate: owning a mobile phone with
Android operating system, being a frequent user of public
transport (at least 5 validations per week), and have Internet
connection via mobile phone.
The experiments were divided in three phases:
1)
Pre-test phase: Explanation of the evaluation process
(by
email
and
in
person)
and
administration
of
a
questionnaire to characterize the sample.
2)
Test phase: The users tested the application in real
environment and in the context of use of public transport
services. During this phase users were accompanied by a
Facebook group created for this purpose and by email,
which allowed for a very detailed review in real time.
3)
Post-test phase: In depth interviews in order to gather
additional information about the experiments.
B.
Sample Characterization
Before starting the experiments, the participants had to
fill in a questionnaire that was applied online using the
google
drive
platform.
The
main
objective
was
to
characterize the sample in terms of socio-demographic
characteristics, and smartphone and public transport usage.
Participants had also to rate, according to five-point Likert
scale [14] ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree,
several statements related with the purchase and validation of
tickets through traditional methods and through mobile
devices.
From the total of 26 participants, 16 are male and 10
female, aged between 21 and 68 years and average age of
around 34 years (see Table I). Most users (23) have a
smartphone for 6 months or more, which indicates some
familiarity with the use of smartphones, making it easier to
adapt to the application. They are all frequent users of public
transport services and about half of the users perform
intermodal transhipment (bus-subway; bus-train; etc.).
Most users buy their tickets at vending machines (18) or
through third party agents (11) and ATM network (9) and
use both debit card (15) and money (11) to make payment.
The most used additional services are checking timetables
(25) and transport network maps (11), being the access to
this information mostly done via the website of the operators
(23) but also in stops and stations (18).
In some situations, users do not know what kind of ticket
to buy to perform a certain trip. Despite considering easy to
buy tickets in vending machines, it is frequent not to have
change to make the purchase. The need to go to a physical
store
to
purchase
the
monthly
pass
is
considered
inconvenient, especially at the end or beginning of each
month because of the long queues. Users also stated that it is
rather more likely to leave the Andante card at home than the
mobile phone.
Regarding the purchase and validation of tickets with the
mobile
phones,
users
revealed
very
receptive
to
it,
considering this payment method useful and secure, and
compatible with their lifestyle and normal use of the phone.
However they showed some concern about connectivity
problems and short battery life that may jeopardize the
completion of the payment operations.
TABLE I - SAMPLE CHARACTERIZATION
Characteristics
Number of Participants
Sample number (n)
26
Age
20-29y (11), 30-39y (8), 40-49y (4), 50-59y (3)
Gender
Male (16), Female (10)
Smartphone
Ownership
More than six months (23), less than six months
(3)
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

C.
Test Phase
The Mobipag STCP application was made available via
Google
Play
two
days
before
the
beginning
of
the
experiments, and only the authorized participants could
download it. This allowed users to get familiar with the
application and clarify doubts.
During this test phase, the users had to buy and validate
travel tickets through the mobile application during their
normal use of public transport. Since the mobile tickets had
no legal value, users had also to buy and validate physical
tickets at the same time.
In two weeks, the users made 723 validations with their
mobile phone, in 234 different stops and 111 different routes
and 36 transhipments. Analyses of Fig. 3 indicate a sharp
decline of validations during the weekends and an average of
50 validations per day during the week. The users bought 24
monthly passes and made 63 purchases of single tickets.
To promote the communication among participants, it
was created a group on the social network Facebook, where
users were encouraged to share their experience, doubts and
questions. This method was a success, since it allowed users
to report in real time their difficulties, opinions and
improvement suggestions. They interacted with each other
by sharing their experiences and trying to solve common
problems. It also allowed us to correct, in real time, any bug
they reported and to gather a lot of information regarding the
experience.
Every comment on the Facebook group was analysed and
coded. These codes were then aggregated into categories,
according to the relationships between them. After the
testing phase, the participants were interviewed individually.
Each interview was recorded and lasted about 50 minutes.
The interviews were useful to explore additional questions
related with travelling habits, security perception and mobile
payment business model. The interviews content was then
analysed and coded. Some codes were related to the ones
founded in the Facebook content analysis, while others have
led to the emergence of new categories. Regarding the
problems of the application and improvement suggestions,
the Facebook group comments revealed to be much richer,
since they were reported in real time. The main conclusions
regarding the analysis of the Facebook comments and
interviews are presented in the next subsection.
D.
Discussion
The comments on Facebook group and the individual
interviews were analysed, coded and grouped in five main
categories: perceived
value, suggestions,
concerns and
issues, security and fraud, and business model. These
categories were summarized in Table II and are detailed
below.
1)
Perceived value
The users liked the concept of buying and validating
tickets with the mobile phone and considered the application
very intuitive and easy to use. The possibility of buying
tickets everywhere and anytime was greatly valued. They
also found very useful the additional information about the
journeys and users’ account provided by the application.
Such customized information, like tickets balance, remaining
time of the journey, and journey details, is not possible to
provide through a contactless card with no screen.
TABLE II - PERCENTAGE OF PARTICIPANTS THAT MENTIONED EACH TOPIC
RELATED TO THE MOBIPAG STCP APPLICATION
Categories
% of
participants
mentioning the
argument
(n=26)
Argument in
favour or
against the
proposed
system
Perceived Value
- Satisfaction (e.g., easy-to-use;
intuitive;
great
functionalities
(historic,
purchase,
remaining
time))
86%
+
Suggestions
- Improvement suggestions (e.g.,
PIN
and
password;
colours;
method of selecting the stops;
storage and upload of
personal
photo)
71%
+ -
-
New
functionalities
(e.g.,
languages; maps; historic of most
used stops; alerts)
57%
+ -
-
Application
Bugs
(e.g.,
aplicattion
crashes;
unknown
characters;
wrong
alert
about
ending station; wrong price)
67%
-
Concerns and Issues
-
Technology (e.g.,
GPS
bad
performance)
29%
-
- Insatisfaction (e.g., takes too
long to complete the validation
process)
33%
-
Security and Fraud
- Security (e.g., security when
paying with the mobile phone)
71%
+
- Fraud (e.g., people may not
validate tickets; use of the same
account
in
different
mobile
phones)
24%
-
Business Model
- Payment method (e.g., pre-paid
account for travelling purposes)
86%
+
- Pay for the mobile ticketing
service (e.g., willing to pay a
modest fee for the application)
76%
+
Figure 3. Number of validations per day.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

2)
Suggestions
The participants were very active in identifying problems
and bugs related to the application. The use of the social
network Facebook in the evaluation process was a major
advantage, since users were able to communicate in real time
the bugs they were finding, and the developing team was
able to fix those errors immediately.
A lot of improvement suggestions were also identified by
users, such as the design and colours of the application, PIN
and password procedures, method of selecting the stop (by
alphabetical order, by most used, etc.). New functionalities
were also suggested, such as adding new languages to the
application, historic of most used stops, alerts about the
expiration of a monthly pass. In Table II the topics
improvement suggestions and new functionalities have the
“+” and “-“ signs simultaneously. These topics are a negative
argument
against
the
application
because
those
functionalities were not (well) covered by the application,
but at the same time are in favour because some of those
were implemented during the tests.
These
inputs
were
fundamental
to
improve
the
application and to set new ideas for future versions of the
system.
3)
Concerns and issues
The validation process was considered more complex
when compared with the traditional one. Users had to choose
the stop, the route and the ticket before the validation. They
proposed several ideas to simplify the process: provide the
last used stops, create favourite stops, and use other
technologies, such as NFC or QR codes. The validation
process is a major challenge in the design of a ticketing
solution.
In order to facilitate the validation process, the system
locates the user through triangulation or GPS to indicate the
departure stop where he is. However, GPS location takes
some time to locate the user and the location through mobile
networks proved in many cases to be inaccurate. This meant
that in most cases it was necessary to resort to a manual
selection of the stops (which was thought to be used only in
special cases), requiring an extra step in the validation
process.
4)
Security and fraud
The users felt secure to pay with the mobile phones. They
even compared this system with mobile banking systems.
The participants that were already familiar with the use of
mobile banking applications, they felt equally safe to
purchase tickets with the phone.
From service providers’ point-of-view some concerns
regarding security and fraud may emerge due to the
inspection process. The process for conductors to check the
validity of a ticket is mainly visual, which may require
adding further security to the process, such as providing
reading devices to the conductors.
In addition to these, there will always be risks associated
with the behaviour of the people itself, regardless of the
ticketing system used. For instance, some participants raised
some concerns about what prevented people from validate
the ticket only when they saw the conductor approaching.
5)
Business Model
Most of users stated they prefer to have a pre-paid
account for travelling purposes instead of having the
ticketing application linked with their bank account or
mobile phone bill. This is important for PTOs, since it means
that users are willing to pay before they travel. This lag
between the payment for the service and its provision,
functions as a way of funding for PTOs.
When questioned about how much they were willing to
pay for the mobile ticketing service, most users stated that
they were willing to pay a modest fee for the application, but
not an additional amount per ticket purchased.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the design and evaluation of a
prototype for a mobile payment system for public transport.
This system is based on customers’ mobile devices that only
need
to
have
Internet
connection. The purchase
and
validation of tickets is made OTA, and location providers are
used to locate the traveller and reduce the number of options
when it comes to purchase or validate a ticket, making the
system easier to use.
The system was tested in real environment, by real
travellers, during their normal use of public transport
services in the city of Porto. The 26 users tested the system
during 2 weeks and were accompanied through a Facebook
group created for this purpose. After the experiments
individual interviews were carried out, in order to explore
additional information related with travelling habits, security
perception and mobile payment business model.
The users liked the concept of buying and validating
tickets with the mobile phone and considered the application
very intuitive and easy to use. They also felt secure to pay
with the mobile phone and valued the fact they could access
to personal information about their journeys, tickets and
account. They also stated they prefer to have a pre-paid
account for travelling purposes instead of having the
ticketing application linked with their bank account or
mobile phone bill. The ticket validation process revealed to
be one of the main challenges in the design of mobile
ticketing systems, since the validation through traditional
physical systems is very simple.
This field trial allowed corroborating the great potential
that mobile ticketing systems have over traditional systems.
They are more convenient (tickets can be purchased
everywhere, anytime), users have access to more information
about their journeys and PTOs can interact more closely with
their
customers,
opening
doors
to
a
one-to-one
communication. In order to maximize the potential of such
solutions, the validation process should be as simple as
possible and additional and complementary services should
be integrated.
As future work, we want to improve this payment system
and add additional and complementary services. It is our
intention to involve further service providers beyond public
transport operators, since the travellers’ value constellation is
composed by other players.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by TICE - MOBIPAG project
13847, Mobile Payments National Initiative. This project
also involved Universidade do Minho, CEDT, Cardmobili,
Creative Systems, and Wintouch. Funding is provided under
the COMPETE, QREN programme, managed by AdI, in the
context of European Union FEDER. OPT (www.opt.pt),
IBM CAS Portugal, INEGI and IDMEC Pólo FEUP are also
supporting
the
project
at
FEUP
(www.fe.up.pt/IBM-CAS-Portugal).
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Au and R. Kauffman, “The economics of mobile
payments: Understanding stakeholder issues for an emerging
financial technology application,” Electron. Commer. Res.
Appl., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 141–164, 2008.
[2]
N. Mallat, “Exploring consumer adoption of mobile payments
– A qualitative study,” J. Strateg. Inf. Syst., vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
413–432, Nov. 2007.
[3]
M. Mut-Puigserver, M. M. Payeras-Capellà, J.-L. Ferrer-
Gomila, A. Vives-Guasch, and J. Castellà-Roca, “A survey of
electronic ticketing applied to transport,” Comput. Secur., vol.
31, no. 8, pp. 925–939, Nov. 2012.
[4]
“Paybox.” [Online]. Available from: http://www.paybox.at/
2014.05.22
[5]
R. Boer and T. de Boer, “Mobile payments 2010: Market
Analysis and Overview,” Chiel Liezenber (Innopay) and Ed
Achterberg (Telecompaper), 2009.
[6]
A. Becker, A. Mladenow, N. Kryvinska, and C. Strauss,
“Aggregated survey of sustainable business models for agile
mobile service delivery platforms,” J. Serv. Sci. Res., vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 97–121, 2012.
[7]
NFC Forum, “NFC in Public Transport,” 2011.
[8]
“Touch&Travel.”
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.touchandtravel.de/ 2014.05.22
[9]
M. Massoth and T. Bingel, “Performance of Different Mobile
Payment Service Concepts Compared with a NFC-Based
Solution,” ICIW 2009, The Fourth Int. Conf. Internet Web
Appl. Serv., 2009, pp. 205–210.
[10] K.-Y. Chen and M.-L. Chang, “User acceptance of ‘near field
communication’ mobile phone service: an investigation based
on the ‘unified theory of acceptance and use of technology’
model,” Serv. Ind. J., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 609–623, May 2013.
[11] A.
Bohm,
B.
Murtz,
C.
Sommer,
and
M.
Wermuth,
“Location-based ticketing in public transport,” in Proceedings
of the 8th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 2005., pp. 837–840.
[12] M. C. Ferreira, A. Cunha, J. F. e Cunha, H. Nóvoa, T. Galvão,
and M. Moniz, “A survey of current trends in smartphone
based payment and validation services for public transport
users,” in The Art & Science of Service Conference,
Maastricht, 2012, pp. 1–28.
[13] “Andante.”
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.linhandante.com/ 2014.05.22
[14] M. S. Matell and J. Jacoby, “Is There an Optimal Number of
Alternative for Likert-Scale Items?,” J. Appl. Psychol., vol.
56, no. 6, pp. 506–509, 1972.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-366-7
MOBILITY 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

