On Demonstrating Spectrum Selection Functionality for Opportunistic Networks 
Alessandro Raschellà, Anna Umbert, Jordi Pérez-Romero, Oriol Sallent 
Department of Signal Theory and Communications  
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) 
Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: [alessandror,annau,jorperez,sallent]@tsc.upc.edu  
 
Abstract— This paper presents a testbed platform to 
demonstrate and validate spectrum opportunity identification 
and spectrum selection functionalities in Opportunistic 
Networks (ONs). The hardware component of the testbed is 
based on reconfigurable devices able to transmit and receive 
data at different operating frequencies, which are dynamically 
configured. The software component has been developed to 
perform the creation and maintenance of ON radio links, 
including spectrum opportunity identification and selection 
decision making as well as all the necessary signaling to support 
the ON operation. Therefore, the presented platform provides a 
powerful tool for testing different algorithms in real operational 
radio environments under various interference conditions, thus 
enabling to gain deeper insight into the performance of 
algorithmic solutions, beyond the purely theoretical analyses 
based on models and/or simulations. Results presented in the 
paper validate the implementation conducted at the laboratory 
and illustrate the reconfigurability capabilities of the ON links 
under different conditions. 
Keywords-Opportunistic Networks; Spectrum Selection; 
Spectrum Opportunity Identification; Testbed. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
It has been stated that the Internet has been successful 
because of its flexibility, its accessibility via different 
physical media, and for its simple support of many different 
types of applications and data types. Initially, wired access 
was dominant, while the set of applications was limited 
mainly to file-transfer, e-mail, media streaming and client-
server based web services/applications. In many positions 
on the Future Internet (FI), wireless access is expected to 
prevail, while at the same time there is growing interest for 
more application (deployment) areas; thus, the FI is 
penetrating and covering almost every facet of our lives. For 
instance, 
increasingly 
modern 
information 
and 
communication services are built around social network 
concepts that require smart personal devices, and this makes 
it even more imperative to meet the need to offer 
appropriate connectivity everywhere where media or data 
flows need to be provided. Diversified applications/services 
can be accessed at any time of a day, can be requested from 
all types of locations/environments (e.g., home, public, 
work, urban, rural, etc.) or by all types of communication 
end-points (e.g., machines, humans acting in different roles, 
namely in-work or private life), and can involve various 
information flows (voice, audio, data, images, video) and 
communication types (uni-cast, multicast, broadcast, peer-
to-peer). In contrast to today’s Internet, for the FI, it can be 
safely assumed that the “best effort” delivery model will not 
hold. Certain applications, services and content will have to 
be delivered under Quality of Service (QoS) levels, or at 
least guaranteeing a certain Quality of Experience (QoE).  
Such hard requirements will set the networks under an 
enormous 
stress 
for 
resources 
(bandwidth, 
storage 
processing required) in both core and access parts. 
Traditionally, the need for more resources has been 
addressed through worst-case (peak-hour) based planning. 
This has lead to over-provisioning of resources in non-peak 
times. Keeping in mind that wireless resources are 
“expensive” (in the sense of “limited” or “scarce”), this 
over-provisioning will have to be tackled. In this respect, a 
range of solutions have been applied. For instance, many 
operators are aggressively adding WiFi access points and 
femtocell nodes to their network, in order to offload large 
portions of the traffic from the wide area networks of their 
infrastructure. However, as user behavior changes and user 
expectations increase, so do the resource requirements that 
are posed onto the communication networks. These 
continuously increasing requirements motivate the quest for 
further efficiency in resource provisioning.  
Opportunistic Networks (ONs) are considered as an 
innovative 
solution 
to 
satisfy 
the 
demand 
for 
applications/services and respective resources, through 
increased efficiency in resource provisioning and utilization 
[1]. ONs are temporary, localised network segments created 
under certain circumstances. In this vision, ONs are always 
governed by the radio access network (RAN) operator 
(which provides the resources, the policies, the knowledge, 
etc.) so they can be considered as coordinated extensions of 
the infrastructure. ONs comprise both infrastructure nodes 
and infrastructure-less devices. The aim for a RAN operator 
to use ONs is to improve the performance of the 
infrastructure network, but also (and perhaps via a third 
party) to provide a new span of localised or closed-group 
services. Further on, the introduction of cognitive 
techniques for the management of the ONs will lead to 
robustness and to capitalize the learning capabilities 
intrinsic to cognitive systems. 
ONs have been investigated to provide efficient solutions 
for a wide range of possible scenarios and use cases [2], such 
as: (1) “Opportunistic coverage extension”, which describes 
a situation in which a device cannot connect to the operator’s 
infrastructure, due to lack of coverage or a mismatch in the 
radio access technologies. The proposed solution includes an 
additional connected user that, by creating an opportunistic 
network, establishes a link between the initial device and the 
infrastructure, and acts as a data relay for this link. (2) 
“Opportunistic capacity extension”, which depicts a situation 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

in which a device cannot access the operator infrastructure 
due to the congestion of the available resources at the serving 
access node. The solution proposes the redirection of the 
access route through an ON that avoids the congested 
network segment. (3) “Infrastructure supported opportunistic 
ad-hoc networking”, which shows the creation of a localised, 
infrastructureless ON among several devices for a specific 
purpose (peer-to-peer communications, home networking, 
location-based services, etc.). Infrastructure governs the ON 
creation, benefits from the local traffic offloading and 
develops new opportunities for service provisioning. 
A common technical challenge in the different scenarios 
and ON use cases is to decide the proper spectrum to be used 
for the transmission of data and control flows in any 
communication link in accordance with the requirements for 
this link depending on the applications to be supported. This 
functionality is referred to as spectrum selection and it 
envisages a dynamic and flexible use of the available 
spectrum that ensures an efficient usage of this resource. The 
spectrum management process should be divided in two 
differentiated 
steps. 
First, 
the 
spectrum 
opportunity 
identification will be in charge of finding out the set of 
possible frequency bands that are available for the link. 
Second, and based on the results of the previous step, the 
spectrum selection will decide the most adequate band for 
the communication. Spectrum opportunity identification and 
spectrum selection functionalities have been a topic of 
research in different studies. For instance, [3]-[5] proposed 
energy detection as a means to identify spectrum 
opportunities, while [6]-[10] present different algorithms and 
protocols for assigning spectrum in cognitive radio networks. 
In this context, this paper describes the testbed 
implementation platform that has been developed for 
demonstrating and validating the spectrum selection 
functionality in ONs. It is built based on reconfigurable 
devices able to operate in different frequencies dynamically 
configured. This allows establishing and monitoring ON 
radio links, and reconfiguring them based on the changes in 
the current spectrum conditions. In this way, the testbed 
provides a practical insight for testing different algorithms in 
real environments, going beyond the purely theoretical 
analyses based on models and/or simulations. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, the ON life cycle and functional architecture for ON 
management are presented. Then Section III presents the 
algorithmic solutions for spectrum selection considered in 
the testbed, and Section IV provides the testbed 
implementation. Section V presents some results and Section 
VI summarises the conclusions and next steps. 
II. 
OPPORTUNISTIC NETWORKS: LIFE CYCLE AND 
FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE  
The life cycle of an ON comprises the following phases: 
(1) Suitability determination, where the convenience of 
setting up a new ON is assessed according to the triggering 
situation, previous knowledge, policies, profiles, etc., (2) 
Creation, which includes the selection of the optimal, 
feasible configuration for the new ON (selection of the 
participant nodes, the spectrum and the routing pattern), (3) 
Maintenance, which involves monitoring and controlling the 
QoS of the data flows involved in the ON and performing the 
appropriate corrective actions when needed, and (4) 
Termination, when the motivations for the creation of the 
ON disappear or the ON can no longer provide the required 
QoS and, therefore, mechanisms should be provided to 
handle handovers and to keep applications alive if possible.  
Spectrum selection is involved in all the management 
stages in the ON life cycle. During suitability determination, 
which is the result of a rough feasibility analysis in order to 
keep complexity moderate, there is the need to introduce 
mechanisms leading to the identification of spectrum 
opportunities that ensure that the resulting interference 
conditions in the possible future ON will result acceptable. 
The suitability stage will provide one or several possible 
configurations for an ON, whose feasibility and potential 
gains have been roughly estimated. Then, during the creation 
a detailed analysis (thus probably requiring additional 
context awareness and/or more accurate estimations related 
to diverse aspects of the radio environment) will be 
conducted and the spectrum to be assigned will be decided. 
ON reconfiguration capabilities will provide the 
necessary adaptability to changing conditions. This stage 
comprises monitoring (i.e., dynamically acquire all the 
relevant information that may influence decision making 
processes around the ON such as relevant changes in the 
radio spectrum occupancy/interference conditions) and 
reconfiguration decisions. Reconfiguration decisions will be 
supported by other functionalities like discovery procedures 
for the identification of new nodes, identification of 
spectrum opportunities, etc.  
Based on the functional architecture proposed in [11] by 
the European Telecommunications Standardization Institute 
(ETSI) for Reconfigurable Radio Systems (RRSs) an 
extension was proposed in [12] to deal with ON 
management. ON management features are attributed to an 
entity implemented in terminal/infrastructure. Fig. 1 depicts 
an example and simplified view of such management entity 
at the infrastructure, highlighting (1) the decision-making 
processes associated to the different ON stages, (2) the 
control mechanisms that will lead to execute the decisions 
taken, (3) the knowledge management module to exploit 
cognitive features, (4) the context awareness to provide the 
necessary inputs about the radio environment conditions to 
the decision making algorithms, and (5) the Dynamic 
Spectrum Management (DSM) that provides the spectrum 
availability conditions and related constraints to guide the 
spectrum selection decision making. 
III. SPECTRUM SELECTION: ALGORITHMIC SOLUTIONS 
From an algorithmic perspective, the problem considered 
in the testbed presented in this paper is the selection of the 
spectrum to be assigned to a set of radio links between a pair 
of terminals and/or infrastructure nodes. The purpose of each 
radio link is to support a given application with certain bit 
rate requirements. The spectrum selection is carried out in 
the decision making entity and is supported by the spectrum 
opportunity identification residing in the DSM module. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

DSM
Operator’s infrastructure
Context 
Awareness
Operator
Policy
Acquisition
Profile 
Management
Know-
ledge
Manage-
ment
Decision Making
Control
Execution of ON 
establishment
Execution of ON 
reconfiguration
Execution of ON 
termination
ON creation, 
maintenance 
and termination
ON  Management
 
Figure 1.  ON management at the infrastructure side 
A. Spectrum Opportunity Identification algorithm 
The spectrum opportunity identification algorithm 
executes two different procedures: the measurement 
procedure and the spectrum block formation. 
In the measurement procedure, the total analysed band is 
subdivided into N smaller portions of equal band ∆f. The 
measurement algorithm performs an energy detection 
sensing (during a period of time ∆t) for each ∆f portion until 
measuring the total band, starting from frequency 
F_min_band. This measurement is repeated Num_Meas 
times. Then, based on the multiple measurements carried out, 
the Spectrum Opportunity Index (SOI) is obtained for each 
portion, defined as the fraction of measurements in which 
this portion has been detected as available. The power 
threshold to decide if a portion is free is set based on [13]. 
In the spectrum block formation procedure, the 
consecutive spectrum blocks with SOI above a certain 
threshold are grouped in blocks. Each block is constituted by 
a maximum of Pmax portions. For each block, the algorithm 
returns the 2-tuple SBk={fk,BWk} where fk is the central 
frequency of the block and BWk the bandwidth. 
B. Spectrum selection algorithm 
The spectrum selection algorithm uses as input the set of 
available spectrum pools resulting from the spectrum 
opportunity identification, together with the characteristics of 
each pool in terms of available bit rate based on radio 
considerations. The algorithm output is the list of spectrum 
assignments to each of the existing links. The algorithm 
presented in [14] is considered for the implementation in the 
testbed. It makes use of the fittingness factor concept as a 
metric to capture how suitable a specific spectrum pool is for 
a specific radio link. The algorithm is based on estimating 
the fittingness factor for each link and available spectrum 
block based on a knowledge database that is maintained with 
different fittingness factor statistics.  
IV. 
TESTBED IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section, the testbed implementation is provided; in 
details, the hardware and software components and the 
testbed architecture are illustrated.  
A. Hardware component: basic building block 
The testbed demonstrator is built on the basis of 
Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) boards. Each 
USRP integrated board incorporates AD/DA Converters 
(ADCs/DACs), a Radio Frequency (RF) front end, and a 
Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) which does some 
pre-processing of the input signal [15]. A typical setup of the 
USRP board consists of one mother board and up to four 
daughter boards. On the mother board, there are four slots, 
where up to 2 RX and 2 TX daughter boards can be plugged 
in. The daughter boards are used to hold the radio frequency 
receiver and the radio frequency transmitter. There are 4 
high-speed 12-bit ADCs and 4 high-speed 14-bit DACs. All 
the ADCs and DACs are connected to the FPGA that 
performs high bandwidth math, such as interpolation and 
decimation. The DACs clock frequency is 128 Ms/s, while 
ADCs work at 64 Ms/s to digitize the received signal. A 
USB controller sends the digital signal samples to a PC in 
I/Q complex data format (4 bytes per complex sample), 
resulting in a maximum rate of 8 Ms/s. Consequently, the 
FPGA has to perform filtering and digital down-conversion 
(decimation) to adapt the incoming data rate to the USB 2.0 
and PC computing capabilities. The maximum RF bandwidth 
that can be handled is thus 8 MHz. 
There exist different kinds of daughter boards that allow 
a very high USRP reconfigurability and working at several 
frequency bands. The daughter boards integrated in the 
USRP motherboard of this testbed are XCVR2450 
Transceivers. They work in the frequency ranges 2.4 - 2.5 
GHz and 4.9 - 5.9 GHz.  
B. Software Component 
Identification of spectrum opportunities is performed by 
both a hardware platform (i.e., USRP) and a software 
component implemented with GNU Radio toolkit. It is a 
software for learning about, building and deploying software 
radios [16]. GNU Radio is free and open source. It provides 
a library of signal processing blocks and the glue to tie it all 
together. In GNU Radio, the programmer builds a radio by 
creating a graph (as in graph theory) where the vertices are 
signal processing blocks and the edges represent the data 
flow between them. All the signal processing blocks are 
written in C++ and Python is used to create a network or 
graphs and glue these blocks together. GNU Radio has been 
used to develop the modules that implement the algorithms 
described in Section III and to enable the data and control 
communication between USRP transceivers.  
C. Testbed architecture 
The objective of this testbed is to show the behaviour of 
the spectrum opportunity identification and spectrum 
selection procedures in an ON. For that purpose, a scenario is 
considered where two devices need to communicate through 
an ON link controlled by the infrastructure, as graphically 
illustrated in the upper part of Fig. 2. Both spectrum 
opportunity 
identification 
and 
spectrum 
selection 
functionalities reside in the infrastructure node. The result of 
executing these functions, with the specific frequency block 
assigned for the ON link between the two terminals is 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

notified using a Cognitive Control Channel [17].  
The testbed implementation of the infrastructure node 
and the terminals by means of USRP transceivers is shown 
in the lower part of Fig. 2. USRP#1 implements the 
infrastructure and the associated spectrum identification and 
selection functionalities, while USRP#2 and USRP#3 are the 
terminals exchanging data. ISM 2.4 GHz band is used for the 
demonstration, 
detecting 
the 
available 
spectrum 
opportunities and allocating a portion of this band for the 
communication between terminals. 
 
Data
Flow
Control
Flow
JRRM, CCM
RAT Support1
ON Management
DSM
JRRM, CCM
RAT Support1
ON Management
JRRM, CCM
RAT Support1
ON Management
SPECTRUM 
OPPORTUNITY 
IDENTIFICATION
SPECTRUM 
SELECTION
Data
Flow
Control
Flow
USRP#1
USRP#2
USRP#3
SPECTRUM 
OPPORTUNITY 
IDENTIFICATION
SPECTRUM 
SELECTION
Considered scenario
Implemented scenario
Infrastructure(BS)
UE #1
UE #2
 
Figure 2.  Scenario considered in the demonstration and corresponding 
implementation by means of USRP 
D. Signalling procedures 
Since the target of the demonstration is the spectrum 
opportunity identification and spectrum selection, the 
demonstration implements only the ON creation and ON 
maintenance stages of the ON life cycle. It is assumed that 
the decision to create an ON among the two devices has been 
previously made in the ON suitability phase.  
The cognitive control channel signaling is implemented 
with the Control Channel for the Cooperation of the 
Cognitive Management System (C4MS) protocol using the 
implementation option based on IEEE 802.21 “Media-
Independent 
Handover 
(MIH) 
Services” 
[18]. 
The 
implemented procedure for the ON creation is shown in Fig. 
3. The steps of the procedure are explained below.  
1. A MIH_C4MS_ONN.request message is sent from 
UE#1 to the infrastructure (Base Station - BS) to start the 
ON-Negotiation (ONN) procedure intended to obtain a valid 
configuration of the radio link. The message indicates the 
terminals involved and the QoS requirements that the link is 
expected to support, in terms of required bit rate.  
2. The infrastructure sends a MIH_C4MS_ONN.request 
to UE#2 informing it about the intention to establish a direct 
radio link with UE#1 and allowing it to join the negotiation 
process for the derivation of the radio link configuration.  
3. 
UE#2 
replies 
to 
the 
BS 
with 
a 
MIH_C4MS_ONN.response 
message, 
notifying 
its 
acceptance for the establishment of the link. 
4. The ON management entity in the infrastructure 
inquires the DSM entity to determine spectrum availability 
for the link. The spectrum opportunity identification 
algorithm is executed. 
5. DSM reply provides the available spectrum blocks, 
and the spectrum selection algorithm is executed to decide 
the spectrum block to be allocated to the link. 
6. The proposed ON configuration with the selected 
spectrum 
is 
transferred 
to 
UE#1 
by 
issuing 
a 
MIH_C4MS_ONN.response message. 
7. To start the ON Creation (ONC), UE#1 sends a 
MIH_C4MS_ONC.request to the BS with the final ON 
configuration.  
8. BS sends another MIH_C4MS_ONC.request towards 
UE#2 with the final ON configuration. 
9. UE#2 replies with a MIH_C4MS_ONC.response 
message with a successful result-code indicating that the 
terminal is ready to establish the link.  
10. BS concludes the ON creation procedure by sending 
a MIH_C4MS_ONC.response message to UE#1. 
11. The link establishment takes place at this point.  
12. Finally, the creation of the ON is notified to the 
infrastructure 
from 
UE#1 
by 
sending 
a 
MIH_C4MS_ONSN.indication message. 
A similar procedure is also implemented for the ON 
modification in case that degradation in the communication 
is perceived by one of the UEs. In this case, the procedure 
eventually triggers a new execution of the spectrum selection 
algorithm to modify the spectrum allocated to the link. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Implemented message exchange for the ON creation 
V. VALIDATION RESULTS 
In order to illustrate the testbed operation, some 
validation and performance results of spectrum opportunity 
identification and spectrum selection functionalities are 
presented in the following.  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

A. Spectrum opportunity identification  
The indoor office scenario considered in this paper is 
illustrated in Fig. 4. The environment where the testbed 
operates includes the presence of two WiFi access points 
(AP5 and AP6) that occupy channels at 2.412 GHz and 
2.432 GHz. The testbed with the ON is located in room R1. 
To test the spectrum opportunity identification algorithm, 
the measurement procedure considered the total band from 
2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz subdivided in 1000 portions of 100 kHz. 
Energy detection sensing was performed for each portion 
during 100 ms. The threshold to detect that a portion is 
available is set using the following procedure: (i) the USRP 
antenna was replaced with a matched load (i.e., a 50 ohm 
resistor); (ii) the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of 
the thermal noise was calculated; (iii) a threshold between 
thermal noise and signal energy was selected considering a 
false alarm probability equal to 1%. 
Fig. 5 presents the obtained SOI for all the 1000 portions 
of 100 kHz averaged during a 10 minutes period. It can be 
observed that: (i) the spectrum portions in the ISM channels 
occupied by AP5 and AP6 at 2.412 GHz and 2.432 GHz, 
have a SOI equal to 0%; (ii) there are three groups of 
consecutive 100 kHz blocks with a high opportunistic index 
value (i.e. greater than 80%). As a result, the spectrum 
blocks provided by the algorithm are those indicated in Table 
I, considering that the maximum number of portions of a 
block has been set to Pmax=290. Correspondingly, the 
available set of portions between 2442 to 2500 MHz with a 
total of 58 MHz has been split into 2 blocks. 
 
Figure 4.  Considered scenario 
 
Figure 5.  Spectrum Opportunity Index  
TABLE I.  
SPECTRUM BLOCKS IDENTIFICATION 
Index 
Central Frequency (MHz) 
Bandwidth (MHz) 
1 
2401.500 
3 
2 
2422.000 
4 
3 
2456.500 
29 
4 
2485.500 
29 
B. Spectrum Selection 
The aim of this subsection is to illustrate how the result 
of the spectrum opportunity identification is used to perform 
the spectrum selection functionality. In the scenario 
illustrated in Fig. 2, the terminals (i.e., USRP#2 and 
USRP#3) need a spectrum block to transmit data under the 
infrastructure (i.e., USRP#1) control. Following the 
procedure in Fig. 3, the allocated spectrum block is decided 
by the infrastructure during the ON-Negotiation procedure 
based on the spectrum opportunity identification executed by 
USRP#1 in the ISM 2.4 GHz band. The identification 
procedure is the same explained in the previous sub-section, 
but now averaging the measurements during a period of 10s 
and with Pmax=200. Once the spectrum is assigned, USRP#2 
is the data transmitter and USRP#3 the receiver. The 
experiment assumptions for the communication between 
terminals are given in Table II. USRP#2 periodically 
monitors the efficiency in the data transmission as the ratio 
between successfully transmitted data packets and total 
number 
of 
transmitted 
data 
packets 
including 
retransmissions. This is computed based on the received 
acknowledgements for each packet. When degradation in the 
communication is detected (i.e., efficiency is below the 
threshold of 80%), USRP#2 triggers the ON modification 
procedure, requesting a new spectrum block.  
TABLE II.  
EXPERIMENT ASSUMPTIONS 
Parameter 
Value 
Modulation 
GMSK 
Data Rate 
256 kbps 
Packet Size 
1500 byte 
Minimum Efficiency threshold 
80% 
Experiment Time 
20 minutes 
 
In the considered experiment, an additional AP has been 
set-up as an interference source that can be manually 
configured in the spectrum block allocated to the link 
between USRP#2 and USRP#3. Fig. 6 depicts the obtained 
results in one experiment. Specifically, the figure reflects the 
evolution of the efficiency in the communication as a 
function of time, in periods of 30 s. The interferer source has 
been activated 5 times during the experiment, leading to 
efficiency degradations below the threshold of 80% as can be 
seen in the figure. After each one of these degradations the 
ON modification is executed and a new spectrum block is 
assigned. The figure indicates the spectrum assigned to the 
ON link in each period of time. During the first minutes the 
infrastructure assigned for data transmissions the spectrum 
block centered at 2.422 GHz. In this period, the efficiency 
monitored by USRP#2 is above 80% until minute 4, when 
the interferer source is activated in the same frequency of the 
link. As a consequence, USRP#2 detects a degradation of the 
efficiency down to 70%. The ON modification procedure 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

leads to the assignment of the spectrum block centered at 
2.452 GHz, with the corresponding increase of the 
efficiency. This process is repeated during 20 minutes 
demonstrating how the testbed is able to automatically 
reconfigure the assigned resources during changes in the 
interference conditions. 
 
Figure 6.  Spectrum Selection under changes in the interference conditions 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS 
In this paper, a testbed platform has been proposed to 
validate the spectrum opportunity identification and 
spectrum selection functionalities in ON management. It is 
based on reconfigurable devices able to transmit and receive 
at different operating frequencies, and implements the 
necessary signaling to support ON operation. Some results 
have been presented to validate the implementation 
conducted 
at 
the 
laboratory 
and 
to 
illustrate 
the 
reconfigurability capabilities of the ON links under varying 
interference conditions. The developed platform constitutes a 
powerful tool to support the development, assessment and 
validation of different algorithms in real operational radio 
environments. Aspects related to the practicality of the 
algorithmic solutions can be better assessed in the testbed 
rather than in a simulation environment. Robustness of the 
proposed solutions to unpredictable radio context conditions 
(e.g., uncontrolled changes in the interference conditions) 
can also be proved in the platform. In this respect, intensive 
and extensive further evaluations and refinements on 
algorithmic solutions are expected in the near future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is performed in the framework of the 
European-Union funded project OneFIT (www.ict-onefit.eu). 
The project is supported by the European Community's 
Seventh Framework Program (FP7). The views expressed in 
this document do not necessarily represent the views of the 
complete consortium. The Community is not liable for any 
use that may be made of the information contained herein. 
The work is also supported by the Spanish Research Council 
and FEDER funds under ARCO grant (ref. TEC2010-
15198).  
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Stavroulaki, et al. “Opportunistic Networks: An Approach 
for Exploiting Cognitive Radio Networking Technologies in 
the Future Internet”, IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, 
Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 52-59, September, 2011. 
[2] O. Moreno (editor) “Business scenarios, technical challenges 
and system requirements”, Deliverable D2.1 of OneFIT ICT 
project, October, 2010, available at http://www.ict-onefit.eu/. 
[3] L. Catalin, K. V. Rama, A. Onur, B. Dusan, and S. Ivan, 
“Evaluation of energy-based spectrum sensing algorithm for 
vehicular networks” in Proceedings of the Software Defined 
Radio and Dynamic Spectrum Access Technical Conference, 
Washington, DC, December, 2009.  
[4] M. A. Sarijari, A. Marwanto, N. Fisal, S. K. S. Yusof, R. A. 
Rashid, and M. H. Satria, “Energy Detection Sensing based 
on GNU Radio and USRP: An Analysis Study”; Malaysia Int. 
Conf. on Comm. (MICC), Kuala Lumpur, December, 2009. 
[5] R. Miller, W. Xu, P. Kamat, and W. Trappe:  “Service 
Discovery and Device Identification in Cognitive Radio 
Networks”, Sustainable Development Research Network 
(SDRN) conference, London, December, 2007.  
[6] Q. Zhao and A. Swami, “A Decision-Theoretic Framework 
for 
Opportunistic 
Spectrum 
Access”, 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications, Vol. 14, No. 4, August, 2007. 
[7] H. Li, G. Zhu, Z. Liang, and Y. Chen, “A Survey on 
Distributed Opportunity Spectrum Access in Cognitive 
Network”, Wireless Communication Networking and Mobile 
Computing (WiCOM), Chengdu, September 2010. 
[8] Q. Zhao, S. Geirhofer, L. Tong, and B.M. Sadler, “Optimal 
Dynamic Spectrum Access via Periodic Channel Sensing”, 
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC) Hong Kong, March 2007. 
[9] S.D. Jones, N. Merheb, and I.J. Wang, “An Experiment for 
Sensing-Based Opportunistic Spectrum Access in CSMA/CA 
Networks”, Dynamic Spectrum Access Network (DySPAN), 
Baltimore,  November 2005. 
[10] L. Ma, X. Han, and C.C. Shen, “Dynamic Open Spectrum 
Sharing MAC Protocol for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks”, 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Network (DySPAN), Baltimore, 
November 2005. 
[11] ETSI, TC RRS, "Reconfigurable Radio Systems; Functional 
Architecture for the Management and the Control of 
Reconfigurable Radio Systems", TR 102 682, July 2009. 
[12] J. 
Gebert 
(editor) 
“OneFIT 
functional 
and 
system 
architecture”, Deliverable D2.2 of OneFIT project, February, 
2011, available at http://www.ict-onefit.eu/. 
[13] Robin I.C. Chiang, Gerard B. Rowe, and Kevin W. Sowerby, 
“A 
Quantitative 
Analysis 
of 
Spectral 
Occupancy 
Measurements for Cognitive Radio”, Vehicular Technology 
Conference (VTC) Spring, Dublin, April, 2007. 
[14] F. Bouali, O. Sallent, J. Pérez-Romero, and R. Agustí, 
“Exploiting 
Knowledge 
Management 
for 
Supporting 
Spectrum Selection in Cognitive Radio Networks,” Cognitive 
Radio Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications 
(CROWNCOM) conference, Stockholm, June, 2012. 
[15] http:// www.ettus. com. 
[16] http://www.gnuradio.org. 
[17] ETSI TR 102 684 “Reconfigurable Radio Systems (RRS); 
Feasibility Study on Control Channels for Cognitive Radio 
Systems”, April, 2012. 
[18] T. Wierzbowski (editor) “Protocols, performance assessment 
and 
consolidation 
on 
interfaces 
for 
standardization”, 
Deliverable D3.3 of OneFIT ICT project, June, 2012.  
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

