Management of Mobile Objects in an Airport Environment 
 
 
Gabriel Pestana1, Augusto Casaca1, Pedro Reis2, Sebastian Heuchler3, Joachim Metter3  
1Inesc-ID/INOV/IST, Lisbon, Portugal 
gabriel.pestana, augusto.casaca@inesc-id.pt 
 
2ANA-Aeroportos de Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal 
pereis@ana.pt 
 
3BIJO-DATA GmbH, Heldburg, Germany 
sheuchler, jmetter@bijodata.de 
 
 
Abstract—A new approach is proposed to the surveillance of 
identified Security and Safety occurrences concerning mobile 
objects in an airport environment, in particular to monitor 
aircrafts, vehicles and staff at the manoeuvring area for all 
weather 
conditions. 
A 
middleware 
platform 
merges 
localization information from the different mobile objects in 
the airport and fuses that information through intelligent 
algorithms in the platform middleware. The system outputs 
are shown in an advanced Graphical-User interface, providing 
a collaborative environment with the relevant information to 
the airport stakeholders. The outputs can be used by the 
stakeholders to take decisions on the best way to improve 
Security and Safety and also on the optimization of airport 
operational procedures in compliance with existing business 
rules. 
Keywords-Mobility 
management; 
Situation 
awareness; 
Airport Safety and Security; Location based services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the airport environment, about 90% of the accidents 
and incidents occur during the ground handling services 
assisting parked aircrafts at the Stand. According to ICAO 
[1], there is a potential for aviation mishaps to become 
catastrophes with high casualty numbers. The need for 
coordination of multiple activities occurring simultaneously 
requires therefore a continuum control of all ground 
movements, in particular during taxi operations. However, 
the current lack of context awareness and controllability is 
frequently identified as a causal factor for Safety 
infringements. 
Without a unified control infrastructure capable to 
provide, in real-time, information related to the surveillance 
of Safety and Security occurrences, airport stakeholders 
(e.g., Airport Authority, Ground Handlers, Airlines, etc.) 
have not an objective and reliable view of the overall 
situation to take well informed decisions in real-time, as 
needed in various operational domains.  
The SECAIR project [2] brings a new approach to the 
surveillance of identified Security and Safety occurrences for 
airports, available at an affordable cost, in particular to 
monitor the mobility of aircrafts, vehicles and staff at the 
manoeuvring areas in all weather conditions. The SECAIR 
project combines different location-based technologies to 
detect the presence of objects (e.g., persons, vehicles), inside 
the airport terminal or in the apron, at predefined locations. It 
intends to improve situation awareness for supporting 
decision makers and task forces in handling with Safety and 
Security issues. The project relies therefore on the 
development of an event observer system, capable to identify 
automatically predefined events and generate alarms in real-
time. This means that for each ground movement (e.g., 
vehicles or any other cooperative moving object), it takes 
less than one second for the system to determine the new 
position of the surveyed objects and validate if any of those 
objects is causing a Safety/Security infringement. A 
middleware platform provides advanced fusion techniques to 
determine the localization of objects based on radio based 
tracking and video based technology. The middleware is part 
of a larger platform that, on the whole, will manage the 
mobility of the objects and will enable the accomplishment 
of an automatic and reliable prediction of hazardous 
situations. 
To test the capabilities of the system, a set of business 
scenarios addressing airport operational requirements [3] 
were defined in close collaboration with ANA-Aeroportos de 
Portugal - the main Portuguese airport’s management 
company, based on the following needs: 
 
Traceability of vehicles and Ground Support 
Equipment (GSE) with automatic detection of 
unauthorised incursions into restricted access areas; 
 
Tracking and controlling of Handling operations 
(objects, staff and passengers); 
 
Surveillance of aircrafts ground movements within 
the apron area; 
 
Provision of context awareness about on-going 
operations at the apron area, triggering Safety and 
Security alarms with different levels of severity; 
 
Support the decision making process of the airport 
stakeholders by providing a reliable view of the 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

overall situation whenever a Safety or Security event 
is detected; 
 
Ensure that each airport stakeholder has access only 
to data according to its operational needs. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
main software components within the multi-tier architecture 
designed for the SECAIR system. Section III presents the 
environment where the project will be deployed together 
with the operational scenarios defined for testing the system. 
Finally, conclusions are included in Section IV. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
The SECAIR system has a client-server architecture, 
structured into three tiers, as outlined in Figure 1. At the 
communication 
tier, 
SECAIR 
will 
operate 
with 
heterogeneous 
wireless 
location-based 
technologies 
(sensors), each one sending data, in real-time, about the 
location of the tagged objects. At the application tier, the 
middleware software component is responsible to collect and 
process incoming data from the wireless sensors, delivering 
reliable location data to the Business Logic. This is 
performed based on a data fusion process that computes 
positioning data to provide accurate and reliable location 
data about the surveyed object.  
Since 
the 
SECAIR 
system 
will 
operate 
with 
heterogeneous sensors, prior to the data fusion process, it 
receives multiple positioning data originated in the mobile 
objects from the communication tier. In fact, we can have a 
set of data for one object. But after the data fusion process, 
we obtain one computed position per object that is reliable. 
Based on such issues, the SECAIR system will provide a set 
of innovative capabilities for positioning accuracy and 
reliability, which is required more and more by value-added 
location-based services such as Safety and Security 
applications for airports [4]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Architectural structure of the SECAIR system. 
The Communication tier will operate with the following 
localisation technologies: 
 
The Stand-alone Global Navigation Satellite System 
(GNSS), will be used together with a WiFi  
communication device to collect and transmit, in 
each second, the coordinates of the vehicle position;   
 
The Ultra Wide Band (UWB) system provides 
immunity to multipath propagation and precision 
range measurement capability. The IEEE 802.15.4a 
UWB standard implements precision location 
measurement. when tracking items close to large 
metallic objects such as Aircraft, Vehicles, Cargo 
containers etc.; 
 
The Video Surveillance and Tracking System 
(VSTS) consists of multiple video cameras installed 
at predefined locations so that they fully cover the 
monitored area with overlapping field of view. The 
video data collected from the cameras will be 
processed by the VSTS to detect, track and classify 
the foreground objects within the monitored 
environment; 
 
The Radio Frequency (RF) locating system consists 
of mobile devices (tags), antenna units (anchors) 
equipped with smart-antennas and mounted in the 
area of interest. It measures the position of a mobile 
device attached to the person or the object to be 
tracked in the area of interest (see Figure 2).   
The Middleware is responsible to continuously provide 
the calculated position of a specific observed object to the 
Business Logic. A major concern regarding the project real-
time effectiveness and positioning accuracy is reflected on 
the analysis of the fusion algorithm which follows a multi-
particles approach. The particle filter is a technique that 
implements a recursive Bayesian filtering using the 
sequential Monte Carlo method, currently one of the most 
advanced techniques for data fusion. Three concepts for the 
data fusion process are considered by the Middleware 
component:  
 
Quality of positioning-based selection; 
 
Sequential Kalman Filtering [5] for simple data 
fusion without map filtering for simple localisation 
error distributions; 
 
Sequential Bayesian Filtering (Particles filters) [5] 
suitable also for the map filtering. 
There is no single technology which can provide 
satisfactory performance in all environments and scenarios; 
therefore, 
various 
localisation 
technologies 
have 
to 
collaborate in order to deliver a flexible locating system, 
instead. Sensor data fusion will combine sensory data from 
different localisation technologies to outperform any 
individual systems working alone. These are lessons learned 
from the LocON project [6] in relation to techniques for 
multi-target, multi-sensor tracking.  
At the Application tier, the Business Logic aggregates a 
set of core software components. For each ground 
movement, the Application tier takes descriptive data 
(metadata) to correlate existing business rules with the 
spatial-context of the airport and if applicable trigger the 
right event. The integration of all these data enables the 
system to perform a set of validations based, for instance, on 
the type of object, its location within the airport, the 
operational status of the areas where the object is located. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Depending on the business rule being infringed a specific 
event (i.e., alert message) is triggered to the end-users at the 
Presentation tier. This is done by creating a subscription 
offered as a public endpoint by the system.  
At the SECAIR system every location based services run 
in parallel, and is accessed via Network Load Balancing, a 
clustering technology that enhances the scalability and 
availability of mission-critical, TCP/IP-based services. Since 
every service runs in parallel, the number of instances on 
different machines is unlimited. 
The Business Logic sends the requested data, either as a 
stream of updates (event-based queries) or as a chunk of 
current state data (instant-queries). The first are triggered on 
a certain event, e.g., an object moving into an area. The 
Business Logic can create an event subscription (“tell me 
about objects moving into a specific area”) to be notified on 
that event (“an object moves into an area”) and perform 
specified actions accordingly (“alert: object moved into 
restricted area”). This kind of subscription may be triggered 
very often, or never, depending on how often the event 
occurs. Contrarily, the result of an instant query is always 
returned immediately and is not dependent on any event. 
This kind of query is useful to retrieve the current state of an 
object. For instance, “give me a list of all objects which are 
currently in a certain area” or “tell me the current battery 
status of an object”. 
For simplicity, the core data handled by the Business 
Rules software component are represented in Figure 1 by 
two distinct databases.  These data are managed by the 
Business Logic using the Microsoft SQL Server 2008, a 
database management system capable to deal with business 
data and map features, describing the airport cartographic 
layout, within the same database.  
In the SECAIR system, all thematic layers use the World 
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84) as the spatial reference 
system to fulfil the requirements defined in the A-SMGCS 
manual [2] and to comply to the ED-119 standard [7]. 
Therefore, 
horizontal 
locations 
are 
provided 
as 
latitude/longitude coordinates. Each layer can be managed as 
an information set independent of other layers. Since each 
layer is spatially referenced, they overlay one another and 
can be combined in a common map display. The user can 
then interact with the features of each layer by selecting, for 
instance, a specific stand and manually change its status, or 
to get information about flights, resources and assigned 
tasks. It is also possible to verify which road segment is 
operational and check for traffic circulation rules that apply 
to a selected road segment (e.g., speed limit and directions of 
traffic flow). In this case, authorized users can even specify 
speed limits for each road segment for different visibility 
condition. 
The resulting geo-database consists of vector and 
attributes features. The vector features represent geometric 
feature instances that are classified as points, lines, or 
polygons. Examples include runway thresholds, holding 
lines, and aircraft stand locations. The vector features can 
also represent obstacle data elements, which may be 
represented by points, lines, or polygons.  
The ED-119 standard defines the physical dataset 
requirements that have been followed to develop the airport 
mapping. These include: geometry and quality, feature rules 
and descriptive attributes. 
The Business Logic also holds a software component that 
is responsible to handle the interoperability with external 
systems, for instance, to collect data related with flight 
schedules, resources and assigned tasks. With such approach, 
location based data for each observed object can be 
coherently correlated with metadata from external sources, 
enabling the surveillance and track of events according to 
business logic/rules [8]. The Application tier, being 
responsible to implement airport business logic, seeks 
grounds for the coexistence and balance between the dual 
trends of the airport industry: increased demand for air travel 
and strengthened aviation Safety and Security [9]. 
For each predefined event (e.g., Safety or Security) 
detected by the system, a semantic meaningful alert message 
will be triggered, with the corresponding relevance and 
severity risk. These functionalities is provided by a 
geographic information system (GIS) specifically designed 
to handle with the business logic taking into account the 
airport spatial context provided by the Map Services. 
Depending on the nature of the detected event, the Alert 
Services will interact with the GIS to generate an alarm to be 
broadcasted to each connected client application. A log 
record of all events is stored for historical data analysis 
purpose. 
At the Presentation tier, the surveillance capability of the 
SECAIR system is presented to end-users in three different 
ways. The Map Viewer represents moving objects as colour 
coded point features with a timestamp and a set of 
descriptive data about the resources causing, for instance, a 
Safety event; this may include data about the aircraft (A/C), 
vehicle, driver, flight data, airport layout of the area where 
the event occurred. The Alert Viewer shows the 
corresponding textual description of the alert messages in 
terms understandable by the end-user (e.g., for each moving 
object causing an event, the Alert Viewer at each Client 
Application will present the alert messages contextualized 
with business semantic and ordered by severity level). All 
alert messages have a start and end time, plus a set of 
additional descriptive data related to each event. The KPI 
Viewer presents in a spatial dashboard, the values of key 
performance indicators (KPI) describing how the business is 
performing.  
The correlations between KPI are mapped in a 
dendrogram structure. Each individual KPI are arranged 
along the bottom of the dendrogram and referred to as leaf 
nodes. KPI clusters are formed by joining individual KPI or 
existing KPI clusters with the join point referred to as a node, 
forming a node-link tree diagram. Each node of the tree 
carries some information needed for efficient plotting or 
cutting as attributes, of which only members, height and leaf 
for leaves are compulsory:  
 
Members, total number of leaves in the branch; 
 
Height, numeric non-negative height at which the 
node is plotted. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

The hierarchical structure of the dendrogram is 
represented by the KPI Viewer using the Squarified Treemap 
algorithm [10]. The Treemap technique provides an area-
based visualization where the size of each rectangle 
represents the relevance of the KPI and the color indicates 
how the value of the metric is evolving. The Treemap 
technique is indeed very effective in showing the attributes 
of the dendrogram nodes using size and colour coding.  
The Squarified Treemap algorithm avoids the generation 
of thin rectangles, improving the representation of the 
dendrogram structure in a space-constrained layout. It also 
enables end-users to compare nodes and sub-trees even at 
varying depth in the dendrogram, and help them spot 
patterns and exceptions. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
In order to validate the SECAIR system, a system 
prototype for a pilot test will be installed at Airport of Faro 
(AFR), Portugal. AFR is one of the Portuguese transport 
infrastructures included in the Priority Project 8 - 
Multimodal axis Portugal/Spain-rest of Europe, 2009-PT-
08006-E. Acting mainly as a gateway for tourists who 
predominantly visit the Algarve region and the Spanish 
region of Huelva, AFR operates mostly with low cost 
carriers in a seasonal basis with its peak at Christmas and 
Summer time. 
The implementation comprises the system deployment, 
the interfaces to heterogeneous localization technologies and 
a set of client applications with a geographical interface for 
airport stakeholders to benefit from the control services 
provided by the system. For field tests, ANA-Aeroportos 
will provide airport vehicles together with a wireless network 
covering all airport operational areas. The manoeuvring area 
of AFR is already equipped with an infrastructure of Wi-Fi 
Access Points (AP) forming the wireless network that will 
support the data communication.  
Figure 2 outlines the areas selected for the specified 
scenarios and to be used for the site test, namely indoor 
environment, adjacent indoor-outdoor transition area (to 
demonstrate ability to track targets moving from indoor to 
outdoor and back) and the apron area adjacent to stands 14 
and 16. Indoor environment scenarios (Boarding Gates 01 
and 02), include: zone intrusion detection, target tracking and 
left behind luggage. The outdoor environment (130x130m of 
apron comprising aircraft stands 14 and 16), include 
additionally the following situations: Aircraft Stand Area 
Vehicle Surveillance (vehicle tracking, obstacle detection), 
Incursion/Collision 
Avoidance 
and 
Aircraft 
Ground 
Movement Tracking.  
As presented in Table 1, indoor scenarios reflect 
operational procedures related to: 
 
Traceability of a person at the boarding gate area; 
 
Localization capability of the SECAIR system in the 
transition area from passenger terminal into 
restricted access areas (outdoor); 
 
Localization obtained by fusion of data obtained 
from the following technologies: VSTS and RF. 
The outdoor scenarios reflect operational procedures 
related to: 
 
Traceability of vehicle and driver at the Apron area; 
 
Automatic detection of drivers without driving 
permission / not logged (RFID Reader) 
 
Localization obtained by fusion of data obtained 
from the following technologies: VSTS, GNSS and 
UWB; 
The airport layout is represented (at the Map Viewer) as 
a collection of overlapped themes, each one representing a 
specific operational area within the airport environment. 
These themes form the background context over which the 
observed objects are represented as point features. All 
thematic layers are provided by the airport authority in a 
standard format as shape files. 
Whenever an object causes a hazardous event, the 
Business Logic uses the metadata provided by each theme 
for location-awareness purposes and generation of the proper 
alert message to be sent to the Presentation tier. 
 
Figure 2. Airport layout of the manoeuvring areas selected for the specified 
scenarios. 
The GIS engine will have to deal with real-time (i.e., 
each second) requirements for surveillance of all moving 
objects, computing simultaneously dynamic changes to the 
spatial context derived from daily airport business activities. 
Additional metadata (e.g., speed, logged driver, vehicle 
category, task, etc.) about each surveyed object, presented as 
labels, provide airport stakeholders with all the required 
information to analyse a specific event or to remotely 
monitor/coordinate on-going operations. Moreover, the 
ability of the GIS to graphically present information from 
heterogeneous mobile sources enables the system to be 
operated even by non-skilled experts. This is particularly 
relevant to monitor the stands’ supporting areas where 
vehicles and GSE are allowed to park in specific technical 
supporting areas, before an A/C entering the assigned stand 
are also included. 
Some preliminary tests were performed to collect field 
data to be used for testing during the development phase. 
The tests included the collection of a huge amount of data for 
both Indoor and Outdoor environments, involving personnel 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

and some vehicles and a parked A/C at stand 14, for 
embarking and disembarking procedures. Within the scope 
of the SECAIR project, the scenarios presented in Table 1 
address Safety/Security issues. 
TABLE 1. LIST OF OPERATIONAL SCENARIOS FOR THE SECAIR PROJECT. 
Num. 
Scenario Name 
Outdoor Safety (OSA)  
OSA.01 
Surveillance of vehicle movements within a stand area  
OSA.02 
Collision avoidance support service 
OSA.03 
Aircraft ground movement tracking 
OSA.04 
Obstruction of an operational stand area 
Outdoor Security (OSE) 
OSE.01 
Detection of zone intrusion by unauthorized vehicle 
OSE.02 
Personnel tracking at the apron area 
Indoor Safety (ISA) 
ISA.01 
Working zone intrusion by unauthorized person 
Indoor Security (ISE) 
ISE.01 
Left luggage detection 
ISE.02 
Indoor-outdoor personnel tracking 
 
The description of each operational scenario follows a 
template 
emphasizing 
relevant 
issues 
from 
airport 
stakeholders’ point of view. Besides a unique identifier with 
a semantic meaning for each scenario the template also 
covers the following items: 
 
Name of the scenario, pointing out concerns from 
the perspective of airport stakeholders; 
 
Classification 
of 
the 
scenario 
addressing 
environmental influences (indoor/outdoor) and type 
of events (Safety/Security); 
 
Technical constraints and a list of key indicators 
captured by the scenario to measure its impact or 
relevance; 
 
List of actions to be performed by each intervenient 
actor to test the specified scenario; 
 
Identification of the scenario expected results. This 
will define the behaviour of the SECAIR system. 
Some vehicles will be equipped with an onboard unit, a 
touch screen display and a radiofrequency reader. A 
radiofrequency card, with data about the driver involved on 
the site tests, will be available to automatically identify the 
driver at the login procedure. At least two client applications 
(i.e., situation rooms) are deployed, one situation room 
corresponding to the Control Centre for the airport operator 
and a second situation room for another airport stakeholder 
(e.g., Ground Handler). 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
Within the SECAIR project, one of the technical 
requirements is that all location–based technologies are 
coherently integrated using advanced data-fusion techniques 
in order to reduce installation costs and to address multipath 
effects reduction. The main objective is to develop new 
context aware services based on an innovative solution 
integrating high-performance RF tracking combined with 
optical recognition technologies and mobility management in 
a middleware platform.  
SECAIR is being designed as a heterogeneous sensor 
fusion system architecture, covering the surveillance of non-
cooperative resources and functionalities for continuous 
control of all ground movements within the apron area. A 
special attention is being given to the environment of the 
system, in particular to information flowing from and to the 
system. The properties of the system components, as well as 
the relationships between them, are core elements for the 
analysis and design of the SECAIR architecture. The project 
takes lessons learned from previous projects in relation to 
techniques for multi target, multi sensor tracking, responding 
to very important Security and Safety issues in airport 
environments  
The software components of the SECAIR system are 
being tested and the results analysed to confirm the ability to 
improve positioning accuracy and reliability, reduce the 
likelihood of false alarms and get feedback from airport 
stakeholders for improving the system-of-interest and to 
study its feasibility with real data, as required by value-added 
location-based services. 
A field test is planned to take place at Faro airport during 
the last quarter of 2013, with a full evaluation of the results 
to be done at the beginning of 2014. The research work in 
the project addresses data integration from the video system 
with data from the radio based systems. Improvements to 
accuracy and scalability of the location based services, 
provided by the system, will continue until middle of 2013 
and from then on the necessary implementations will be 
completed for the field test. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The SECAIR (ref. E6030) is an R&D project, partially 
funded under the EUROSTARS program, which started in 
September 2011. It is also acknowledged the funding from 
FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia through the 
PIDDAC program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ICAO: Safety Management Manual (SMM), 2nd ed. Doc 9859 
AN/474, ISBN 978-92-9231-295-4, 2009. 
[2] Eurocontrol: Operational Concept and Requirements for A-SMGCS 
Implementation Level 2. Ed. 2.1, 2010. 
[3] SECAIR Deliverable 1.1: Definition of requirements and operational 
scenarios. Technical report presented to the Eurostars, Dec 2011. 
[4] M. Ayres Jr. et al.: Safety Management Systems for Airports: 
Guidebook. Volume 2, ACRP REPORT 1, ISBN 978-0-309-11798-2, 
2009. 
[5] LOCON Deliverable 5.1: Concept of High Level Sensor Fusion. 
Technical report presented to the Eurostars, Jun 2009.  
[6] G. Pestana, N. Duarte, P. Catelas, and J. Metter, Technical Document: 
LocON Client GUI Specifications, available on http://www.locon.org, 
Oct 2010. 
[7] EUROCAE: ED-119B : Interchange Standards For Terrain, Obstacle, 
And Aerodrome Mapping Data, 2011. 
[8] N. Subbotin: Development of an Airport Ground Vehicle Runway 
Incursion Warning System. DOT/FAA/AR-11/26, 2011. 
[9] G. Pestana, N. Duarte, I. Rebelo, and S. Couronné: Adressing 
stakeholders coordination for airport efficiency and decision-support 
requirements. Journal of Aerospace Operations (JAO11), 2011. 
[10] G. Chintalapani, C. Plaisant, and B. Shneiderman: Extending the 
Utility of Treemaps with Flexible Hierarchy, in Proc. of Int. Conf. on 
Information Visualisation, London, 2004.  
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

