Meeting the Challenge of Global Mobile Phone Usability  
Design and practices 
 
Yan Cimon 
CIRRELT 
Université Laval 
Quebec City, Canada 
yan.cimon@fsa.ulaval.ca 
 
Fatima-Zahra Barrane 
Faculty of Business Administration 
Université Laval 
Quebec City, Canada 
fatima-zahra.barrane.1@ulaval.ca  
 
Diane Poulin 
CIRRELT 
Université Laval 
Quebec City, Canada 
diane.poulin@fsa.ulaval.ca 
 
 
 
Abstract— How can mobile phone design increase usability and 
the user’s experience in a global setting?  The purpose of this 
paper is to put forth general design principles to enhance 
usability.  We use a structured literature review of 307 peer-
reviewed papers.  We find that shared interaction, intuitiveness 
and personalization should drive mobile phone design.  
Industry practices are examined and future research avenues 
are suggested. 
Keywords-usability; design; principles; global practices. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
How can mobile phone design increase usability and the 
user’s experience in a global setting?  Information 
technology (IT) and mobile phones, commonly referred to as 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are 
now pervasive in our everyday lives and that pervasiveness 
increases as computers and phones converge as they are fast 
becoming information appliances.   While there are still non-
adopters, the non-adoption of ICTs may be explained by a 
range of attitudinal, skills-related and infrastructure-related 
factors [1].  However, non-adoption, as it relates to literacy 
issues, is weaker in the case of mobile phones [2].  Possible 
explanations 
are 
the 
availability 
of 
complementary 
infrastructure, efficient enough providers [e.g., 3], and easily 
accessible related innovations [4].  This implies that mobile 
phones are within reach of most of the world’s population: 
Somalia – a failed state – ranks 16th out of 42 African 
countries in terms of penetration [5]. 
In the global arena, mobile phones are an empowerment 
tool as they help develop human capital [6]. In Mexico, they 
free users from geography-related institutional constraints 
[7].  In rural Indian areas, they help the less fortunate and are 
a catalyst for social change [8].  In the Middle East, they 
positively influence economic freedom [9].  Conversely, a 
lack of access to mobile technologies may hinder 
development [10] and even promote inequalities [11]. 
This paper is structured as follows.  First, we state the 
problem we are addressing which is that of designing an 
optimal user experience in a global and diverse context.  
Second, we explain the context of this research as it relates to 
the impact of literacy on ICT use.  Then we look at how 
users’ familiarity with technology influences design in terms 
of accessing information.  Third, we discuss the methods 
used which consist in a structured literature review of a large 
number of articles.  Fourth, the resulting design principles 
are examined in terms of their contribution to the 
improvement of usability and some industry practices are 
presented.  Finally, we conclude and discuss potential 
implications 
for 
academics, 
businesspeople 
and 
policymakers. 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Mobile phones – and ICTs in general – have proven very 
popular in recent years.  Globally, they are used in a variety 
of contexts:  from highly educated and “sophisticated” users 
who exploit every single functionality, to utilitarian users 
that focus exclusively on core functions (i.e. dialling calls 
only or simple web surfing), to users with low or no literacy 
who have developed strategies to overcome this obstacle in 
order to make mobile phones a tool for meaningful 
interaction and/or community engagement.  Also, there are a 
wide variety of geographical and cultural challenges to 
mobile phone usage as pictograms and input-output methods 
and devices may be culturally biased even if they are 
globally standardized. 
Notwithstanding this, accessing information is highly 
dependent on interface design and usability.  Tools and 
technique are evolving at a rapid pace and user adaptation 
would be easier if interface design followed sets of principles 
that would be consistent globally and culturally, among other 
variables. 
Thus, in extremely diverse usage contexts as reflected by 
an ever-increasing global user base, it is important to 
determine how mobile phones may be designed for optimal 
usability notwithstanding the potential users’ levels of 
literacy or familiarity with technology. 
III. 
CONTEXT 
A. Literacy 
In the global arena, the challenge of literacy is often 
overlooked when considering usability issues. The traditional 
concept of literacy tied to the written language is obsolete as 
it is not essential to access information and knowledge 
anymore if only because of the penetration of television and 
mobile phones [see 12].  Literacy is now considered to be 
« digital » [13] insofar as access to ICT is now deemed 
123
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

essential by UNESCO [14].  Thus, designers need to provide 
an 
information-rich 
experience 
to 
users 
of 
ICTs 
notwithstanding their literacy level, in synch with the 
growing migration of content on these platforms.    
B. Familiarity with technology 
Similarly, users’ familiarity with technology is another 
design challenge. Traditionally, user interface tools for 
accessing information have consisted in series of menus that 
may be classified in three categories.  First, hierarchical 
menus are a commonly used tool that reflects the 
organization of information.  Although they are not 
necessarily intuitive and require a great deal of both classical 
and digital literacy skills, they have the benefit of being 
systematic.  Second, fisheye menus blow up certain parts of 
the information a user is querying to make it easier to 
discriminate between the choices offered to this specific 
user.  They often rely on text and icons.  Third, tag clouds 
organize information according to its popularity.  This is 
very useful for users with preferences and search patterns 
aligned on those of related groups of users.  Designers need 
to find ways to divorce familiarity with technology and 
access to content so that ICTs become an enabler for all 
potential or actual users. 
IV. 
METHODS 
We used a structured literature review process in order to 
determine a set of principles and practices for the design of 
highly usable mobile phones and ancillary applications.  We 
reviewed a total of 307 peer reviewed papers that focused on 
keywords related to mobile phone usage and design like: 
literacy, usability, sales, adoption, etc.  Papers were then 
grouped by themes that were clustered around design 
principles and industry applications.  
With regards to the validity and reliability [15] of this 
review, the breath of articles we surveyed allows for a good 
level of reliability, while the keywords chosen and our 
preoccupation for examining diverse research fields and 
cases [16] provides validity to this research.  We were thus 
able to extract design principles and industry practices that 
increased usability and user experience. 
V. 
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND INDUSTRY PRACTICES 
Our structured literature review first led to general design 
principles.  Then, real-life examples were extracted in light 
of those general principles. 
A. Designing interfaces for usability 
Usability is thought to be a driver for interface adoption.  
As a general rule, interface design should be centered on the 
user to allow increased confidence and meaning in their 
interactions with – and through – mobile phones.  Especially 
in the case of interface design for low literacy users [17], any 
sustainable solution must be coherent with their geographic 
or cultural contexts [18].  Thus, design principles may be 
drawn around three core ideas: shared experience, 
intuitiveness, and personalization.  
1) Allow users a shared interactive experience: A 
common experience, in the form of a common platform or 
as an ability to access and exchange similar content, is 
conducive to higher quality knowledge flows between users 
[19].  It must also allow for various modes of interaction 
(i.e., with keyboards, touchscreens, videos, or other 
input/output modes, etc.) [see 20, 21].  Massive multiplayer 
online video games are a case in point [see 22].  Thus, social 
relationships and interface interactions benefit greatly from 
being designed like human relationships [23].     
2) Focus on intuitiveness: Reducing the users’ cognitive 
load increases their interaction accuracy.  This implies that 
processes underlining a given interface have to make it user-
friendly and rich [e.g., 24].  Minor changes to handsets and 
a streamlining of the interface (colors, symbols, etc.) 
significantly improve usability [17].  Furthermore, an 
elegant interface influences the perception of usability [e.g., 
25] as this concept has both objective and subjective 
components [26].   
3) Personalization and user-control matter: Some 
systems offers choices for increased personalization [27] 
that go as far as being sensitive to a particular context [28].  
Usability may also be improved by increasing the level of 
control exerted by the user and through a « help » section 
[29].  Social tagging [30] and the combination of 
visualization and voice activated features are another set of 
useful tools [31]. 
These principles also find their way into industry 
practice. 
B. How global industry leaders do it: some examples 
Global industry leaders have embodied these principles 
in their practices and products to varying degrees.  These 
may be grouped into three categories: 1) the relationship 
between literacy and the handset; 2) interacting with the 
mobile phone; and 3) leveraging the possibilities offered by a 
mobile phone.   
1) The handset and literacy:  Few global leaders have 
focused on low literacy customers.   Yet in many emerging 
markets, these customers constitute the bulk of mobile 
phone users.  In developed countries, many users have 
literacy-related challenges as well.   In 2008, Nokia and 
Motorola have come up with different ways of addressing 
these challenges from intensive R&D effort into the matter.  
While Nokia focused on the physical ergonomics of the 
handset, simpler menu functions, and an icon-based menus; 
Motorola opted for a larger screen with bigger letters and 
numbers as well as more classical, yet streamlined, 
hierarchical menus.  At that time, both handset makers 
focused on trying to increase intuitiveness while providing 
limited user control through a less complex phone. 
2) User interaction with/via a handset.  Global industry 
leaders have often sought efficient ways to leverage user 
interaction with – and through – mobile phones.  Web 
browsing, email, social media, film and picture applications 
– and eventually 3D applications – provide additional 
124
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

richness and connectedness beyond the voice transmission 
capabilities of traditional mobile phones.  Handset makers 
offer users differentiated modes for interaction (reticular 
screen vs mini-keyboard) and different means for scrolling 
content.  While the iPhone and traditional Blackberry 
handsets offered very different user experiences, the 
Blackberry Torch constitutes an example of the possible 
convergence between these products as it offers a reticular 
screen and a physical QWERTY keyboard.  It also offers 
“apps”, just like Android-based phones and Apple devices 
do; the latter having been the pioneer in marketing “apps” 
efficiently. 
3) Leveraging the handset.  Mobile phones offer 
increasing possibilities for interaction trough web-browsing 
and “apps”.  Google is a case in point. Its search engine 
interface design is extremely simple, streamlined yet very 
efficient, especially for mobile devices.  It is intuitive as it 
only has one text-entry box.  It allows for personalization as 
users may filter search results according to certain 
preferences.  It is easy to use on mobile platforms and is a 
recognized leader in keyword searches.  The Amazon 
Kindle also embodies these principles. While one can 
procure a physical e-reader, it is also possible to download a 
Kindle application that allows one to read Kindle books on 
an iPhone, an Android handset or a Blackberry.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
More broadly, a continuous focus on design for user-
centered usability has many implications for business, 
government and research.  
A. Implications for business and government 
Business and governments will benefit greatly from 
better mobile phone and interface design.  This will provide 
for better, high-context and information-rich transactional 
environments.  Service delivery will be improved for all 
customers, including those with literacy challenges.  
Furthermore, it will enable implementation mechanisms that 
will not be sensitive to geography or context, thus providing 
value-added solutions to emerging economies as well as 
developed ones. 
B. Implications for academics 
This research has a range of implications for academics.  
First, it is a multidisciplinary foray into mobile phone 
usability in a global context.  Second, it helps refocusing this 
research field beyond engineering requirements or marketing 
issues, which are useful but provide a partial picture. 
C. Future research 
In conclusion, the literature, the design principles and 
industry practices derived from this research call for a return 
to basic user-oriented principles to drive future research: 1) 
more should be done to find ways to reduce the cognitive 
load attached to mobile phone usage; 2) both engineering 
and the social science aspects need to be simultaneously 
considered to tackle the issues that surround usability; 3) 
simplicity and interaction richness need to become a focus 
for industry leaders. Immediate future steps for this research 
involve a careful examination of the impact of literacy that 
could help explain the effect of this variable on mobile phone 
usage for complex tasks and transactions, especially for users 
with no or limited levels of literacy.  Furthermore, the related 
technical challenges need to be dealt with following the 
determination of a roadmap detailing the engineering 
requirements and technology development that will flow 
from this research. In-depth cases, examples and user life 
stories are tools that will lead to an increased understanding 
of the particular technologies that are bound to shape the 
implementation of these principles. From healthcare 
management challenges in the emerging world [32] to more 
participation and citizen engagement in Africa [33], mobile 
phones have become a part of global communities and thus 
should be on a path to increased usability by the widest range 
of customers on a global scale. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Ministère des 
services gouvernementaux du Québec; The Fonds québécois 
de la recherche sur la société et la culture (FQRSC) and the 
Research start-up fund of Université Laval.  The comments 
of 
the 
three 
anonymous 
reviewers 
are 
gratefully 
acknowledged as they have improved this paper.  The usual 
caveats apply. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Verdegem and P. Verhoest, "Profiling the non-
user: Rethinking policy initiatives stimulating ICT 
acceptance," Telecommunications Policy, vol. 33, 
pp. 642-652, 2009/12// 2009. 
[2] 
V. Andonova, "Mobile phones, the Internet and the 
institutional 
environment," 
Telecommunications 
Policy, vol. 30, pp. 29-45, 2006. 
[3] 
H. Junseok, C. Youngsang, and L. N. Viet, 
"Investigation of factors affecting the diffusion of 
mobile telephone services: An empirical analysis 
for Vietnam," Telecommunications Policy, vol. 33, 
pp. 534-543, 2009. 
[4] 
P. 
Rouvinen, 
"Diffusion 
of 
digital 
mobile 
telephony: Are developing countries different?," 
Telecommunications Policy, vol. 30, pp. 46-63, 
2006. 
[5] 
B. Powell, R. Ford, and A. Nowrasteh, "Somalia 
after state collapse: Chaos or improvement?," 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, vol. 
67, pp. 657-670, 2008. 
[6] 
A. Ashish and A. Suma, "The software industry and 
India's 
economic 
development," 
Information 
Economics and Policy, vol. 14, pp. 253-273, 2002. 
[7] 
A. Veneta, "Mobile phones, the Internet and the 
institutional 
environment," 
Telecommunications 
Policy, vol. 30, pp. 29-45, 2006. 
[8] 
S. Mehta and M. Kalra, "Information and 
Communication Technologies: A bridge for social 
125
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

equity and sustainable development in India," The 
International Information & Library Review, vol. 
38, pp. 147-160, 2006. 
[9] 
F. Shirazi, R. Gholami, and D. Añón Higón, "The 
impact 
of 
information 
and 
communication 
technology (ICT), education and regulation on 
economic freedom in Islamic Middle Eastern 
countries," Information & Management, vol. 46, pp. 
426-433, 2009. 
[10] 
R. S. Subba, "Bridging digital divide: Efforts in 
India," Telematics and Informatics, vol. 22, pp. 
361-375, 2005. 
[11] 
E. Forestier, J. Grace, and C. Kenny, "Can 
information and communication technologies be 
pro-poor?," Telecommunications Policy, vol. 26, 
pp. 623-646, 2002. 
[12] 
A. Robinson-Pant, "Changing discourses: Literacy 
and development in Nepal," International Journal 
of Educational Development, vol. 30, pp. 136-144, 
2009. 
[13] 
I. P. Pandey, "Literate lives across the digital 
divide," Computers and Composition, vol. 23, pp. 
246-257, 2006. 
[14] 
M. Shiohata, "Exploring literacy and growth: An 
analysis of three communities of readers in urban 
Senegal," International Journal of Educational 
Development, vol. 29, pp. 65-72, 2009. 
[15] 
E. G. Carmines and R. A. Zeller, Reliability and 
Validity Assessment vol. 07-017. Newbury Park 
CA: Sage, 1979. 
[16] 
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research vol. 5. Thousand 
Oaks CA: Sage, 1994. 
[17] 
Z. Lalji and J. Good, "Designing new technologies 
for illiterate populations: A study in mobile phone 
interface design," Interacting with Computers, vol. 
20, pp. 574-586, 2008. 
[18] 
S. Tino, "E-Government in developing countries: 
Experiences from sub-Saharan Africa," Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 26, pp. 118-127, 2009. 
[19] 
Y. 
Cimon, 
"Designing 
Computer 
Supported 
Collaborative Work around Knowledge Flows," 
Proceedings of the Decision Sciences Institute 
Annual Meeting, pp. 3891-3896, 2009. 
[20] 
S. Bodker and Y. Sundblad, "Usability and 
interaction design - new challenges for the 
Scandinavian tradition," Behaviour & Information 
Technology, vol. 27, pp. 293-300, 2008. 
[21] 
J. York and P. C. Pendharkar, "Human-computer 
interaction issues for mobile computing in a 
variable work context," International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 60, pp. 771-797, 
2004. 
[22] 
C. S. Nam, S. Johnson, Y. Li, and Y. Seong, 
"Evaluation of human-agent user interfaces in 
multi-agent systems," International Journal of 
Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 39, pp. 192-201, 2009. 
[23] 
H. Schaumburg, "Computers as Tools or as Social 
Actors? 
The 
Users' 
Perspective 
on 
Anthropomorphic Agents," International Journal of 
Cooperative Information Systems, vol. 10, p. 217, 
2001. 
[24] 
Y. Zou, Q. Zhang, and X. Zhao, "Improving the 
Usability of E-Commerce Applications using 
Business 
Processes," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Software Engineering, vol. 33, p. 837, 2007. 
[25] 
N. Tractinsky, A. S. Katz, and D. Ikar, "What is 
beautiful is usable," Interacting with Computers, 
vol. 13, pp. 127-145, 2000. 
[26] 
K. Hornbæk, "Current practice in measuring 
usability: Challenges to usability studies and 
research," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 64, pp. 79-102, 2006. 
[27] 
A. Bunt, C. C., and M. J., "Mixed-Initiative 
Interface Personalization as a Case Study in Usable 
AI," AI Magazine, vol. 30, p. 58, 2009. 
[28] 
G. Calvary, J. Coutaz, D. Thevenin, Q. Limbourg, 
L. Bouillon, et al., "A Unifying Reference 
Framework for multi-target user interfaces," 
Interacting with Computers, vol. 15, pp. 289-308, 
2003. 
[29] 
S. Y. Chen and R. D. Macredie, "The assessment of 
usability of electronic shopping: A heuristic 
evaluation," International Journal of Information 
Management, vol. 25, pp. 516-532, 2005. 
[30] 
F. Carmagnola, F. Cena, L. Console, O. Cortassa, 
C. Gena, et al., "Tag-based user modeling for social 
multi-device adaptive guides," User Modeling and 
User - Adapted Interaction, vol. 18, p. 497, 2008. 
[31] 
M. Howell, S. Love, and M. Turner, "Visualisation 
improves the usability of voice-operated mobile 
phone services," International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 64, pp. 754-769, 2006. 
[32] 
H. Lucas, "Information and communications 
technology for future health systems in developing 
countries," Social Science & Medicine, vol. 66, pp. 
2122-2132, 2008. 
[33] 
A. J. Njoh, "African cities and regional trade in 
historical 
perspective: 
Implications 
for 
contemporary globalization trends," Cities, vol. 23, 
pp. 18-29, 2006. 
 
 
 
126
MOBILITY 2011 : The First International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-164-9

