mTADA: Mobile Tracking and Advanced Driver Assistance 
 
Alexiei Dingli and Christopher Bartolo 
Department of Intelligent Computer Systems 
Faculty of ICT, University of Malta 
Msida, Malta 
alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt, chris@chrisbartolo.com 
 
 
Abstract—Safe driving requires knowledge of the surrounding 
traffic environment. Such knowledge will enable the driver to 
predict possible dangerous situations and events. Driver 
distraction and reckless driving are two cases, which reduce 
the ability of a driver to perceive these situations. This is the 
reason why Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADASs) are 
being introduced. In this paper, we will tackle how mobile 
devices may help out in ADASs. Many companies, such as 
BMW and Audi have been developing their own ADASs, but 
offer them as optional accessories at an additional cost, being 
available only with new vehicles. The aim of the system we are 
developing is to help out in decreasing the amount of motor 
vehicle accidents by developing a low cost solution, which can 
be easily downloaded to and installed on a mobile device, and 
which may be used on any vehicle. The final results prove that 
the system was quite successful during tests, with many people 
claiming that they would use such a system on a regular basis. 
Keywords-active driver assistance, driver behaviour, motor 
accidents, driver safety 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this section, we will introduce the subject matter of the 
paper. We will first identify the problem, and then we will 
continue to explain the major causes of motor traffic 
accidents. 
A. The Challenge 
Road traffic accidents have become one of the leading 
causes of death. This costs countries billions of dollars a year 
for damages, insurances, and health bills. The most 
worrying, though, is the fact that the increase of these 
accidents has brought the cause up to the same ranks as 
HIV/AIDS, 
Malaria 
and 
Tuberculosis, 
and 
most 
communities are still practically ignoring it. Lord Robertson 
from Make Roads Safe argues that every six seconds we 
have another reason to work with campaigns such as Make 
Roads Safe as an international community. Make Roads Safe 
present statistics claiming that 1.2 million people are killed, 
with a minimum of 50 million people left injured, every 
year. They predict that by 2015, “road crashes will be the 
leading cause of disability for children aged four and above 
in developing countries” [1]. L.G. Norman argues that 
accidents are or will become the number one cause for 
deaths, mainly in highly industrialized nations where roads 
are crowded with vehicles. He continues to argue that road 
traffic accidents can be considered as the new epidemic. The 
paper by L.G. Norman was published in 1962, which only 
goes to show that the situation of road traffic accidents has 
not been improved as dramatically as was needed and still 
has a lot of work to be done [2]. 
Many drivers are over-optimistic, over-confident, and 
make above-average biases, leading to excessive risk taking, 
a delay in the uptake information, and social norms of bad 
driving, which lead to a high number of traffic accidents. 
These accidents also lead to moral hazards for damages, 
which are usually covered by insurances, as many damages 
are not paid for by the drivers, which make and take the 
risks. Knowing this, drivers are willing to take more risks. 
We can easily see that many accidents can be easily avoided. 
Most accidents are caused by the victims themselves, caused 
by human errors, such as “imperfect perception, insufficient 
attention, and inadequate information processing” [3]. 
B. Major Motor Accident Causes 
Cause 1: Alcohol; Alcohol is one of the most well-known 
and most advertised causes of accidents. There have been 
many campaigns launched to tackle this cause and increase 
the awareness of such health issues. In fact, the amount of 
accidents caused by drunk driving has been declining in 
many countries throughout the past few years [4]. 
Cause 2: Fatigue; We all know that we need to sleep 
seven to nine hours a day to optimize our performance, and 
to be able to concentrate and work. It is not a matter of 
choice. The longer we remain awake, the more we feel the 
need to sleep and the harder it gets to resist the urge to do so. 
By not sleeping the right number of hours, we are becoming 
more prone to extreme short term sleepiness, which could 
easily lead to chronic sleepiness. Sleepiness reduces the 
person’s 
reaction 
time, 
vigilance, 
alertness, 
and 
concentration, hence resulting in impairment of attention-
based activities. These activities include driving. Sleepiness 
reduces the speed at which information is processed and the 
quality of all decision-making, badly affecting any driving 
activity. A study was held by the Sleep Research Centre in 
the United Kingdom on how drivers are affected by fatigue. 
The study reported a finding which indicates that 20% of all 
accidents are caused by driver fatigue on long, monotonous 
roads [5]. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Cause 3: Distraction; Driver distraction is when a driver 
pays attention to other activities while driving. It is another 
major problem, which is also well-known to be one of the 
biggest causes of road traffic accidents. Most widely used in 
campaigns is the risk of driving while using mobile phones 
and in fact fines issued by police due to the use of mobile 
phones while driving have been increasing rapidly during the 
past few years. However, research in the area has proved that 
road traffic accidents related to driver distraction are actually 
being caused by other methods and other forms of 
multitasking. Distraction impairs the driver’s decision-
making and observation skills, making him take worse 
decisions about how to control his vehicle’s and surrounding 
vehicles’ safety [6].  
Cause 4: Behavior; The driving behavior of drivers 
reflects how the driver perceives situations and his decision-
making skills when encountering different situations. 
Irresponsible driving behaviors have been given the term 
‘road rage’ to describe them. Road rage is becoming 
increasingly popular especially with the young and middle 
aged population because of the stress, anxiety, anger, 
antagonism, and fear experiences on today’s roads and traffic 
situations. Surprisingly, most problems which result from 
bad driving behavior are actually caused by the belief that 
the law cannot or will not do anything and would not take 
action about any fleeting transgressions [7]. 
 
II. 
TECHNOLOGIES AND DRIVER ASSISTANCE 
In this section, we the focus will be around around what 
has already been published related to driving assistance 
systems and the technologies used. 
A. Computer Vision 
One of the most broad and vast research areas in 
computing is image processing. It involves not just filtering, 
but also compression and image enhancement. Computer 
vision is where image processing is used and implemented, 
and one of its main tasks is to understand what the image is 
actually depicting. This is handled by making use of 
complex algorithms to analyse the content based on 
recognition. All functionalities provided by computer vision 
such as reconstruction of 3D scenes, motion capturing and 
object recognition. The field of computer vision is rapidly 
growing, with microprocessors being improved and 
becoming more powerful [8]. The results of these 
improvements came with a number of computer vision 
libraries being made available, some of which are even open 
source and free to use, while others are commercial products. 
Some of the libraries we investigated were libCVD, openCV, 
Matrox Imaging Library and NI Vision [9]. 
B. Advanced Driver Assistance Systems 
These systems have recently become very popular, with 
many companies researching and developing their own 
versions. Their aim is to decrease the amount of accidents 
and decrease the gravity of consequences caused by 
accidents, while also making the driving experience easier 
and more efficient. These systems are intelligent systems, 
and support the driver in performing one or more elements 
involved in the driving task [9]. A number of surveys have 
been conducted regarding ADASs, and the results conclude 
that 40% of traffic accidents can be prevented with their use. 
However, even though ADASs can prevent many accidents, 
injuries and fatalities, they are still rarely used. This is 
believed to be true because many people have yet to 
understand their usefulness [10].  
As previously discussed, many manufacturers have been 
and are still developing and implementing their own ADASs. 
These companies include Mobileye, Nvidia, Continental, 
BMW, VolksWagen, and Audi.  Many of the features which 
they have implemented include night vision, lane departure 
warning, curve and speed limit information, collision 
warning, adaptive cruise control, local hazard warning, lane 
change assistant, obstacle and collision warning and 
avoidance [11]. 
 
III. 
TACKLING THE MAIN CAUSES 
A. Cause 1: Alcohol 
The current idea to reduce the problem of driving under 
the influence of alcohol is to “separate drinking drivers from 
their vehicles” [12]. This can be done by installing an 
ignition interlock device on the vehicle, which is connected 
to the starting system. The setup is connected to a 
breathalyzer, which enables or disables the ignition interlock 
device. When the driver needs to drive, he is required to 
blow into the breathalyzer tube [12]. Smart Start Inc. is a 
company based on Irving, TX, and has developed ignition 
interlock devices for vehicles and also for homes [13]. 
B. Cause 2: Fatigue 
VolksWagen and Smart Eye AB have developed their 
own solutions to tackle this cause. VolksWagen group have 
developed an attention control system, which includes a 
camera in the cockpit that monitors the driver’s eyelids. 
When the system finds any signs that the driver may be 
tired, it makes a noise and requests the driver to take a break 
[11]. SmartEye AB developed the SmartEye Pro 3.0, which 
is a system that estimates head pose by using methods based 
on tracking of facial features and a three dimensional head 
model. However, they do not manufacture any algorithms to 
monitor the drowsiness [14]. 
C. Cause 3: Distraction 
A number of companies have introduced various 
systems and ideas to solve this cause. Many of these 
systems are not intelligent, providing feedback if, for 
example, the driver is intentionally changing lanes. Some of 
the best solutions are those presented by Mobileye. Their 
main solution is a camera-based safety solution, which helps 
out in accident prevention and mitigation. It notifies the 
driver on lane departure with visual and audio warnings and 
measures the distance between the tires to the lane markings 
on both sides of the vehicle [15]. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

D. Cause 4: Behavior 
Companies developing driver behavior monitoring 
include Teltonika and Cellocator. These two companies 
offer vehicle tracking hardware with in-built algorithms 
based on accelerometer values. They take into consideration 
over-speeding, acceleration and braking, while also 
detecting, processing, logging and reporting a wide set of 
events concerned with hazardous driving behavior [16][17]. 
 
IV. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
ADASs aim to prevent motor accidents mainly caused by 
distractions, drowsiness and behavior. In this work, our main 
goal is to provide a low-cost driver assistance system without 
the need of installing any additional hardware and which 
works on any vehicle. In order to produce such a solution, 
we have investigated a number of existing solutions.  
We aim to provide an easy to use, and an easy to 
understand interface, which notifies the driver of dangerous 
events based on priorities (sorted according to their 
importance) without distracting the driver. The notifications 
we aim to provide the driver with are related to over-
speeding, driver distraction and drowsiness, lane departure, 
oncoming obstacles, and suggested speeds for oncoming 
curves. 
 
V. 
DESIGN 
A system has been developed and released. In this 
section, we will go through the system’s design and the 
chosen platform.  
A. Mobile Platforms 
Mobile devices have improved radically, especially with 
the progress of the internet on these devices. This caused the 
usage of smartphones and their services to “become more 
and more popular” [18]. Some of these services include 
Location Based Services and transport information services. 
“Mobile Services make life easier, simpler and more 
effective” [18]. There are a number of Mobile Platforms 
available for mobile devices, including Android, Windows, 
iOS, WebOS, Symbian, and RIM [18]. 
Developing the system to work on a commonly used 
mobile platform will satisfy one of the aims we set out to 
achieve – we have tried to produce an easy to use 
application, which can be installed and made use of by 
anyone of any age. 
The system was developed on the Android platform. It is 
the mobile platform, which is on the rise, has the highest 
market share and is one of the easiest to develop on since 
applications can be developed using JAVA. 
B. ADAS to Android mobile application 
A lot of time was spent researching existing driver 
assistance systems and solutions, which are available to the 
general public. All the systems found are powered by quite 
powerful hardware, specifically designed and built for the 
use of ADASs. The systems also have plenty of sensors 
installed around the vehicle, such as RADAR infrared 
sensors, and cameras with night vision enhancement 
technologies. For our implementation, we made it a point not 
to use any third party hardware peripherals, and use only the 
built-in hardware sensors provided by the device, which 
made it harder to implement. 
Analyzing the causes and how they have been previously 
tackled, all of them require additional hardware, such as 
breathalyzers. In our implementation, we developed 
workarounds, which make use of estimates. This will satisfy 
one of the aims, which states that we will try to provide a 
low cost solution with no need to purchase and install any 
external devices. However, for causes such as drunk driving, 
workarounds could not be developed since there is no actual 
control over the vehicle. 
1) Tackling Cause 1: alcohol;  
As previously mentioned, developing functionality to 
tackle this cause is close to impossible without third party 
external peripherals. One of the ideas which came to mind 
was to implement an accelerometer sensor listener, which 
analyses user activity patterns and checks the driving 
behaviour. This however would turn out to be very 
inaccurate, and can only be used to warn the driver not to 
drive. Warning a person under the influence of alcohol not to 
drive would prove to be close to useless. This is because as 
previously explained, alcohol encourages a competitive 
behaviour, which will only encourage the driver to be 
dangerously daring. 
2) Tackling Cause 2: fatigue; and cause 4: Behavior 
The methods to tackle driver fatigue and driver behavior 
are very similar. The idea is to analyse the user activity 
patterns to identify the status of the user. The data is 
collected from the device’s in-built accelerometer sensor, 
and then filtered to achieve the data needed. The current 
implementation identifies the status of the user, whether 
walking, driving, or standby. It also identifies any sharp 
‘hits’ exerted on the device, such as pot holes in the road,  
harsh turns, harsh braking and harsh acceleration. However, 
the implementation assumes that any sharp ‘hits’ are only 
harsh braking or harsh acceleration, and does not understand 
the difference between the others (harsh turning, etc.). To 
tackle fatigue, the current implementation constantly 
provides feedback to the driver by both audible tones, and by 
speaking out instructions. This keeps the driver attentive and 
pesters him if he is driving too fast and therefore recklessly. 
The implementation to continually give feedback to the user 
will also help to satisfy the third aim, which states that we 
will provide the user with warnings to reduce his possibility 
of being in a traffic motor accident. 
Other parts of the implementation include a curve 
detection and notification function, which analyses the road 
the vehicle is currently on, and using digital maps, extracts 
and calculates the angles of the rest of the road in front. The 
algorithm then takes the user’s speed from the GPS sensor, 
and compares the angles to the suggested speeds. These 
implementations will help reduce motor accidents, which 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

occur due to over speeding in curves by notifying the user 
earlier to give him time to take preventive action. 
3) Tackling cause 3: Distraction; Tackling this cause is 
a combination of all the functionalities and methods used to 
tackle the other three causes. We tackled driving distraction 
with the idea that we need to constantly pester the driver to 
keep his attention and focus on the road ahead. The alerts 
and 
warnings 
used 
in 
the 
previously 
described 
functionalities already do a big part of the job. The 
additional methods to tackle this cause have not been fully 
implemented. However, the essential, most difficult parts 
have been implemented for proof of concept. 
The system makes use of the camera to analyse the lane 
markings and oncoming obstacles, and tries to estimate 
(since only one camera is available) the distance between the 
host vehicle and the obstacle linearly in front. The current 
implementation can also detect obstacles on neighbouring 
lanes, which then can be used to provide feedback to the 
driver if there is a possibility that an obstacle is beside the 
host vehicle while changing lanes. All the functionalities 
combined help reduce the risk of motor accidents by alerting 
the driver and catching his attention if he distracted. 
 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The system has been developed in a modular fashion, 
where each feature is developed in its own separate module. 
The main modules are the user interface, the activity 
analyser, the lane processor, the obstacle processor, the 
directions and curve detector, the GPS location module and 
the call catching module. It is important to note that our aim 
was not to develop all features which are available in other 
existing ADASs, but to give an idea of what can be achieved 
with a mobile device and how it can help out in this area. 
The GPS sensor will be used for geolocation purposes, to 
record location, speed and acceleration. The 3G connections 
provided by the device will be used to connect to the server, 
and the accelerometer will be used to analyse the driver’s 
activities.  
 
 
1) The service and the main thread 
The system has been divided into two main parts: the 
main thread and the service. The main thread handles the 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the application: the 
camera view, the car information views, the destination 
selection and map view, and other small, low memory 
intensive threads, lane processing and obstacle processing. 
The service is a background thread, which controls other 
small background threads. It handles the text to speech, the 
activity analyser, the GPS location listener, curve detection, 
turn by turn navigation, location tracking, warning logging 
and notifications, incoming call blocker and the SMS 
sender. 
 
2) The activity analyser 
This feature analyses the device’s accelerometer and GPS 
information to determine whether the user is walking, 
driving, or standby. It is mainly used in conjunction with the 
incoming call block. If the user is in ‘standby’ or ‘walking’ 
mode, the incoming call block is switched off. If the user is 
in ‘driving', the incoming call block is enabled. In Figure 1, 
we can see the process for analyzing the user’s activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The Activity Analyzer process  
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

3) Lane processing 
The lane processing algorithm took a lot of time to figure 
out; much longer than expected. Many implementations 
were tried and tested, until a good output was achieved. The 
main problems were caused because of the faded out lane 
markings in Malta. Also, many roads do not have lane 
markings. The result achieved by the lane processing 
algorithm can be seen in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The result achieved from the lane processing algorithm 
 
 
4) Obstacle processing 
The obstacle processing algorithm which has been 
designed and implemented for the paper has to be improved 
and worked on. The algorithm implemented is one which 
has been adapted from the algorithm proposed by Shane 
Tuohy in his dissertation paper: Real Time Distance 
Determination for an Automobile Environment using 
Inverse Perspective Mapping in OpenCV.  
 
5) Directions and Curve detection 
For this feature, we needed to set up a special server with 
map data. We set up a CentOs 6.0 64bit server and installed 
a number of applications such as Mapnik, osm2pgsql and 
Routino. These applications are used for mapping 
functionalities such as routing. We downloaded the map 
data from an open source, free to use server: Open Street 
Maps. We then implemented some methods using PHP and 
postgresql queries to retrieve road data, such as road names 
and road points, which make up the road. The road points 
are sent to the application installed on the device, which in 
turn analyses them and calculates the difference between 
each angle. It then issues both visual warnings and sound 
warnings to the driver depending on the speed of the vehicle 
and the strength of the oncoming curve. An example of a 
warning given by the curve detection can be seen in Figure 
3. 
 
 
Figure 3: A curve detection speed warning 
 
6) Incoming calls and SMSs 
The main purpose of this feature is to reduce driver 
distraction. It listens for any incoming calls, and can be set 
to either answer the call and send it to loud speaker, or block 
any incoming calls, and send an SMS automatically to the 
caller, with a message saying that the other user is driving. 
VII. RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
The system was made available on Google Play, free of 
charge. We created a website which enabled users to 
register and receive a username and password. As soon as 
we released the system for private testing, we sent out an 
email to all registered users to inform them that they could 
start testing it. We had some limitations, such as the fact 
that user must be located in the Maltese Islands to be able to 
test it out. After installing the application on the user’s 
mobile, the mobile had to be installed on the dashboard of a 
vehicle, with the camera facing towards the road in front. 
We evaluated the system in two ways. As explained 
above, we allowed users to download it and test it on their 
own. For the second method, we chose a number of 
individuals from different age groups and went on test 
drives with each one of them individually.  
1) Private testing 
The website for registering and downloading the 
application was launched on www.m-tada.com. After given 
some time to evaluate, each user was sent a short 
questionnaire. The questionnaire was filled and submitted 
by twenty-one people, 48% being between the ages of 
eighteen and twenty, 33% being between the ages of 
twenty-one and twenty-five, 5% being from the age group 
of twenty-seven to thirty-five and the last 14% being older 
than thirty-five. Six of the applicants have been in a motor 
traffic accidents, four admitting that it was their fault, 
mainly caused by driver distraction and driver drowsiness. 
One of the applicants also said that the accident was 
partially caused because of driver behavior. Eleven people 
said that they never considered making use of ADASs, 
while four never felt the need, and the other six may have 
considered them. Also, four of the applicants did not know 
that many modern vehicles come with driver assistance 
options, while two never considered it. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

With the questions regarding the application, three of the 
applicants did not have a compatible device and therefore 
could not make use of it. The others who managed to make 
use of the system, found the notifications and warnings it 
provided very accurate, with 15 claiming that it helped them 
improve their driving behavior, and another three saying 
that they do not know if it helped. The last question in the 
questionnaire asked whether the applicants would buy such 
an application. Fourteen of the applicants said they would, 
while three said no. One of the applicants comments that he 
would prefer the basic application to be made free of charge, 
with only additional features being put up for optional 
purchase. 
2) Individual test drives 
We went on test drives with 7 people of different age 
groups. We carefully analyzed their reactions to the 
feedback provided by the system to determine their 
compliance and acceptance of it. The device we used was a 
Samsung Galaxy S3 with Android version 4.1.2. It had an 
average frame rate of 10 frames per second. 
Age group 1: 18-20; We tested 2 different people. Both 
were very compliant and accepting of the system, and drove 
very cautiously. They did their best to avoid being provided 
any feedback from the system. One of the participants said 
that he complied to the system as it made him feel safer. He 
said that since he is still a beginner, he is still used to 
following instructions given by the instructor, and he felt 
that the system was replacing him. He also claimed that the 
curve detection and warning system helped him travel along 
roads, which were new to him. 
Age group 2: 20-30; The person from this age group 
drove very cautiously and slowly. He was given close to no 
feedback at all. When asked how he felt driving with the 
system, he said that he obeyed it because he did not want to 
be pestered by it, and also wanted to make the best of it. He 
used it to aid him while driving. He also claimed that he 
thought that the visual warnings defeated the scope of 
auditory warnings as it would take your eyes off the road 
unnecessarily. 
Age group 3: 30-40; The person from the third age group 
ignored most of the warnings provided to him by the 
system, and only complied to it when it seemed to be the 
only choice he had. He gave us the impression that he did 
not comply because of pride and ego. We later asked him 
why he did not comply, and he simply answered that he 
wasn’t interested in being given any feedback. He also said 
that he wouldn’t mind having such a system in his vehicle, 
as long as he could choose the type of warnings and what 
warnings he would be given. 
Age group 4: 40 -50; For this age group we went on 2 
different test drives, a female and a male. The female 
claimed that she finds driver assistance system useful, and 
makes use of them regularly. She said that they help her in 
heavy traffic roads, and high speed roads. When using the 
system, she said that the warnings were very helpful and 
quite accurate. The male did not want any feedback given to 
him. Out of pride, he went to the extent of doing exactly the 
opposite of what the system suggested him to do. He 
constantly criticized the system and said that the only 
feedback he wants is to know if there is a speed camera up 
ahead. He also claimed that he also ignores feedback from 
passengers as he is a very good driver because of his 
experience he gained over the years. 
3) Results 
At first glance, we can say that the system, although still 
requiring a lot of work, was very effective with the majority 
of the users. The system provided the users with accurate 
warnings. Most of the warnings were regarding high speeds 
when approaching curves in the road. The system pestered 
the drivers, encouraging them to drive cautiously and slowly 
while approaching these curves. A limitation in evaluating 
such a system is that the best way to evaluate it would have 
been to have a higher number of test drives and users 
evaluating it. We couldn’t analyze exactly the number of 
near-collision situations, and how much of them would have 
been reduced with the aid of our system. We also believe 
that as can be seen from the test drive with age group 1, 
assistance needs to be given from the beginning of a driver’s 
experience. Starting to provide assistance to experienced 
drivers will only encourage a competitive attitude and show 
one’s pride and ego. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
1) Improvements over existing systems 
We tackled two main points, which we aimed on 
improving over existing systems. One of these is that 
existing systems are very costly, because they require the 
driver to purchase external devices unless the vehicle has 
existing sensors. These devices then need to be installed by 
an auto mechanic, and set up by an auto technician or 
engineer. To buy a vehicle with pre-installed ADASs also is 
very costly as each feature is an ‘optional’, which has to be 
paid for extra. An existing system which works on mobile 
phones, as mentioned previously, Mobileye, also needs the 
user to purchase external devices and install them in various 
locations around the vehicle. The solution mTADA, which 
we have developed however does not need any external 
devices, but only makes use of the sensors provided by the 
host mobile phone itself. Another improvement is that the 
application also provides audible feedback with the voice of 
a human being, while also categorizing the different types of 
warnings according to the gravity of the situation. The 
system also provides driver behavior feedback while 
providing turn by turn navigation instructions, which no 
existing system currently provides. 
2) Future Work 
Plenty of ideas had been brought forward for the system 
proposed, however due to time restrictions it proved very 
difficult to even research them. In this section, we will be 
identifying the main ideas and explaining how they could be 
implemented and their possible uses.  
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

Bug fixes - The first work to be done on the system would 
be to fix the existing known bugs. These include the bugs 
related to the turn by turn navigation and finding a solution 
for the harsh braking and acceleration algorithms. 
Obstacle detection and tracking - Obstacle detection has 
already been implemented, however as explained in the 
testing section, in real-life scenarios a lot of false positives 
are also being detected due to the different road shades, 
glares and the need for further pre-processing on the image 
feed to help identify the vehicles in dark situations. 
Lane departure warnings - On fixing the obstacle 
detection and tracking algorithm the lane departure warning 
system can be enabled as the basics for this feature have 
already been implemented. By getting the obstacles from the 
image and tracking them, it would be possible to analyse 
whether there are any possible vehicles in blind spots, at the 
sides of the vehicle. Doing so will make it possible for the 
system to provide feedback when the host vehicle is 
deviating from the lane and a vehicle might be on the other 
lane. 
Driving behavior - Another idea is to improve the user 
activity algorithm to be able to analyze the driving patterns  
to deduce the driving behavior of the user. This data then 
can be used to offer constructive criticism to the user based 
on these patterns. Another idea was that after deducing the 
driver behavior, feedback is provided to the user on how to 
reduce fuel consumption – eco driving.  
Settings screen - A number of people provided additional 
comments and feedback in the questionnaire. The idea we 
liked the most was to have a ‘settings’ screen, which would 
allow the user to customize the user experience, and 
deactivate certain functionalities such as lane detection and 
tracking.  
Map data - Another idea would be to have the map data 
downloaded and stored on the device instead of requesting 
the data every few seconds. This would help to reduce data 
costs and to preserve battery life. To accomplish this, 
however, the application would have to store the logs in 
internal memory, and then upload them to the server as soon 
as a valid connection is found.  
Web application and traffic data - A part of the system 
which we did not manage to work on was a web application, 
which provides real-time data of the location of the mobile 
and real time logs. The application would enable many 
possible uses, such as vehicle tracking for businesses, and 
also 
driver 
analysis 
for 
personal 
use. 
With 
the 
implementation of this real-time system, it would enable the 
possibility of crowd-sourced traffic analyses and indication 
systems. This system would be able to analyze the data 
being transmitted by the devices, consider the different 
speeds on the different roads to estimate where there would 
be possible traffic. It could also be improved to indicate 
where there would be an accident. In fact, another 
possibility for future work on the system would be to 
implement collision detection, which would automatically 
notify the authorities to take action, and neighboring traffic 
to avoid the road. 
3) Conclusions 
Road traffic accidents are a major problem, which takes 
major toll on life in all countries, mainly in industrialized 
areas and developing countries. The major causes of such 
accidents are alcohol, driving behaviour, fatigue and driver 
distraction. When tackling a cause like driver distraction and 
driver behaviour, it is very difficult for the driver to actually 
acknowledge that he is doing something wrong since there 
is no good source for feedback except for passengers or 
being in a near-accident situation. To solve this, we 
attempted to develop a system, which pesters the driver, 
keeping his attention and focus on the road, while also 
providing feedback based on his behaviour, such as 
excessive speeding, harsh braking and harsh acceleration.  
We did extensive research, and presented the most 
relevant information. Based on this information we 
developed a system, which we named mTADA: Mobile 
Tracking 
and 
Advanced 
Driver 
Assistance. 
We 
implemented mTADA on the Android mobile platform so 
that it can be easily installed and used by a majority of the 
population. The system does not make any use of any third 
party peripherals but only makes use of the sensors already 
available on the device – GPS sensor, accelerometer, back 
camera and the touch screen. We managed to implement 
lane tracking and detection, curve detection, a turn by turn 
navigation system, and a warning system. However, we 
encountered some problems while tackling the obstacle 
detection algorithm because of different colours in the 
roads. We also encountered some small bugs during testing, 
which we have mentioned in the testing section previously 
and pointed out as future work in the previous section. To 
top it all off, after fully testing the system, we evaluated it in 
a real world scenario and it proved to be useful. Many 
people who we questioned claimed to have found it useful, 
and claimed that they would make use of such an 
application on a regular basis. We also went on test drives 
with people from different age groups and analysed their 
reactions, acceptance and compliance towards the system. 
Younger age groups were more compliant and accepting of 
the system, while males from older age groups did not want 
to be provided feedback, and were neither accepting nor 
compliant.  
We found that the system development was quite difficult 
at first without making use of external devices, especially in 
night situations. We managed to design and implement a 
number of workarounds to tackle most of the 4 main causes. 
However, the system still has a number of bugs to be fixed, 
and a number of features and functionalities to be 
implemented. Even in the current state the system managed 
to achieve the results we set out to achieve, together with 
the aims and objectives we identified at the beginning of 
this paper. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. R. Safe, “Road Crashes Are The No 1 Killer Of Young People 
Worldwide It Is Time to Act,” 4 12 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.makeroadssafe.org/publications/Documents/no1_killer.pd
f. [Accessed 10 02 2013]. 
[2] 
L. Norman, “Road Traffic Accidents,” World Health Organization, 
Geneva, 1962. 
[3] 
P. A. Hancock and P. A. Desmond, Stress, workload, and fatigue, 
Mahwah, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001. 
[4] 
European Transport Safety Council, “Reducing Traffic Injuries 
Resulting From Alcohol Impairment,” European Transport Safety 
Council, Brussels, 1995. 
[5] 
T. . R. S. f. t. P. o. Accidents, “Driver Fatigue and Road Accidents,” 
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, 2001. 
[6] 
T. R. S. f. t. P. o. Accidents, “Driver Distraction,” Road Safety 
Information, December 2007, pp. 1-7. 
[7] 
R. L. Dukes, S. L. Clayton, L. T. Jenkins, T. L. Miller and S. E. 
Rodgers, “Effects of aggressive driving and drvier characteristics on 
road rage,” The Social Science Journal, 2001, pp. 323-331. 
[8] 
Y. Wu, “An Introduction to Computer Vision,” Northwestern 
University, Evanston, 2012. 
[9] 
S. Tuohy, “Real Time Distance Determination for an Automobile 
Environment using Inverse Perspective Mapping in OpenCV,” NUI 
Galway, Galway, 2010. 
[10] O. Gietelink, J. Ploeg, B. D. Schutter and M. Verhaegen, 
“Development of advanced driver assistance systems with vehicle 
hardware-in-the-loop simulations,” Delft University of Technology, 
Netherlands, 2006. 
[11] Volkswagen, 
“Driving. 
Safety. 
Powered 
by 
Innovation.,” 
Volkswagen Group of America, 2009. 
[12] J. Mejeur, “Ignition Interlocks, Can Technology Stop Drunk 
Driving?,” State Legistlatures, 2007, pp. 16 - 21. 
[13] Smart Start Inc., “Smart Start Inc.,” Smart Start Inc., [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.smartstartinc.com/index.php/products/about-
interlock-and-the-advantages/. [Accessed 10 1 2013]. 
[14] L. Barr, S. Popkin and H. Howarth, “A Review And Evaluation of 
Emerging Driver Fatigue Detection Measure and Technologies,” U.S. 
Department of Transportation, Washington, DC, 2009. 
[15] Mobileye, “Mobileye C2-270,” Mobileye, 2009. 
[16] Cellocator Division, Pointer Telocation Ltd., “Cellocator Cello-IQ,” 
Pointer, Rosh Haayin, 2013. 
[17] Teltonika, 
“Teltonika,” 
Teltonika 
AB, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.teltonika.eu. [Accessed 12 4 2013]. 
[18] H. Sugiharto, “Current and Future Mobile Platforms,” Berlin Institute 
of Technology, Berlin, 2010. 
 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-313-1
MOBILITY 2013 : The Third International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

