On-road Wireless Sensor Network for Traffic Surveillance 
JaeJun Yoo, DoHyun Kim, KyoungHo Kim 
Vehicle/Ship/Defense IT Convergence Division 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, South Korea 
{jjryu, dohyun, kkh}@etri.re.kr 
JongHyun Park 
Robots/Perception Convergence Division 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, South Korea 
jhp@etri.re.kr
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, a traffic surveillance system using 
wireless 
sensor 
networks 
is 
introduced. 
Such 
traffic 
surveillance system should satisfy more requirements and 
overcome harder constraints because wireless network systems 
have some characteristics such as small hardware resources 
and less stability of communication. Such requirements include 
energy-efficient operation, reliable data transmission, and 
accurate operations. A traffic surveillance system using 
magnetic sensor network is designed and implemented to 
satisfy 
mentioned 
requirements. 
The 
designed 
traffic 
surveillance system is tested on indoor and outdoor test-beds. 
Keywords – WSN; Magnetic Sensor; Traffic Surveillance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND PREVIOUS WORKS 
Recently, as various sensor network technologies for 
ubiquitous computing have been being researched actively, 
the convergence of existing applications and the sensor 
network technologies has been being a key issue in several 
industrial and scientific fields. For example, in the Intelligent 
Transport System field, the convergence of diverse services, 
research issues and sensor network technologies has been 
being suggested [1][2].  
Some previous works on wireless sensor network based 
on magnetic sensor nodes [3][4][5] were introduced to adapt 
the sensor network technologies on real road environments. 
The previous works focus on each research topics related to 
wireless sensor network such as energy efficiency, detection 
accuracy, traffic management, and so on. However, they do 
not suggest overall and essential requirements to successfully 
adapt wireless magnetic sensor network on road networks 
and do not describe their overall system which are the most 
important for manufacturing sensor nodes. 
In this paper, as a kind of the convergence of wireless 
sensor networks and Telematics/ITS environments, we 
design and implement a prototype of a whole traffic 
surveillance system using wireless magnetic sensor networks 
on roads. For that, we suggest key and essential requirements 
and overall architecture including sub-components and 
signal processing mechanisms reflecting the requirements 
are explained. 
This paper is structured as followings. In section 2, we 
explain the overall design and structure of the traffic 
surveillance system including system requirements. In 
section 3, we conduct some experiments and show the results. 
In section 4, we conclude this paper. 
II. 
ON-ROAD WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK FOR TRAFFIC 
SURVEILLANCE 
 
In this section, the overall design and structure of the 
traffic surveillance system including system requirements 
will be explained. 
A. Key Requirements 
A traffic surveillance system using wireless sensor 
networks should consider the following requirements [6]. 
 
· 
Energy-efficiency on sensor networks  
· 
Accurate vehicle detection 
· 
Reliable and real-time data transmission on wireless 
communication 
· 
Real-time sensor data processing and vehicle 
detection 
· 
Efficient and intuitive management of sensor 
networks and services 
 
There can be some variations on such requirements 
according to installation environments of the vehicle 
detection system. For example, some real-time properties, 
such as the limit time for system responses, can differ from 
types of real-roads, such as high-way and in-city roads. 
B. System Architecture 
Figure 1 below shows the overall structure of the 
designed traffic surveillance system. The traffic surveillance 
system mainly consists of three parts according to their 
functions - 1) vehicle detection layer, 2) data management 
layer, and 3) monitoring & application layer. The vehicle 
detection layer consist of magnetic sensor nodes installed on 
surface of real-roads, gate-nodes to relay vehicle detection 
data, and base-stations to process detection data and to 
calculate speed of vehicles. More specifically, the magnetic 
sensor nodes detect vehicles based on variations of magnetic 
fields of earth caused by moving vehicles. The magnetic 
sensor nodes also transfer the vehicle detection information 
to gate-nodes or base-stations with detection time (local 
ticks). Base-stations receive the detection information from 
magnetic sensor nodes or gate-nodes, and process them to 
extract more useful data such as speed of vehicles. The data 
management layer provides broader services based on 
information transmitted from base-stations, such as traffic 
status of some districts. The monitoring and application layer  
131
Copyright (c) The Government of MIC/IITA, South Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Figure 1.  Overall structure of the traffic surveillance system based on 
magnetic sensor networks 
provides more customized services to end-users, such as 
system monitoring and personalized services. 
In this paper, we have focused on the vehicle detection 
layer, especially wireless sensor network and base-stations, 
because remains are related to flexible functions according to 
kinds of traffic-related services.  
 
C. Base-Stations 
A base-station collects vehicle detection data from 
magnetic sensor network, processes them to produce more 
valuable information, for example, speed of a vehicle, and 
provides them to upper layers. Figure 2 and Table I show the 
S/W structure and H/W aspects of a base-station.  
 
 
Figure 2.  S/W and H/W of a base-station 
TABLE I.  
STRUCTURE OF BASE-STATION PROCESSES 
Module Name 
Description 
Sensor Data 
Acquisition 
Process 
(SDAP) 
This process receives vehicle detection data 
from gate-nodes or sensor nodes, and checks 
validity of the detection. If valid, this process 
sends them to the shared memory (SM). 
Shared 
Memory 
(SM) 
This is a memory structure to share data 
among several processes efficiently. Some 
locks are used to prevent data corruption and 
to provide synchronized access. 
Sensor Data 
Processing 
Process 
(SDPP) 
This 
process 
extracts 
more 
valuable 
information, for example, speed of the vehicle, 
from the received detection data. Error 
information is logged. 
Data 
Transmission 
Process 
(DTP) 
This process transfers some data and 
information to external devices such as data 
management servers in data management 
layer, or monitoring agents. 
Watch-Dog 
Process 
(WDP) 
This process checks whether all other 
processes in a base-station operate normally or 
not. If there are some errors, this process 
triggers reset procedures for each process. 
Base-Station 
Management 
Process 
(BSMP) 
This process manages overall operations in a 
base-station. Target of the management 
includes operation status, storage availability,   
RTC (Real Time Clock) status, and so on. 
D. Wireless Sensor Networks 
Wireless sensor network consists of some magnetic 
sensor-nodes and gate-nodes. The gate-nodes enlarge  
TABLE II.  
STRUCTURE OF SENSOR NODE MODULES 
Module Name 
Description 
Hardware 
Abstraction 
Module 
(HAM) 
This module abstracts interfaces for hardware 
setup and several node operations.  
Vehicle 
Detection 
Module 
(VDM) 
This module decides whether a vehicle exists or 
not by executing the pre-defined vehicle 
detection algorithm. Some filtering mechanisms 
are used to filter noise. 
Node 
Management 
Module 
(NMM) 
This module controls execution status of a 
sensor-node. 
Also, 
this 
module 
provides 
recovery procedures and configuration backup. 
Watch-Dog 
Module 
(WDM) 
This module enforces reset options if some 
runtime errors occurred during node operations. 
Wireless 
Communicatio
n Module 
(WCM) 
This module transfers the vehicle detection data 
to outside of the sensor-nodes. If packet loss in 
the transmission occurred, it tries to resend by 
buffering and keeping acknowledgement status. 
TDMA 
mechanism 
[7] 
with 
time 
synchronization protocol is used for packet 
transmissions. 
132
Copyright (c) The Government of MIC/IITA, South Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
Figure 3.  S/W and H/W of a sensor-node 
communicable scope by relay some data packet from sensor-
nodes to a base-station. Table II and Figure 3 show the S/W 
structure and H/W aspects of a sensor-node (The structure 
and specification of a gate-node is similar to those of a 
sensor-node except that a gate-node do not include magnetic 
sensors.) Normally, sensor nodes for vehicle detection are 
installed on surface of roads, and gate-nodes are installed on 
a pole on road-side. Therefore, sensor node packaging is 
different from that of a gate-node. Figure 2(b-3) shows the 
package of a sensor node. 
To provide energy efficiency property, a sensor-node 
operates on sleep-and-wakeup concept to enlarge life-time of 
sensor nodes [10]. In other words, when there is no vehicle 
or specific events, the sensor node enters to sleep mode in 
which non-essential H/W components are in sleep, and if a 
vehicle is approaching or some timers are expired, the sensor 
node wakes up to process the required operations. The figure 
4 shows this concept. Moreover, to maximize energy 
efficiency, more sophisticated method called “dynamic 
sleep-and-wakeup interval” is used. With the concept, the 
sensor nodes change some intervals of some node operations 
dynamically according to existence of a moving vehicle. 
That is, if it is decided that a moving vehicle exists, the 
signal sampling operations operates are executed on normal 
interval, and if it is assumed that there is no a vehicle on the 
sensor node, the interval of sampling operation is adjusted 
larger than that of normal.  
 
E. Signal Processing and Vehicle Detection 
A sensor-node detects a vehicle by analyzing variations 
of magnitude of magnetic fields occurred by a moving 
vehicle. Therefore, a baseline - the level of raw signal which 
can be obtained when there is no vehicles - is needed to be 
compared some raw signals acquired when a vehicle is 
moving. To reduce the complexity of magnetic signal  
 
 
Figure 4.  Dynamic sleep-and-wakeup interval mechanism 
processing and vehicle detection algorithms, not raw 
magnetic signal values is considered, but pre-processed 
signals are used for vehicle detection. 
Raw magnetic signals include some noises. Such noises 
should be removed to detect moving vehicles more clearly. 
There can be various methods to remove noises in raw 
signals. For example, the calculation of the average of recent 
N signals is the easiest method to alleviate noise effect. 
However, the average filter has a disadvantage, that is, it 
spreads the effect of noises to near signal samplings. In this 
paper, we adopt a method called interval-based average filter 
to remove noises. In the filter, if the difference of the 
magnitude of two signals – the first and the last of a given 
interval – is smaller than normal noise, all the signals 
between the two signals modified to the average of the two 
signals. To remove noises effectively using the interval-
based average filter, the interval should be small enough to 
catch only noises. This filtering method doesn’t spread the 
effect of noises to other signals and the length of the interval 
(width) and the normal noise level can be algorithm tuning 
parameters. Figure 5 shows the mentioned signal filtering 
concepts. 
After filtering the raw magnetic signals, the filtered 
signal becomes to input data of the designed vehicle 
detection algorithm. In this paper, pattern-based vehicle 
detection algorithm is designed and used. Increase and 
decrease pattern of filtered signals can be abstracted as UP 
and DOWN pattern of which descriptions are followings.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Magnetic signal filtering and processing for vehicle detection 
133
Copyright (c) The Government of MIC/IITA, South Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

 
 
Figure 6.  The state transition diagram to detect a moving vehicle 
· UP 
The magnitude of magnetic signal increased more than 
given height during the given successive sampling interval. 
 
· DOWN 
The magnitude of magnetic signal decreased more than 
given height during the given successive sampling interval. 
 
The vehicle detection algorithm decides whether a vehicle 
exists or not based on the patterns of UP and DOWN. That is, 
for example, if successive UPs more than the number of a 
given value (as a parameter) are given, the algorithm decides 
that a vehicle is approaching, and, in like manner, if 
successive DOWNs more than the number of a given value 
(as a parameter) are given, the algorithm decides that a 
moving vehicle goes away from the position of the sensor-
node. Figure 6 below shows such detection algorithm as a 
form of state transition machine diagram. 
F. Speed Calculation 
A base-station calculates speed \using vehicle detection 
data from sensor-nodes, distance between two sensor-nodes, 
and time data (clock ticks) of the vehicle detection. However, 
because the designed vehicle detection system collects data 
from wireless sensor network using TDMA communication 
mechanism, there can be several exceptional cases like 
below. The exceptions should be carefully designed because 
such exception processing can affect accuracy and 
performance of overall detection systems and services. 
 
· Time synchronization error between the magnetic sensor 
network and a base-station 
· Loss of ON or OFF data during wireless communication\ 
· Duplicated transmission of ON or OFF data due to 
possibilities of packet loss. 
III. 
INDOOR AND OUTDOOR TEST-BEDS  
To test and evaluate the vehicle detection system 
designed and implemented in this paper, several indoor tests 
and outdoor tests were prepared.  
For the indoor tests, a small test-bed was prepared. 
Several magnetic sensor nodes and a small loop detector 
were installed on the indoor test-bed, and a model car rotates 
on the indoor test-bed. The rotation speed of the model car is 
controlled by external notebook and controller software. 
Figure 7(a) shows the indoor test-bed. The indoor tests was 
conducted during about 4 days, the overall accuracy of speed 
obtained by vehicle detection system related to that of the 
small loop system was about 98%, although some minor 
errors were also detected. Because indoor space had clean 
radio environments and there was just a test car, there were 
almost no transmission error and no packet loss. 
To test the designed system in real-road environments, an 
outdoor test-bed was constructed as shown at the figure 7(b).  
 
 
Figure 7.  Indoor and Outdoor test-beds 
The outdoor test-bed has eight magnetic sensor nodes, one 
gate-node and one base-station, and one loop system at the 
same place. The base-station compares the speeds obtained 
from the designed vehicle detection system and the loop 
system. The outdoor test is on-going and the results of the 
tests are being monitoring using a web-site. The overall 
results will come out about four month later. Analysis on the 
results of outdoor test-beds will be conducted intensively in 
various ways, and next paper will cover the analysis results. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, a vehicle detection system using magnetic 
sensor network was designed and implemented. Some 
requirements to be satisfied by the designed system were 
summarized. The S/W and H/W specification and design 
were introduced. Also, to test the designed system some 
indoor and outdoor test-beds were constructed. The result of 
indoor-tests was excellent, and several outdoor tests are on-
going. As future works, some hard test in real-road 
environments will be conducted. As research topics, real-
time vehicle classifications and accurate tracking of a 
moving vehicle are being considered. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the IT R&D program of 
MIC/IITA 
[10035249, 
Development 
of 
U-TSD 
(Traffic 
Surveillance & Detection) Technology] which are Korea 
government 
department 
regarding 
to 
Information 
and 
Communication. 
134
Copyright (c) The Government of MIC/IITA, South Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

REFERENCES 
[1] Kanian, A.N., "A wireless sensor network for smart roadbeds 
and intelligent transportation systems," M.Eng. Thesis, 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2000. 
[2] Marcin K., Aline S., and Vinny C., “Sensor Networks for 
Smart Roads,” PerCom 2006 Workshop, Pisa, Italy, March. 
13-17. pp. 306-310, 2006.  
[3] Sang K. L. and YoungJun M., “Intelligent All-Way Stop 
Control System at Unsignalized Intersections,” In Proceeding 
of ICCME 2004, Greece, Nov. 19-23, pp. 13-18, 2004. 
[4] Kim, J. S., Lim. J. H., Pelczar, C., and Jang. B. T., “Sensor 
Networks for Traffic Safety,” In Proceeding of VTC 2008, 
Singapore, May. 11-14, pp. 3052-3056, 2008. 
[5] Chueng, S. Y., Coleri, S., Dundar, B., Ganesh, S., Tan, C. W., 
and Varaiya, P., "Traffic Measurement and Vehicle 
Classification with a Single Magnetic Sensor," Journal of 
Transportation Research Board, pp. 173-181, Feb., 2005. 
[6] Yuhe Z., Xi H., Li. C., and Ze Z., “Design and Evaluation of a 
Wireless Sensor Network for Monitoring Traffic,” In 
Proceeding of ITS World Congress, Beijing, China, Oct. 9-13, 
pp. 1258-1263,2007. 
[7] Saurabh. G., Ram. K., and Mani. B. S., “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks,” In Proceeding of SenSys 2003. 
LA, USA., Nov. 5-7, pp. 138-149, 2003 
[8] http://www.ti.com/product/cc2520  [retrieved: Oct. 2012] 
[9] http://www51.honeywell.com/aero/common/documents/myae
rospacecatalog-documents/Missiles-Munitions/HMC_1001-
1002-1021-1022_Data_Sheet.pdf  [retrieved: Oct. 2012] 
[10] Joseph, P., Robert, S., and David, C. "Telos: Enabling Ultra-
Low Power Wireless Research," In Proceedings of 4th IPSN, 
pp. 364-369, 2005. 
 
135
Copyright (c) The Government of MIC/IITA, South Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-229-5
MOBILITY 2012 : The Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and Users

